BUILDING FEES
October 23, 2012
RESIDENTIAL Square foot area or quantity
New Dwelling
Finished living space 1st floor x0.16
Finished living space 2nd floor` x0.16
Unfinished floor area x0.08
Unfinished cellar area x0.08
Remolding
Remodel or finished living space x0.08
Unfinished added floor space including cellar x0.05
Accessory Structures
Attached garage x0.08
Detached garage x0.08
Deck x0.08
Breezeway, shed, porch, etc. x0.08
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL
New Structure: Total floor area including cellar x.020
Remodel Structure: Total floor area including cellar x0.20
Accessory Structure: Total floor area including cellar x0.20
FIRE DEPT FEES
Furnaces, Oil/Gas Burners $25.00
Fireplaces (Any Fuel) $25.00
Gas piping $25.00
OTHER
Electrical permit $60.00
Plumbing permit $60.00
Sign Permit $30.00
Use/Change of Use Permit $35.00
Septic System Bed Bottom $30.00
Page 1 of 6
Town of Candia
Cemetery Trustees
74 High Street
Candia, New Hampshire
03034
Cemeteries Usage Rules and Regulations
SECTION I : Purpose
Cemetery lot owners, in general, may misunderstand the purpose and function of cemetery rules and regulations
and the vital role they play in the preservation, safety, and aesthetics of the cemetery grounds. In many cases,
lot owners take exception to what they feel are restrictions on their perceived rights and privileges regarding the
use of their cemetery lot in the belief this ownership has the same rights and privileges as any other piece of
“real property”. It is important to understand that cemetery rules are primarily adopted for the protection of the
Town, the lot owner and others who visit or work in the cemeteries by, among other things, safeguarding
against those actions that may create dangerous situations and/or impair the dignity and appearance of the
cemeteries.
It is for the mutual protection and benefit of lot owners, the Candia Cemetery Trustees (hereinafter “Trustees”),
the Town of Candia (hereinafter “Town”), and each cemetery as a unit that the following Rules and Regulations
have been adopted.
SECTION II : Definitions
A) The definitions contained in NH RSA 289:1 are hereby incorporated, in their current form and subject to
future changes by the legislature as time goes by.
B) The term "interment" as used herein shall mean the permanent disposition of the remains or cremains of a
deceased person by burial in the earth.
C) The term “gravesite” or “grave” as used herein shall mean a burial site for a single interment. A standard
grave for a full size casket is 42 superficial square feet (6’ x 7’).
D) The term “cremation lots” as used herein shall mean those sections of the cemeteries set aside for the
interment of cremated remains. A standard grave for a cremains is 20 superficial square feet (4’ x 5’).
E) The term "memorial" as used herein shall mean an upright memorial stone or tablet installed within a lot to
designate ownership.
F) The term "marker" as used herein shall mean a stone or bronze tablet, the entire upper surface of which is
even with the adjacent surface of the ground, which serves to identify individual interments by its placement at
the head and/or foot of a gravesite. In special circumstances, an oversized flat marker may be used as a marker
to mark no more than two (2) adjoining gravesites.
G) The term “agent” as used herein means the Candia Cemetery Sexton appointed by the Trustees.
SECTION III : General Cemetery Rules
A) The consumption of alcohol within the cemeteries is strictly prohibited.
Candia Cemeteries Usage Rules and Regulations
Page 2 of 6
B) Loitering within the cemeteries is strictly prohibited.
C) Dog Fouling is strictly prohibited within the cemeteries and dogs must be on a leash.
D) All off-road vehicles are prohibited from the cemeteries. By way of these regulations, snowmobiles and
other recreational vehicles are also prohibited. Emergency vehicles are exempt from this rule.
E) Per RSA 163-B, littering is prohibited. Trash should be properly disposed of offsite.
F) The cemeteries will be open to visitors at sunrise, and will be closed at sunset. Visitors will not be allowed
upon the grounds after sunset, except by permission of the Trustees. The cemeteries will be closed for the
winter from December 1st to April 1st of the succeeding year. The Holbrook Tomb is available for temporary
storage of remains from December 1st until May 15th of the succeeding year.
G) No vehicles, except maintenance or others involved in lot preparation or restoration under direction of the
Trustees or their agent, shall be ridden or driven in any part of the cemeteries except upon the paved roadways
designated for that purpose, nor at speeds faster than 10 miles per hour.
H) Children under fifteen (15) years of age shall not be permitted within the cemeteries or their buildings
unless accompanied by an adult.
I) No person shall gather flowers, either wild or cultivated, on the premises; or remove, cut, break, or mark any
tree, shrub or plant; or mark upon, deface, or injure any memorial or any other structure on the grounds.
J) Firearms shall not be discharged in the cemeteries, except for salutes at military funerals, Memorial Day
ceremonies, or by direction of the Trustees. Fireworks are strictly prohibited. Hunting and trapping are not
allowed in the cemeteries.
K) Green Burials will not be permitted within the Town-owned Cemeteries.
L) Approaching the bereaved and soliciting memorial business, bedding of flowers or plants, or the sale of any
commodity or service is prohibited within the confines of the cemeteries.
M) Exceptions to these rules may be made, on a case-by-case basis, at the discretion of a majority of the
Trustees, at a properly noticed public meeting.
N) In the event of a violation of these Rules and Regulations, the Trustees are authorized to take necessary and
appropriate corrective action as it pertains to said corrective action. Furthermore, the Town of Candia is
authorized to hold the party or parties responsible for said violation and financially accountable for any and all
costs, expenses and charges associated therewith.
SECTION IV : Purchase/Ownership of Lots
A) The Trustees or their agent shall, upon request, furnish to those desiring to purchase rights of burial,
information relative to the current, one-time purchase and maintenance (formerly “perpetual care”) costs per
gravesite and the purchase and installation costs of corner markers for the lot, as established by the Trustees in a
separate “Fee Schedule”. Only the following are eligible to purchase rights of burial:
1. Current residents of the Town;
2. Previous resident of the Town who: a) resided in the Town for a period in excess of fifteen (15) years
AND who; b) relocated outside the Town within the previous two (2) years. Limit of two (2) gravesites. Proof
of eligibility shall include, but not be limited to, certification by Town Clerk or Tax Collector of evidence in
their records of residency/payment of taxes; certified copies of property deeds.
Candia Cemeteries Usage Rules and Regulations
Page 3 of 6
3. Exceptions would be allowed to individuals whose family members are already interred in the Candia
Cemeteries or for other just cause.
B) A deed will be delivered by the Town within thirty (30) days of when the total number of gravesites
purchased is paid in full. The deed will have the seal of the Town on it and will be signed by the members of the
Board of Selectmen. Lack of an executed deed shall not be cause to delay use of the gravesites in the event of
an immediate need, provided payment has been received.
C) Once a deed has been duly issued by the Town, no person shall be considered as the rightful owner of any
lot unless they shall be in possession of said document. If a deed cannot be presented, then the records of the
Trustees shall be considered as final in determining ownership.
D) Descent of Title: The laws of the State of New Hampshire govern the descent of title to cemetery lots, as
well as other matters relating to their ownership. It is important that, on the death of a lot owner, the heirs or
devisees of such person should file with the Trustees full proof of ownership for the purpose of correcting the
record. Notarized statements as to relationship and certified copies of wills or probate documents are normally
sufficient.
E) Address Changes: It shall be the duty of the owner to notify the Trustees of any change in physical or
mailing address. Notice sent to the owners at the last address on file with the Trustees shall be considered
sufficient and proper legal notification.
F) The owners of rights of burial, or their heirs, may not assign or convey those rights to any other party
without having first obtained the written approval of the Trustees; but it shall be the option of the Trustees to
grant or withhold such approval and consent. Subsequent sale of lots by owners, or their heirs, to any other
party is strictly prohibited. An application may be made, in writing, to the Trustees to sell unused lot(s) back to
the Town for an amount equal to the original purchase price; however the Trustees reserve the right to grant or
deny such a request upon review.
SECTION V : Interments
A) The Trustees reserve the right to refuse an interment in any lot if, in their judgment, there is a question of
ownership and/or the right for said interment pursuant to RSA 290:24. No bodies, other than family members,
may be buried in a family plot unless written permission has been obtained from the owner(s) of the said family
plot. It shall be the responsibility of the Funeral Director or the person in charge of said burial to obtain
permission for such burial and to supply the Trustees or their agent written confirmation of the same not less
than fourteen days before the date of burial.
B) No interment shall be made until the Trustees or their agent have been furnished with a permit, as may be
required by the laws of the State of New Hampshire, together with an order from the owner, or the legal
representative, of the right to inter within the lot in question. The Trustees or their designee(s) shall not be liable
for the information contained in said permit, nor for the identity of the person to be interred.
C) No lot shall be opened for interment or exhumation by any person not approved by or in the employ of the
Town under the direction of the Trustees or their agent. Exhumations shall be done at the discretion of the
Trustees without family or relatives in attendance, in accordance with the laws of the State of New Hampshire.
D) When instructions regarding the specific location of remains or cremains within a lot cannot be obtained
from the owner or his/her authorized representative, or the cemetery records, or are imprecise; or when for any
reason, the preferred location cannot be opened where specified, the Trustees or their agent may, at their
discretion, open an area of the lot as deemed best and proper, so as not to delay the funeral. Neither the Trustees
nor their agent shall be liable for any error so made.
Candia Cemeteries Usage Rules and Regulations
Page 4 of 6
E) Interment of more than one remains within a single gravesite is prohibited except, at the discretion of the
Trustees, multiple remains may be interred in one gravesite as follows: parent and child or two infants buried in
one casket; or three separate infants buried at a distance of one foot apart. Further variation may be made in the
case of cremains subject to lot space available, dimensions of urns, and the proposed placement of markers. In
general, up to two (2) cremains are permitted in the same gravesite with one (1) remains. For cremains alone, no
more than four (4) will be permitted per standard gravesite.
F) All interments shall be enclosed within a cement vault, except that infants may require a fiberglass container
thirty (30) inches or less in length and cremations shall require an urn or other permanent container. The natural
grade of the lot must be maintained. Vaults/containers may be procured from any source provided they meet the
established specifications.
G) All funeral processions, while within the grounds, will be subject to the directions of the Trustees or their
agent.
H) The Trustees or their agent reserve the right to postpone interment time due to acts of God, nature, civil, or
national emergencies.
SECTION VI: Cremation Section
A) A cremation lot contains 20 superficial square feet. There shall be only two (2) cremation burials per
Cremation Lot. There will be a maximum of 2 flush markers per cremation lot.
B) Only flush headstones will be allowed in the cremation sections of the cemeteries. Flush markers with
retractable vases may be used only if the vases are returned to the flush position when the flowers are removed.
Flush markers must be no larger than 12x24x4 and shall be placed at the foot of the burial as permitted.
C) In rare instances, we may be asked to relocate cremains to another grave after it has been planted and the
disturbed ground seeded. In order to move cremains a procedure shall be followed. The cremains may be
moved but only to another grave in the same lot. The owner of the lot, or a family member with the owner’s
permission, shall write a letter addressed to the Trustees requesting such move and must note a reason why
cremains must be moved. The Trustee shall, if granted, request the Sexton to arrange to have the cremains
relocated within the same lot. The Family shall pay a fee to the person moving said cremains for the work
before it is completed which shall be known to the family ahead of time. No person or persons shall ever dig up
family cremains and bury them elsewhere, on their own. The permanent burial records reflect where cremains
are placed and therefore cannot be altered without this procedure.
SECTION VII : Memorials
A) No memorial, marker or headstone shall be considered for approval by the Trustees for installation or
maintenance without submission of a properly completed “Memorial Authorization Permit”. Proposed
memorials shall adhere to the “Memorial Size Restrictions” as established by the Trustees. No curbing, fencing,
hedges or enclosures of any kind are allowed around any lot.
B) The Trustees shall have the authority to reject any plan or design for any memorial which, in their opinion,
on account of size, design, inscription, kind or quality of stone is unsuited to the aesthetics of the cemeteries or
the lot on which it is to be placed, may constitute a hazard, or is not in conformity with the Rules and
Regulations.
Candia Cemeteries Usage Rules and Regulations
Page 5 of 6
C) All headstones shall be made of good quality granite, hard marble or slate, and all markers shall be of either
the same material or of quality bronze. Neither shall be permitted to be erected in the cemeteries without a good
and sufficient foundation as approved by the Trustees or their agent.
D) Each memorial placement shall be placed according to the “Memorial Size Restrictions” as established by
the Trustees.
E) Persons engaged in erecting or maintaining memorials are prohibited from attaching ropes to surrounding
headstones, trees and shrubs, or from scattering their material over adjoining lots or from blocking roadways or
pathways or from leaving materials on the ground longer than is absolutely necessary. They must do as little
injury to the area as possible and must remove all debris and restore the ground and sod to its original condition.
Any workmen failing to conform to these regulations may be excluded from the grounds, and the person
employing him shall be responsible for the injuries sustained through his neglect.
F) While a funeral or interment is being conducted nearby, all work of any description shall cease for the
duration.
G) While the Trustees will exercise all possible care to protect all memorials and the raised lettering, carving or
ornaments thereon as part of their general oversight of the cemeteries, any responsibility for any damage or
injury thereto is hereby disclaimed.
SECTION VIII : Permissions/Prohibition/Grievances
A) The lots in the cemeteries shall be used for no other purpose than a place for the interment of human
remains or cremains and memorials as defined in these Rules and Regulations. The interment of animals is
strictly prohibited.
B) Planting of flowers is permitted within one (1) foot in front of headstones only.
C) Planting of trees and shrubs is prohibited. Shrubs and trees already in place at the time these Regulations are
adopted will be grandfathered, provided that:
1. They have not been neglected so as to hinder the maintenance or aesthetics of the cemetery; or
2. They are not, by means of roots or branches, detrimental to said lot or its memorial, or to the adjacent
lots/memorials, roadways, or paths; or
3. They are not a hazard or inconvenience to cemetery visitors, contractors, or others.
In the event any of the above is true, it shall be the duty and the right of the Trustees or their agent to remove
said tree or shrub, or such parts thereof, as are detrimental, dangerous or inconvenient, after an attempt to
contact the owner of the lot and advise them to remove said tree or shrub.
D) While the Trustees fully appreciate that the grieving process is keenly personal in nature, in the interest of
aesthetics and the safety of all, items such as, but not limited to, glass vases, windmills, wind socks, lanterns:
candle, solar or battery, boxes, shells, resin or cement statues that are not part of the headstone, or toys are
prohibited. In addition, no wood, iron, wire, hedge, or other fence shall be erected or maintained on or around
any lot, and no walks of brick, stone, gravel, or similar materials shall be allowed on any lot. These items are, in
general, a hindrance to proper maintenance of the cemetery grounds and are potential hazards to all cemetery
users. As such, the Trustees reserve the right to remove such items if so erected, planted or placed. Special
consideration may be given, on a case by case basis, to allow smaller items to remain which are confined to the
Candia Cemeteries Usage Rules and Regulations
Page 6 of 6
monument base or permitted planting area. Extra flowers are permitted for a 30 day period immediately
following a funeral.
E) The American Flag and Service Flag are permitted and encouraged on Veteran’s, KIA, or Public Service
(i.e., Fireman, Policeman) and by organizations promoting such individuals patriotism as tribute, (such as
DAR/SAR/CAR). However, flags for non-service organizations or other national flags will not be permitted.
Trustees reserve the right to remove any such flag that does not meet with these rules and regulations without
the permission of the owner.
F) Only one wreath is permitted on a gravesite at a time and must be held in a tripod wreath holder, except for
the 30 day period immediately following a funeral. Wreaths must be live evergreen or live flowers only. No
plastic flowers or silk flowers are allowed. Wreaths will be removed when Sexton deems they are no longer
esthetically pleasing.
G) Timely notices will be published twice annually on the Town website and at each cemetery advising owners
of when lots are expected to be attended to by them in preparation for the winter and spring seasons. Items
remaining on lots after the established deadlines are subject to disposal by the Trustees or their agent. In
addition, neglected plantings will be trimmed or removed as necessary.
Be advised that the Trustees, without notice, reserve the right to remove any items which interfere with the
maintenance of the cemeteries, are non-permitted, or become unsightly. The cemetery is only responsible for
damage to monuments or markers if said damage is caused by cemetery personnel.
H) Gravestone rubbings are prohibited without the express written approval of the Trustees or their agent.
I) Any individual, group or organization aggrieved by an action, actual or pending, associated with an
interpretation of these rules and regulations or a difference of opinion as to their meaning and intent may appeal
directly to any of the Trustees and request a meeting with the Trustees. Such request shall be communicated to
the Chair of the Trustees and expeditiously complied with. Any action associated with the matter in contention
shall, if at all possible, be held in abeyance until the meeting is completed.
Reviewed, Revised and Adopted by the Cemetery Trustees at their May 16, 2019 Regular Meeting.
Effective May 16, 2019.
TOWN OF CANDIA, NEW HAMPSHIRE
PLANNING BOARD
RULES OF PROCEDURES
ARTICLE I: AUTHORITY: These rules of Procedure are adopted under the authority of the laws of the State of New
Hampshire, RSA 676:1.
ARTICLE II: NAME: This body shall be known as the Candia Planning Board and may be referred to as “the Board”.
ARTICLE III: OBJECTIVES: The Planning Board shall guide the Town through the preparation of a Master Plan and
Zoning Ordinances, through Subdivision Regulations, Site Plan Reviews, Capital Improvement Plan, and
other means in accordance with the laws of the State of New Hampshire.
ARTICLE IV: MEMBERSHIP:
4.01 Composition:
a. In accordance with the vote taken at Town Meeting on March 17, 1978 the Board shall consist of
seven members, one of whom is a Selectman. In accordance with the vote taken at Town Meeting on
March 17, 1990, the other six Planning Board members shall be elected following the procedures
outline in NH RSA 673:2, II(b).
b. In accordance with the NH RSA 673:6, II, the Planning Board may appoint 5 alternate members, who
shall be designated an alternate to sit in the member’s place if a member is absent or if the member
disqualifies themselves. The alternate appointed by the Board of Selectmen may not replace any other
absent member of the Planning Board, nor may any other Planning Board alternate replace the Ex-
Officio member if they are absent or if they disqualify themselves. (NH RSA 673:6 III and 673: II)
c. Members of the Board may also serve on any other municipal board or commission as allowed by NH
RSA 673:7 (I).
4.02 Term:
The Term of office for an Elected Planning Board member or an alternate member shall be three years,
beginning after elections at annual Town Meeting and ending on the date of Town Meeting for the
appropriate term. The term of office of the Selectmen shall be decided by the Board of Selectmen in
accordance with NH RSA 673:5 (I)(b).
4.03 Vacancies:
Vacancies in the membership of the Planning Board other than through the expiration of a term of office
shall be filled at the time of their occurrences by appointment by the remaining Board members until the
next municipal election, in accordance with the NH RSA 673:12.1.
ARTICLE IV: MEMBERSHIP:
4.04 Duties and Responsibilities:
a. Full Board members are expected to attend all meetings on a regular basis.
b. Notice of Absence – A full Board member unable to attend a meeting shall, at the earliest possible
time, inform the Land Use Assistant.
c. Alternate members are encouraged to attend meetings on a regular basis.
d. Visit the sites of proposals being considered by the Board, when so voted by a majority of the Board.
e. Vote on all motions except in those cases where the member has a conflict of interest or is
disqualified for any cause as found in the laws of New Hampshire, RSA 673:14.
f. To be familiar with the Zoning Ordinances and Adopted Planning Regulations of the Town of Candia
and with the NH RSA 674:1.
2
ARITCLE V: OFFICERS:
5.01 Election, Term, and Vacancies:
a. The officers of this organization shall be a Chairman and a Vice Chairman, elected by a majority vote
at a meeting of the Board occurring in the month of March.
b. The term of office for each officer shall be one year, from April 1 to March 31, or until a successor is
elected.
c. Officers shall be eligible for re-election.
d. Any vacancy shall be filed by majority vote of the Board at the time of its occurrence.
5.02 Duties and Responsibilities:
a. The Chair shall:
1. preside over all meetings and hearings and shall set the agenda for each meeting.
2. appoint committees as deemed necessary or as directed by the Board.
3. affix his or her signature in the name of the Board; and
4. prepare and present a budget to the Board prior to providing a recommendation to the Board
of Selectmen.
b. The Vice Chairman shall preside in the absence of the Chairman and shall have full power of the
Chairman on matters which come before the Board during the absence of the Chairman.
ARTICLE VI: MEETINGS:
6.01 Time and Place:
Regular meetings shall be held on the first and third Wednesdays of each month unless otherwise posted
at the town office. Other meetings shall be at the discretion of the Chairperson.
6.02 Quorum:
A quorum for regular business shall consist of 4 members.
6.03 Notifications of Meetings:
a. Notice of each Planning Board meeting shall be posted in accordance with NH RSA 91-A:2, II.
b. Agenda, and when possible, basic information necessary for attending to the business at hand, shall
be distributed to the members no later than 24 hours prior to each meeting.
c. In the event that a regularly scheduled Planning Board meeting is cancelled due to weather, lack of a
quorum or for any other reason, that meeting will be rescheduled for the following evening at the
same time and location. If the rescheduled meeting is cancelled, the meeting will be held one week
from the original meeting date at the same time and location. A description of this procedure shall be
included in all Planning Board Agendas and in all abutter notification letters.
6.04 Voting Procedures:
Every qualified member, including the Chairman, votes at the same time when a vote is called by the
Chairman. A Roll Call vote will then be made by the Chair.
6.05 Conduct of Meetings:
a. The Chairman, with the concurrence of the Board, shall establish the procedure and order of business
at each meeting and each hearing.
b. The Chairman shall allow public comment during all meetings and hearings.
c. Testimony at public hearing shall be made through the Chairman and in accordance with procedure
established at the beginning of each hearing.
3
6.06 Minutes of the Meetings:
a. A record of those present and of action taken at all meetings shall be kept. All votes take shall be
recorded, noting those in favor and those opposed to the motion.
b. Minority opinions shall be recorded at the discretion of the Chairman or by the majority vote of the
Board.
6.07 Records:
Records of all meetings, transactions, and decisions of the Board shall be maintained in the office of the
Town of Candia.
ARTICLE VII: COMMITTEES: Committees shall be appointed by the Chairman or as required by the Board;
membership of the committees need not be limited to Planning Board members.
ARTICLE VIII: OPERATION FUNDS: STAFF:
8.01 Funds:
Funds for the conduct of business of the Board shall come from the revenues of the Town of Candia and
from other available sources as determined by the Board of Selectmen.
ARTICLE IX: AMENDMENTS: The Rules of Procedure may be amended by majority vote at any duly noticed meeting
of the Board, provided that the proposed amendments are read at one meeting
receding the vote.
ARTICLE X: VALIDITY: If any portion of these Rules and Procedures shall be held to be invalid for any reason by any
court, such holding shall not invalidate in any matter any other provision contained herein.
ARTICLE XI: LEGALITY: If any portion of these Rules of Procedures shall be found in conflict with the laws of the
State of New Hampshire, the state statute shall prevail.
Adopted: 11/16/88
Amended: 4/17/91, 3/17/93, 9/3/03
Re-Adopted: 4/5/17
Amended: 10/2/19




TOWN OF CANDIA
NEW HAMPSHIRE
EARTH EXCAVATIONS REGULATIONS
HISTORY:
Adopted January 11, 1989
Amended August 4, 2010
Amended July 19, 2017
Amended April 3, 2019
Town of Candia Earth Excavation Regulations April 3, 2019
2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
REGULATIONS GOVERNING EARTH EXCAVATIONS ........................................................................... 3
SECTION I: AUTHORITY .......................................................................................................................... 3
SECTION II: PURPOSE AND SCOPE ........................................................................................................ 3
SECTION III: DEFINITIONS ...................................................................................................................... 3
SECTION IV: PROJECTS REQUIRING A PERMIT ................................................................................. 6
SECTION V: PROJECTS EXEMPT FROM A PERMIT ............................................................................ 6
SECTION VI: ABANDONED EXCAVATIONS ........................................................................................ 7
SECTION VII: PROHIBITED PROJECTS .................................................................................................. 8
SECTION VIII: EXCAVATION EXPANSIONS ........................................................................................ 9
SECTION IX: OPERATIONAL STANDARDS .......................................................................................... 9
SECTION X: SITE RECLAMATION STANDARDS ............................................................................... 11
SECTION XI: INCREMENTAL RECLAMATION .................................................................................. 12
SECTION XII: BLASTING AND ROCK FACE SLOPES ........................................................................ 12
SECTION XIII: PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE ................................................................................... 14
SECTION XIV: EXCEPTIONS .................................................................................................................. 14
SECTION XV: APPLICATION PROCEDURES ...................................................................................... 14
SECTION XVI: APPLICATION SUBMISSION ITEMS.......................................................................... 16
SECTION XVII: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT .............................................................. 19
SECTION XVIII: SEPARABILITY ........................................................................................................... 20
SECTION XIV: EFFECTIVE DATE ......................................................................................................... 20
APPENDIX I ................................................................................................................................................ 21
APPLICATION PACKAGE ........................................................................................................................ 21
APPENDIX II ............................................................................................................................................... 27
EXCAVATION PERMIT ............................................................................................................................ 27
APPENDIX III ............................................................................................................................................. 29
SAMPLE SURETY LETTER ...................................................................................................................... 29
Town of Candia Earth Excavation Regulations April 3, 2019
3
REGULATIONS GOVERNING EARTH EXCAVATIONS
SECTION I: AUTHORITY
Chapter 155-E of the New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated stipulates that, with some exceptions, all
earth excavations in the State are subject to regulation from the local municipality in which the operation
occurs. Pursuant to the authority vested in the Planning Board by the voters of the Town of CANDIA and
RSA 155-E, the Planning Board adopts the following regulations to govern the excavation of earth materials
in the Town of CANDIA.
SECTION II: PURPOSE AND SCOPE
The goals of this regulation are to: provide for reasonable opportunities for excavation; minimize safety
hazards which can be created by open excavations; ensure that the public health and welfare will be
safeguarded; protect natural resources and the environment; and maintain the aesthetic features of the Town.
For the purpose of achieving these goals, no earth materials in the Town shall be removed except in
conformance with these regulations.
SECTION III: DEFINITIONS
A. ABANDONED EXCAVATION means an excavation site from which no earth of a minimum of 50 tons
weight or volume to be commercially useful has been removed from that excavation site during any twoyear
period, either before, on, or after August 4, 1989 as described in RSA 155-E:2 II (a).
B. ABUTTER means (1) any person whose property is located in New Hampshire and adjoins or is directly
across the street or stream from the land under consideration. (2) For the purposes of receiving testimony
only, and not for purposes of notification, the term “abutter” shall include any person who is able to
demonstrate that his land will be directly affected by the proposal under consideration. (3) In the case of
an abutting property being under a condominium or other collective form of ownership, the term “abutter”
means the officers of the collective or association, as defined in RSA 356-B:3, XXIII.B. (4) For purposes
of notification and receiving testimony, “abutter” means all affected towns and the regional planning
commission(s) in the case of a development having regional impact, as determined by the Board. (5) For
any earth excavation permit application involving blasting, “abutter” shall also include any person whose
land is located within ½ mile (2,640 feet) of the area in which blasting is proposed.
C. AGRICULTURAL EXCAVATION means excavation of earth by the Owner of the land to be used on the
Owner’s land exclusively for agricultural use.
D. AGRICULTURAL USE means land used for agriculture, farming, dairying, pasturage, apiculture,
horticulture, floriculture, silviculture and animal and poultry husbandry.
E. APPLICANT means the Owner of the property to be excavated or the Owner’s agent, so designated in
writing as part of the excavation application.
F. APPLICANTION FOR AMENDMENT means an amendment of an existing excavation permit pursuant
to the provisions of RSA 155-E:6.
Town of Candia Earth Excavation Regulations April 3, 2019
4
G. AQUIFER means a geologic formation, group of formations, or part of a formation that is capable of
yielding quantities of ground water usable for a municipal or private water supply.
H. BOARD means the Town of Candia, NH Planning Board.
I. BUFFER means the area between the top of slope of an excavation and a highway right-of-way, an abutting
property or a river, stream, wetland or a regulated floodway.
J. COMMERCIAL EXCAVATION means excavation of earth intended for commerce, This may also
include excavation that is strictly conducted for the purpose of alteration, renovation, improvement or
construction to the property on which the excavation takes place. Any material leaving the property for
whatever reason is considered to be a commercial operation.
K. COMPLIANCE INSPECTION means a mandatory inspection of site conditions, erosion and
sedimentation control measures, construction sequencing as they relate to the approved plans, permits,
order of conditions and Town of Candia Ordinances.
L. CONTIGUOUS means land whose perimeter can be circumscribed without interruption in common
ownership except for roads or other easements, in a single town.
M. DIMENSION STONE means rock that is cut, shaped or selected for use in blocks, slabs, sheets, or other
construction units of specified shapes or sizes and is used for external or interior parts of buildings,
foundations, curbing, paving, flagging, bridges, revetments, or for other architectural or engineering
purposes. Dimension stone includes quarry blocks from which sections of dimension stone are to be
produced. Dimension stone does not include earth as defined below.
N. EARTH means sand, gravel, rock, top soil, loam or construction aggregate produced by quarrying,
crushing or any other mining activity or such other naturally-occurring unconsolidated materials that
normally mask the bedrock.
O. EXCAVATION means a land area which is used, or has been used, for the commercial taking of earth,
including all slopes.
P. EXCAVATION AREA means the area within an excavation site where excavation has occurred or is
eligible to occur under the provisions of RSA 155-E. This is also known as the pit area.
Q. EXCAVATION SITE means any area of contiguous land in common ownership upon which excavation
takes place.
R. EXCAVATION FEE means a fee established by the Board, submitted by the Applicant to the Planning
Board, following the public hearing and prior to the issuance of an excavation permit, to defray the cost of
processing the application.
S. EXCAVATION PERMIT means a permit issued by the Board allowing the excavation of material at a
specific site, in a manner consistent with RSA 155-E and local regulations for the period designated on the
permit itself.
T. EXISTING EXCAVATION means any excavation, as described in RSA 155-E: 2, I, which lawfully
existed as of August 24, 1979, from which earth material of sufficient weight or volume to be commercially
Town of Candia Earth Excavation Regulations April 3, 2019
5
useful had been removed during the 2-year period before August 24, 1979 and had submitted the report as
required by RSA 155-E:2, I, (d).
U. EXPANSION means excavation and disturbance of earth beyond the limits as shown on the plan as
approved by the regulator.
V. INCIDENTAL EXCAVATION means excavation of earth which has been granted an exception from an
excavation permit by the regulator.
W. MINOR TOPOGRAPHICAL ADJUSTMENT means a one time removal of earth from the site of less than
1000 cubic yards that is exclusively necessary to change the physical configuration of the land for a
specified use or situation.
X. NORMAL LANDSCAPING means the on- site alteration and contouring of the land exclusively devoted
to improving the functional utility and planting of the grounds.
Y. OVERBURDEN means earth and other natural materials over and around the minerals which will be
displaced by excavation operations.
Z. PIT AGREEMENT means an agreement between the excavation site Owner and the Contractor describing
the procedure for material excavation (see Section 106.02 of "Standard Specifications for Roads and
Bridges" published by the New Hampshire Department of Public Works and Highways).
AA. QUARRY means an excavation in bedrock open to the surface excavated for the purpose of removing
rock, minerals or metallic ores.
BB. RECLAMATION means the restoring of an excavation site to a standard at least equal to those outlined
in Section X of these regulations.
CC. REFERENCE LINE see RSA 483-B:4, XVII.
DD. REGULATOR means: The Town of Candia, NH Planning Board
EE. STATIONARY MANUFACTURING AND/OR PROCESSING PLANTS means facilities which are
placed on a site for the purposes of sorting, washing, screening, crushing, classifying, drying or processing
excavated earth materials.
FF. TEMPORARY PROCESSING EQUIPMENT means machinery or equipment placed on a site for less than
three (3) months for the purposes of sorting, washing, screening, crushing, classifying, drying or processing
excavated materials.
GG. TRIP means a single or one-direction vehicle movement with either the origin or the destination
(exiting or entering) inside a study site. For trip generation purposes, the total trip for a land use over a
given period of time is the total of all trips entering plus all trips exiting a site during a designated time
period.
II. VISUAL BARRIER means a man-made structure or natural vegetative growth. This includes, but is not
limited to; vegetated fence rows; forested land whether managed or undisturbed, natural or planted. Where
no effective barrier exists, the Board may require the planting of a row of evergreens at least 4 feet in
Town of Candia Earth Excavation Regulations April 3, 2019
6
height at planting, which will grow to a dense vegetative buffer no less than 6 feet high, or the construction
of a Board-approved fence that is opaque, neatly maintained, and not less than 6 feet high.
JJ. WELL means a hole or shaft sunk into the earth to tap an underground supply of water.
SECTION IV: PROJECTS REQUIRING A PERMIT
A. The regulator of the Town of CANDIA has determined that none of the excavation sites within the
Municipality have met the burden of proof that they are exempt from a permit under RSA 155-E:2, I
(Existing Excavation) and RSA 155-E:2, III (Stationary Manufacturing Plants).
B. Any excavation proposing to begin operation after the effective date of these regulations.
SECTION V: PROJECTS EXEMPT FROM A PERMIT
A. No permit shall be required under these Regulations for excavation which is performed exclusively for
the lawful construction, reconstruction, or maintenance of a class I, II, III, IV, or V highway by a unit
of government having jurisdiction for the highway or by an agent of the unit of government which has
a contract for the construction, reconstruction, or maintenance of the highway, subject, however, to the
following:
1) A copy of the pit agreement executed by the Owner, the agent, and the governmental unit shall
be filed with the Regulator prior to the start of excavation. The failure to file such agreement,
or the failure of the excavator to comply with the terms of such agreement, shall be deemed a
violation of these Regulations, and may be enforced pursuant to SECTION XVI.
2) Such excavation shall not be exempt from the Town of Candia Zoning Ordinance, or other
applicable ordinances, unless such an exemption is granted pursuant to Subsection A.3) below,
or from the operational and reclamation standards as expressly set forth in RSA 155-E:4a, 5
and 5a, which express standards shall be the sole standards with which such excavations must
comply in order to retain their nonpermit status as provided under this Section A. Before
beginning such excavation, the governmental unit or its agents shall certify to the Regulator
that:
i. The excavation shall comply with the operational and reclamation standards of; RSA
155-E:4-a, 5 and 5a.
ii. The excavation shall not be within fifty feet of the boundary of a disapproving abutter
or within ten feet of the boundary of an approving abutter, unless requested in writing
by said approving abutter;
iii. The excavation shall not be unduly hazardous or injurious to the public welfare;
iv. Existing visual barriers to public highways shall not be removed, except to provide
access to the excavation;
v. The excavation shall not substantially damage a known aquifer, so designated by the
U.S. Geological Survey; and
vi. All required permits for the excavation from state or federal agencies have been
obtained.
3) The New Hampshire Department of Transportation or its agent may apply directly to the
appeals board created under RSA 21-L to be exempted from the provisions of the Town of
Candia Zoning Ordinance or other ordinances or regulations, with respect to the excavation or
Town of Candia Earth Excavation Regulations April 3, 2019
7
transportation of materials being used exclusively for lawful construction, reconstruction, or
maintenance of a class I, II, or III highway.
i. The application shall state whether the Applicant has requested any exceptions or
variances which may be available at the local level, and shall describe the outcome of
such requests.
ii. Prior to acting on the application, the Board shall hold a hearing in the Town of Candia.
At least ten (10) days prior to such hearing, notice shall be published in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Town, and shall be sent by certified mail to the Applicant, the
Chairman of the Conservation Commission and Board of Selectmen, if the proposed
exemption concerns an excavation site, to the abutters of that site as defined in
SECTION III.
iii. Following the hearing, the board shall issue a written decision, copies of which shall be
mailed to the Applicant and the parties to whom notice was sent. If an exemption is
granted, the written decision shall include:
1. A statement of the precise section of the ordinance or regulation from which the
Applicant is exempted. The Applicant shall not be exempt from any section or
provisions not so listed.
2. An identification of the public interest being protected by the ordinance or
regulation.
3. A statement of the state interest involved, and of why, in the opinion of the
board, that the state interest overrides the interest protected by the ordinance or
regulation.
4. Any conditions to be imposed on the Applicant, to protect the public health,
safety, or welfare.
iv. The decision of the Board may be appealed in the manner provided for zoning decisions
in RSA 677:4-14; provided, however, that a decision under this Subsection 4.3 shall be
considered a rehearing under RSA 677, and no further motion for rehearing shall be
required.
B. The following projects are deemed to be an exception from requiring a permit :
1) Excavation of earth that is a direct consequence and is exclusively incidental to the lawful
construction or alteration of a building or structure, a parking lot or way including a driveway
on a portion of the premises where removal occurs. This excavation cannot be started, however,
until all required state and local permits have been issued.
2) Excavation from a granite quarry for the purpose of producing dimension stone, if such
excavation requires a permit under RSA 12-E (Mining and Reclamation).
3) Any excavations required during a catastrophic event or a state of emergency as determined by
the Town of Candia Selectmen or the Road Agent.
A person owning land abutting a site which was taken by eminent domain or by any other governmental
taking upon which construction is taking place may stockpile earth taken from the construction site and
may remove the earth at a later date after written notification to the Board.
SECTION VI: ABANDONED EXCAVATIONS
A. Any excavation, for which the affected area has not been brought into complete compliance with the
reclamation standards of this regulation shall be considered abandoned if:
Town of Candia Earth Excavation Regulations April 3, 2019
8
1) No material of sufficient weight or volume to be commercially useful has been removed from the
site during any 2-year period either before, on, or after August 4, 1989.
2) The excavation is in use, but either has not been brought into compliance with the incremental
reclamation standards of this regulation, or a bond has not been posted and a reclamation timetable
has not been approved by the Board.
3) The Owner or operator of the excavation has neither secured a permit pursuant to these regulations.
B. In the event the Board determines that any abandoned excavation presents a hazard to the public
health, safety or welfare, the Owner may be required, following a public hearing, to comply with the
timetable and bonding requirements outlined above, or to complete reclamation within a reasonable
period of time. Should reclamation not be completed, the Board may request the Town to authorize
reclamation at the Town’s expense. The Town’s costs shall constitute an assessment against the
Owner, and shall create a lien against the property. Such assessment and lien may be enforced and
collected in the same manner as provided for real estate taxes
C. The provisions of Paragraph B above also apply to any excavation which ceased commercially-useful
operation prior to August 24, 1977, but for which the affected area has not been brought into
compliance with the reclamation standards, if the Board determines in writing that a danger to public
health or safety exists.
SECTION VII: PROHIBITED PROJECTS
A. Excavations within 25 feet of the property boundary.
B. Excavations within 200 feet of an existing private water supply source and 100 feet of an existing
community or municipal water supply source.
C. Where existing visual barriers would be removed, except to provide access to the excavation.
D. Where the issuance of the permit would be unduly hazardous or injurious to the public welfare. The
Board shall give particular consideration to such factors as noise, traffic, dust, fumes, or danger from
operation.
E. The Board shall not grant a permit where the hours of proposed operation will create a disturbance to
abutters or neighbors who live on the street(s) providing access to the site. Unacceptable hours of
operation shall presumptively include operation beyond 7 am to 6 pm Monday through Friday and 8
am to 12 noon on Saturday, with no operation on Sunday.
F. Where an Applicant cannot demonstrate to the Board adequate safeguards to prevent damage to a
known aquifer, as designated by the United States Geological Survey.
1) Excavation operations shall be performed in such a manner as to not cause damage to any aquifer.
The Planning Board shall determine whether or not damage to the aquifer will be incurred by
considering the following criteria:
Town of Candia Earth Excavation Regulations April 3, 2019
9
i. The excavation shall not detrimentally affect the quality of groundwater contained in the aquifer
by directly contributing to pollution or by increasing the long-term susceptibility of the aquifer
to potential pollutants;
ii. The excavation shall not cause a significant reduction in the long-term volume of water
contained in the aquifer or in the storage capacity of the aquifer.
iii. The Board may require that the Applicant provide data or reports prepared by a professional
groundwater consultant, which assess the potential aquifer damage that could be caused by the
proposed excavation project. The Board may require that the information submitted be
reviewed by its own groundwater expert at the Applicant’s expense.
G. When the excavation does not receive necessary approvals from state or federal agencies, such as
Alteration of Terrain or Wetlands permits.
H. Where the excavation is not permitted by zoning or other applicable ordinances, provided, however, that
reasonable opportunities for excavation exist in town, as described in RSA 155-E:4,III.
I. Where the project cannot comply with the requirements of these regulations ordinances.
J. When the Applicant cannot demonstrate excavation operations can be performed in such a manner as not
to cause damage to any abutting properties, building, utilities, features or facilities.
SECTION VIII: EXCAVATION EXPANSIONS
When the scope of an approved excavation is proposed to be altered as to affect either the size or location of
the excavation, the rate of removal, or the plan for reclamation, the Owner must submit a new application for
an excavation permit following the regulation criteria in Section XV. As part of the hearing process the
regulator will consider any adverse impacts that may occur with the granting of a permit. Impacts will vary
depending upon the particular neighborhood; nevertheless, the following criteria will be taken into
consideration:
? The excavation will not cause a diminution in area property values or unreasonably change the character
of the neighborhood.
? The excavation will not create any nuisance or create health or safety hazards.
? The excavation will not unreasonably accelerate the deterioration of highways or create safety hazards in
the use thereof.
SECTION IX: OPERATIONAL STANDARDS
A. For those excavations requiring a permit, these standards are considered to be the minimum; more stringent
standards such as are consistent with the purpose of these regulations may be applied, as deemed necessary
by the Board.
1. No excavation shall be permitted closer than 150 feet to an existing building or structure that
requires a building permit.
2. No excavation shall be permitted below road level within 50 feet of the right-of-way of any public
highway as defined in RSA 229:1 unless such excavation is for the purpose of said highway.
Town of Candia Earth Excavation Regulations April 3, 2019
10
3. Vegetation shall be maintained, or, if not existing, shall be established within the peripheral areas
of items 1 and 2 of this section in accordance with acceptable horticultural practices.
4. No fuels, lubricants or other toxic or polluting chemicals shall be stored on-site unless in
compliance with State laws or rules pertaining to the storage of such materials.
5. Where temporary slopes will exceed a 1:1 grade, a fence or other suitable barricade shall be erected
to warn of danger and/or to limit access to the site.
6. Appropriate drainage shall be provided to prevent the accumulation of freestanding water for
prolonged periods in accordance with RSA 155-E 4-a IV.
7. Excavation practices which result in continued siltation of surface waters or any degradation of
water quality of any public or private water supplies are prohibited. The burden of proof lies on
the injured party to submit in writing to the Board details of the incident.
8. No excavation shall be permitted within 100 feet of any great pond, navigable river, or any other
standing body of water 10 acres or more in area, or within 75 feet of any other stream, river or
brook which normally flows throughout the year, or any naturally-occurring standing body of water
less than 10 acres, prime wetland as designated in accordance with RSA 482-A: 15, I, or any other
wetland greater than 5 acres in area as defined by the Wetlands Board.
9. Acceptable hours of operation shall be 7 am – 6 pm Monday through Friday and 8 am – 12 noon
on Saturday, with no operation on Sunday. The Board may modify these hours depending on
resident’s needs and the needs of the gravel pit owners.
10. No excavation shall be permitted within six feet of the seasonal high water table. A waiver to such
prohibition shall be granted if the Applicant demonstrates that such excavation will not adversely
affect water quality, provided, however, that written notice of such exception shall be recorded in
the registry of deeds, one copy filed with the Department of Environmental Services, and one copy
filed with the Board.
11. Natural vegetation adjacent to neighboring properties on which excavation is not intended shall be
maintained for the purposes of erosion control, screening, noise reduction, and property valuation.
A vegetative or topographical buffer of a minimum of fifty feet shall be maintained between
surrounding streets, highways commercial and residential land uses and the excavation site. The
Regulator shall direct the Applicant as to specific requirements for the proposed excavation site
and may in its discretion waive or alter the fifty-foot requirement in unusual situations or in the
case of an approving a butter, but in no case, shall the buffer ever be less than twenty-five feet.
12. Where existing, a natural woodland buffer shall be maintained within 150 feet of the reference line.
The purpose of this buffer shall be to protect the quality of public waters by minimizing erosion,
preventing siltation and turbidity, stabilizing soils, preventing excess nutrients and chemical
pollution, maintaining natural water temperatures, maintaining a healthy tree canopy and
understory, preserving fish and wildlife habitat, and respecting the overall natural condition of the
protected shoreland.
13. All temporary structures required during excavation operations shall be removed from the site
within ninety (90) days after such operations cease.
Town of Candia Earth Excavation Regulations April 3, 2019
11
14. Excavation sites shall be kept free of all discarded waste material; i.e. machine parts, cables, cans,
miscellaneous debris, trash, etc. In addition, no solid and/or hazardous waste, septage, dredge
spoils, or organic waste and debris shall be disposed of on the excavation site unless specifically
authorized and/or permitted by the appropriate federal, state or local authority(s).
15. All excavation operators shall report the amount of material removed to the Town
Engineer/Building Inspector. Said reports shall be submitted quarterly, as required. The Town
Engineer/Building Inspector shall perform an on-site inspection to determine the accuracy of the
reports.
16. All equipment for sorting, washing, crushing, drying, processing and treating or other operation
machinery shall not be used closer than one hundred feet from any public street or from any
adjoining lot line.
17. No excavation of an area shall exceed five (5) acres at any one time without reclamation.
18. The Applicant shall be responsible for the restoration or repair of any existing Town road(s) which
access the excavation site which are damaged as a result of hauling or excavation operations. The
Regulator may require that these costs be bonded prior to the granting of a permit to excavate.
19. Trucks operating on any roads within the Town of Candia, will be limited to NHDOT statutory
weights. Gravel excavation, loading and hauling will be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on Town
roads, Monday through Friday only.
20. No hauling over Town roads will be allowed from December 1st to May 1st of any given year unless
a bond for road repair is posted with the Selectmen of the Town at the time of issuance of the
permit. The amount and form of the bond will be determined by the Selectmen.
21. All proposed temporary or permanent drainage shall meet the requirements of the Town of Major
Site Plan Regulations.
22. Reinforced construction fencing, such as chain link fence, shall be provided for all locations where
temporary side slopes exceed two (2) horizontal feet to one (1) vertical foot. Permanent fencing
consisting of chain link fence or wood fence, six (6) feet or taller, shall be provided uphill of all
locations where permanent side slopes exceed one (1) vertical feet to two (2) horizontal feet.
23. Slope stabilization fabric or rip rap shall be designed and provided for all locations where
permanent slopes are proposed in excess of three (3) vertical feet to one (1) horizontal foot.
B. For those excavations that have been deemed to be incidental, and have received and exception from a
permit, the regulator may impose operational conditions and a performance bond as may be deemed
necessary to insure completion of the proposed project.
SECTION X: SITE RECLAMATION STANDARDS
A. For excavations requiring a permit, these standards are considered to be the minimum; more stringent
standards such as are consistent with the purpose of these regulations may be applied, as deemed necessary
by the Board.
Town of Candia Earth Excavation Regulations April 3, 2019
12
B. Within 12 months following the expiration date of a permit issued under these regulations, or the
completion of any excavation, whichever occurs first, the excavated area shall be reclaimed in accordance
with the following standards:
1. Areas visible from a public way, from which trees have been removed, shall be replanted with tree
seedlings, set out in accordance with acceptable horticultural practices.
2. Except for exposed rock ledge, all disturbed areas shall be spread with topsoil or any other soil
capable of maintaining vegetation, and shall be planted and maintained with seedlings or grass
suitable to prevent erosion.
3. All earth and vegetative debris resulting from the excavation shall be removed or otherwise lawfully
disposed of.
4. All slopes, except for exposed ledge, shall be graded to natural repose for the type of soil of which
they are composed so as to control erosion or at a ratio of horizontal to vertical proposed by the
Owner and approved by the Board. Changes of slope shall not be abrupt, but shall blend with the
surrounding terrain.
5. Any standing bodies of water created by the excavation that are judged to constitute a hazard to
health and safety shall be eliminated.
6. The topography of the land shall be left so that water draining from the site leaves the property at
the original, natural drainage points and in the natural proportions of flow.
7. Any excavation permit Applicant that requires a RSA 485-A17 alteration of terrain permit from
NH DES shall incorporate the requirements of these regulations, to the extent that they are more
restrictive, in any NH DES permit application. Copies of all such permits shall be filed with the
Board.
SECTION XI: INCREMENTAL RECLAMATION
Any excavated area of 5 contiguous acres or more which is depleted of commercial earth materials, excluding
bedrock, or any excavation from which earth materials of sufficient weight or volume to be commercially
useful have not been removed for a 2-year period, shall be reclaimed in accordance with Section X of these
regulations within 12 months following such depletion or non-use, regardless of whether other excavation is
occurring on adjacent land in contiguous ownership. A reclamation plan, including a reclamation timetable
for the depleted areas within the reclamation site, shall be submitted to the Board for approval.
SECTION XII: BLASTING AND ROCK FACE SLOPES
A. If an excavation requires the blasting of materials, Applicant shall so indicate in the application and
certify that all blasting operations shall conform to NH RSA 158, along with the rules and regulations
for Explosives promulgated by the Division of State Police, NH Department of Safety.
B. Local Blasting Permit Required
1. Blasting permits are issued and administered by the Candia Fire Chief or designee. Blasters
shall be responsible to pay local blasting permit fees, as determined required by the Regulator.
Town of Candia Earth Excavation Regulations April 3, 2019
13
2. Blasting permits shall not be issued for excavation sites until an excavation permit has been
issued by the Planning Board.
3. The Fire Department, building department and all abutters shall receive written notified by the
Applicant or the Developer a minimum of 7-days prior to the start of blasting operations and at
the end of blasting operations.
4. The Town of Candia Fire Department shall be notified daily of blasting operations
C. Additional Minimum Requirements for Blasting
1. In recognizing that blasting for excavation sites can be intense and frequent for short-term
projects or occur over a period of years, the Planning Board must collect information that will
enable it to determine a project’s ability to comply with the goals as delineated in Section II of
these Regulations. To that end, the Planning Board shall require from an Applicant, at a
minimum, but not be limited to:
i. Studies that will provide analysis of potential for groundwater or aquifer contamination
from blasting, (i.e. – hydro geologic study, etc.);
ii. Detailed Blasting Plan to include drilling, explosives handling and loading procedure;
observation procedures; blast evaluation procedures; procedures for handling and
storage of blasted rock; and spill prevention measures and mitigation;
iii. As a condition precedent of an excavation permit, the Planning Board may require the
Applicant to conduct pre-blast surveys on all structures and wells not controlled by the
Applicant up to within 2,000 feet of the excavation area limits. Applicant shall provide
a detailed record of each survey to the Fire Chief or his designee in the project file.
Applicant shall be responsible for providing updated information annually over the term
of the excavation permit.
D. Rock Face Slopes
1. All temporary and permanent rock face slope designs and details shall be in conformance with
current New Hampshire DOT standards and specifications.
2. All rock face slopes shall be designed by and stamped by a Geotechnical Engineer, with a
current professional Engineer registration in the State of New Hampshire.
3. The maximum allowable temporary and permanent rock face slopes shall be based design by
the Geotechnical Engineer of record but shall not exceed a maximum slope of 1 foot horizontal
to 4 feet vertical.
4. Fall zones shall be provided that are greater than or equal to half the height of the excavation.
Fall zones shall be designed to slope towards the rock face at the base of the rock face.
5. Stone slopes shall be designed based on the stability of the existing material.
6. Under no circumstances shall stormwater be allowed to flow over rock face slopes in excess of
six (6) vertical feet.
Town of Candia Earth Excavation Regulations April 3, 2019
14
7. Permanent reinforced chain link fencing, six (6) feet or taller, shall be provided uphill of all
rock face slopes.
SECTION XIII: PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE
A. Prior to the granting of any permit the Applicant shall submit to the Selectmen a bond with sufficient surety
as determined by the Planning Board. The purposes of the bond are to guarantee reclamation of the area,
compliance with the permit, and any inspections. Off-site improvements for potential damage of Town
roads or facilities caused by the transportation of earth materials shall be discussed at this stage. The surety
estimate will be determined by the Town’s Engineer.
B. The surety may be in the form of cash or letters of credit, which shall be in an amount and form acceptable
to the Board and its legal counsel. The surety may be phased to coincide with the phasing of work, in an
amount sufficient to guarantee reclamation of the applicable section, to be released as sections are
completed. Prior to a new section being opened, new securities shall be posted. The surety shall not be
released until the Board is satisfied that all conditions of the site reclamation plan have been complied
with.
C. The surety may be reduced by the Board of Selectmen, in conjunction with the Road Agent and the Town’s
Engineer, during the course of construction, in such amounts as deemed to be in the best interest of the
Town, and that the remaining performance guarantee shall be sufficient to complete all remaining
construction and provide adequate retainage.
D. 90% of the surety may be released when the Selectmen, in conjunction with the Road Agent and the
Town’s Engineer, are satisfied that the Applicant has complied with all the requirements as set forth in the
approved final site plan. The decision to release the performance guarantee will be based upon an
assessment of the plans, the proposed construction activities and the final status of work completed. The
Selectmen shall notify the Planning Board when all conditions of the performance guarantee have been
met, and shall have the authority to release the bond.
The remaining 10% of the performance bond shall not be released until all proposed work activities have
been satisfactorily completed for one (1) year.
E. If the Applicant has not complied within two years of the date of the approved permit, the Town may
enforce the Town's rights by using the funds from the posted surety. In the event that the Town is required
to enforce the performance guarantee, the Town shall be entitled to have Attorney's fees paid by the
Applicant.
SECTION XIV: EXCEPTIONS
Due to the diverse nature of excavation operations which vary in scale and scope, and due to the varying
conditions of the land to be excavated, the Board may, upon application and following a duly-noticed hearing,
grant any exception in writing to the standards contained in Sections IX, X, XI, and XII for good cause shown.
The written decision shall state specifically what requirements are being waived and include any reasonable
alternatives.
SECTION XV: APPLICATION PROCEDURES
Town of Candia Earth Excavation Regulations April 3, 2019
15
Prior to the Board rendering a decision for an excavation permit, a public hearing shall be held, with due
notification of all abutters and the public. The procedure for holding these public hearings is as follows:
A. Excavation Permit Application Review
1. Applications for an excavation permits shall be filed with the Planning Board Clerk no later than
30 days before the next regularly scheduled Planning Board meeting. A complete application shall
consist of a completed application page including submission items, a completed abutters list, and
the appropriate fees as calculated on the application page
2. The application will be reviewed with the Applicant at the scheduled meeting. If the application is
found to meet all submission requirements it will be accepted and voted by the regulator as
complete and the hearing scheduled. Should the application not be accepted as complete, another
review meeting must be scheduled for re-submission as outlined in Section XV, A, 1.
B. Board Action on Completed Application
1. Upon acceptance of a completed application the Planning Board will hold a public hearing within
30 days to consider the application.
2. Within 20 days of the close of the hearing on the application, or any continuation thereof, the Board
shall make a decision. Notice of this decision shall be recorded in the minutes of the meeting and
placed on file in the Town offices within 144 hours.
3. The Applicant shall receive a copy of the minutes along with the decision. If the application was
approved with special conditions, these conditions shall also be stated. In the event the application
is disapproved, the reasons for the disapproval shall be given.
C. Notices Required for Public Hearing
1. All abutters will be notified by certified mail, not less than 10 days prior to the meeting at which
the application will be submitted for acceptance. Names and addresses of abutters must be taken
from Town records not more than five (5) days before filing the application.
2. Public notice will appear in a newspaper of general circulation and in at least three public places
not less than 10 days prior to the meeting.
3. The notice must include the location and general description of the proposal, as well as the date,
time and place of the meeting.
D. Fee Schedule
1. The following schedule of fees shall apply to all major Earth Excavation plan review applications:
A. Application Fee $200.00
B. Legal Notice Fee $50.00*
C. Abutters, Applicant, Owner, Engineer, Architect,
Licensed Land Surveyor, Soil Scientist Notices (each) $6.54*
D. Engineering Review Fee (as determined)1
E. Mylar Recording Fees: (22” x 34”sheet) $45 plus $26.00 per sheet
F. Permit Fee $50.00
Town of Candia Earth Excavation Regulations April 3, 2019
16
* Subject to postal and noticing fee increases.
1 Estimate provided for each project
2. Failure to pay the described costs shall constitute grounds for the Board to not accept the
application.
3. Upon the Town’s receipt of an Excavation Permit Application the Town’s Engineer shall develop
a review fee cost to perform a technical review of the application. Prior to the application being
accepted by the Town, the Applicant shall provide a check in the amount fee cost to the Town to
be held in escrow for the Town’s Engineer to perform technical review(s) of the submitted
application.
4. A permit fee of $50 shall be paid upon the issuance of a permit, to defray the costs of permit
compliance.
5. The site Owner or authorized agent shall upon submission of an application to the Land Use Office,
meeting with the Planning Boards Completeness Review Committee to perform a completeness
review of all Earth Excavation Permit applications.
6. Upon approval by the Town of the Earth Excavation Permit the Town’s Engineer shall develop a
construction cost estimate for the purpose of establishing a project completion surety. The
Applicant or the Developer shall provide an acceptable form of the surety in the amount determined
prior to the Planning Board signing the final plat plans.
7. Upon approval of the Earth Excavation Permit the Town’s Engineer shall develop a Compliance
Monitoring fee estimate for the purpose of inspecting the work for compliance with the permit, the
approved plans and Town regulations and standards. The Applicant or the Developer shall provide
the estimated amount in escrow prior to the Planning Board signing the final plat plans.
8. Prior to the start of construction activities, the Developer shall provide a construction schedule and
shall request and attend a pre-construction meeting with the necessary Town Departments and the
Town’s Engineer.
9. Additional fees shall be charged should the Board require the advice of an Engineer or other expert
to review plans or inspect the site to determine permit compliance.
SECTION XVI: APPLICATION SUBMISSION ITEMS
The Applicant for an excavation permit shall submit to the Planning Board a completed application form,
including a current abutters list, an excavation and a reclamation plan, any other submission documents as
requested, and the filing fee. At least three copies of all plans shall be filed with the Planning Board prior to
a regularly scheduled Board meeting, and one copy shall be sent to the Conservation Commission. The plans
shall be at a scale of 1” = 100’.
A. Excavation Plan
The excavation plan shall address specific actions to be taken on the site relative to fuel and chemical
handling and storage, dust control, traffic, noise control and abatement, and comprehensive site safety of
unauthorized persons. The plan shall, at a minimum, contain the following items
Town of Candia Earth Excavation Regulations April 3, 2019
17
1. Name and address of the Owner, the excavator (if different) and all abutters.
2. Name, address and signature of the person preparing the plan; date, bar scale and north arrow.
3. Zoning district boundaries of the proposed area and within 200 feet of the boundary of the project.
4. Excavation Plan by a licensed Engineer of the location and boundaries of the proposed and any
existing excavations; the area in square feet and acre. Board will accept copies of engineering
drawings required by NHDES in lieu of additional Engineer drawings.
5. The location of existing stone walls, ledge outcroppings, utilities, buildings, structures, septic
systems and wells within 200 feet of the boundary of the project.
6. Public streets, driveways, intersections, rights-of-way, and all easements within 200 feet; road
network to be affected; intended transportation routes to be used.
7. Existing and proposed topography at contour intervals of five feet or less.
8. All surface drainage patterns including wetlands and standing water.
9. Sketch and description, and/or Engineer surveyed map at the request of the Board, of existing and
proposed access roads, including width and surface materials.
10. The breadth, depth and slope of the proposed excavation and the estimated duration of the project.
11. An estimate of the total volume of earth to be excavated.
12. The elevation of the highest annual average ground water table within or next to the proposed
excavation.
13. A log of borings or test pits that extend to either the seasonal high water table, ledge, or a minimum
of four (4’) feet below the maximum proposed excavation depth, including location and soils data.
A certified soils scientist, recognized as such by the Regulator, shall provide a written report as to
any indications of the presence of a seasonal high groundwater mark within four(4’) feet below the
desired depth of excavation.
14. Proposed temporary and permanent fencing, buffers or other visual barriers, including height and
materials.
15. All measures to control dust, erosion, sedimentation, water pollution, air pollution, and any hazards
to human safety.
16. All surface drainage patterns including wetlands and standing water, lakes, streams, and the like;
on-site and within two-hundred fifty (250’) feet of the perimeter of the area to be excavated.
Wetlands shall be delineated on the plan by a Certified Wetland Scientist whose stamp and
signature shall also appear on the plan.Plans and details for storm water management.
17. Plans for equipment maintenance.
Town of Candia Earth Excavation Regulations April 3, 2019
18
18. Methods to prevent materials from the site from being tracked onto public roadways.
19. Copies of all necessary state and federal permits.
20. A construction phasing plan or plans.
21. A typical rock face slope with an associated fall zone.
22. Existing foliage and proposed limits of clearing.
23. A restoration plan and associated details.
24. Signed and dated by licensed soil scientist/Engineer. Board will accept copies of engineering
drawings required by NHDES in lieu of additional drawings.
25. Existing and proposed access roadways.
26. Aquifer locations and limits as identified by the U.S. Geological Survey.
27. Blasting provisions, if required, consistent with NHDOT requirements.
28. Location of three (3) ground water monitoring wells.
29. Locations of all existing and proposed easement, on and below ground.
B. Reclamation Plan
The reclamation plan shall address the effects of the proposed excavation on soil, surface, and ground
water, vegetation, overburden, topography, and fill material, and should address future land use consistent
with the Master Plan. The plan shall, at a minimum, contain the following items:
1. Seal and signature of a licensed surveyor or Engineer. Board will accept copies of engineering
drawings required by NHDES in lieu of additional drawings.
2. All boundaries of the area proposed for reclamation and the land within 200 feet of the boundary
of this site.
3. First topography of the area proposed for reclamation, at contour intervals of five feet or less.
4. Final surface drainage pattern, including the location and physical characteristics of all artificial
and/or modified drainage facilities.
5. Timetable as to fully-depleted sites within the excavation area.
6. Schedule of final reclamation activities including seeding mixtures, cover vegetation, fertilizer
types, and application rates.
7. Soil conditioning specifications, i.e. liming and fertilizing required based on soil analysis;
8. The proposed planting materials to be used in the restoration, and their quantities and sizes.
Town of Candia Earth Excavation Regulations April 3, 2019
19
9. An erosion and sedimentation control plan.
10. Phasing of site restoration showing designated areas and completion dates.
11. Such other information as the Regulator may reasonably require.
12. Loam shall be a minimum of 4-inches thick and shall be screened.
13. Specified winter stabilization requirements for the site in conformance with current NHDES
requirements for October 15th through April 15th.
C. Traffic Circulation and Truck Routes
Hauling information, including routes to be utilized, the type and weight of motor vehicles involved, and
the frequency and schedule of operations of such vehicles shall be provided to the Regulator prior to the
issuance of an excavation permit. The Regulator may require modifications to such plans and/or may place
conditions upon such operations, depending on surrounding land uses and road conditions. The Regulator
reserves the right to conduct a traffic study at the Applicant's expense to ensure that public safety,
neighborhood compatibility and road capacity and condition have been properly considered and addressed
in the hauling plan.
D. Other Information:
The Board reserves the right, per NH DES RSA 155-E: 3, VII to request any other information it deems
necessary to make an informed decision, or to have plans reviewed by an outside agency. According to
the authority vested in the Board by NH DES RSA 155-E: 11, III & RSA 676:4, I(g), any reasonable
expenses incurred for such information or reviews shall be charged to the Applicant. Failure to pay such
costs constitutes valid grounds for the Board to deny the application.
SECTION XVII: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
A. Permits
1. Permits shall be issued only to the Owner or his agent and shall not be transferable without the prior
written consent of the Board. A copy of the permit shall be prominently displayed at the site or the
principal access to the site.
2. A permit shall be valid for six years and the expiration date shall be specified. A permit is
automatically withdrawn if no substantial work is done on the site for a period of two years from
the date of the issuance of the permit.
3. Excavation of earth without a valid permit is a violation of RSA 155-E and these regulations.
Violators shall be issued a cease and desist order FOR NON-COMPLIANCE.
4. The Board may include in the permit any such reasonable conditions as are consistent with the
purpose of these regulations.
5. The Board will establish a schedule by which all permitted sites are inspected on an annual basis.
The gravel pit committee will conduct an annual inspection except in the year of application
Town of Candia Earth Excavation Regulations April 3, 2019
20
B. Compliance Inspections
The Board or its designee shall make at a minimum annual inspections or as required of all excavation sites to
determine if the operations are in compliance with these regulations, the issued permit, the Town’s regulations
and the approved plans.
1. A site inspection review letter will be sent to the Owner citing and deficiencies and providing a
timeline for correction of the deficiency.
2. Should identified deficiencies not be corrected within 14-days the Applicant and Developer shall
be issued a cease and desist order FOR NON-COMPLIANCE and will be required to present a
remediation plan and schedule of corrective action to the Planning Board.
C. Suspensions and Revocations
The Board may suspend or revoke a permit if the Board determines that any provision of the permit has been
violated, a material misstatement made in the application upon which a permit was granted, or any unsafe or
hazardous conditions are determined by a site inspection to exist, or failure to correct any deficiency after
notice. Such suspension or revocation shall be subject to a motion for rehearing thereon and appeal in
accordance with these regulations.
D. Appeals
Any person affected by the Board’s decision to approve or disapprove an application or any amendment thereto
or any suspension or revocation of a permit, may appeal to the Board for a rehearing on such decision or any
matter determined thereby. The motion for rehearing shall be filed within ten (10) days of such decision and
shall fully specify every ground upon which it is alleged that the decision or order complained of is unlawful
or unreasonable. The Board shall either grant or deny the request for rehearing within twenty (20) days, and
if the request is granted, a rehearing shall be scheduled within thirty (30) days. Any person affected by the
Board’s decision on a motion or rehearing may appeal in accordance with RSA 677:4-15.
E. Penalties
Fines, penalties and remedies for violations of this regulation shall be the same as for violations of RSA 676:15
and RSA 676:17. Whoever violates any provision of this regulation, a permit or a valid order issued hereunder
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
SECTION XVIII: SEPARABILITY
The invalidity of any provision, sentence, paragraph, etc. of this regulation shall not affect the validity of any
other provision, sentence, paragraph, etc.
SECTION XIV: EFFECTIVE DATE
These regulations shall take effect upon adoption by the Board and as amended.
Town of Candia Earth Excavation Regulations April 3, 2019
21
APPENDIX I
APPLICATION PACKAGE
APPLICATION FOR EARTH EXCAVATION
TOWN OF CANDIA
(Incomplete applications will be returned to the Applicant with no action taken by the Board)
Date Received: _______________________ File No.:____________
Fee Schedule: Amount Check #
a. Application……………………………………………$ 75.00
b. Engineering Fee………………………………………_______
c. Advertising……………………………………………$100.00 _______ _______
d. Certified Mail: gravel Pit Owner @ $6.54 ………..._______
e. Number of Abutters _______@ $6.54…………..……._______ _______ _______
TOTAL…………………………………………..….$_______
1. Name of Owner/Applicant:
Name of Agent or Pit Owner, if different from Owner:
(Notarized letter must be submitted indicating agent assigned and the amount of authority given)
Signature of Owner/Applicant:
2. Current mailing address:
Telephone Number:
3. Date of Submission:
(Note: Section XV requires submission of completed applications 30 days before the next regularly scheduled Planning
Board meeting)
4. Location of proposed and/or existing excavation:
5. Tax Map #: Lot #: Zoning District(s):
6. Type of Operation:
7. If existing, date of commencement
8. Submission Items:
a. Excavation and/or Reclamation Plans completed by licensed Engineer.
b. Name, address and license # of Engineer
c. Engineer cost estimates
d. Evidence of ability to provide bond or surety
e. Test pit results
f. Abutters list
g. Local, State and/or Federal Permits
h. Fees
Town of Candia Earth Excavation Regulations April 3, 2019
23
CANDIA PLANNING BOARD
LIST OF ABUTTERS
(To be attached and submitted with application)
Name of Applicant Tax Map # Lot #
Name of Agent or Pit Operator if different from Owner
Address
Abutter means any person whose property is located in CANDIA or adjoining towns, and adjoins or is
directly across the street or stream from the land under consideration by the Planning Board. For purposes of
receiving testimony only, and not for purposes of notification, the term “abutter” shall include any person
who is able to demonstrate that his land will be directly affected by any proposal under consideration. For
purposes of receipt of modification by a municipality of a local land use board hearing, in the case of an
abutting property being under a condominium or other collective form of ownership, the term abutter means
the officers of the collective or association, as defined in RSA 356-B:3, XXIII.
1. Name Tax Map # Lot #
Address
Zip Code
2. Name Tax Map # Lot #
Address
Zip Code
3. Name Tax Map # Lot #
Address
Zip Code
4. Name Tax Map # Lot #
Address
Zip Code
5. Name Tax Map # Lot #
Address
Zip Code
6. Name Tax Map # Lot #
Address
Zip Code
24
TOWN OF CANDIA
NEW HAMPSHIRE
Date
Submitted
Application Checklist
1. Signed and dated application form.
2. List all abutters.
3. Copies of any required local, state, or federal permits.
4. Excavation plan at a scale of 1” = 50’ showing the
information listed below:
a. Name and address of Owner, excavator, and all
abutters.
b. Name, address, and signature of person
preparing the plan; date of plan, scale, and north
arrow.
c. Sketch and description of the location and
boundaries of proposed and any existing
excavations in square feet and acres and the
municipalities involved.
d. Zoning district boundaries of excavation area
and within 200’ of the area boundary.
e. Lot lines, public streets, driveways,
intersections, rights-of-way, and all easements
within 200’ of the excavation.
f. Locations of existing buildings, structures,
septic systems, and wells within 200’ of the
excavation.
g. Topography at contour levels of five feet or less.
h. All surface drainage patterns, including wetlands
and standing water.
i. Sketch and description of existing and proposed
access roads, including width and surface
materials.
j. Breadth, depth, and slope of the proposed
excavation.
k. Elevation of the highest annual average
groundwater table within or next to the proposed
excavation.
l. Test pit data or log of borings to within either
the seasonal high water table or a minimum of
six feet below the proposed excavation depth.
25
m. Fencing, buffers, or other visual barriers,
including height and materials.
n. Measures to control erosion and sedimentation,
water and air pollution and any hazards to public
safety.
5. Reclamation plan at a scale of 1” = 100’ including the
information below:
a. Name, address, and signature of the person
preparing the plan; date of plan, scale, and north
arrow.
b. All boundaries of the area proposed for
reclamation and the land within 200’ of these
boundaries.
c. Final topography at contour intervals of five feet
or less.
d. Final surface drainage pattern.
e. Timetable as to fully depleted sites within the
project area.
f. Schedule of final reclamation activities,
including seeding mixtures, cover vegetation
fertilizer types, and application rates.
6. Evidence of ability to be bonded.
Excavation Checklist
1. The excavation is within 50’ of a disapproving
abutter or 10’ of an approving abutter.
2. The excavation will not be unduly hazardous to the
public welfare.
3. Existing visual barriers will not be removed except
to gain access to the excavation.
4. The excavation will not substantially damage a
known aquifer.
5. The excavation is not closer than 150’ to an existing
dwelling or to a site for which a building permit has
already been issued.
6. The excavation is not below road level within 50’ of
the public right-of-way.
7. Vegetation is maintained within the peripheral areas
of two above mentioned requirements.
8. Fuels, lubricants, etc., are not stored on the site.
9. If temporary slopes exceed 1:1 grade, an appropriate
barricade is provided.
26
10. The excavation will not cause the accumulation of
freestanding water for prolonged periods.
11. The excavation is not within 75’ of any great pond,
navigable river, or any other standing body of water
ten acres or more in area.
12. The excavation is not within 25’ of any stream,
river, brook that normally flows throughout the
year, or any naturally-occurring standing body of
water less than ten acres, prime wetland, or any
other wetland greater than five acres in area.
Reclamation Checklist
1. Tree seedlings will be planted in areas visible from
a public way to replace trees that were removed.
2. All disturbed areas will be reseeded.
3. Provision is made for the removal of all stumps and
other debris.
4. Soils will be graded according to soil type, and
changes in slope will not be abrupt.
5. No standing bodies of water created by the
excavation will be left if they create a public safety
hazard.
6. The topography will be left so that drainage reverts
to its original points and proportions of flow.
27
APPENDIX II
EXCAVATION PERMIT
28
CANDIA, NEW HAMPSHIRE
EXCAVATION PERMIT
PURSUANT TO RSA 155-E
PERMIT #: _______________________ ISSUE DATE: _________________________
EXPIRATION DATE: _________________________
LOCATION:
STREET: ____________________________________________________________________________
MAP #: _________________ LOT #: _________________
OWNER (S): _________________________________________________________________________
ADDRESS: _________________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________
THIS PERMIT IS NON TRANSFERABLE WITHOUT THE PRIOR, WRITTEN APPROVAL OF
THE CANDIA PLANNING BOARD PURSUANT TO RSA 155-E:8
NOTE: Pursuant to RSA 155-E:10 – The regulator or its duly authorized agent may suspend or revoke
the permit of any person who has violated any provision of his permit or this chapter or made a material
misstatement in the application upon which his permit was granted. Such suspension or revocation shall
be subject to a motion for rehearing thereon and appeal in accordance with RSA 155-E:9.
Issued by:
CANDIA, NH Planning Board
____________________________________
Chairman of the Planning Board
THIS PERMIT IS TO BE PROMINENTLY POSTED AT THE
EXCAVATION SITE OR AT THE PRINCIPAL ACCESS PURSUANT TO
RSA 155-E: 8.
29
APPENDIX III
SAMPLE SURETY LETTER
30
Irrevocable Standby Letter of Surety
DATE:
Beneficiary: Town of CANDIA (hereinafter “Town”)
45 Washburn Road
CANDIA, New Hampshire 03222
Re: APPLICANT’S NAME
Dear Chairman and Members of the Planning Board:
We, BANK’S NAME, hereby establish in favor of the Town, for the account of APPLICANT’S
NAME, our Irrevocable Standby Letter of Credit (hereinafter “Credit”) in the amount of AMOUNT ($#).
Funds under the Credit are available to the Town, in any number of draws, by your sight draft(s) drawn on
us identifying the above-referenced Credit Number, if presented at our office at BANK’S ADDRESS,
prior to the expiration of this Credit together with the original of this Credit and either of the following
statements signed by you:
1. “We are drawing under Irrevocable Standby Letter of Credit No. ____ because APPLICANT’S
NAME is in default of completion of the reclamation improvements required by the CANDIA
Planning Board for the property located at GRAVEL PIT ADDRESS, said reclamation
improvements being shown on the plan of land entitled “Plan Showing Property of APPLICANT’S
NAME, dated __________, as prepared by SURVEYOR’S NAME (Hereinafter “Plan”).”; or
2. “We are drawing under Irrevocable Standby Letter of Credit No. ____ because BANK’S NAME has
elected not to renew such Credit.”
The Credit expires at the close of business on _______. However, unless we elect not to extend the
Credit, it will be automatically extended for additional consecutive one-year periods. If we elect not to
extend the Credit beyond any applicable expiration date, we shall provide written notice of such election
at least sixty (60) days prior to such expiration date, sent by Certified Mail Return Receipt Requested, to
the Town’s Chairman of the Planning Board at 74 High Street, CANDIA, New Hampshire 03034, and the
Town’s Attorney’s Upton & Hatfield 10 Centre Street PO Box 1090, Concord, NH 03302-1090.






















TOWN OF CANDIA
NEW HAMPSHIRE
MAJOR SITE PLAN REGULATIONS
HISTORY:
Adopted – May 21, 1986
Amended – April 26, 1989
Amended – November 15, 1995
Amended – December 3, 2003
Amended – October 3, 2007
Amended – January 10, 2009
Amended – August 4, 2010
Amended – July 19, 2017
Amended – April 3, 2019
Town of Candia, NH Major Site Plan Regulations April 3, 2019
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION I: ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY ........................................................................................ 1
ARTICLE 1.00 AUTHORITY, ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT: ....................................................... 1
1.01 Authority: ............................................................................................................................................ 1
1.02 Title: .................................................................................................................................................... 1
1.03 Validity: .............................................................................................................................................. 1
1.04 Amendment:........................................................................................................................................ 1
1.05 Prohibition of Construction Prior to Approval: .................................................................................. 1
1.06 Waiver Provision: ............................................................................................................................... 1
Article 2.00 Purpose, Scope and Compliance with Other Ordinances: ...................................................... 1
2.01 Purpose: .............................................................................................................................................. 1
2.02 Scope:.................................................................................................................................................. 2
2.03 Compliance with Other Regulations and Ordinances: ........................................................................ 2
2.04 Definitions: ......................................................................................................................................... 2
2.05 Construction Standards: ...................................................................................................................... 3
2.06 Change of Use Criteria: ...................................................................................................................... 3
2.07 National Flood Insurance Requirements: ........................................................................................... 3
SECTION II: PROCEDURES AND SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS .................................................... 4
Article 3.00 Procedure for Site Plan Review .............................................................................................. 4
3.01 Submission of Application: ................................................................................................................ 4
3.02 Notice: ................................................................................................................................................. 4
3.03 Filing Fees, Administrative Expenses and Other Costs Incurred by the Town and the Board: .......... 4
A. Fee Schedule: ......................................................................................................................................... 5
B. Prepayment of Plan Review and Compliance Inspection Fee: .............................................................. 5
C. Fire Department Review and Inspection Fee: ........................................................................................ 5
Article 4.00 Submission Requirements ...................................................................................................... 5
4.01 Number of Copies and Scale Required: .............................................................................................. 5
4.02 Certification of Plan Required: ........................................................................................................... 6
4.03 Information Required to be Shown on the Plan:................................................................................. 6
4.04 Additional Information Which May Be Required: ............................................................................. 7
4.05 Additional Required Information: ...................................................................................................... 7
Article 5.00 Action by the Board: ............................................................................................................... 8
A. Review Period ........................................................................................................................................ 8
B. Issuance of Decision .............................................................................................................................. 9
C. Failure to Act.......................................................................................................................................... 9
5.01 Acknowledgment of Receipt of Notice of Approval/ Disapproval: ................................................... 9
5.02 General Construction and Guidelines: ................................................................................................ 9
1. Prohibition: ............................................................................................................................................ 9
2. Period for Commencement of Construction and Completion of Work: .............................................. 10
5.03 Provisions of Guarantees of Performance: ....................................................................................... 10
A. Reduction of Security: ......................................................................................................................... 10
B. Release of Bond: .................................................................................................................................. 10
C. Retainage Release: ............................................................................................................................... 10
D. Enforcement of Bond: .......................................................................................................................... 10
5.04 Modification of Design Improvements: ............................................................................................ 11
Town of Candia, NH Major Site Plan Regulations April 3, 2019
5.05 Compliance Inspection Fee:.............................................................................................................. 11
5.06 Correction Of Deficiencies: .............................................................................................................. 11
5.07 Guarantee of Installation of Improvements: ..................................................................................... 11
6.00 Notice of Site Plan Approval: ........................................................................................................... 11
7.00 Development of Regional Impact: .................................................................................................... 12
SECTION III: STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR SITE DEVELOPMENT ........................... 13
8.00 Site Standard Requirements: ............................................................................................................. 13
8.01 General Requirements: ..................................................................................................................... 13
8.02 Site Characteristics: .......................................................................................................................... 13
8.03 Construction Standards: .................................................................................................................... 13
8.04 Coordination of Streets, Parking, Loading and Safety: .................................................................... 18
8.05 Screening .......................................................................................................................................... 18
8.06 Storm Water Management: ............................................................................................................... 19
8.07 Groundwater Protection: ................................................................................................................... 22
8.08 Utilities and Fire Protection: ............................................................................................................. 23
8.09 Disposition of Excavated Waste: ...................................................................................................... 24
8.10 Solid Waste Disposal Plan: ............................................................................................................... 24
8.11 Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan: ......................................................................................... 24
8.12 Impervious Cover: ............................................................................................................................ 24
8.13 Underground Petroleum Storage Tanks:........................................................................................... 24
8.14 Landscaping: ..................................................................................................................................... 25
8.15 Structural Design Requirements: ...................................................................................................... 27
8.16 Temporary Signs: .............................................................................................................................. 28
8.17 Guardrail: .......................................................................................................................................... 28
SECTION IV: JOINT PROCEDURES PROVISIONS .............................................................................. 28
Article 9.00 Procedure When Subdivision Approval is required ............................................................. 28
9.01 Procedure When Subdivision Approval is required: ........................................................................ 28
9.02 Procedure When a Special Exception or Variance Approval by the Zoning Board of
adjustment is required: .............................................................................................................................. 28
8.03 Procedure When Earth Excavation Permit is Required: ................................................................... 29
SECTION V: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS ..................................................................................... 29
10.00 Representations at Public Hearings: ............................................................................................... 29
11.00 Upgrading Off-Site Public Facilities: ............................................................................................. 29
12.00 Fines and Penalties: ........................................................................................................................ 29
13.00 Appeals: .......................................................................................................................................... 29
14.00 Active and Substantial Development or Building: ......................................................................... 29
TABLE I ................................................................................................................................................... 30
TABLE II .................................................................................................................................................. 32
Town of Candia, NH Major Site Plan Regulations April 3, 2019
1
SECTION I: ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY
ARTICLE 1.00 AUTHORITY, ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT:
1.01 Authority:
The Candia Planning Board hereby adopts Site Plan Review Regulations as authorized and required
by New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated Chapter 674:43 I, and pursuant to the authorization
from the Town of Candia by vote at Town meeting on March 14, 1986 (Article 28).
1.02 Title:
These Regulations shall be known as the Town of Candia Major Site Plan Regulations, hereinafter
referred to as "these Regulations".
1.03 Validity:
If any portion of these Regulations is found for any reason to be invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of these Regulations.
1.04 Amendment:
These Regulations may be amended whenever such action is deemed advisable by the Board
following a duly noticed public hearing on the proposed amendment. All changes to these
Regulations shall become effective when adopted and signed by the majority of the Planning Board
members and filed with the Town Clerk and with the Board of Selectmen. The amendment shall be
filed in a central location with the Office of State Planning.
1.05 Prohibition of Construction Prior to Approval:
No construction, change of use, land clearing, or building development shall be initiated until the
final plan of the proposed site plan has been approved by the Board, as evidenced in the issuance of
the Notice of Approval.
1.06 Waiver Provision:
Upon the written request of the Applicant, the Board may grant a relaxation of one or more of the
provisions under these Regulations as it deems appropriate.
Article 2.00 Purpose, Scope and Compliance with Other Ordinances:
2.01 Purpose:
The purpose of these Regulations is:
A. To provide for the safe and attractive development of the site and to guard against such conditions
as would involve danger or injury to health, safety or prosperity by reason of:
1. Inadequate drainage or conditions conducive to the flooding of the subject property or
that of another;
2. Inadequate protection for the quality of groundwater;
Town of Candia, NH Major Site Plan Regulations April 3, 2019
2
3. Undesirable and preventable elements of pollution such as noise, smoke, soot,
particulates or any other discharge into the environment which might prove harmful
to person, structures or adjacent properties; and
4. Inadequate provisions for fire safety, prevention and control.
B. To provide for the harmonious and aesthetically pleasing development of the municipality
and its environs;
C. To provide for open spaces and green spaces of adequate proportions;
D. To provide the proper and coordination of streets, driveways and entrances within the subject
site in relation to other existing or planned streets;
E. To provide suitably located streets of sufficient width to accommodate existing and
prospective traffic and to afford adequate light, air, and access of fire fighting apparatus and
equipment to buildings, and to be coordinated so as to develop a convenient system;
F. To require that plats showing new streets or narrowing or widening of such streets be
submitted to the Planning Board for approval;
G. To require that the land indicated on the plats submitted to the Planning Board shall be of
such character that it can be used for building purposes without danger to health;
H. To include such provisions as will create conditions favorable for health, safety, convenience,
and prosperity; and
I. To require that appropriate support services and facilities are provided.
2.02 Scope:
The Planning Board shall review and approve or disapprove site plan review applications for initial
development or change or expansion of use tracts for any non-residential use or for multifamily
dwelling units whether or not such development includes a subdivision or re-subdivision of the site,
or whether the proposed use includes the construction of a building.
2.03 Compliance with Other Regulations and Ordinances:
The Site Plan Review procedure shall in no way relieve the Applicant from compliance with Candia
Zoning Ordinance, the Candia Subdivision Regulations, Earth Excavation Regulations or any other
regulations or bylaw which pertains to the proposed development. No site plan shall be approved
unless such plan complies with applicable local ordinances and regulations.
2.04 Definitions:
Major Site Plan Review Regulations: For the purpose of the meaning of the term used herein, it
shall conform to the definitions found in Article III, of the Candia Zoning Ordinance and Article 20
of the Candia Subdivision Regulations.
Board: The word shall mean the Candia Planning Board.
Town of Candia, NH Major Site Plan Regulations April 3, 2019
3
Performance Guarantee: A security that may be accepted in lieu of a requirement that certain
improvements be made before the Planning Board to approve the Site Plan, including cash passbook,
irrevocable letters of credit, escrow agreements, and other similar collateral. All letters of credit
must be automatically renewable.
2.05 Construction Standards:
All site improvements, including roadways and parking areas, shall be constructed in conformance
with the Candia Subdivision Regulations and the Town Building Code.
2.06 Change of Use Criteria:
Change or expansion of use of a site: any multi family or nonresidential use which substantially
differs from the previous use of a building or land. Any activity which in the opinion of the Building
Inspector constitutes a change or expansion of use of a site may be subject to Planning Board
approval under the Candia Site Plan Review Regulations. The Building Inspector shall be guided
by consideration of the extent to which the proposal relates to any of the following types of
circumstances, each of which is subject to site plan approval.
Criteria:
A. Any increase in the size of an existing off-street parking area of 50% or more when associated
with a multifamily or a nonresidential use;
B. The creation of an off-street parking area on a site, except when the off-street parking area is
associated with a single or two-family residential use;
C. Any change in the number or size of access points or any change in the location of the driveway
providing access to or from the adjoining highway when not covered by these Regulations; and
D. Any occupancy for commercial, industrial or multifamily where prior use has been discontinued
for two (2) years and where no prior site plan has been approved.
Change of one land use classification to another in accordance with the Standard Industrial
Classification using the two-digit numerical code as a guideline.
2.07 National Flood Insurance Requirements:
For site plans that involve land designated as “Special Flood Hazard Areas” (SFHA) by the National
Flood Insurance Program (NFIP):
A. The Planning Board shall review the proposed development to assure that all necessary permits
have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by
Federal or State law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334.
B. The Planning Board shall require the Applicant to submit sufficient evidence (construction
drawings, grading and land treatment plans) so as to allow a determination that:
(i) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(ii) All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and
(iii) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
Town of Candia, NH Major Site Plan Regulations April 3, 2019
4
C. The Planning Board shall require that all proposals for development located within the FEMA
100-year floodplain include Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data within such proposals (i.e.
floodplain boundary and 100-year flood elevation). The Applicant shall provide a design with
compensatory flood storage greater than or equal to pre-development conditions.
SECTION II: PROCEDURES AND SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
Article 3.00 Procedure for Site Plan Review
3.01 Submission of Application:
Submission of application and other information relevant to the site plan proposal shall be made
through the Land Use Office. Inquiries for advice concerning procedures, requirements or the status
of a particular application may be made to the assistant during regular office hours.
A. The application shall include the names and street addresses of the Applicant and property
Owner, name and business address of every Engineer, architect, land surveyor, or soil
scientist whose professional seal appears on any plat, and all abutters as indicated in the
Town records not more than five (5) days before the day of filing. Abutters shall also be
identified on any plat submitted to the Board.
B. When the application is submitted copies of the plan shall be provided to the Police, Fire
Dept., Building Inspector, and Road Agent for their review. A copy of the plan shall also be
provided to the Town Engineer for review at the Applicant’s expense. Copies to be given no later
than thirty (30) days prior to the noticed hearing.
3.02 Notice:
Prior to holding a public hearing, the Board shall give notice as follows:
A. The notice shall include a general description of the proposed site plan which is subject of
the application, shall identify the land Owner and the site location, and shall state the date,
time and place of the public hearing.
B. A copy of the notice shall be sent to the Owners and abutters by certified mail.
C. For the purpose of these Regulations in counting days, the day on which the notice is given
and the day of the public hearing shall be excluded.
D. Notice shall be mailed at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing.
E. Notice to the general public shall be given by one publication of a legal public notice in a
newspaper as designated by the Board, at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing,
and in at least two (2) public places in the Town of Candia.
F. The Applicant shall pay the noticing costs with submission of the site plan application.
3.03 Filing Fees, Administrative Expenses and Other Costs Incurred by the Town and the Board:
The Applicant shall pay the filing fees in advance according to the schedule of fees adopted by the
Planning Board and placed on file at the Land Use Office. In addition, the Board may require the
Town of Candia, NH Major Site Plan Regulations April 3, 2019
5
Applicant to pay additional reasonable fees to cover its administrative expenses and costs of special
investigative studies, review of documents and other matters which may be required by particular
applications (RSA 676:4 I(g) and 674:44). Such additional fees may also include legal expenses
incurred by the Board.
A. Fee Schedule:
The following schedule of fees shall apply to all major site plan review applications:
1. Application Fee $200.00
2. Legal Notice Fee $100.00*
3. Abutters, Applicant, Owner, Engineer, Architect,
Licensed Land Surveyor, Soil Scientist Notices (each) $7.56*
5. Engineering Review Fee (as determined)1
6. Compliance Inspection Fee (as determined) 1
7. Fire Department review fee $0.10/square foot
8. Mylar Recording Fees: (22” x 34”sheet) $45.00 plus $26.00 per
sheet
L-chip recording fee $25.00
* Subject to postal and noticing fee increases.
1 Estimate provided for each project
B. Prepayment of Plan Review and Compliance Inspection Fee:
The site Owner or authorized agent shall deposit with the Land Use Office, an initial escrow deposit
as determined by the Town’s Engineer to pay for the Town’s Engineer to perform a technical review
of all Major Site Plan applications. Additional funds may be required, to be paid to cover additional
professional Engineer reviews of the site plan documents and the necessary inspections which the
Board deems reasonable and necessary to protect the general welfare of the Town. The Town
Engineer will estimate the cost of the additional funds required for review and the Applicant will be
responsible for any additional cost thereafter. Funds will be kept in an escrow account.
C. Fire Department Review and Inspection Fee:
A fee of $0.10 (ten cents) per square foot of building area shall be assessed for fire department
review of plans, drawings, and specifications, and for necessary inspections of all commercial,
industrial, or multi-family structures of three or more dwelling units. A copy of the drawings shall
be submitted to the Fire Department at the time of application. Fee payment shall be payable to the
Town of Candia.
Article 4.00 Submission Requirements
4.01 Number of Copies and Scale Required:
The application for Site Plan Review shall be submitted with three (3) copies of the proposed site
plan drawn at a minimum scale of 1-inch equals 20-feet. All plans must also be submitted
electronically via e-mail or approved storage media in the portable document format (PDF) with a
maximum file size of 10 MB.
Town of Candia, NH Major Site Plan Regulations April 3, 2019
6
4.02 Certification of Plan Required:
The site plan shall be prepared and certified by a civil Engineer licensed to practice in New
Hampshire.
4.03 Information Required to be Shown on the Plan:
The site plan shall include the following information:
A. A vicinity sketch showing the location of the site in relation to the surrounding public street
system and zoning boundaries within 1,000-feet of the site boundary;
B. The names and street addresses of Owner(s) of record and those of the abutting properties;
C. The name, address and seal of the preparer of the plan;
D. Certification by a New Hampshire licensed land surveyor of a currently valid boundary
survey;
E. The scale of the plan shall be at a minimum of one inch equals twenty feet (1” = 20’), and
the plan shall include a north arrow and the date;
F. A survey of the perimeter boundaries of the proposed use subject to site plan review,
including compass bearings, distances and area in acres;
G. Existing and proposed topography showing surface contours at intervals not in excess of 2-
feet;
H. The shape, size, height and location of all existing and proposed structures, including typical
elevation views;
I. The location of natural features such as rivers, streams, marshes, wetlands and any manmade
feature such as existing dams, roads, stone walls, and structures. The plan shall
indicate those natural and man-made features which are to be removed, retained or altered;
J. The use of properties within 500-feet of the site boundary; roads, streets and driveways
within 500-feet of the site boundary;
K. Proposed streets, driveways, parking spaces and sidewalks, with indication of direction of
travel and inside radii of all curves. The width of the traveled way of all streets, driveways
and sidewalks, and the total number of all parking spaces shall be shown. Loading spaces,
trash disposal facilities, and facilities used in connection with any structure on the site shall
be shown;
L. The size and location of all existing and proposed public and private utilities shall be shown
on the plan. Public and private utilities shall be underground and shown on the plan;
M. A plan for the proposed exterior lighting, pavement markings and signage;
Town of Candia, NH Major Site Plan Regulations April 3, 2019
7
N. A proposed landscaping plan indicating plantings to be installed and natural cover to be
retained. The plan shall specify in detail the size and types of shrubs, plants, caliper of trees,
etc. Such plan shall also show the proposed landscaping and natural cover of the perimeter
of the site including all trees greater than 6-inches in diameter, all groupings and types of
trees, screens, fences, and natural cover to be retained within the area to be disturbed;
O. The dimensional requirements, as per Table I, and the number of parking spaces under the
Candia Zoning Ordinance. Typical parking space layout and location of dimensional
requirements for areas of five (5) or more parking spaces, as per Exhibit I;
P. All surface and subsurface storm drainage facilities, including all storm drainage facilities
located within 100-feet of the property boundary or to the nearest downstream drainage
system(s) off the parcel being developed;
Q. An estimated timetable for construction and completion of buildings, improvements and
landscaping;
R. If the proposed development requires a special exception or variance from the Zoning Board
of Adjustment, a copy of the approved minutes is to be made part of the site plan application;
S. Proposed snow storage areas;
T. The location of any fire suppression system as required by the Fire Dept. must be shown on
the plans;
U. A signature block for signing by seven (7) members of the Board;
V. A vehicle turning movement plan with truck turning movements into, around and exiting the
site without potentially impacting other vehicles or pedestrian traffic;
W. A table summary of the area in square feet of the total lot area, existing impervious area,
proposed impervious area, existing green space area, proposed green space area and
proposed landscaping area with associated percentages for each land use area.
4.04 Additional Information Which May Be Required:
The Planning Board may require an impact study such as municipal services, traffic, etc. or an
environmental impact assessment, and / or additional information that it deems necessary in order
to enforce the purpose of these Regulations. Such studies shall be undertaken at the expense of the
Applicant for site plan review at no extra cost to the Town. The Planning Board or its designated
agent shall review said studies. All costs shall be borne by the Applicant.
4.05 Additional Required Information:
The site plan application shall include the following information:
A. A copy of all required State and Federal permits and permit applications.
B. A drainage analysis and report, stamped by a professional Engineer licensed in the State of
New Hampshire, with supporting drainage calculations that include the following:
Town of Candia, NH Major Site Plan Regulations April 3, 2019
8
a. Pre and post development drainage calculations for the specified storm events.
b. A narrative of the project with a summary table for all required storm events of the peak
discharge rate for the off-site discharge points.
c. Test pit data where detention basin or storm water systems are proposed.
d. Riprap apron or other scour protection dissipation or stability calculations.
e. NHDES BMP worksheets, when drainage and infiltration systems are utilized.
f. A SWPP Plan.
Article 5.00 Action by the Board:
A. Review Period
1. In accordance with RSA 676:4 (c)(1) the Board shall act to approve, approve with
modification, or disapprove the proposed site plan within sixty-five (65) days following the
public hearing at which the application was deemed complete and accepted as presented,
excepting that the Board may apply to the Board of Selectmen prior to the expiration of the
sixty-five (65) day period for an extension of time not to exceed ninety (90) day period
within which to act upon the application. The Applicant may consent to an extension of time
for the Board to act beyond the initial sixty-five (65) day period on the condition that such
consent shall be in writing and shall be made part of the Board’s record.
2. Upon receipt of an application, the Board shall provide decision in writing within seven (7)
business days regarding the completeness of the application. Should it be deemed by the
Board that the submitted application is incomplete the application will be rejected by the
Board and the Applicant shall then be required to submit all necessary information prior to
the application being reconsidered for acceptance by the Planning Board. All additional fees
associated with re-notifying abutters for the re-submittal of an incomplete application shall
be borne by the Applicant.
3. Once a complete application has been provided to the Planning Board or its designee, the
Town’s Engineer will provide a cost estimate for the technical review of the submission. If
the estimated amount is greater than the remaining completeness review deposit, the
Applicant shall provide the additional balance to the Town to be held in escrow to pay for
the technical review of the plans.
4. Technical reviews and associated review letters shall be provided to the Applicant by the
Town within fourteen (14) days of the Town’s receipt of the Town Engineer’s technical
review fee costs. Subsequent technical reviews and associated review letters shall be
provided to the Applicant by the Town within seven (7) days of receipt of all revised or
modified plans, reports, waivers or other submitted documents.
5. All revised or modified plans, reports, waivers or other documents shall be submitted to the
Town a minimum of eleven (11) days prior to the meeting the Application is continued to.
6. An application shall be heard within thirty (30) days of the notification of a complete
application by the Planning Board.
Town of Candia, NH Major Site Plan Regulations April 3, 2019
9
B. Issuance of Decision
1. The Planning Board shall notify the Applicant, in writing by means of an official Notice of
Approval/ Disapproval signed by the Chairman, of its action on the final site plan. In the
case of disapproval, the Board shall clearly set forth in the notice to the Applicant the reasons
for its action with specific reference to the standards contained in these Regulations. The
minutes of the meeting at which such vote is taken, including the Official Notice of Decision
including all conditions of approval, shall be placed on file in the Board’s office and shall
be made available for public inspection within five (5) business days of such vote. Whenever
a plat is recorded to memorialize an approval issued by the Board, the official Notice of
Decision including all conditions of approval shall be recorded with or on the plat.
2. Upon approval of a major site plan application the Town’s Engineer shall develop a
construction cost estimate for the purpose of establishing a project completion surety. The
Applicant or the Developer shall provide an acceptable form of surety in the amount
determined prior to the commencement of construction.
3. Upon approval of a major site plan application the Town’s Engineer shall develop a
Compliance Monitoring fee estimate for the purpose of inspecting the work for compliance
with the approved plans and Town regulations and standards. The Applicant or the
Developer shall provide the estimated amount in escrow prior to the Planning Board signing
the final plat plans.
4. Prior to the start of construction activities, the Developer shall provide a construction
schedule and shall request and attend a pre-construction meeting with the Town Departments
and the Town’s Engineer.
C. Failure to Act
1. If the Board has not obtained an extension in accordance with RSA 676:4 (f) and has not
approved or disapproved the plat within sixty-five (65) days from the date the plan was
accepted as complete, the Applicant may seek relief in accordance with RSA 676:4 (c) (1)
and (2).
5.01 Acknowledgment of Receipt of Notice of Approval/ Disapproval:
Notice shall be sent registered return receipt required. The Applicant shall acknowledge the receipt
of the Notice and acceptance of all provisions set forth therein and shall return a signed copy of
same to the Board for its records. Until such acknowledgment and acceptance has been filed with
the Board, no further action shall be taken with regard to the final site plan. Failure to acknowledge
receipt of said Notice and acceptance within ninety (90) days of mailing of this notice will cause
approval to lapse.
5.02 General Construction and Guidelines:
1. Prohibition:
No construction, change of use, or building development shall be initiated until the Final Plan of
the proposed site plan has been approved by the Board, as evidenced by the issuance of the Notice
of Approval/ Disapproval and signing of plans.
Town of Candia, NH Major Site Plan Regulations April 3, 2019
10
2. Period for Commencement of Construction and Completion of Work:
The Applicant shall commence work on all required improvements within one (1) year from the
date of acknowledgment of the Notice of Approval/ Disapproval.
Construction of all required improvements shall be completed within two (2) years of the date of
acknowledgment unless a greater period shall be specified in the Notice of Approval/ Disapproval
(RSA 674:44).
5.03 Provisions of Guarantees of Performance:
Before the Board signs the approved site plan, the Applicant may be required file a surety in an
amount sufficient to cover the cost of all terms, conditions or other off-site improvements where
applicable. This performance guarantee shall be estimated by the Town’s Engineer and approved as
to form and surety by the legal counsel of the Town of Candia, and conditioned on the completion
of such improvements within two (2) years of the date of the performance guarantee unless released
by a vote of the Board of Selectmen, by request of the Applicant. All documents evidencing or
establishing the performance guarantee shall be prepared at the Applicant’s expense.
A. Reduction of Security:
The surety may be reduced by the Board of Selectmen, in conjunction with the Road Agent and the
Town’s Engineer, during the course of construction, in such amounts as deemed to be in the best
interest of the Town, and that the remaining surety shall be sufficient to complete all remaining
construction and provide adequate retainage. When necessary, the Town’s Engineer shall submit a
compliance inspection report to the Board of Selectmen; also, the Applicant shall provide an
updated construction completion schedule prior to the Selectmen partially releasing the surety in
the stages corresponding with completion of construction or compliance inspection report.
B. Release of Bond:
90% of the secured surety may be released when the Selectmen, in conjunction with the Road Agent
and the Town’s Engineer, are satisfied that the Applicant has complied with all the requirements as
set forth in the approved final site plan. The decision to release the surety will be based upon an
assessment of the plans, the proposed construction activities and the final status of work completed.
The Selectmen shall notify the Planning Board when all conditions of the surety have been met and
shall have the authority to release the bond.
The Board of Selectmen shall retain 10% of the total of the original surety and all interest earned to
guarantee correction of latent defects, potential damage from erosion and sedimentation, not to
exceed one (1) year.
The performance bond shall not be released until all proposed work and repair activities have been
satisfactorily completed for the period of one (1) year.
C. Retainage Release:
One (1) year after satisfactory completion of all corrective action or improvements as determined
by the Town or their designated agent.
D. Enforcement of Bond:
If the Applicant has not complied within two (2) years of the date of the approved final site plan,
the Town may enforce the Town's rights by using the funds from the posted surety. In the event
Town of Candia, NH Major Site Plan Regulations April 3, 2019
11
that the Town is required to enforce the performance guarantee, the Town shall be entitled to have
reasonable Attorney's fees paid by the Applicant.
5.04 Modification of Design Improvements:
If, at any time before or during the construction of the proposed improvements to the site, the
Applicant determines that unforeseen conditions make it necessary or desirable to modify the
location or design of any of the required improvements or installation, the Board may authorize such
modifications without further public hearing upon determination of the Board, and in consultation
with the Town’s Engineer, that the proposed modifications do not significantly impact the original
proposal.
5.05 Compliance Inspection Fee:
Prior to construction, the Applicant shall pay to the Town of Candia an amount of money estimated
by the Board of Selectmen to fully defray the cost of all compliance inspections deemed necessary
by the Town’s Engineer. The Applicant shall be responsible for notifying the Board of Selectmen
or the Town’s Engineer upon completion of the proposed improvements for the purpose of
evaluating compliance with the proposed site plan.
5.06 Correction Of Deficiencies:
If it is determined that any of the required improvements have not been completed in accordance
with the plans and specifications as filed by the Applicant and as required by the Town, the
Selectmen or its Town’s Engineer shall notify the Applicant in writing of any such deficiencies. The
Applicant shall rectify all deficiencies at the expense of the Applicant. If the Applicant does not
substantially rectify all deficiencies within a reasonable time as determined by the Town, the Town
shall take all necessary actions to protect and preserve the Town's rights and interests including
suspension or revocation of site plan approval.
5.07 Guarantee of Installation of Improvements:
For a period of one (1) year after satisfactory completion of all improvements or one year after the
satisfactory correction of all deficiencies as described above, whichever occurs last, if the Selectmen
or its Town’s Engineer determines that the improvements have failed for any reason or do not meet
the specifications as filed by the Applicant and as required by the Town, the Selectmen shall notify
the Applicant in writing of such failure and the Applicant shall rectify all failures at the expense of
the Applicant. If the Applicant does not substantially rectify all deficiencies within a reasonable
time as determined by the Town, the Selectmen shall take all necessary action to protect and preserve
the Town's interests.
6.00 Notice of Site Plan Approval:
A Notice of Site Plan Approval shall be issued by the Planning Board to the Building Inspector under
the Site Plan Review Regulations when the Applicant has complied with all requirements of the Site
Plan Review Regulations. The Applicant shall not use or occupy the site until the Notice of Site Plan
Approval has been issued. The Building Inspector shall not issue a Certificate of Occupancy under the
Town Building Code as provided in RSA 676:13 for any building on a site plan that does not comply
with the Site Plan Review Regulations or the approved site plan. Any requirement of the Site Plan
Review Regulations to be performed in the future that have been bonded under Article 5 will satisfy
the conditions for the Notice of Site Plan Approval.
Town of Candia, NH Major Site Plan Regulations April 3, 2019
12
7.00 Development of Regional Impact:
A. Purpose:
1. Provide timely notice to potentially affected municipalities concerning proposed
developments which are likely to have impacts beyond the boundaries of the Town of
Candia.
2. Provide opportunities for the regional planning commission and the potentially affected
municipalities to furnish timely input to the Town of Candia.
3. Encourage the Town of Candia to consider the interests of other potentially affected
municipalities.
B. Definitions:
Fulfill the statutory Definition – Any development which the Planning Board determines could
reasonably be expected to impact on a neighboring municipality, because of factors such as,
but not limited to, the following:
a. Relative size or number of dwelling units as compared with existing stock.
b. Proximity to the borders of a neighboring community.
c. Transportation networks.
d. Anticipated emissions such as light, noise, smoke, odors, or particles.
e. Proximity to aquifers or surface waters which transcend municipal boundaries.
f. Shared facilities such as schools and solid waste disposal facilities.
C. Review Required:
Review Required: The Candia Planning Board, upon receipt of an application for subdivision,
shall review it promptly and determine whether or not the development, if approved,
reasonably could be construed as having the potential for regional impact. Doubt concerning
regional impact shall be resolved in a determination that the development has a potential
regional impact.
D. Procedure:
a. Upon determination that a proposed development has a potential regional impact, the
Candia Planning Board shall afford the regional planning commission and the affected
municipalities the status of abutters as defined in RSA 672:3 for the limited purpose of
providing notice and giving testimony.
b. Not more than five (5) business days after reaching a decision regarding a development
of regional impact, the Candia Planning Board shall, by certified mail, furnish the regional
planning commission and the affected municipalities with copies of the minutes of the
meeting at which the decision was made. The Candia Planning Board shall, at the same
time, submit an initial set of plans to the regional planning commission, the cost of which
shall be borne by the Applicant.
c. At least fourteen (14) days prior to public hearing, the Candia Planning Board shall notify,
by certified mail, all affected municipalities and the regional planning commission of the
date, time, and place of the hearing and their right to testify concerning the development.
d. Notwithstanding the foregoing, when the building inspector determines that a use or
structure proposed in a building permit application will have the potential for regional
Town of Candia, NH Major Site Plan Regulations April 3, 2019
13
impact and no such determination has previously been made by another local land use
Board, he or she shall notify the local governing body. The building inspector shall also
notify by certified mail the regional planning commission and the affected municipalities,
who shall be provided thirty (30) days to submit comment to the local governing body
and the building inspector prior to the issuance of the building permit.
E. Applicability:
The provisions of this section shall supersede any contrary or inconsistent provisions of
local land use regulations enacted under RSA 155-E and RSA 674.
SECTION III: STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR SITE DEVELOPMENT
8.00 Site Standard Requirements:
The Planning Board shall approve the proposed site plan upon determination that the following
requirements have been met:
8.01 General Requirements:
A. The site shall be of such character that it can be demonstrated that it can be used safely without
excessive grades, inadequate drainage or other hazardous condition.
B. The proposed site plan shall provide for safe and attractive development of the site and guard
against such conditions as would involve danger to health, safety or property by undesirable and
preventable elements of pollution. The plan shall provide that:
1. Smoke, soot, particulates and other discharge into the air shall not exceed levels established
under the State Ambient Air Quality Standards; and
2. Noise and vibration at property boundaries shall not exceed levels at determined to be
harmful to health and welfare under regulations adopted by the Environmental Protection
Agency under 42 USC Chapter 65, "Noise Control".
8.02 Site Characteristics:
The development shall conform to the extent appropriate to the natural topography of the site. Site
clearing shall be kept at a minimum required for the construction of buildings and improvements,
taking into consideration the need for pedestrian and vehicular safety and the need for light and air.
Provisions shall be made for the protection of natural features and natural cover shall be retained to
the extent possible and reasonable. Landscaping and screening shall be provided with regard to
adjacent properties, the public highways and within site, including interior landscaping of parking
areas.
8.03 Construction Standards:
Any proposed site improvements including roadways and parking areas, shall be constructed in
conformance with the Candia Subdivision Regulations, State of New Hampshire Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction and the Town Building Code.
A. Driveway and Parking Areas: All driveway and parking areas shall be topped with a minimum
3-inch thick bituminous asphalt on an engineered sub-base.
Town of Candia, NH Major Site Plan Regulations April 3, 2019
14
1. All driveway access locations shall be approved by the New Hampshire Department of
Transportation (hereinafter “NHDOT”) or the Town of Candia, as applicable. Such written
approvals shall be provided to the Board and the location shall be shown on the plan.
2. Turning movements shall be provided for a WB-67 vehicle demonstrating that a delivery
vehicle can access, maneuver and exit the site without impacting other motorists or
pedestrians.
3. An area designated and striped for delivery vehicles.
4. The minimum pavement slope shall be 1% with a maximum pavement slope of 4% for
parking areas and parking aisles.
5. All stormwater collected by closed drainage system shall travel a maximum of 300-feet prior
to entering a stormwater system.
B. Treatment of the Disturbed Areas: All disturbed areas shall be covered upon completion with an
approved finish treatment of grass, asphalt, concrete or other materials as approved by the
Planning Board.
C. Seeding and Mulching: Disturbed areas shall be prepared and seeded in conformance with
Candia’s Subdivision Regulation Standards regarding topsoil, seeding, fertilizer and mulching.
D. Lighting: Soft lighting of the building exterior will be permitted provided the light source is not
visible and that it complements the architecture. The lighting shall not draw inordinate attention to
the building. Parking lot, service areas, pedestrian walkways and roadway lighting shall be provided
by free standing fixtures with cut off light sources to assure that the source will not constitute a
hazard to adjacent properties, or to street or highway driving from glare. The material and the colors
of the light fixtures will be evaluated by the Board in terms of their compatibility with the
architecture and natural site characteristics.
1. All Site Plans submitted to the Planning Board shall include a lighting plan, prepared and sealed
by a professional Engineer with expertise in lighting design, which shows all the exterior
lighting to be installed as part of the proposed development.
2. The lighting plan shall contain:
a. Details of the lighting fixtures proposed to illuminate all buildings, signs, roadways,
service areas, landscaping, parking and pedestrian areas, including the location, height,
make, model, lamp type, and wattage of each outdoor fixture.
b. Specifications and illustrations of all proposed lighting fixtures including pole heights,
height of luminaire photometric data, Color Rendering Index of all lamps and any other
necessary descriptive information.
c. Maximum pole mounted light fixture height shall be 16-feet, as measured from the
ground to the top of the fixture.
d. Photometric diagram that shows horizontal illumination levels at ground level on the site
from all externally visible lighting sources, including existing sources, to show the
amount of illumination that will be provided and that the standards for lighting maximum
and uniformity set by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA)
Town of Candia, NH Major Site Plan Regulations April 3, 2019
15
will not be exceeded. Foot candle measurements shall be ground level and measured over
any 10-foot interval.
3. Proposed lighting shall meet the following criteria:
a. Poles and fixtures shall be proportionate to the buildings and spaces they are
illuminating and designed with good engineering practices.
b. Lighting shall not trespass on to adjacent properties or create dangerous conditions
due to glare on adjacent roadways.
c. Where commercial or industrial zones abut residential uses the light levels at the edge
of the commercial or industrial property shall be reduced to a maximum 0.1 horizontal
and vertical foot candles.
d. Parking lot and sidewalk lighting shall provide a minimum 0.2 horizontal foot candles
with an average uniformity ratio of 4:1 and a minimum color ratio index of 50.
E. Signage: Pursuant to Article 8.01 of the Candia Zoning Ordinance, an approved application for sign
permit from the Building Inspector will be required as part of the site plan proposal. Signs may be
illuminated by continuous white light from sources placed so they will not constitute a hazard to
street or highway driving from glare. The following standards shall be observed:
1. Size: maximum 40 square feet
2. Height: maximum 10 feet
3. Base: wood and / or stone masonry
4. Setback: minimum of 10 feet
F. Flashing Signs: No flashing or animated signs having visible or moving parts or intermittent
lighting intended to create a visual effect are permitted (Section 8.04 of the Candia Zoning
Ordinance).
G. Architectural Renderings: The Applicant shall provide the Planning Board with all architectural
renderings including side elevations, landscaping plans and planting schedules and proposed
signage.
Commercial and Industrial Architectural Design Standards:
Purpose and Intent
The purpose of this document is to provide development and renovation standards for commercial,
industrial and institutional structures that shall ensure architecturally consistent and aesthetically
pleasing structures styled to complement the traditional New England heritage of Candia. These
standards are not intended to restrict innovation or variety. They are intended to support and
encourage property development as envisioned by the Candia Master Plan.
Procedure and Requirements
All Applicants are required to review these standards early in the design process that they understand
the expectations of the Candia community and avoid any design efforts that may decidedly
contradict these standards.
Town of Candia, NH Major Site Plan Regulations April 3, 2019
16
All proposed designs for new and renovated commercial, industrial and institutional structures will
be evaluated against these standards as part of the Candia Planning Board site plan review.
Site plan applications for commercial, industrial or institutional structures shall include renderings
of the front, sides and rear elevations. The principal rendering of the structure shall be in color.
Plans shall include all of the pertinent external architectural detailing such as:
a) Dimensional information;
b) Window sizing and detailing;
c) Materials of construction;
d) Location and identification of all externally fixed mechanical and communication
systems;
e) External detailing such as stairways, balconies, and chimneys, cupolas, etc.;
f) Lighting plans;
g) Signage design and location sighting; and
h) Landscape design;
Architectural Design Considerations
1. Foundation
a) Visual exposure of foundation walls should be kept to a minimum.
2. Exterior Walls
a) Materials providing a traditional New England appearance are the preferred materials
for any sides exposed to public view. Traditional stone or architectural block may be
substituted when necessary. Cement, masonry lock and metal paneling are strongly
discouraged and may be cause for rejection of the application.
b) The façade of structures larger than 15,000-square feet shall minimize the impact of long,
unbroken planes and increase visual interest.
c) Façades greater than 100-feet in length shall include plane projections or recesses.
3. Windows
a) Large plate glass windows are discouraged unless broken by mullions or muttons.
b) Mirrored glass or brightly colored panels are discouraged.
c) Display windows shall be sized appropriately to the overall structure and in keeping with
traditional New England style architecture.
4. Roofs
a) Whenever possible roofs shall have a minimum pitch of 3:12 to avoid warehouse style
flat roof construction.
b) Where flat roofs are unavoidable due to building size, architectural devices such as false
facades shall be incorporated to conceal the flat expanse. Whenever possible eaves
should extend more than 18-inches beyond all walls.
c) Roofing materials should provide for three dimensional textures. Wood shingles, asphalt
shingles and traditional standing-seam metal roofs are encouraged.
d) Long, unbroken expanses of roof shall be avoided through the use of dormers, cupolas,
chimneys and varied ridgelines. Multiple roof planes of the same pitch are encouraged.
Town of Candia, NH Major Site Plan Regulations April 3, 2019
17
e) All rooftop mounted mechanical or communication systems shall be located so that they
are not easily visible from pedestrian level. If necessary, architectural screening should
be provided to minimize any negative visual impact.
5. Colors, Detailing, and Treatments
a) Colors shall reflect a traditional New England palette.
b) Neon tubing in all forms and internally lighted signs are unacceptable.
c) Detail features should provide visual interest and pedestrian scale. Ground floor facades
should provide display windows, arcades, entry areas, awnings, or other such features
along a minimum of 40% of their length.
6. Styling
a) Efforts should be made to re-use existing structures particularly if they have historical
significance within the community.
b) Traditional New England styling is preferred. Colonial construction details such as
gabled roofs, hip roofs, dormers, and window treatments are encouraged.
7. Site Planning
a) Development should be pedestrian-friendly. Benches, bike racks, and the like are
strongly encouraged. Walkways and sidewalks should be provided to connect places for
foot travel.
b) All lighting should be minimized to the extent necessary for security and should be
designed to guarantee a maximum of dark skies. Fixtures should be pleasing to the eye,
obscure the light point source and be shielded for minimum of glare. Lighting shall not
impact driving safety or spill out onto residentially-zoned properties.
c) Trees and shrubs of various sizes should be used to soften all man-made features,
particularly parking areas. Natural areas should be preserved wherever possible to
provide a rural feel. The standards require developers maximize green space.
Topography of all green areas shall be kept natural wherever possible and artificial
leveling should be minimized.
H. Sidewalks and Cross Walks shall comply with Americans for Disability Act (ADA) standards
and shall be constructed in accordance with the NHDOT’s most recently amended
Specifications. Pedestrian crossings and crosswalks of Town roadways shall be approved by
the Road Agent. The crosswalk shall be marked to be visible by both the pedestrian and vehicle
driver. Crossings are encouraged at street corners and mid-block, or 100-150-feet apart in areas
of pedestrian activity. New sidewalks and crossings shall be linked and connected to existing
walkways and bicycle paths.
I. Parking spaces shall be of adequate size and number in accordance with Candia’s Zoning
Ordinance, and shall be physically delineated by granite curbing so as to protect adjacent
pedestrians.
J. Handicap Accessibility shall be provided in accordance with State and Federal ADA
requirements. The provided number of handicap accessible vehicle and handicap accessible van
spaces shall be in addition to the required parking for the designated use.
Town of Candia, NH Major Site Plan Regulations April 3, 2019
18
8.04 Coordination of Streets, Parking, Loading and Safety:
A. The public highways providing access to the site shall be sufficient and adequate for the safety
of vehicles, pedestrians and bicycles. This requirement includes not only the public highways
on which the site fronts, but also public highways which constitute the main traffic arteries which
must be utilized by traffic to and from the site.
B. The traffic pattern on and at the site shall be coordinated so to comprise a safe and convenient
system. All new commercial and industrial buildings must provide fire lanes to be built in
accordance with Fire Dept. specifications (copy of which can be obtained from the Land use
office). Access to all sides of the building is required. All driveway entrances must be built to
accommodate access as specified by the Fire Department. Fire lanes at existing buildings shall
be approved at the discretion of the Fire Chief.
C. When deemed necessary, traffic signal devices may be required and be provided at the
developer’s expense.
D. All loading areas shall be designed so as not to interfere with other planned vehicular and
pedestrian traffic on the site, and so as to provide adequate space and facilities.
E. All new commercial, industrial buildings, multi-family structures of three (3) or more dwelling
units, and existing buildings that have a change of use shall have a monitored fire alarm system
and a Knox Box. A Knox Box application may be obtained by contacting the Fire Department.
All buildings shall have the street address in numbers a minimum of 4-inches high with a contrasting
background and posted on a minimum 4-inch by 4-inch post or mailbox within 10-feet of the
roadway. The street address shall be obtained from the Fire Department prior to obtaining a building
permit and be posted prior to the commencement of any construction activity. Temporary markers
shall be allowed with prior approval of the Fire Department.
All Fire Department requirements must be completed prior to issuance of any certificate of
occupancy.
8.05 Screening
Storage areas, waste collection areas, and service areas shall be fenced and screened from on-site
areas and from neighboring properties. Sites adjacent to the residential district shall be adequately
screened with a landscaping buffer that includes plantings of live trees, shrubs, bushes, etc. approved
in advance by the Planning Board through its Town’s Engineer.
A. Existing vegetation will not satisfy the requirement of providing a vegetative screen between
the proposed development and the residential district.
B. At a minimum, the planting shall consist of trees 6-feet in height 2-inch caliper planted at
intervals of 10-feet on center. Non-evergreen plantings may be included to supplement
evergreen planting, but not to take the place of evergreen plantings.
C. An earthen berm, wall or fence of location, height, design, and material approved by the
Planning Board may be substituted for any portion of the required planting and/or buffer area
Town of Candia, NH Major Site Plan Regulations April 3, 2019
19
requirements. All plants in the buffer area shall be permanently maintained by the
Owner\occupant so as to maintain a dense screen year-round.
D. A landscaped area shall be provided along the perimeter of all parking area, except where the
parking area is functionally integrated with adjoining parking areas on abutting lots. The
landscaped area shall have a minimum dimension of 4-feet, shall be planted with grass, mulch
or shrubs, and shall include at least one (1) deciduous tree of not less than 2-inch caliper, at least
6-feet in height for every 50-feet along the perimeter of the parking area.
E. When the proposed use of a site presents the potential for obtrusive sound or noise pollution to
adjoining lots, appropriate sound buffering shall be incorporated into the site design. The use of
walls, berms, fencing, dense plantings, or a combination thereof may be required.
a. No person shall emit noise beyond the boundaries of his/her premises exceeding the levels
stated herein and applicable to adjacent residential, commercial or industrial zones:
i. Industrial 62 dBA
ii. Commercial 55 dBA
iii. Residential/day 55 dBA
iv. Residential/night 45 dBA
b. These conditions shall be exempt from the noise ordinance standards:
i. Natural phenomena
ii. Any bell or chime from any building clock, school, or church;
iii. Any siren, whistle, or bell lawfully used by emergency vehicles or any other alarm;
systems used in an emergency situation;
iv. Warning devices required by OSHA or other state of federal safety regulations;
v. Farming equipment or farming activity;
vi. Noise generated by any construction equipment which is operated between the hours
of 7:00 AM and 6:00 PM on weekdays.
8.06 Storm Water Management:
The following standards shall be applied in planning for the proposed stormwater management:
A. Rainfall Intensity – Rainfall intensities (24 hour) for Candia shall be established using Cornell
Universities Extreme Precipitation rates for New York and New England a copy of the extreme
rainfall events for the modelled storms shall be provided as part of the drainage report.
B. All runoff, erosion, and sediment control measures and the design of all drainage structures and
systems shall meet the design standards and specifications set forth in these Regulations or in
the current “Manual on Drainage Design for Highways” published by the NHDOT and the most
recent New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services Alteration of Terrain manuals.
C. All private drainage systems are to be maintained as necessary and minimally on a bi-annual
basis. Upon request, written records verifying compliance with this requirement shall be
provided to the Town. A note requiring this annual report must appear on the recorded cover
sheet and site plan.
Town of Candia, NH Major Site Plan Regulations April 3, 2019
20
D. No LID drainage structures (i.e. rain gardens, bio-retention basins, underground infiltration
systems, etc.) shall be installed within the Town right-of-way or in any drainage easements to
be maintained by the Town.
E. On all projects requiring United States Environmental Protection Agency SWPPP Plan and NOI
Permit, the Applicants must provide copies of the SWPPP inspection reports to the Town and
the Town’s Consulting Engineer within three (3) days of each site inspection and resulting
report.
F. All drainage computations and related submissions shall be certified by a Professional Engineer
G. The design shall not direct concentrated flows across property lines where the flows were not
concentrated in the existing conditions.
H. The drainage design shall model the pre- and post-development 2-year, 10-year, 25-year, 50-
year and 100-year storm events for the site using the rainfall intensities described in Section
8.06 (A). The design shall demonstrate no increase of runoff at any point on abutting properties
for any of the modeled events. The entire event shall be modeled and the hydrograph for each
structure shall be provided.
I. The drainage system shall be sized as follows:
a. Closed Drainage System = 25-Year storm event, with no overtopping in the 50-year
storm.
b. Open Drainage System = 50-Year storm event
c. Cross-Culverts Connecting Wetlands or outletting to a Wetland = 100-Year storm event
d. Detention Ponds = 100-Year storm event with 1’ freeboard to the top of the berm
e. Box Culverts or Bridges = 100-Year with zero surcharge
f. Scour Protection Measures= 50-Year storm event
J. Pipes and culverts shall not be surcharged during the design storm event. Outlet control
structures (relating to detention ponds only) may be surcharged. Culverts shall be placed to
accommodate natural drainage courses.
K. Acceptable pipe material for roadway drainage systems and driveway culverts is: Reinforced
Concrete Pipe (RCP),
L. Stormwater shall not be impounded adjacent to roadways. The 100-Year Detention Pond
elevation shall be designed to be a minimum of 10-feet from the edge of the right-of-way or
otherwise a minimum of 25-feet from the edge of pavement.
M. Maximum flow velocity in any pipe during the 25-year storm shall be 10 fps. When the
computed outlet pipe velocity is in excess of 10 fps, additional outlet protection shall be
employed. The minimum allowable flow velocity in a pipe or culvert during a 2-year storm
event is 2 fps.
Town of Candia, NH Major Site Plan Regulations April 3, 2019
21
N. Maximum flow velocity in a vegetated channel is 3.5 fps during the 25-year storm event.
Maximum flow velocity in a rock lined channel is 6 fps during the 25-year storm event. These
swales shall be analyzed for stability during this storm event.
O. All culverts, including driveway culverts, shall be constructed with end treatments (flared end
section, headwalls, etc.).
P. A ditch or swale shall have a minimum 6-inches of loam and seed and a minimum slope of 1.0
percent, except for treatment swales which shall have a minimum slope of 0.5 percent.
Q. Minimum pipe diameter in a closed drainage system is 12-inches. Minimum pipe diameter in
an open drainage system is 15-inches.
R. Standard roadway catch basin grates shall be limited to a design inlet flow of 2 CFS unless
manufacturer’s data (based on transverse and longitudinal slopes) indicates greater capacity at
a gutter line depth of 2-inches.
S. When two different diameter culverts enter one basin, the pipe crown elevations shall be
matched.
T. The compatibility of grate capacity, pipe capacity and design flow must be considered in closed
drainage system design.
U. Test pits or borings in the roadway cut sections shall be taken, as required or ordered by the
Town’s Engineer, to locate the Seasonal High Water Table (SHWT) and determine the need for
underdrain pipe. This pipe shall be perforated PVC or HDPE with a minimum diameter of 6-
inches, placed 1-foot outside the edge of pavement at a centerline depth of 4-feet.
V. The Applicant shall provide the following information in the drainage report/analysis with
adequate description of the drainage system features. Submission shall include pre- and postdrainage
plans with catchments (area, slope, length and flow path) and other drainage system
components clearly identified.
1. Infiltration Basins: Elevations, incremental storage capacity, stage-discharge relationship,
areas, critical depth, flood elevation, inflows, outflows, outlet information.
2. Pipes and Culverts: Inlet and outlet inverts, base flows, material, slope, length, dimensions,
roughness, restrictions, and special conditions.
3. Channels: Inlet and outlet inverts, base flows, stability, construction and lining, slope,
length, dimensions, roughness, restrictions, and special conditions.
4. Catchments: Also known as “subcatchments.” Slope, average length, changes in flow
modes, soils, CN, condition, time of concentration, area, rainfall information, description of
specific location.
5. Modeling should include the entire storm event with a minimum time of twenty-four (24)
hours.
Town of Candia, NH Major Site Plan Regulations April 3, 2019
22
W. Detention/Retention Ponds
1. Both retention and detention ponds shall provide a minimum of 1-foot of freeboard at peak
elevation during the 100-year storm event.
2. Detention and retention ponds shall be provided with an emergency overflow with an invert
at the peak elevation of the 100-year storm event preferably provided as part of the outlet
control structure. Overflow weirs are permitted if designed with erosion protection for the
100-year storm event.
3. Slopes shall have 6-inches of loam and be fully grassed. Permanent fencing (4-foot
minimum) and a locking gating (minimum 12-foot width) shall be required if the pond
permanently retains more than 12-inches of water or the peak depth (measured from the
invert of lowest outlet to the invert of the emergency overflow) is greater than 6-feet.
4. Slopes and contouring are critical to a drainage system. Maximum slopes, directly relating to
the construction of ponds, swales, or diversions, and cut slopes intercepting the estimated
seasonal high water table, shall be limited to 3:1 unless the design Engineer provides a
geotechnical evaluation showing that steeper slopes are stable and sustainable in a saturated
and surcharged condition. The evaluation shall examine all failure modes and provide
calculations with supporting documentation based on individual soil types, compaction
requirements, surcharge loads, and moisture content. Other methods providing additional
structural support and stability to a proposed slope may be approved by the Board on a caseby-
case basis.
5. Stamp test pit logs and percolation rates shall be taken at the proposed depth and shall be
provided in the drainage report when infiltration is being considered as part of the drainage
system design. When infiltration is included as part of the drainage calculations the Applicant
shall also demonstrate that the proposed drainage system(s) are sized appropriately for no
infiltration.
8.07 Groundwater Protection:
The quality of groundwater is defined in RSA 485.C: 2 shall not be adversely affected by the
proposed development. The design Engineer of record shall certify that the proposed development
does not violate the rules and regulations of Chapter 485:3 (c) Groundwater Protection Act with
regard to groundwater and shall meet the following requirements:
A. Groundwater Pollution Monitoring Devices:
Any proposed or expanded site with the potential for contaminate leaching shall have provision for
suitably designed and approved monitoring wells installed around the perimeter of the site. Said
design and installation shall be approved by the Planning Board through its Town’s Engineer at the
expense of the Applicant.
B. Surface Drainage Control Measures:
Any proposed or expanded site with the potential for surface run off degradation shall have
provision for the containment and diversion of surface water runoff to suitable and approved
Town of Candia, NH Major Site Plan Regulations April 3, 2019
23
catchment facilities. Said design and construction to be approved by Planning Board through its
Town’s Engineer at the expense of the Applicant.
C. Disclosure
Any application for site plan review which involves the proposed receiving, handling, storing or
processing of any regulated substance (as defined by RSA 339-A:2) shall disclose this information
as part of the application submission. Copies of all appropriate state permits as required by the NH
DES for the proposed use shall be submitted to the Town of Candia Health Officer and Candia Fire
Department as part of the site plan application. Site plan applications which involve property
contaminated by hazardous or toxic materials (as defined by RSA 339-A:2) shall disclose such
information as part of the application. If the Planning Board finds that a potential health risk or an
environmental threat exists from a previous use or existing use of the site, then the Planning Board
shall require that any environmental assessment that has been completed and submitted to NH DES
shall be submitted to and reviewed by the Town Health Officer (or 3rd party consultant of Board’s
choice at Applicant’s expense) prior to any Planning Board action.
8.08 Utilities and Fire Protection:
A. Utilities:
Provisions shall be made for the site to be serviced by underground utilities which may include
water for fire and domestic use, sanitary sewer, electrical, gas, telephone and cable.
B. Fire Protection:
All new multi-family structures of three or more dwelling units, commercial and industrial buildings
constructed in the Town of Candia shall have provisions for fire protection system in accordance
with the latest version of the NH State Fire Code and NFPA#1142. Options include but are not
limited to a cistern, fire pond or approved building sprinkler system.
1. As determined by the Fire Chief, in conjunction with the Town’s Engineer and based on
current NFPA and IBC Building code Standardsction
2. Cost based on Engineer’s estimate.
The volume of the cistern water supply shall be based on the formula used by the NH State Fire
Marshall Office with the minimum supply consisting of a 30,000 gallon, 30 year warranty, fiberglass
cistern, which the property Owner shall be responsible for maintaining access to at all times. Actual
water supply requirements will be determined by the use, type of construction and the fire load
inside the building. The cost basis for this contribution shall be as estimated by the Town’s
engineering consultant.
Sprinkler systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with NFPA Standard 13 for
commercial and industrial buildings and NFPA Standard 13R for multi-family structures. The fire
department may, at the discretion of the Chief, require the developer to contribute the cost for the
installation of the Fire Chief’s recommended fire protection system to the Town of Candia Water
Supply Capital Reserve Fund if it is determined that this option will improve the overall fire
protection of the Town.
1. Existing commercial property will be required to conform to this requirement when a
proposed expansion exceeding 50% of the existing square footage occurs.
Town of Candia, NH Major Site Plan Regulations April 3, 2019
24
2. A letter from the Fire Chief and the Police Chief regarding safety issues is required. A
copy of the plan shall be submitted to these agencies at least thirty (30) days prior to any
public hearings, to allow their recommendations to be part of the hearing process.
8.09 Disposition of Excavated Waste:
All excavated waste including but not limited to: boulders, rubble and debris, shall be removed from
the site unless the Planning Board authorizes otherwise. The exception is if boulders are proposed
for lands.
8.10 Solid Waste Disposal Plan:
Provisions for the disposal of solid waste in conformance with Candia Recycling Center Regulations
shall be evidenced and submitted prior to final plan approval. Said plan shall include the following
information:
A. Description of the solid waste to be generated by the site;
B. Description of the on-site solid waste storage facilities;
C. A removal schedule showing volume and frequency; and
D. A statement acknowledging the conditions imposed by the Candia Recycling Center
Regulations and the method by which the site will conform with those conditions.
8.11 Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan:
Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plans shall be submitted in conformance with the Candia
Subdivision Regulations.
8.12 Impervious Cover:
The area of the site to be finished with impervious cover shall be shown in terms of the percentage
of the entire site. The Board may require a reduction in the impermeable surface area and/or the
construction of storm drains and catch basins where warranted by conditions of soil, slope and
groundwater. The proposed development shall be limited to the following:
1. No more than fifty (50%) percent or under 2-acres of the lot shall be covered by impervious
material, including but not limited to, building, concrete and asphalt.
2. A minimum of thirty (30%) percent of the developed lot shall remain as green are or
undeveloped.
3. The maximum allowable building area coverage shall be twenty (20%) percent of the developed
lot area.
4. All uses providing twenty (20) or more off-street parking spaces shall have at least five (5%)
percent of landscaped open area within the paved portion of the parking area. With a total of
twenty (20%) percent of area proposed for impervious cover provided as landscape area.
8.13 Underground Petroleum Storage Tanks:
Copies of permits obtained from the State of New Hampshire Water Division shall be required
when underground storage tanks are proposed whether for private or commercial use. All site plan
designs submitted to the Planning Board that include underground storage tanks, as defined by the
Town of Candia, NH Major Site Plan Regulations April 3, 2019
25
New Hampshire Code of Administrative Rules ENV-OR 400-Underground Storage Facilities, must
include underground storage tank design with the complete underground storage tank submittal
application to New Hampshire Division of Environmental Services Oil Compliance and Initial
Response Section.
8.14 Landscaping:
A landscaping plan shall be required upon application for site plan review and approval. The final
landscaping plan shall be drawn to scale, said plan shall include the following:
A. All site plans shall include a landscaping plan designed by a qualified landscaping Designer.
The Board shall make the final determination of whether the landscape Designer is qualified.
B. For all proposed landscaped areas a minimum of 4-inches of topsoil, with 5% organic matter
incorporated shall be spread in all planting and turf areas.
C. Landscape plans shall be designed to provide buffers in an effort to mitigate impacts to
neighboring properties. Buffers are intended to physically separate one use or property from
another so as to visually shield or block, noise, lights, provide a water quality benefit and to
minimize other impacts.
a. Along the property line of a property, buffers are required in the following instances:
i. Where a proposed non-residential use abuts a residential zoning district.;
ii. Where a proposed non-residential use abuts an existing residential use; and
iii. Where a proposed roadway abuts an existing property line or is within 20-feet of
a property line where the existing use is residential.
b. Within a property, buffers are required to provide visual screens in the following
instances:
i. Outdoor Storage Areas; and
ii. Refuse and Recycling Collection Areas
D. Within a property landscaping buffers shall meet the following criteria:
a. Buffers shall be located to prevent visibility of the above listed items from the parking
areas, traveled right-of-way or neighboring properties.
b. Buffers shall be at least 6-feet in height and may consist of fencing, evergreens, berms,
mounds or combinations thereof. Chain link fencing with privacy slats are discouraged.
E. Landscaping shall be provided along all building frontage. A minimum of one (1) shrub for
every 12-feet of building frontage shall be provided. In instances where it is not possible to
locate all required shrubs along the building frontage due to doorways, walkways or other
impervious surfaces, the required shrubs shall be utilized within the parking lot or landscape
buffers. Plant locations are designed to be flexible and not necessarily in even spaced intervals.
F. Peripheral landscaping shall be required along all sides of a parking lot or access way that
abuts adjoining property or a public right.
Town of Candia, NH Major Site Plan Regulations April 3, 2019
26
G. Landscaping within parking lots or green space encompassing not less than five (5%) percent
of the total parking area shall be required. A minimum of one (1) tree for every fifteen (15)
parking spaces shall be provided. These trees shall be complemented by suitable ground cover
and shrubs.
H. A minimum 4-foot wide landscape area shall be provided surrounding each free-standing sign
base.
I. Bare soil is not acceptable. The introduction of groundcovers and/or perennials planted, the
use of mulch or other natural material as a soil covering is acceptable. However, no more than
twenty percent of the minimum landscaped area may be covered with nonliving landscaping
materials such as bark mulch, woodchips or leaf litter.
J. Use of Existing Landscaping Towards Requirements:
a. Each existing healthy and native or non-invasive tree, with a caliper of 3-inches or
greater, preserved using proper protection methods within the interior parking lot area
may be substituted for one tree required for every fifteen (15) parking spaces.
b. Where an Applicant proposes leaving a significant portion of healthy non-invasive trees
and other vegetation within the proposed parking area, the Board may consider
alternative landscaping designs.
K. All trees, shrubs and ground cover shall be planted according to accepted horticultural
standards.
a. Minimum for shade or canopy trees shall be 3-inches in diameter measured at breast
height, with a height not less than 12-feet.
b. Minimum size for small or minor shade trees shall be 2.5-inches in diameter measured
breast height, with a height of not less than 9-feet.
c. Minimum size for ornamental or flowering fruit trees shall be 2-inches in diameter
measured at breast height, with a height of not less than 7-feet.
d. Minimum size for evergreen trees shall be 6-feet in height.
e. Minimum size for a shrubbery shall be 1.5-feet in height or spread.
f. All trees and shrubs shall be appropriately pruned after planting with all broken or
damaged branches removed.
L. All landscaping shall be completed prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. An
inspection of all plantings to ensure compliance with the approved landscaping plan shall be
conducted prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. Ongoing inspections of
landscapes shall be conducted to ensure compliance of the site with the approved landscape
plan in perpetuity.
Town of Candia, NH Major Site Plan Regulations April 3, 2019
27
M. All landscaping shall be warranted for one (1) year from the of issuance of a Certificate of
Occupancy.
8.15 Structural Design Requirements:
A. Retaining Walls
a. Retaining walls are discouraged within the Town right-of-way. If a retaining wall is to
be allowed, as determined by the Planning Board, a typical detail of the proposed
retaining wall must be included in the plans. The following requirement must be
included with the typical detail: “The stamped shop drawings and calculations for the
actual retaining wall must be provided for review and approval at or prior to the project’s
required preconstruction meeting.”
b. All retaining walls shall be designed by a professional Engineer with expertise in this
field. A note must appear on the plans requiring that the provided plans and supporting
calculations address the following criteria:
i. Design calculations stamped by a Professional Engineer of the appropriate
discipline, licensed in New Hampshire;
ii. Stability calculations (including bearing capacity, global stability, overturning
and sliding);
iii. Geogrid pullout and other pertinent data & evaluations;
iv. Construction installation specification;
v. Lateral earth pressure coefficient;
vi. Surcharge load, embedment depth;
vii. Both a plan and profile of each wall section;
viii. Guardrail / handrail installation details and geogrid penetration procedures; and
ix. Location of the required pedestrian barrier.
c. If requested by the Planning Board or the Town Consulting Engineer, a pedestrian
barrier, (i.e. 4-foot chain link fence), must be installed at the top of the proposed
retaining wall. If guardrail is also proposed, the requested pedestrian barrier must be
installed between the guardrail and the top of the retaining wall.
d. A note must appear on the approved plans and the stamped shop drawings requiring the
design Engineer, after the retaining wall construction is completed, provide a stamped
letter certifying that: “the retaining wall was fully constructed per the approved design
plans and will function as intended.”
B. Box Culverts, Bottomless Spans, Bridges, Headwalls, and Wingwalls
a. A typical detail of the proposed structure(s) must be included in the design plans. The
following requirement must be included with the typical detail: “The stamped shop
drawings and calculations for the actual structure(s) must be provided for review and
approval at or prior to the project’s required preconstruction meeting.”
b. All structural designs shall meet or exceed HL-93 loading.
Town of Candia, NH Major Site Plan Regulations April 3, 2019
28
c. These structures shall be designed by a professional Engineer with expertise in this field.
A note must appear on the plans requiring that the provided plans and supporting
calculations must address and/or include the following criteria:
i. Hot dipped galvanized hardware connection details;
ii. Cementitious patching of all hardware pockets;
iii. Flexible sealant (i.e. Sika 1A or equal), specified between structure sections;
iv. Connection details for headwalls and/or wingwalls;
v. Specify steel shimming material;
vi. Cast in place concrete minimum design strength equal to 4,000 psi;
vii. Precast concrete minimum design strength equal to 5,000 psi;
viii. Note requiring the structure to also meet all NHDOT roadway and bridge design
standards;
ix. Design elevations such as top/bottom of footing, top of structure, finish grade,
select gravel and pavement thicknesses, etc.;
x. Dimensions for all pieces;
xi. Backfill specifications and compaction requirements;
xii. Subgrade preparation requirements, minimum of 12-inches of crushed gravel;
xiii. Epoxy coated rebar to be used for all bridge decks and box culverts with less
than 5-feet of cover and all rebar to be 60 grade steel; and
xiv. Applicable membrane and/or coatings for both backfilled and exposed surfaces.
8.16 Temporary Signs:
The developer shall obtain and post signs to warn motorists of construction and construction
vehicles in the area of the proposed roadway construction. All signage shall be in accordance with
the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices published by the Federal Highway Administration.
Changeable message signs are okay to be used on a temporary basis of forty-eight (48) hours or
less.
8.17 Guardrail:
Guardrail shall be provided for all locations where side slopes exceed 4-feet horizontal and 1-foot
vertical, for a vertical drop greater than 5-feet. All proposed guardrail limits, end sections, materials
and details shall meet all NHDOT roadway and bridge design standards.
SECTION IV: JOINT PROCEDURES PROVISIONS
Article 9.00 Procedure When Subdivision Approval is required
9.01 Procedure When Subdivision Approval is required:
When both subdivision and site plan approval are required on a proposed development, the Board
may hold the site plan review hearing at the same time as the hearing required by the subdivision
regulations.
9.02 Procedure When a Special Exception or Variance Approval by the Zoning Board of
adjustment is required:
When a Special Exception or Variance is required by the Zoning Ordinance, the Applicant shall
first obtain the special exception or variance before the application is considered complete for site
Town of Candia, NH Major Site Plan Regulations April 3, 2019
29
plan approval. Any condition imposed by the Board of Adjustment Shall not be diminished by the
requirements contained in these Regulations.
8.03 Procedure When Earth Excavation Permit is Required:
The procedures required under Earth Excavation Regulations shall substitute for the procedures
required under these Regulations with respect to proposed excavation operations.
SECTION V: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
10.00 Representations at Public Hearings:
Representations made at public hearings or material submitted to the Board concerning features of
the proposed buildings, structures, parking or use which is subject to regulations pursuant to these
Regulations or to the Candia Zoning Ordinance, whether written or verbal, shall be deemed
conditions upon such approval.
11.00 Upgrading Off-Site Public Facilities:
The Board may require that existing public streets, sidewalks and utilities providing access to the
site be upgraded and improved to accommodate the additional burden placed on the streets,
sidewalks and utilities by proposed use of the site. The Applicant's share of such cost for off-site
improvements shall be determined by the Town’s Engineer.
12.00 Fines and Penalties:
Any violation of these Regulations shall be made punishable as provided in New Hampshire Revised
Statutes Annotated Chapter 676:17 I-V.
13.00 Appeals:
Any person aggrieved by an official action of the Board may appeal that decision in accordance
with RSA 677:15.
14.00 Active and Substantial Development or Building:
In approving any application, the Planning Board may specify the threshold level of work which
shall constitute “active and substantial development or building” for the purpose of determining the
minimum amount of work required in order to satisfy the provisions of RSA 674:39. Active and
substantial development, in the absence of a specific finding of the Planning Board shall mean the
construction of one or more roads as shown on an approved and recorded site plat in accordance
with the construction specifications contained within Article 19 of the Town of Candia Subdivision
Regulations. Such road construction shall be completed through final binder course of pavement,
sufficient to cause eligibility for certificates of occupancy to be issued for structures on those lots
fronting the road. This active and substantial development would thus entitle the site plan to the
four-year exemption as provided under RSA 674:39.
Town of Candia, NH Major Site Plan Regulations April 3, 2019
30
TABLE I
MINIMUM DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PARKING AREAS
DEGREES
Angle of
Parking
Spaces
‘A’
(Feet)
‘B’
(Feet)
‘C’
(Feet)
One-
Way
Traffic
‘C’
(Feet)
Two-
Way
Traffic
‘D’
(Feet)
‘E’
(Feet)
One-
Way
Traffic
‘E’
(Feet)
Two-
Way
Traffic
‘F’
(Feet)
Two-
Way
Traffic
0 22.5 9.0 15.0 24.0 33.0 42.0 42.0
30 17.0 16.6 15.0 24.0 25.9 48.2 57.2 53.2
45 12.75 20.5 14.0 24.0 34.7 55.0 65.0 65.0
60 9.8 20.3 15.0 24.0 36.3 55.6 64.6 60.5
90 9.0 20.0 24.0 24.0 40.0 64.0 64.0 64.0
Schedule of Required Off-Street Parking Spaces
Use No. Parking Spaces Required
(a) Rooming & Boarding Houses 1 per each sleeping room plus 1 per employee
at the largest shift
(b) Hotel, Motel, Tourist Home space 1 per Guest Room plus 1 per employee at the
largest shift
(c) Hospital or Nursing Home 1 per 4 beds
(d) Places of Public Assembly 1 per 4 seats
(e) Bowling Alleys 2 per alley
(f) Eating & Drinking Establishments 1 per 4 seats plus 1 per employee at the largest
shift
(g) Drive-In Establishments 1 per 50 sq. ft. building floor area plus 1 per
employee at the largest shift
(h) Service Station/Gasoline Station 2 per service bay plus 1 per employee at the
largest shift
Town of Candia, NH Major Site Plan Regulations April 3, 2019
31
(i) Retail Trade & Personal Services 1 per 200 sq.. of sales area plus 1 per employee
at the largest shift
(j) Wholesale Trade and Warehousing 1.2 per employee at the largest shift
(k) Office and Industrial Uses 1.2 per employee at the largest shift
(l) Residential Units 3 Spaces per unit, can include garage
(m) Bank or Financial Institution 4 per 1,000 sq. ft building floor area
(n) Golf Course/Country Club 8 per hole
(o) Place of Worship 9 per 1,000 sq. ft. building floor area
(p) Medical Facility – Animal Hospital 5 per 1,000 sq. ft. building floor area
(q) Medical Facility – Urgent Care 6 per 1,000 sq. ft. building floor area
(r) Medical Facility – Dental Office 1 per seat plus 1 per employee at the largest
shift
(s) Park/Playground 6 per Acre
(t) Movie Theatre 1 space per 4 seats
(u) Day Care 3 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. building floor area
(v) Commercial Recreation 12 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. building floor area
Town of Candia, NH Major Site Plan Regulations April 3, 2019
32
TABLE II
TYPICAL PARKING SPACE LAYOUT AND LOCATION OF DIMENSIONAL
REQUIREMENTS FOR AREAS OF FIVE OR MORE PARKING SPACES
Revised: In Planning Board Minutes. 11/5/97, 1/31/01, 7/1/01, 6/30/02, 01/10/07, 1/2009, 3/20/2019
TOWN OF CANDIA
PLANNING BOARD
MAJOR
SITE PLAN REVIEW
APPLICATION AND CHECKLIST
I. GENERAL INFORMATION AND FEE SCHEDULE
1. Name, address and phone number of property Owner:____________________________
___________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________
2. Name, Address and phone number of authorized agent:___________________________
___________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________
3. Location of Site: Street ___________________________ Total acreage _____________
Tax Map No. _____________________ Lot No. __________________
4. Intended Use: Commercial ____________________ Industrial ____________________
Multi-family ____________________ Other ______________________
5. Name and street addresses of abutters: Complete attached Schedule A (abutters must
also be identified on the plat)
6. Statement of Intent: Attach a brief project description.
7. Statement of Authorization: If the Applicant is not the Owner of the site, a notarized
Statement giving authority to the Applicant to make site plan review application must be submitted.
This statement must include any conditions or restrictions set forth by the Owner and an expiration
date, if any.
8. Payment of the following fees:
A. Application of Subdivision (Minor) $100.00
(Major) $150.00
B. Lot Origination Fee (per lot/dwelling unit) $75.00 each
C. Engineering Review Fee $ at cost
D. Compliance Inspection Fee $ at cost
E. Boundary Line Adjustment $50.00
F. Site Plan Review (Minor) $75.00
(Major) $200.00
G. Legal Notice (per hearing) $100.00
H. Abutters (per lot-include owner and agent) $7.80
*OR current rates established by the US Postal Service
I. Driveway Permit $25.00
J. Gravel Pit Permit $100.00
K. Recording Fees:
Mylar (22” x 34” sheet) $45.00 + $26.00 per sheet
Revised: In Planning Board Minutes. 11/5/97, 1/31/01, 7/1/01, 6/30/02, 01/10/07, 1/2009, 3/20/2019
L-Chip Fee $25.00
(as of 7/2008 *current rates established by Registry)
Delivery to Registry Charge $20.00
L. Fire Department Inspection Fee $50.00
II. EXISTING DATA AND INFORMATION
ITEM CHECKED
1. Location of site shown
2. Names and street addresses of Owner’s of record
3. Names and street addresses of abutters
4. Name & address of firm preparing the plan
5. Scale of plan (1” = 20’ minimum)
a. entire site area shown on one sheet with index on sheets
6. North arrow
7. Plan prepared by a P.E. or R.L.S. with seal. All plans must also be submitted
electronically via e-mail or approved storage media in the portable document
format (PDF) with a maximum file storage size of 10 M.B.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
II. ITEM
8. Date of plan
9. Name and address of person or firm preparing other data if different
from preparer of plan
10. Boundary lines of site shown
11. Bearings and distances shown
12. Total lot area shown
13. Plan drawn in ink on transparent mylar
14. Existing grades shown
15. Existing drainage systems and structures shown
16. Existing easements; locations and dimensions:
a. drainage
b. slope
c. detention ponds
d. temporary (cul-de-sac, other)
e. utility
f. rights-of-way
17. Use of all abutting properties shown with all structures thereon and
access roads
18. Vicinity sketch (locus map)
a. location of site shown
b. zoning within 1000’ of site shown
c. 100 year flood plain, if applicable
d. scale shown
19. Topographic map of site with:
a. Bench mark established by Applicant or USGS
b. 2’ contours with spot elevations
c. existing contours dashed
20. Special features, natural and man made, affecting site or giving it
character such as:
a. bodies of water
b. streams or water courses
c. swamps, marshes or wetlands
d. wooded areas
e. large (in excess of 24” DBH) trees or boulders
f. other significant features
21. Location of all existing monuments
22. Statement describing purpose of the plan
23. Tax Map and Lot number
24. Existing zoning variances or special exceptions, with applicable
references
III. PROPOSED PLAN AND INFORMATION
1. Plans:
a. Area to be disturbed for streets, drainage, structures (100,000+ SF
requires WSPCD site specific approval
b. Sewer, water, gas and electric lines
CHECKED
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
a.
b.
Revised: In Planning Board Minutes. 11/5/97, 1/31/01, 7/1/01, 6/30/02, 01/10/07, 1/2009, 3/20/2019
c. Erosion and sedimentation control plan
d. Finished contour lines
e. Existing tree lines and proposed plantings
f. Paved areas
g. Percentage of site finished with impervious cover
h. Location and size of structures
I. Scale 1” = 50’, or as approved by the Broad
j. Details as required:
1. construction details
2. grading details
3. drainage and erosion control
4. utility details
k. USGS or assumed datum
III.
2. Proposed streets, including names
* 3. Proposed drives, parking spaces and sidewalks
4. Radii of all curves shown
5. Widths of streets, drives and sidewalks shown
6. Parking required by Zoning Ordinance ________ spaces
Parking provided by proposed site plan _________ spaces
Size of parking spaces: _______ X ______
7. Size and location of all proposed and public utilities
8. Proposed landscaping and screening
a. location
b. type
c. size
d. planting schedule
9. Lighting and signage plans
10. Drainage Calculations/Report
a. System sizing
b. detention, retention provided as necessary
c. headwalls provided as necessary
d. pipes adequate for the designated design storm
e. end treatments for all
11. Circulation plan provided
a. pedestrian and vehicular traffic
b. checked turning radii for fire equipment
c. checked for access to fire hydrant(s)
12. Construction drawings and details provided:
a. pavement and road profiles
b. walks and steps
c. curbing
d. drainage structures
e. other details as required
13. Architectural Renderings
14. Solid Waste Disposal Plan
15. Timetable for construction and completion of buildings, improvements and landscaping
16. Snow storage areas
17. Location of any fire suppression system as required by the Fire Department
18. A signature block for signing by seven members of the Planning Board
19. All required State, Federal and Local permits and permit numbers
20. All proposed waivers of Town of Candia regulations.
21. A table summary of the area or impervious cover, greenspace, landscaping and
building area.
22. SWPPP
23. Sight Distance Plan
IV ADDITIONAL INFORMATION AS REQUIRED
1. Abutters list provided
2. Permits secured or applications submitted, copies provided
3. Review letter by Fire Department
4. Review letter by Police Department
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
I.
j.
k.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
a.
b.
c.
d.
9.
10.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
11.
a.
b.
c.
12.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
1.
2.
3.
4.
Revised: In Planning Board Minutes. 11/5/97, 1/31/01, 7/1/01, 6/30/02, 01/10/07, 1/2009, 3/20/2019
5. Review letter by Building Inspector
6. Other (Zoning Board of Adjustment, for example)
7. Drainage calculations and report
V. DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS
See Section III: Standards and requirements for Site Development
* All newly proposed driveways and points of access must be approved by either the
local
Road Agent or by the NH Department of Transportation for curb cut locations.
VI. ENGINEERING REVIEW
1. Consolidation or subdivision required
a. plan submitted
b. plan per regulation (see major subdivision checklist)
2. Zoning Issues
a. zoning district shown
b. zoning district for adjacent properties within 1000’ shown
c. wetlands involvement (see Article X, Candia Zoning Ordinance for definition of
wetlands)
d. wetlands exception obtained from ZBA
e. site per zoning ordinance:
1. frontage required _________
frontage proposed __________
2. area required ___________
area proposed ____________
3. usages permitted ________________
usages proposed ________________
4. proposed usages permitted by special exception ____________________
f. date project scheduled with ZBA
g. ZBA stipulation recorded and complied with
h. buffers provided per regulations
I. parking adequate per regulations
j. set-backs:
1. shown per regulations
2. distances correct
3. front yards per regulations
4. rear and side yards per regulations
k. building height conforming
3. Plan elements submitted:
a. subdivision or lot line adjustment plan
b. site plan
c. landscaping, signage and lighting plan
d. drainage and utility plan
e. drainage profiles
f. drainage calculations
g. test pit data
h. soils map and or wetlands map
1. SCS
2. HISS
3. Legend for soil types
I. sedimentation and temporary erosion control plan
4. Construction cost estimates and completion schedule
* Also required is an approved local or state driveway permit for all new access ways
5.
6.
7.
YES NO UNKNOWN
Revised: In Planning Board Minutes. 11/5/97, 1/31/01, 7/1/01, 6/30/02, 01/10/07, 1/2009, 3/20/2019
APPLICATION FOR SITE PLAN REVIEW
CANDIA, NEW HAMPSHIRE
ABUTTERS LIST
Name Address
1. Applicant ____________________________________________________________________
2. Owner (if different than Applicant)_________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
3. Contact person________________________________________________________________
4. ____________________________________________________________________________
5. ____________________________________________________________________________
6. ____________________________________________________________________________
7. ____________________________________________________________________________
8. ____________________________________________________________________________
9. ____________________________________________________________________________
10. ____________________________________________________________________________
11. ____________________________________________________________________________
12. ____________________________________________________________________________
13. ____________________________________________________________________________
14. ____________________________________________________________________________
15. ____________________________________________________________________________
All the above names and addresses must be shown on the site plan. A fee of $7.47 per abutter is
required at the time of application. Applicant bears full responsibility that all required notices
were given. Board reserves the right to continue the hearing if proper notice was not given.
I hereby certify that the above list contains the names and mailing address of all property owners as
prescribed by the Site Plan Review Regulations for Candia, NH.
________________________________________________________________________________
Applicant’s signature Date
Date received ______________________________________ By____________________________

















TOWN OF CANDIA
NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
HISTORY:
Adopted Sections III & IV on 11/4/87
Adopted Sections I & II on 1/20/88
Adopted Section V on 1/20/88
Amended 5/11/88
Amended 6/27/90
Amended 11/97
Amended 10/20/99
Amended 11/15/00
Amended 12/03/03
Amended 10/03/07
Amended 03/10/09
Amended 8/4/2010
Amended 7/19/2017
Amended 4/3/2019
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION I: AUTHORITY ............................................................................................................ 5
ARTICLE 1. ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT .................................................................... 5
1.01 (a) Authority: .................................................................................................................... 5
1.02 Title: ................................................................................................................................. 6
1.03 Validity: ............................................................................................................................ 6
1.04 Amendment: ..................................................................................................................... 6
ARTICLE 2. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT ................................................... 6
2.01 Administration and Enforcement: .................................................................................... 6
2.02 Approval by Planning Board: ........................................................................................... 6
2.03 Special Use Permits:......................................................................................................... 6
2.04 Prohibition of Construction Prior to Approval: ............................................................... 6
2.05 Building Permits:.............................................................................................................. 6
2.06 Prohibition of Sale Prior to Endorsement and Recording: ............................................... 7
2.07 Penalties: .......................................................................................................................... 7
2.08 Appeals: ............................................................................................................................ 7
2.09 Construction of Subdivision: ............................................................................................ 7
2.10 Acceptance of Streets and Utilities: ................................................................................. 7
2.11 Maintenance of Streets: .................................................................................................... 8
2.12 National Flood Insurance Requirements: ......................................................................... 8
2.13 Active and Substantial Development or Building: ........................................................... 9
2.14 Development of Regional Impact: ................................................................................... 9
ARTICLE 3. WAIVERS OF COMPLIANCE ......................................................................... 10
3.01 Relaxation of Requirements: .......................................................................................... 10
3.02 Expedited Review for Lot Line Adjustments, and Boundary Agreements Which ........ 11
Create No New Lots or Non-conforming Lots: ..................................................................... 11
SECTION II: PROCEDURES AND SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS ................................... 11
ARTICLE 4. APPLICATION PROCEDURE FOR SUBDIVISION ...................................... 11
4.01 Submission of Application and Review Period: ............................................................ 11
4.02 Notice - When notice is required, the Board shall give Notice as follows: ................... 12
4.03 Filing, Review and Compliance Monitoring Fees ......................................................... 13
4.04 Fee Schedule: ................................................................................................................. 13
4.05 Types of Subdivision: .................................................................................................... 13
ARTICLE 5. MINOR SUBDIVISION ................................................................................... 14
5.01 Definition: ...................................................................................................................... 14
5.02 Standards: ....................................................................................................................... 14
5.03 Procedure for Review: .................................................................................................... 14
5.04 Expansion of Procedures: ............................................................................................... 15
5.05 Description of Final Plat: ............................................................................................... 15
5.06 Information Required: .................................................................................................... 15
5.07 Other Information:.......................................................................................................... 16
ARTICLE 6. MAJOR SUBDIVISION .................................................................................... 16
6.01 Definition: ...................................................................................................................... 16
6.02 Standards: ....................................................................................................................... 16
6.03 Procedure for Review: .................................................................................................... 16
6.04 Submission Requirements: ............................................................................................. 17
ARTICLE 7. CLUSTER SUBDIVISION REPEALLED ....................................................... 17
ARTICLE 8. MANUFACTURED HOUSING CLUSTER SUBDIVISION REPEALLED .. 17
Town of Candia, NH Major Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
3
ARTICLE 9. PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT REPEALLED ....................... 17
ARTICLE 10. PLATTING PROCEDURE ............................................................................. 17
A. INFORMAL DISCUSSION ................................................................................................. 17
10.01 Procedure:..................................................................................................................... 17
10.02 Information Reguired: .................................................................................................. 17
10.03 Action of the Board: ..................................................................................................... 17
B. REVIEW OF PRELIMINARY LAYOUT ........................................................................... 17
10.04 Procedure:.................................................................................................................... 17
10.05 Description of Layout: ................................................................................................. 17
10.06 Information Required: .................................................................................................. 18
10.07 Review of Layout: ........................................................................................................ 19
10.08 Action of the Board: ..................................................................................................... 20
C. REVIEW OF FINAL PLAT ................................................................................................. 20
10.09 Procedure:..................................................................................................................... 20
10.10 Description of Final Plat: ............................................................................................. 20
10.11 Information Required on Final Plat .............................................................................. 20
10.12 Additional Information on Final Plat: .......................................................................... 21
D. ACTION ON FINAL PLAT ................................................................................................. 23
10.13 Submission of an Application for Final Plat Approval: ............................................... 23
10.14 Consideration and Action on Final Plat: ...................................................................... 23
10.15 Notice for Meetings/Hearings; ..................................................................................... 23
10.16 Notice of Action on the Final Plat:............................................................................... 24
10.17 Acknowledgment of Receipt of Notice: ....................................................................... 24
10.18 Performance Bond: ....................................................................................................... 24
10.19 Description and Recording of Final Plat: ..................................................................... 24
10.20 Failure to Record: ......................................................................................................... 25
10.21 Modification of Official Map: ...................................................................................... 25
SECTION III: STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION DESIGN ................................................... 25
ARTICLE 11. GENERAL PROVISIONS .............................................................................. 25
11.01 Compliance with Other Ordinances: ............................................................................ 25
11.02 Character of Land for Subdivision: .............................................................................. 25
11.03 Prohibition of Premature or Scattered Subdivision: ..................................................... 26
11.04 Off-site Improvements: ................................................................................................ 26
11.05 Preservation of Existing Features:................................................................................ 26
11.06 Fire Protection and Fire Suppression Water Source Requirements: ............................ 26
11.07 Sewage Disposal Requirement: .................................................................................... 26
11.08 Liability for Public Use of Land: ................................................................................. 27
11.09 Groundwater Protection: .............................................................................................. 27
ARTICLE 12. LOT AND SITE LAYOUT ............................................................................. 27
12.01 Compliance with Zoning Ordinances:.......................................................................... 28
12.02 Lots on Public Streets: ................................................................................................. 28
12.03 Entrance into Public Streets: ........................................................................................ 28
12.04 Marking of Lots:........................................................................................................... 28
ARTICLE 13. OPEN SPACE AND COMMON AREA REQUIREMENT ........................... 28
13.01 Reservation of Land: .................................................................................................... 28
ARTICLE 14. STREET LAYOUT AND DESIGN ................................................................ 28
14.01 Conformance with Official Map: ................................................................................. 28
14.02 Conformance with Construction Standards: ................................................................ 28
Town of Candia, NH Major Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
4
14.03 Utility Connections with Existing Subdivision: ........................................................... 29
14.04 Adjustment of Alignment of Right-of-Way: ................................................................ 29
14.05 Harmony with Topography: ......................................................................................... 29
14.06 Street Patterns and Extensions: .................................................................................... 29
14.07 Traffic Deterrents: ........................................................................................................ 29
14.08 Curb Cuts: .................................................................................................................... 29
14.09 Intersections and Grades: ............................................................................................. 29
14.10 Multiple Intersections: ................................................................................................. 29
14.11 Permanent Cul-de-Sac Streets: ..................................................................................... 29
14.12 Temporary Cul-de-sac Streets: ..................................................................................... 30
14.13 Dead End Streets: ......................................................................................................... 30
14.14 Tree Plantings:.............................................................................................................. 30
14.15 Classification of Streets: .............................................................................................. 30
14.16 Roadways in Commercial and Industrial Zones: ......................................................... 31
14.17 Marking of Proposed Streets: ....................................................................................... 31
14.18 Street Rough-Grading: ................................................................................................. 31
14.19 Alteration of Right-of-Way or Travel Surface: ............................................................ 31
14.20 Curbing: ........................................................................................................................ 31
14.21 Pedestrian Walks, Sidewalks and Crosswalks: ............................................................ 32
14.22 School Bus Boarding Area: .......................................................................................... 32
14.23 Street Lighting: ............................................................................................................. 32
14.24 Naming of Streets: ........................................................................................................ 32
14.25 Street and Traffic Control Signs: ................................................................................. 32
ARTICLE 15. UTLITIES, DRAINAGE AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL ................................. 32
15.01 Provision for Utilities and Drainage: ........................................................................... 32
15.02 Avoidance of Flood Damage: ...................................................................................... 32
15.03 Installation of Utilities: ................................................................................................ 32
15.04 Installation of Laterals:................................................................................................. 33
15.05 Underground Placement of Utilities:............................................................................ 33
15.06 Storm Water Drainage System: .................................................................................... 33
15.07 Sewage Disposal Design: ............................................................................................. 36
ARTICLE 16. SEDIMENT AND EROSION CONTROL ..................................................... 36
16.01 Purpose: ........................................................................................................................ 36
16.02 Standards: ..................................................................................................................... 36
16.03 Sediment and Erosion Control Plan: ............................................................................ 37
16.04 Notice of Intent to Initiate Construction Activity: ....................................................... 37
ARTICLE 17. DISPOSITION OF EXCAVATION MATERIALS ....................................... 37
17.01 Disposition and Excavation of Materials: .................................................................... 37
17.02 Disposition of Construction Generated Materials: ....................................................... 37
17.03 Hazardous Waste: ......................................................................................................... 38
SECTION IV: STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION CONSTRUCTION .................................. 38
ARTICLE 18. ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS............................................................... 38
18.01 Administrative Authority: ............................................................................................ 38
18.02 Administrative, Legal and Engineering Fees: .............................................................. 38
18.03 Time for Completion of Construction: ......................................................................... 38
18.04 Performance Bond: ....................................................................................................... 38
18.05 Modification of Design and Improvements: ................................................................ 39
18.06 Inspection of Construction: .......................................................................................... 39
Town of Candia, NH Major Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
5
18.07 Certification of Compliance: ........................................................................................ 39
18.08 Correction of Deficiencies: .......................................................................................... 40
18.09 Guarantee of Installation of Improvements:................................................................. 40
18.10 Damage to Adjacent Public and Private Property, Drainage Facilities, Waterways,
Streams and Brooks:............................................................................................................... 40
18.11 Correction of Defects: .................................................................................................. 40
18.12 Erosion Control after Construction: ............................................................................. 40
18.13 Subdivision Record Drawing Plans: ............................................................................ 41
18.14 Monuments: .................................................................................................................. 41
18.15 Offer of Cession: .......................................................................................................... 41
ARTICLE 19. CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS .......................................................... 41
19.01 Conformance with Construction Standards: ................................................................ 41
19.02 Settlement of Design & Road Construction Questions: ............................................... 42
19.03 Pre-Construction Conferences: .................................................................................... 42
19.04 Clearing and Grubbing: ................................................................................................ 42
19.05 Excavation and Embankments: .................................................................................... 42
19.06 Drainage: ...................................................................................................................... 43
19.07 Structural Design Requirements : ................................................................................ 43
19.08 Sub-Base Specifications: .............................................................................................. 45
19.09 Base Material: .............................................................................................................. 45
19.10 Compaction: ................................................................................................................. 46
19.11 Surface Course: ............................................................................................................ 46
19.12 Profiles: ........................................................................................................................ 46
19.13 Miscellaneous Items: .................................................................................................... 46
19.14 Fire Protection: ............................................................................................................. 47
19.15 Construction of a Fire Suppression Water Source: ...................................................... 49
19.16 Permanent Cul-de-Sac Turnaround: ............................................................................. 50
19.17 Temporary Turnaround Design: ................................................................................... 51
SECTION V: DEFINITIONS ....................................................................................................... 53
ARTICLE 20. DEFINITIONS .................................................................................................... 53
APPENDIX A............................................................................................................................ 56
APPENDIX B ............................................................................................................................ 57
APPENDIX C ............................................................................................................................ 58
SECTION I: AUTHORITY
ARTICLE 1. ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT
1.01 (a) Authority:
Pursuant to the authority granted by the voters of the Town of Candia, and in accordance
with the provisions of Chapter 674: Section 35, Revised Statutes Annotated, the Candia
Planning Board adopts the following Regulations governing the subdivision of land in the
Town of Candia, New Hampshire.
1.01 (b) Purpose:
Town of Candia, NH Major Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
6
To assure that the land indicated on plats submitted to the Planning Board shall be of such
character that it can be used for the building purposes without danger to public health.
To protect ground water quality for purposes of public health and safety (RSA 674:36).
1.02 Title:
These Regulations shall be known as the Town of Candia Subdivision Regulations,
hereinafter referred to as “these Regulations”.
1.03 Validity:
If any portion of these Regulations is found for any reason to be invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion
of these Regulations.
1.04 Amendment:
These Regulations may be amended whenever such action is deemed advisable by the
Board following a duly noticed public hearing on the proposed amendment. All changes
to these Regulations shall become effective when adopted and signed by majority of the
Planning Board members and filed with the Town Clerk and with the Board of Selectmen.
The amendment shall be filed in a central file with the Office of State Planning.
ARTICLE 2. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
2.01 Administration and Enforcement:
The administrative and enforcement officer for these Subdivision Regulations shall be the
Candia Selectmen.
2.02 Approval by Planning Board:
All subdivision of land in the Town of Candia requires approval by the Planning Board in
accordance with these Regulations.
2.03 Special Use Permits:
No special use permit for use of land or building related to a proposed subdivision shall be
granted prior to review and approval of said subdivision by the Planning Board and the
recording of an endorsed Final Plat in the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds.
2.04 Prohibition of Construction Prior to Approval:
No construction, land clearing or building development shall be initiated until the Final
Plan of the proposed subdivision has been approved by the Planning Board, as evidenced
by the issuance of the Notice of Action (Art. 10.17).
2.05 Building Permits:
No building permit shall be issued and no building or other structure shall be erected on
any lot within the Town unless the street giving access to said lot is a public street, or unless
authorized by the Board of Adjustment pursuant to RSA 674:41. Any building erected in
violation of these provisions is an unlawful structure and the Board of Selectmen or
appropriate agent of the governing authority shall enjoin any erection or cause the building
to be vacated or removed.
Town of Candia, NH Major Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
7
2.06 Prohibition of Sale Prior to Endorsement and Recording:
No sale, rental, lease or other conveyance of any part of a proposed subdivision shall be
entered into by the subdivider until an approved Final Plat has been endorsed by the
Planning Board and recorded in the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds.
A. In the event the Planning Board accepts a performance bond, in a form acceptable
to the Selectmen after review by Town Counsel, the Final Plat shall be endorsed by
the Planning Board at the time of approval and thereupon recorded in the
Rockingham County Registry of Deeds.
B. If construction of the subdivision is not secured by a performance bond,
construction of said subdivision shall be fully completed in accordance with Article
19, following which the approved Final Plat shall be endorsed by the Planning
Board and recorded in the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds.
2.07 Penalties:
As provided in RSA 676:16, any Owner or agent of the Owner of any land located within
a subdivision who transfers or sells any land before a Plat of the said subdivision has been
approved and endorsed by the Planning Board and filed with the appropriate recording
official under RSA 674:35 II., shall forfeit and pay a civil penalty of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each lot or parcel so transferred or sold; and the description by metes and
bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or
transferring shall not be exempt the transaction from such penalties.
The Town may enjoin such transfer or sale and may recover the said penalty by civil action.
In any action to recover a penalty, the prevailing party may recover reasonable court costs
and Attorney’s fees as may be ordered by the court (August 4, 2010).
2.08 Appeals:
Any person aggrieved by an official action of the Board may appeal there from to the
Superior Court as provided in RSA 677:15.
2.09 Construction of Subdivision:
A subdivider shall construct the subdivision to comply with the approved Final Plat and all
requirements set forth in the Notice of Action (Article 10.16). Construction of
improvements shall be in accordance with the provisions of Article 19.
2.10 Acceptance of Streets and Utilities:
The Applicant should be aware that the Planning Board’s approval of a road does not
constitute acceptance of the road, or a statement that the Town will take over the road. This
can only be done by the Board of Selectmen after the road has been completed and built to
the Town’s requirements, and satisfactory confirmation of same is received from the
Planning Board and the Town’s consulting Engineer.
Any new street or utility will not be considered for acceptance by the Town until such time
as all improvements have been completed as shown on the final plat, in accordance with
these Regulations and Town road specifications, and subject to any conditions established
by the Board at the time of the approval of the final plat. The Town is under no obligation
Town of Candia, NH Major Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
8
to accept the offer to dedicate the street. When the Planning Board and Board of Selectmen
have voted to accept the street as complete, the Selectmen may hold a public hearing upon
request to consider dedication of the street as a Town road. If the Board accepts the
dedication, a deed, signed by the Applicant and the Board of Selectmen must be provided
and will be recorded in the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds.
2.11 Maintenance of Streets:
The Applicant shall make arrangements for maintenance of any new street within a
subdivision for the period prior to its acceptance by the Town as a public highway, and a
deed has been accepted, signed and recorded in the registry of deeds.
The Applicant may choose to maintain the street prior to its acceptance as a public highway
by providing a notarized letter to that effect, and by notifying all of the residents of the
street. Alternatively, the Applicant may enter into an agreement with the Town to
undertake winter maintenance at the Applicant’s cost. However, no such agreement will
be entered into unless and until the construction of the road is complete in accordance with
these Regulations and Town road specifications and subject to any conditions established
by the Board at the time of the approval of the final plat.
2.12 National Flood Insurance Requirements:
For site plans that involve land designated as “Special Flood Hazard Areas” (SFHA) by
the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP):
A. The Planning Board shall review the proposed development to assure that all
necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from
which approval is required by Federal or State law, including Section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334.
B. The Planning Board shall require that all proposals for development include Base
Flood Elevation (BFE) data within such proposals (i.e. floodplain boundary and
100-year flood elevation).
C. The Planning Board shall require the Applicant to submit sufficient evidence
(construction drawings, grading and land treatment plans) so as to allow a
determination that:
(i) all such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage;
(ii) all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage;
(iii) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards; and
(iv) No filling or alterations shall be allowed within the regulated floodway
unless it can be demonstrated that the proposed development provides
Town of Candia, NH Major Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
9
a ‘no rise’ in the 100-year surface water condition for the site and
abutting properties.
2.13 Active and Substantial Development or Building:
In approving any application, the Planning Board may specify the threshold level of work
which shall constitute “active and substantial development or building” for the purpose of
determining the minimum amount of work required in order to satisfy the provisions of
RSA 674:39. Active and substantial development, in the absence of a specific finding of
the Planning Board shall mean the construction of one or more subdivision roads as shown
on an approved and recorded subdivision plat in accordance with the construction
specifications shall be completed within Article 19 of these Regulations. Such road
construction shall be completed through the final wearing course, sufficient to cause
eligibility for certificates of occupancy to be issued for structures on those lots fronting the
road. This active and substantial development would thus entitle the subdivision to the
four-year exemption as provided under RSA 674:39.
2.14 Development of Regional Impact:
A. Purpose:
1. Provide timely notice to potentially affected municipalities concerning proposed
developments which are likely to have impacts beyond the boundaries of the Town
of Candia.
2. Provide opportunities for the regional planning commission and the potentially
affected municipalities to furnish timely input to the Town of Candia.
3. Encourage the Town of Candia to consider the interests of other potentially affected
municipalities.
B. Definitions:
Fulfill the statutory Definition – Any development which the Planning Board determines
could reasonable be expected to impact on a neighboring municipality, because of factors
such as, but not limited to, the following:
a. Relative size or number of dwelling units as compared with existing stock.
b. Proximity to the borders of a neighboring community.
c. Transportation networks.
d. Anticipated emissions such as light, noise, smoke, odors, or particles.
e. Proximity to aquifers or surface waters which transcend municipal boundaries.
f. Shared facilities such as schools and solid waste disposal facilities.
C. Review Required:
Town of Candia, NH Major Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
10
The Candia Planning Board, upon receipt of an application for subdivision, shall review it
promptly and determine whether or not the development, if approved, reasonably could be
construed as having the potential for regional impact. Doubt concerning regional impact
shall be resolved in a determination that the development has a potential regional impact.
D. Procedure:
a. Upon determination that a proposed development has a potential regional impact,
the Candia Planning Board shall afford the regional planning commission and the
affected municipalities the status of abutters as defined in RSA 672:3 for the limited
purpose of providing notice and giving testimony.
b. Not more than five (5) business days after reaching a decision regarding a
development of regional impact, the Candia Planning Board shall, by certified mail,
furnish the regional planning commission and the affected municipalities with
copies of the minutes of the meeting at which the decision was made. The Candia
Planning Board shall, at the same time, submit an initial set of plans to the regional
planning commission, the cost of which shall be borne by the Applicant.
c. At least fourteen (14) days prior to public hearing, the Candia Planning Board shall
notify, by certified mail, all affected municipalities and the regional planning
commission of the date, time, and place of the hearing and their right to testify
concerning the development.
d. Notwithstanding the foregoing, when the building inspector determines that a use
or structure proposed in a building permit application will have the potential for
regional impact and no such determination has previously been made by another
local land use Board, he or she shall notify the local governing body. The building
inspector shall also notify by certified mail the regional planning commission and
the affected municipalities, who shall be provided thirty (30) days to submit
comment to the local governing body and the building inspector prior to the
issuance of the building permit. Applicability: The provisions of this section shall
superseded any contrary or inconsistent provisions of local land use regulations
enacted under RSA 155-E and RSA 674.
e. Regional impacts in other towns such as Raymond, Chester and Auburn.
ARTICLE 3. WAIVERS OF COMPLIANCE
3.01 Relaxation of Requirements:
Upon the written request of the subdivider, the Board may grant a relaxation of one or more
of the provisions of these Regulations as it deems appropriate, provided the Board shall
first determine the following:
A. That the relaxation is related to unique physical conditions peculiar to the proposed
subdivision;
Town of Candia, NH Major Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
11
B. That the granting of the relaxation will not be contrary to the purposes and
objectives of these Regulations; and
C. That the public good will not be adversely affected.
3.02 Expedited Review for Lot Line Adjustments, and Boundary Agreements Which
Create No New Lots or Non-conforming Lots:
A. Notice is required.
B. Any abutter may be heard on the application for review at the public meeting when the
matter is discussed by the Board. If deemed necessary, the Board may adjourn its
consideration to another date and time to allow further abutter participation.
C. A site location shall be submitted to the Board showing the original boundaries of the
adjacent parcels.
D. A detailed plan shall be submitted to the Board showing the new property line or lines
created as a result of the lot line adjustment/boundary agreement.
E. A statement shall be placed on the plan stating as follows:
"This Plan shows a division of land for the purpose of lot line adjustment/boundary
agreement as defined in the Candia Subdivision Regulations and does not require the
approval of the Candia Planning Board as a subdivision."
F. The plan shall be filed in the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds and with the Candia
Board of Selectmen.
G. A Lot Line Adjustment is an exchange of land or the transfer of part of one lot to an
adjoining landowner where such exchange or transfer does not convey an area of land equal
to the minimum lot size.
SECTION II: PROCEDURES AND SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
ARTICLE 4. APPLICATION PROCEDURE FOR SUBDIVISION
4.01 Submission of Application and Review Period:
Application to the Planning Board for subdivision approval, and subsequent submission of
required information, shall be made through the Office of the Planning Board. Inquiries
for advice concerning procedures, requirements or the status of a particular application may
be made to the Planning Board during regular business hours.
A. Upon receipt of an application, the Board shall provide decision in writing within
seven (7) business days regarding the completeness of the application. Should it be
deemed by the Board that the submitted application is incomplete the application will
be rejected by the Board and the Applicant shall then be required to submit all
necessary information prior to the application being reconsidered for acceptance by
Town of Candia, NH Major Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
12
the Planning Board. All additional fees associated with re-notifying abutters for the
re-submittal of an incomplete application shall be borne by the Applicant.
B. Once a complete application has been provided to the Board, the Town’s Engineer
will provide a cost estimate for the technical review of the submission. If the estimated
amount is greater than the remaining completeness review deposit the Applicant shall
provide the additional balance to the Town, to be held in escrow to pay for the
technical review of the plans.
In accordance with RSA 676:4 (c)(1) the Board shall act to approve, approve with
modification, or disapprove the proposed subdivision within sixty-five (65) days
following the public hearing at which the application was deemed complete and
accepted as presented, excepting that the Board may apply to the Board of Selectmen
prior to the expiration of the sixty-five (65) day period for an extension of time not to
exceed ninety (90) day period within which to act upon the application. The Applicant
may consent to an extension of time for the Board to act beyond the initial sixty-five
(65) day period on the condition that such consent shall be in writing and shall be
made part of the Board’s record.
C. Technical reviews and associated review letters shall be provided to the Applicant by
the Town within fourteen (14) days of the Town’s receipt of the Town Engineer’s
technical review fee costs. Subsequent technical reviews and associated review letters
shall be completed by the Town within seven (7) days of receipt of all revised or
modified plans, reports, waivers or other submitted documents.
D. An application shall be heard within thirty (30) days of the notification of a complete
application by the Planning Board.
E. Revised plans shall be reviewed by the Town’s Engineer within seven (7) days of all
resubmittals.
4.02 Notice - When notice is required, the Board shall give Notice as follows:
A. The Notice shall include a general description of the proposed subdivision which is
the subject of the application, shall identify the subdivider and the location of the
proposed subdivision, and shall state the date, time and place of the public
hearing/meeting.
B. A copy of the Notice shall be sent to the abutters and the subdivider by certified mail.
C. For the purpose of these Regulations in counting days, the day on which Notice is
given and the day of the public hearing/meeting shall be excluded.
D. Notice shall be mailed at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing/meeting.
E. Notice to the general public shall be given, by one publication of a copy of the Notice
in the Union Leader or such other paper as may be designated by the Planning Board,
at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing/meeting, and at least two (2) places in
the Town of Candia.
Town of Candia, NH Major Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
13
F. The application shall include the names and addresses of the subdivider and all
abutters as indicated in the Town records not more than five (5) days before the day
of filing. Abutters shall also be identified on any plat submitted to the Board.
G. The subdivider shall pay in advance all costs of Notice to Abutters. Failure to pay
costs may be basis for disapproval of the Application.
4.03 Filing, Review and Compliance Monitoring Fees
A. The subdivider shall pay the filing fees in advance according to the Schedule of Fees
adopted by the Planning Board and placed on file in the Office of the Selectmen. In
addition, the Board may require the subdivider to pay additional reasonable fees to
cover its administrative expenses and costs of special investigative studies, review of
documents, and other matters which may be required by particular applications (RSA
676:4(G)). Such additional fees may also include an appropriate allocation of legal
expenses incurred by the Board.
B. All Subdivisions requiring new street/roads are subject to review by the Candia Town
Engineer and Town Road Agent, at the Applicant’s expense. The site Owner or
authorized agent shall meet with the Planning Board’s Completeness Review
Committee to perform a completeness review of all Major Subdivision applications.
C. Upon a determination by the Completeness Review Committee that the application is
complete the Town’s Engineer shall develop a cost to perform a technical review of
the application. The review fee amount must be submitted to the Town and will be
held in escrow for the technical review of the application.
D. Upon approval of a Major Subdivision application, the Town’s Engineer shall develop
a construction cost estimate for the purpose of establishing a project completion
surety. The Applicant or the Developer shall provide an acceptable form of the surety
in the amount determined prior to the Planning Board signing the final plat plans.
E. Upon approval of a Subdivision application, the Town’s Engineer shall develop a
Construction Inspection and Compliance Monitoring fee estimate for the purpose of
inspecting the work for compliance with the approved plans and Town regulations and
standards. The Applicant or the Developer shall provide the estimated amount in
escrow prior to the Planning Board signing the final plat plans.
4.04 Fee Schedule:
Reference Appendix C for fee schedule:
A. Failure to provide any of the required application fees shall be grounds for the
Planning Board to not accept the application.
4.05 Types of Subdivision:
For the purposes of these Regulations, five (5) types of subdivision are defined. Types (A)
and (B) may involve residential, commercial or industrial development.
Town of Candia, NH Major Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
14
A. Minor Subdivision: The subdivision of land into three (3) or fewer lots with no potential for
re-subdivision and requiring no new roads, utilities or other municipal improvements. The
procedure, requiring only the Final Plat, is set forth in Article 5.
B. Major Subdivision: The subdivision of land into four (4) or more lots, plats or other sites for
the purpose whether immediate or future, of sale or of building development. It includes resubdivision
and when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the
land or territory subdivided. Procedure and requirements are set forth in Article 6.
C. Cluster Subdivision: When permitted by zoning ordinance, an optional form of subdivision for
single-family housing, allowing the division of land into lots of reduced dimensions and the
sharing of open space.
D. Manufactured Housing Subdivision: When permitted by zoning ordinances, an optional form
of subdivision for manufactured housing allowing the division of land into lots of reduced
dimensions and the sharing of open space. Procedures and requirements are set forth in Article
8.
E. Planned Residential Development: When permitted by zoning ordinances, Planned Residential
Development is a form of subdivision intended for mixed housing types, from single-family to
multi-family, in which buildings are grouped in patterns which allow a large percentage of
space to be retained for common use.
ARTICLE 5. MINOR SUBDIVISION
A. Definition
5.01 Definition:
The subdivision of land into three (3) or fewer lots with no potential for re-subdivision and
requiring no new roads, utilities of other municipal improvements.
B. Procedure
5.02 Standards:
All Minor Subdivision shall conform to applicable standards set forth in Sections III and
IV. In addition, the subdivision may not adversely affect any adjoining property.
5.03 Procedure for Review:
The Minor Subdivision process requires only the submission of the Final Plat, as set forth
in Article 5.06 below. At an informal meeting with the subdivider, the Board shall first
determine that the proposed subdivision qualifies for the Minor Subdivision procedure,
following which the subdivider may submit the Final Plat immediately or at a subsequent
meeting of the Board. Review of the Final Plat shall be in accordance with the procedures
in Article 10.C. Notice is required in accordance with RSA 676:4.II.B.
Town of Candia, NH Major Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
15
5.04 Expansion of Procedures:
If in the judgment of the Board, the subdivision as initially presented does not meet the
requirements for a Minor Subdivision as stated in the Definition, the Board shall require
the subdivision to be processed as a Major Subdivision.
C. Submission Requirements
5.05 Description of Final Plat:
The Final Plat shall be in permanent black ink on permanent reproducible polyester film.
It shall be submitted in one (1) polyester film copies, and four (4) black line paper prints.
Sheet sizes shall be in accordance with the requirements of the Rockingham County
Registry of Deeds. Space shall be reserved on the Plat for endorsement by the four (4)
Board members. The Final Plant shall contain the following statement:
"The Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Candia and Notice of Action are a part of
this Plat, and approval of the Plat requires the completion of all the requirements of said
Subdivision Regulations except in only any relaxation of requirements granted in writing
by the Board."
5.06 Information Required:
For Minor Subdivision, the Final Plat shall contain or be accompanied by the following
information. Final Plat shall be drawn at a scale of no more than 100-feet per inch, unless
otherwise specified by the Board.
a) Name of municipality and subdivision, names and addresses of the subdivider and
Designer(s).
b) Names and addresses of abutting property owners, subdivisions and buildings within
200-feet of the parcel to be subdivided, and also roads, streets and driveways within 200-
feet of the parcel to be subdivided.
c) Name and seal of the licensed State of New Hampshire Engineer and/or land surveyor
who prepared the Final Plat.
d) A general site location map locating the proposed Minor Subdivision boundaries in
relation to major roads. A vicinity map showing the location of the proposed subdivision
in relation to abutting properties and existing streets, highways or municipal facilities.
e) Boundaries and areas of the entire parcel referenced to a public street intersection or
USGS benchmark, north point, bar scale, date and dates of any revisions. The Board may
waive the requirement of a perimeter survey for the entire parcel and may require specific
data only for lots for which sale or lease is contemplated, in such instances; the Final Plat
shall include a general map insert which indicates approximately the size and shape of the
entire parcel to be subdivided.
f) Approximate contour lines at 5-foot intervals for the entire parcel, sketched from a
standard USGS map or a Town base map.
Town of Candia, NH Major Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
16
g) Existing and proposed building sites and lot lines, angles and dimensions, lot sizes in
square feet and acres, consecutive numbering of lots.
h) Location of existing and proposed easements, deed restrictions, building set-back lines,
parks and other open space, water courses, stone walls and significant natural and manmade
features. This includes culverts, and the direction of flow indicated by arrows through
those culverts.
i) Where individual on-lot sewage disposal systems are proposed or in existence, the
subdivider shall present evidence of State approval of the suitability of each lot for on-site
sewage disposal for building purposes. For lots greater than 5-acres, an opinion by a
registered Professional Engineer that a suitable site for a subsurface disposal system exists
may be substituted for state approval. For lots greater than 10-acres, a request for a waiver
from this requirement may be made when supported by appropriate soil data. In all
instances shall specifically indicate on each such lot that state approval for an on-site
subsurface disposal system has not been applied for nor has been granted.
j) Where the minor Subdivision is to be supplied by public water supply or sewers, the
Plat shall show the location of such existing service. A statement from the municipal
department or company involved attesting to the availability of such service shall be
submitted.
k) A statement from the Candia Tax Collector indicating whether the property is under
current use taxation status or not.
5.07 Other Information:
When in the judgment of the Board, additional information is required to serve the purposes
of these Regulations, the Board may require such other information as set forth in Articles
10.06, 10.11 and 10.12, Final Plat Requirements.
ARTICLE 6. MAJOR SUBDIVISION
6.01 Definition:
The subdivision of land into four (4) or more lots, plats or other sites for the purpose
whether immediate or future, of sale or of building development. It includes re-subdivision
and when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or
territory subdivided.
6.02 Standards:
All Major Subdivisions shall conform to the requirements within Sections III and IV of the
Candia Subdivision Regulations, Standards for Subdivision Design, and Standards for
Subdivision Construction, respectively.
6.03 Procedure for Review:
The procedures of Article 10 may be followed for the review of Major Subdivision. These
procedures involve three steps: 1) an Informal Discussion for which no fee shall be
assessed (see Article 10A) 2), a review of the Preliminary Layout (see Article 10B) and 3)
a review of and public hearing on the Final Plat (see Article 10C).
Town of Candia, NH Major Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
17
The Informal Discussion and the Preliminary Layout review shall be conducted at separate
meetings of the Board and on separate dates from the public hearing on the Final Plat.
6.04 Submission Requirements:
Submission Requirements for Major Subdivision shall be as set forth in Article 10.
ARTICLE 7. CLUSTER SUBDIVISION REPEALLED
ARTICLE 8. MANUFACTURED HOUSING CLUSTER SUBDIVISION REPEALLED
ARTICLE 9. PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT REPEALLED
ARTICLE 10. PLATTING PROCEDURE
A. INFORMAL DISCUSSION
10.01 Procedure:
Upon request of the subdivider, the Planning Board shall place on the agenda of the
Planning Board at a regularly scheduled meeting an Informal Discussion between the
subdivider and the Board. No fee shall be assessed for the Informal Discussion. No notice
to abutters is required. A notarized statement authorizing representation by an agent of the
land Owner is required if the land Owner is not present.
10.02 Information Reguired:
The subdivider shall provide the Board with a sketch plan showing the location and type
of proposed development, including such information as general topography including
prominent natural features of the tract and how the concept conforms with the Master Plan.
10.03 Action of the Board:
The Informal Discussion between the subdivider and the Board shall be limited to a
discussion as to concept for the limited purpose of familiarizing the Board with the location
and type of development. Following the Informal Discussion, and after determining the
general character of the proposed subdivision, the Board shall advise the subdivider
concerning subsequent procedures and submission requirements.
B. REVIEW OF PRELIMINARY LAYOUT
10.04 Procedure:
The subdivider shall submit to the Planning Board a Preliminary Layout of the proposed
subdivision.
10.05 Description of Layout:
The Preliminary Layout shall be drawn in pencil or ink and submitted in four (4) black line
paper prints. Dimensions may be approximate, date may be tentative, but shall be
sufficiently clear to establish the basis of and to clarify the design requirements for the
subdivision Final Plat. Maps shall be at a scale of no more than 100-feet per inch unless
otherwise specified by the Board.
Town of Candia, NH Major Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
18
10.06 Information Required:
The following information shall be submitted to the Planning Board as the Preliminary
Layout:
a) Name of municipality and subdivision, name and address of subdivider and Designer
or Engineer, names and addresses of property owners within 200-feet of the parcel to
be subdivided.
b) General site vicinity map showing the subdivision boundaries and proposed streets
in relation to existing streets, highways, abutting parcels of land and other features
shown on the Town highway map.
c) Boundaries and area of the entire parcel owned by the subdivider, whether or not all
land therein is to be subdivided, referenced to a public street intersection or USGS
bench mark, north point, bar scale, date and dates of revision.
d) Boundaries and designation of zoning districts within the subdivision, municipal
boundary, if any, land use designation from the Zoning Ordinance.
e) Existing and Proposed contours at 2-foot minimum intervals developed from an on
the ground survey by a surveyor licensed in the state of New Hampshire.
f) The subdivision plan shall provide soil maps and information in accordance with Site
Specific Soil Maps for New Hampshire Special Publication No. 3, June, 1997, and
as amended. Maps prepared by field examination shall be prepared and stamped by
a Certified Soil Scientist and include the date of the field examination. All costs of
preparing soil data shall be borne by the Applicant.
g) Subdivision and buildings within 200-feet of the parcel to be subdivided; roads,
streets and buildings within 200-feet of the parcel to be subdivided.
h) Location of parks and other open space, watercourses, flood prone areas, foliage
lines, stone walls that are existing and new boundaries, significant natural and
manmade features.
i) Existing and proposed lot lines: Existing and proposed easements, deed restrictions,
deed covenants, building, accessory buildings and building set-back lines.
j) Preliminary road profiles showing grades, existing and proposed street right-of-way
lines (including side slopes), widths of streets, proposed names of new streets.
k) Location of existing and proposed water mains, sanitary sewers, storm drainage lines,
drainage structures and drainage ways, existing and proposed telephone, electricity,
water, sewer, fire protection lines and other proposed facilities and/or utilities.
l) A preliminary drainage design of all proposed drainage features, analysis and
comparisons of pre and post conditions.
Town of Candia, NH Major Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
19
m) A statement from the Candia Tax Collector indicating whether the property is under
current use taxation status or not.
n) A letter from the Road Agent, Fire Chief and Police Chief regarding safety issues is
required. A copy of the plan shall be submitted to these agencies: Road Agent,
Conservation Commission, Building Inspector, and the Town Engineer at least
thirty (30) days prior to any public hearings to allow their recommendations to be
part of the hearing process.
o) Proposed streets, driveways, and sidewalks, with indication of direction of travel
and inside radii of all curves.
p) All existing and proposed pavement markings, signage and other traffic devices.
q) Building, driveway, well and septic system locations for each proposed lot,
demonstrating that the lot can be constructed.
r) A sight distance profile for proposed driveways and proposed roads at the
intersection of the proposed and/or existing road.
s) The location of any fire suppression system as required by the Fire Dept. must be
shown on the plans.
t) A statement that all lots contain a minimum of 1 ½ acres of contiguous non-poorly
drained soils shall be placed on the final plan.
u) A vehicle turning movements plan with truck turning movements into and out of the
proposed road without potentially impacting other vehicle or pedestrian traffic.
v) The limit of existing wetlands, delineated in the field and certified by a Wetlands
Scientist registered in the State of New Hampshire.
w) The limit of the FEMA FIS floodway.
x) All required state, federal or local permits, associated permit numbers or permit
applications.
y) A list of all proposed waivers, with the date of the Planning Board meeting that a
ruling was made on said waivers.
z) A list of all proposed special exceptions and/or variances, with the date of the
Zoning Board meeting that the ruling was made of said special exceptions.
10.07 Review of Layout:
Upon receipt of the complete Preliminary Layout, the Board shall conduct a review of the
proposed sub-division during a regularly scheduled public meeting. Notice shall be given
to the subdivider, the abutters and the general public. No action to approve or disapprove
will be taken at the preliminary hearing
Town of Candia, NH Major Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
20
10.08 Action of the Board:
After review of the Preliminary Layout by the Board, the Board shall submit in writing its
Recommendations and Reservations with respect to the proposed subdivision and the
advisability of preparing a Final Plat.
C. REVIEW OF FINAL PLAT
10.09 Procedure:
A completed application for Final Plat approval for review and action by the Board shall
be submitted to the Planning Board within ninety (90) days of the completion of the
preliminary hearing. Notice is required. If not submitted by this time a new preliminary
could be required.
10.10 Description of Final Plat:
The Final Plat shall be submitted on four (4) blackline paper prints and an electronic PDF
copy.
10.11 Information Required on Final Plat
The Final Plat shall contain or be accompanied by all of the information listed in Article
10.06 for the Preliminary Layout, whether or not a Preliminary Layout has been prepared
for the proposed subdivision. In addition, the Final Plat shall contain the following maps
and information. Maps shall be drawn at a scale or no more than 100-feet per inch unless
otherwise specified by the Board.
a) A boundary survey certified and identified by a seal of a land surveyor licensed to
practice in the State of New Hampshire.
b) Existing and proposed contour lines at 2-foot intervals for the entire parcel to be
subdivided.
c) Soil test data, sewage disposal information, and approvals as required in Article
11.07.
d) Existing and proposed lot lines and building sites, angles and dimensions, lot sizes in
square feet and acres, consecutive numbering of lots.
e) Existing and proposed street right-of-way lines, dimensions of tangents, chords and
radii, location of all monuments to be set at street intersections, points of curvature
and tangency of curved streets and angles of lots, names of existing and proposed
streets.
f) Wasting site noted on plan as specified in Article 17.
g) A signature block for signing by seven (7) members of the Board, including a space
for the Chairperson.
Town of Candia, NH Major Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
21
h) Construction details for all proposed utilities cross sections, roadway and pavement
cross sections and features proposed as part of the project.
i) A final drainage design of all proposed drainage features, analysis and comparisons
of pre and post conditions.
j) Plans stamped by either a professional Engineer or land surveyor licensed in the state
of New Hampshire, as appropriate.
k) A SWPPP in conformance with the requirements of NHDES.
10.12 Additional Information on Final Plat:
As part of the Final Plat submission, the Board may require the subdivider to submit any
or all of the following information:
a. Subdivision Grading and Drainage Plans: This Plan shall be submitted on a separate
sheet or sheets and shall provide the following information for the entire area of the
proposed subdivision, unless there is a determination by the Board that a lesser area
is sufficient:
1) Basic street and lot layout, with all lots or sites numbered consecutively.
2) Location of all existing buildings and approximate location of proposed
building.
3) Contours of existing grades at intervals of not more than 2-feet. Intervals less
than 5-feet, including spot elevations, may be required, depending on the
character of the topography.
4) Final identification, location, elevation, grades and/or contours at intervals of
not more than 2-feet for the existing and proposed drainage ways, drainage
easements, drainage structures, and water bodies. Intervals of less than 5-feet
may be required by the Board, depending on the topography.
5) Final identification and location of proposed soil erosion and sediment control
measures and structures.
6) Final drawings and specifications for each proposed soil erosion and sediment
control measure in accordance with the standards set forth in Article 16.
7) Final drawings, details and specifications for proposed flood hazard measures
and structures, and for proposed storm water retention facilities for ground
water recharge. This includes culverts and the direction of flow indicated by
arrows through those culverts.
8) Final slope stabilization details and specifications.
Town of Candia, NH Major Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
22
9) A timing schedule indicating the anticipated starting and completion date of
the subdivision development and the duration of exposure of each area prior
to the completion of effective soil erosion and sediment control measures.
10) A statement acknowledging the requirements of Article 19.03 and
confirmation that said pre-construction conference has been scheduled.
11) A deed dedicating the road to the Town and any easements with respect to
drainage etc. must be presented before the plans are signed. This also includes
deeds and easements to fire ponds, detention ponds, cisterns, and access to
same.
b. Subdivision Street and Utility Plan: This Plan shall be submitted on a separate
sheet or sheets and shall provide the following information:
1) Complete plans and profiles of all proposed streets, including but not limited
to horizontal and vertical curve data at the street centerline, street stationing
every 50-feet, intersection and turnaround radii and typical sections of
proposed streets.
2) Complete plans and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm sewers,
including invert elevations, original and finished ground profiles, grades of
storm sewer lines and inlets, type and class of material used.
3) A statement as to the adequacy of flow and pressure for proposed subdivision
and surrounding properties, the flow available on existing and proposed water
main, the proposed number of units and anticipated sanitary sewer flow, and
the available storm water facilities downstream of the subdivision.
4) A statement from the appropriate utility company that utilities will be placed
underground and that the work will be done within a reasonable time and
without expense to the Town, and that the appropriate easements are available
and have been granted.
5) Location and details of all existing and proposed utilities (including water
mains, telephone, electric and television distribution lines) on and adjacent to
the land to be subdivided.
6) Any other details pertinent to street and/or utility construction.
c. Fire Protection and Emergency Access Plan: This Plan shall be submitted to show
conformity with the recommendations of the Candia Police and Fire Departments,
and shall comply with Article 19.14.
d. Requests for Waivers: All requests for relaxation of requirements as described in
Section 3.01 shall be in writing and included in the Application.
Town of Candia, NH Major Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
23
e. Surety: The subdivider shall put in place prior to the Planning Board signing the
plans a surety based on the estimate developed by the Town’s Engineer of the full
cost of all improvements and description of the surety or security to be offered to
secure the surety.
f. Other Plans: The Board may require such other information as it deems necessary
to serve the purpose of these Regulations. Any expense incurred by the Board in
developing such information shall be paid by the subdivider.
D. ACTION ON FINAL PLAT
10.13 Submission of an Application for Final Plat Approval:
a. Necessity for Acceptance of a Completed Application: Before any review of the
proposed final subdivision Application, the Board shall first determine if the
Application is complete.
b. Time for Filing an Application: The subdivider shall file the Application for Final Plat
approval with the Planning Board at least thirty (30) days prior to the public meeting
at which the Application is to be considered for acceptance by the Board.
c. Action by the Board on the Request to Accept the Completed Application: The
Application shall be presented to the Board by the subdivider at a public meeting of the
Board for which Notice has been given. The Board, by motion, shall accept or reject
the Application at the public meeting or an adjourned session thereof, and such action
shall be noted on the application and in the records of the Board.
10.14 Consideration and Action on Final Plat:
The accepted Application shall be deemed to be submitted to the Board as of the date on
which the Board accepted the Application. Within thirty (30) days of such date the Board
shall begin formal consideration of the Application at a public hearing for which notice has
been given.
The Board shall act to approve, approve with modifications or disapprove the Application
within sixty-five (65) days of the date of acceptance. The Board may apply to the Board
of Selectmen prior to the expiration of the sixty-five (65) day period for an extension of
time not to exceed ninety (90) days before acting to approve or disapprove the Application.
The subdivider may consent to an extension of time for the Board to act beyond the initial
sixty-five (65) day period on the condition that such consent shall be in writing and shall
be made part of the Board's record.
10.15 Notice for Meetings/Hearings;
Notice shall be given to the property owners within 200-feet, the subdivider and the general
public as to all public hearings on the Application. Any public meeting or public hearing
for which Notice was required may be adjourned without additional Notice, provided the
Board announces at the public meeting or hearing that such meeting or hearing will be
adjourned to a fixed date, time and place. For a valid adjournment the records of the Board
must contain a statement that such announcement was made and include also the date, time
and place when the adjourned meeting/hearing is to be held.
Town of Candia, NH Major Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
24
10.16 Notice of Action on the Final Plat:
The Board shall notify the subdivider, by Notice in writing signed by the Chairman, of its
actions on the Final Plat. In case of disapproval, the grounds for such disapproval shall be
set forth in the Notice, which shall become part of the records of the Board. In case of
approval, the Notice of Action shall set forth the following:
a. A copy of any deed restrictions submitted by the subdivider and accepted by the
Board;
b. All requirements for off-site improvements;
c. A description of the land, if any, to be dedicated to widen existing streets;
d. A description of any relaxation of requirements granted to the subdivider;
e. Requirements, if any, relative to underground utilities;
f. When applicable, the statement described in Article 1.08 concerning liability for
public use of land;
g. All agreements, if any, between the subdivider and the Board concerning matters not
required by these Regulations, but to be performed by the subdivider;
h. A statement that the subdivision shall be completed and constructed in conformity
with the Final Plat and these Regulations, as set forth in Article 19; and
i. A reference to the bond to be provided by the subdivider as guarantee of performance in
construction of the subdivision as set forth in Article 10.19 and Article 19.
10.17 Acknowledgment of Receipt of Notice:
The subdivider shall acknowledge receipt of the Notice and acceptance of all provisions
set forth therein and shall return a signed copy of same to the Board for its records. Until
such acknowledgment and acceptance has been filed with the Board, no further action shall
be taken with regard to the Final Plat. Failure to acknowledge receipt of Notice of Action
and acceptance within ninety (90) days of mailing of the Notice of Action will cause
approval to lapse.
10.18 Performance Bond:
The subdivider shall submit a performance bond providing for and securing to the Town
the completion of the actual construction and installation of all improvements and utilities
within four (4) years from the date of acknowledgment and acceptance of the Notice of
Action. The bond shall be in an amount determined by the Planning Board and in
conformity with the requirements of Article 18.04.
10.19 Description and Recording of Final Plat:
The subdivider shall submit to the Board one (1) mylar copy and four (4) black line copies
of the approved Final Plan. Sheet sizes shall be in accordance with the requirements of the
Town of Candia, NH Major Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
25
Rockingham County Registry of Deeds. Space shall be reserved on the Plat for
endorsement by four (4) Board members. The Final Plat shall contain the following
statement:
"The Subdivision Regulations and the Notice of Action of the Town of Candia are a part
of the Plat, and approval of this Plat requires the completion of all the requirements of said
Subdivision Regulations excepting only any relaxation of requirements granted in writing
by the Board."
The Board shall cause one (1) copy of the Plat to be recorded in the Rockingham County
Registry of Deeds and shall deliver a copy to the Town for its records. All graphic material
and presentations shall be on the surface of the mylar Plat which is suitable for writing.
The act of recording an approved subdivision Plat shall not in itself constitute acceptance
by the Town of any street or easement shown thereon.
10.20 Failure to Record:
No sale or transfer of land within the subdivision may be entered into until an approved
subdivision Final Plat has been recorded in the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds.
Approval of a Final Plat shall lapse if such Plat is not recorded in the Registry of Deeds
within three (3) years from the date of acknowledgment and acceptance of the Notice of
Action (Section 10.17), unless the Planning Board extends the time.
10.21 Modification of Official Map:
When there exists an Official Map of the Town of Candia, the recording of an approved
Final Plat shall without further action modify the Official Map. The act of modifying the
Official Map shall not constitute acceptance by the Town of any street or easement shown
thereon.
SECTION III: STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION DESIGN
ARTICLE 11. GENERAL PROVISIONS
11.01 Compliance with Other Ordinances:
All subdivisions shall be in harmony with the Master Plan and shall be in conformance
with the Official Map, when such exists and shall be in conformance with other applicable
Federal, State and local by-laws, ordinances and regulations. Where these Regulations are
in conflict with such other ordinances or regulations, the more stringent of those setting the
higher standard shall apply.
11.02 Character of Land for Subdivision:
Land of such character that it cannot, in the judgment of the Board, be safely used for
building development because of danger to health or peril from fire, flood, poor drainage,
excessive slope (25% or greater), or other hazardous conditions, and/or because of these
conditions does not provide a contiguous acceptable area of 50% of the minimum lot size,
shall not be platted for residential, commercial, industrial or institutional subdivision, nor
for such other uses as may increase danger to life, property or the environment. Land with
inadequate characteristics or capacity for on-site sanitary sewage disposal shall not be
Town of Candia, NH Major Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
26
subdivided for residential, commercial, industrial or institutional subdivision purposes
unless each lot is connected to a public sewer system.
11.03 Prohibition of Premature or Scattered Subdivision:
Scattered or premature subdivisions of land as would involve danger or injury to health,
safety or prosperity by reason of inadequate water supply, drainage, transportation, school,
fire protection or other public services, or would necessitate an unplanned and/or excessive
expenditure of public funds for the supply of such services, shall not be approved by the
Board.
11.04 Off-site Improvements:
If, upon the finding of fact, the Board determines that the proposed subdivision will
adversely affect existing public facilities, such as streets, sidewalks, drainage, sewer and
water supply, causing them to be inadequate to meet the additional needs created by the
subdivision, then the subdivider shall pay for such upgrading of the public facilities to an
extent necessary to protect the public interest. If other properties benefit from the
upgrading of such off-site public improvements, the Board shall determine the portion of
the cost to be paid by the subdivider, taking into consideration the following elements:
a) The character of the area;
b) The extent that other public and private property will be benefited by the upgrading;
and
c) Any other factors that the Board deems appropriate to establish a rational connection
between the needs created by the subdivision and the amount to be paid by the
subdivider.
11.05 Preservation of Existing Features:
Prominent natural and archaeological features within a subdivision such as trees, shrubs,
scenic points, brooks, streams, rock outcroppings, water bodies, stone walls, boundary
markers, historic markers and historic landmarks, shall be preserved and protected to the
maximum extent possible by the subdivider. The subdivider shall demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Board the manner by which said existing features will be protected.
11.06 Fire Protection and Fire Suppression Water Source Requirements:
All Major subdivisions shall meet the approval of the Candia Fire Department regarding
fire prevention, protection, emergency access and fire suppression water source
requirements and shall conform to the specifications in Section IV, article 19.14. Minor
subdivision three (3) lots or less may receive a waiver from fire suppression if safety is not
a concern.
11.07 Sewage Disposal Requirement:
No subdivision of land will be approved by the Board where it creates a lot or site that will
not meet the minimum design, construction standards, and requirements imposed by the
State of New Hampshire Water Supply and Pollution Control Division regarding
subdivision for building purposes, and any standards imposed by the Town of Candia
regulations. Unless the proposed subdivision will be connected to a public sewage or other
Town of Candia, NH Major Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
27
state-approved central sewage system, all proposed lots or sites shall include an "approval
for subdivision for building purposes" for at least one subsurface disposal system on each
such lot or site, in accordance with the most recent regulations of the New Hampshire
Water Supply and Pollution Control Division. In minor subdivisions, for lots greater than
5 acres which meet land character requirements (Article 11.02), an opinion by a registered
Professional Engineer that a suitable site for a subsurface disposal system exists, may be
substituted for state approval. In minor subdivisions, for lots greater than 10-acres which
meet land character requirements (Article 11.02), a request for a waiver from this
requirement may be made when supported by appropriate soil data. In all instances where
state approval was not required, the plat shall specifically indicate on each such lot that
neither state approval for an on-site subsurface disposal system has been applied for nor
has been granted.
11.08 Liability for Public Use of Land:
On land required to be dedicated for public use, the subdivider shall file a statement in
writing accepting liability for personal injuries and/or property damage arising from any
negligence of the subdivider or agents of the subdivider suffered by any person or to the
property of any person until such offer of dedication is accepted by the Town. In addition,
the subdivider's statement shall acknowledge responsibility for the maintenance of the
easement areas until such time as the areas are dedicated and accepted by the Town or
transferred to an association of Owners or the like. The subdivider shall furnish evidence
of sufficient insurance coverage with regard to such liability in an amount and form
satisfactory to the Town legal counsel and the Selectmen. This statement required of the
subdivider shall be approved as to form and substance by the Selectmen after review by
the Town legal counsel.
11.09 Groundwater Protection:
The quality of groundwater as defined in RSA 485-C: 2 VIII shall not be adversely affected
by the proposed development. The Applicant shall certify that the proposed development
does not violate the rules and regulations of Chapter 485-C Groundwater Protection Act
with regard to groundwater and shall meet the following requirements:
A. Groundwater Pollution Monitoring Devices:
Any proposed or expanded site with the potential for contaminate leaching shall
have provision for suitably designed and approved monitoring wells installed
around the perimeter of the site. Said design and installation shall be approved by
the Planning Board through its Town’s Engineer at the expense of the Applicant.
B. Surface Drainage Control Measures:
Any proposed or expanded site with the potential for surface runoff degradation
shall have provision for the containment and diversion of surface water runoff to
suitable and approved catchment facilities. Said design and construction to be
approved by Planning Board through its Town’s Engineer at the expense of the
Applicant.
ARTICLE 12. LOT AND SITE LAYOUT
Town of Candia, NH Major Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
28
12.01 Compliance with Zoning Ordinances:
The general layout of lots, lot sizes and dimensions, sites and buildings shall conform to
the requirements of the Candia Zoning and Wetlands Ordinances in effect at the time of
application.
12.02 Lots on Public Streets:
All lots shall abut and have frontage access on a regularly maintained public street or at the
discretion of the Board, on a street planned, built and maintained to Town specifications
and standards.
12.03 Entrance into Public Streets:
Where lots abut existing Town, State or Federal streets, there shall be a minimum number
of driveways and/or streets entering into said Town, State or Federal streets. Lots which
can be serviced by both existing Town roads and a proposed road shall be accessed from
the proposed subdivision road. Double frontage and reverse frontage lots may be allowed
where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries. A
planting screen easement of at least 10-feet, and across which there shall be no right of
access, shall be provided along the line of lots abutting such a traffic artery.
12.04 Marking of Lots:
Within thirty (30) days, the subdivider shall place on the ground clearly observable survey
stakes or ribbons marking the corners of all proposed lots or sites. At the time of
submission of the Final Plat, the subdivider shall place granite blocks with adjacent iron
detection pins at the corners of all lots. Use of slash marks on trees, paint on rocks and
drill holes in small boulders to identify permanent boundary lines is prohibited.
ARTICLE 13. OPEN SPACE AND COMMON AREA REQUIREMENT
13.01 Reservation of Land:
When deemed necessary in the judgment of the Board, land for recreation areas, schools
and other municipal needs within a subdivision shall be reserved. The Board shall
determine whether such land shall be deeded to the Town or shall be reserved for the
common use of all property owners of the subdivision by covenant in the deeds to the lots.
All areas to be reserved for recreation, schools or other requirements shall be of reasonable
size, slope and character.
ARTICLE 14. STREET LAYOUT AND DESIGN
14.01 Conformance with Official Map:
The layout of all streets shall conform to the Official Map, if such exists.
14.02 Conformance with Construction Standards:
All streets whether existing or proposed and all bridges, culverts, drainage structures, storm
drains, gutters, drainage ditches, sidewalks and any other improvements shown on the Final
Plat and/or required by any accompanying documents shall be constructed in conformance
with the Standards for Subdivision Design and the Standards for Subdivision Construction
adopted by the Town of Candia, New Hampshire.
Town of Candia, NH Major Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
29
14.03 Utility Connections with Existing Subdivision:
When utilities are to be installed between the proposed street patterns and any connecting
street in an existing subdivision, they shall be indicated on the Final Plat.
14.04 Adjustment of Alignment of Right-of-Way:
When a subdivision abuts an existing street and the right-of-way width of such street is
rendered inadequate because of the needs created by the proposed subdivision, the
subdivider shall include in the street dedication all land needed to provide access and right
of way to said street. Such a dedication shall be shown on the Final Plat.
14.05 Harmony with Topography:
Street patterns shall give due consideration to contours and natural features. Subdivision
streets shall be laid out to blend with the topography.
14.06 Street Patterns and Extensions:
The layout of the street pattern shall be based on a minor street system connected to a
collector street system connected to an arterial street system, in conformance with the
standards set forth in Article 14.15. In addition, streets shall be arranged to provide for
extension or connection of eventual street systems necessary to develop abutting land in
future subdivisions. Loop roads are preferred.
14.07 Traffic Deterrents:
Minor residential streets shall be designed to discourage through traffic. Said methods of
traffic deterrents may take the form of undulating street lines and other forms of passive
traffic controls.
14.08 Curb Cuts:
A maximum of two (2) driveways (curb cuts) per lot may be permitted if approved by the
Road Agent or New Hampshire Department of Transportation (hereinafter “NHDOT”) as
appropriate.
14.09 Intersections and Grades:
Streets shall intersect so that within 75-feet of the intersection the street lines are at right
angles, and in no case shall said angle be less than seventy-five degrees (75°). The grade
within 50-feet of an intersection shall be negative two percent (-2%) and shall not exceed
three percent (3%) +/- within. At no time shall the roadway grade exceed as outlined in
Section 14.15 percent or be less than one percent (1%).
14.10 Multiple Intersections:
Multiple intersections involving a junction of more than two (2) streets shall be prohibited.
Four-way intersections shall be avoided on all minor streets. The minimum distance
between center line offsets of successive intersections shall be 150-feet.
14.11 Permanent Cul-de-Sac Streets:
A permanent cul-de-sac street in excess of 1,000-feet may be permitted at the discretion of
the Planning Board provided that public safety issues are addressed. The maximum 1,000-
foot length shall be measured from the intersecting center line of the closest class V or
better road to the center point of the turn around. A cul-de-sac street shall not be brought
Town of Candia, NH Major Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
30
to the property boundary line, but shall be placed so that the lots are contiguous with the
property line of the subdivision. The cul-de-sac shall be designed for storm drainage and
provided with proper turn around termination, as specified in Section IV, Article 19.16.
The minimum length of a cul-de-sac shall be 400-feet and the maximum road grade within
the cul-de-sac shall be identified at 4% maximum.
14.12 Temporary Cul-de-sac Streets:
Temporary cul-de-sac streets shall not be allowed. In the case of temporary streets, where
future extension to another outlet is approved by the Board, the full width of the right-ofway
shall be shown on the plat. Provisions shall be made for future extension of the street
through to adjacent property and for reversion of the excess right-of-way to the adjoining
properties. A temporary turn around shall be designed with proper turn around termination
as specified in Section IV, Article 19.18.
14.13 Dead End Streets:
Dead end streets which do not end in a cul-de-sac conforming to Article 19.16 shall be
prohibited.
14.14 Tree Plantings:
The Board may require the planting of trees and/or shrubs within the street right-of-way in
those subdivisions where, due to the nature and character of the land, it would be
appropriate. Such plantings shall be indicated on the Final Plat.
14.15 Classification of Streets:
Classification standards for street design shall be as set forth below:
STANDARDS FOR STREET DESIGN
Minor Collector Arterial
Number of Units 1 – 30 31 - 50 50+
Average Daily Traffic (a) 1 – 300 300 - 500 500+
Minimum Right-of-Way (b) 60' 60' 60'
Minimum Paved Travel Surface Width 22' 22' 24'
Minimum Shoulder Width (each side) 4' 4' 6'
Minimum Horizontal Curve Radii 300' 575' 950'
Minimum Vertical Curve Radii 200' 300’ 400'
Maximum Profile Grade 7% 6% 5%
Minimum Profile Grade 1% 1% 1%
Town of Candia, NH Major Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
31
Minimum Stopping Sight Distance 250' 300' 400'
Minimum “K” Value *
* K is defined as the length of the vertical curve divided by the algebraic difference of the tangent
grades entering and exiting the vertical curve. K indicates numerically that the combination of the
length of curve and the tangent grades provide adequate sight distance at a particular speed.
(a) Shall be future anticipated traffic (assuming 10 trips per day per dwelling unit)
(b) All cross-section horizontal distances shall be measured perpendicular to straight-line sections
and radial to curved sections.
(c) Sight distance is the distance along a roadway that an object of specified height is continuously
visible to the driver. This distance is dependent on the height of the driver’s eye above the
road surface, the specified object height above the road surface, and the height of sight
obstructions within the line of sight. The height of the driver’s eye is considered to be 3.5-
feet above the road surface. The height of the object is 30-inches above the road surface.
The minimum sight distance shall be all-season sight distance of 2.5-feet above finished
grade.
(d) All other roadway requirements not stated herein shall be specified by the most current
AASHTO standards.
14.16 Roadways in Commercial and Industrial Zones:
All roads in Commercial and Industrial zones shall comply with the design and
specifications of an Arterial Street.
14.17 Marking of Proposed Streets:
At the earliest practical stage during the application the subdivider shall place on the
ground clearly observable survey stakes or ribbons marking the center line of all proposed
streets.
14.18 Street Rough-Grading:
Streets shall be rough-graded to the minimum extent necessary to provide for the
construction of paving surface and required drainage features. Trees, stone walls and other
natural features shall be protected and preserved whenever possible.
14.19 Alteration of Right-of-Way or Travel Surface:
The Board will require greater width of right-of-way and/or travel surface where in the
judgment of the Board, the demands of present or future traffic make it desirable or where
topographic conditions create a need for greater width for grading.
14.20 Curbing:
The Board may require curbing for closed drainage systems in urban or village areas. All
curbing shall be sloped granite curbing only unless the proposed curbing is between the
roadway and a proposed sidewalk. Curbing proposed between a roadway and a sidewalk
shall be vertical granite curbing.
Town of Candia, NH Major Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
32
14.21 Pedestrian Walks, Sidewalks and Crosswalks:
Where necessary in the judgment of the Board, rights-of-way for pedestrian access shall
be required between parts of the subdivision or between a subdivision, a school, and/or
other public property. When such need has been created by the subdivision, the Board may
require the subdivider to provide sidewalks outside the subdivision. shall comply with
Americans for Disability Act (ADA) standards and shall be constructed in accordance with
the NHDOT’s most recently amended Specifications. Pedestrian crossings and crosswalks
of Town roadways shall be approved by the Road Agent. The crosswalk shall be marked
to be visible by both the pedestrian and vehicle driver. Crossings are encouraged at street
corners and mid-block, or 100-150-feet apart in areas of pedestrian activity. New sidewalks
and crossings shall be linked and connected to existing walkways and bicycle paths.
14.22 School Bus Boarding Area:
Boarding areas shall be required by the Board where deemed necessary.
14.23 Street Lighting:
The Board shall require the installation of street lighting in any subdivision where it deems
it necessary.
14.24 Naming of Streets:
No street shall have a name which will duplicate or closely duplicate the name of an
existing street. The continuation of an existing street shall have the same name. The names
of public ways shall be approved by the Board.
14.25 Street and Traffic Control Signs:
Street and traffic control signs shall be furnished and installed by the sub divider, as
directed by the Planning Board or its designated agent. A stop sign shall be placed at
intersection where the street intersects with existing street or road. All cul-de-sac streets
shall have appropriate signage to indicate that this is not a through street.
ARTICLE 15. UTLITIES, DRAINAGE AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
15.01 Provision for Utilities and Drainage:
All subdivisions shall make adequate provision for water supply, storm water, sanitary
sewage disposal, required utilities and improvements.
15.02 Avoidance of Flood Damage:
All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems shall be
located, elevated, and/or constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. All utilities
and drainage construction in subdivisions shall conform to the flood plain protection
requirements of the Candia Zoning Ordinance.
15.03 Installation of Utilities:
All utility system installations shall be at the expense of the subdivider and shall be
installed under the supervision of the Planning Board's designated agent.
Town of Candia, NH Major Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
33
15.04 Installation of Laterals:
The subdivider shall install laterals from all utilities in the street right-of-way to 5-feet
inside the property line of each proposed building lot within the subdivision.
15.05 Underground Placement of Utilities:
Electric, telephone, cable television distribution and alarm systems shall be placed
underground, including services to street lights. The subdivider shall coordinate
subdivision design with the utility companies to insure adequate and suitable area for
underground installations. This design shall be on the Final Plat plan before final approval
by the Board.
15.06 Storm Water Drainage System:
An adequate surface storm water drainage system for the entire subdivision area shall be
provided by the subdivider. The subdivider shall provide a suitable designed on-site
drainage retention system wherever needed, that shall carry storm drainage. Drainage
calculations must be submitted by a licensed professional Engineer and shall include both
pre and post development runoff and sizing of all proposed drainage facilities. Otherwise,
storm drainage shall be carried to existing watercourses or shall connect to existing storm
drains. Storm water drainage shall not create additional flow over any adjacent property.
The following standards shall be applied in the design and analysis of the proposed
stormwater management systems:
A. Rainfall Intensity – Rainfall intensities (24 hour) for Candia shall be established using
Cornell Universities Extreme Precipitation rates for New York and New England a
copy of the extreme rainfall events for the modelled storms shall be provided as part
of the drainage report.
B. All runoff, erosion, and sediment control measures and the design of all drainage
structures and systems shall meet the design standards and specifications set forth in
these Regulations or in the current “Manual on Drainage Design for Highways”
published by the NHDOT and the most recent New Hampshire Department of
Environmental Services Alteration of Terrain manuals.
C. All private drainage systems are to be maintained as necessary and minimally on an
bi-annual basis. Upon request, written records verifying compliance with this
requirement shall be provided to the Town. A note requiring this annual report must
appear on the recorded cover sheet and site plan.
D. No LID drainage structures (i.e. rain gardens, bio-retention basins, underground
infiltration systems, etc.) shall be installed within the Town right-of-way or in any
drainage easements to be maintained by the Town.
E. On all projects requiring United States Environmental Protection Agency SWPPP Plan
and NOI Permit, the Applicants must provide copies of the SWPPP inspection reports
to the Town and the Town’s Consulting Engineer within three (3) days of each site
inspection and resulting report.
Town of Candia, NH Major Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
34
F. All drainage computations and related submissions shall be stamped and signed by a
Professional Engineer registered in the State of New Hampshire.
G. The design shall not direct concentrated flows across property lines where the flows
were not concentrated in the existing conditions.
H. The drainage design shall model the pre- and post-development 2-year, 10-year, 25-
year, 50-year and 100-year storm events for the site using the rainfall intensities
described in Section 8.06 (A). The design shall demonstrate no increase of rate of
runoff at any point on abutting properties for any of the modeled events. The entire
event shall be modeled and the hydrograph for each structure shall be provided.
I. The drainage system shall be sized as follows:
a. Closed Drainage System = 25-Year storm event, with no overtopping in the 50-
year storm.
b. Open Drainage System = 25-Year storm event, with no overtopping in the 50-
year storm.
c. Cross-Culverts Connecting Wetlands or outletting to a Wetland = 100-Year
storm event.
d. Detention Ponds = 100-Year storm event with 1’ freeboard to the top of the
berm.
e. Box Culverts or Bridges = 100-Year with zero surcharge.
f. Scour Protection Measures= 25-Year storm event.
J. Pipes and culverts shall not be surcharged during the design storm event. Outlet control
structures (relating to detention ponds only) may be surcharged. Culverts shall be
placed to accommodate natural drainage courses.
K. Acceptable pipe material for roadway drainage systems and driveway culverts is:
Reinforced Concrete Pipe (RCP).
L. Stormwater shall not be impounded adjacent to roadways. The 100-Year Detention
Pond elevation shall be designed to be a minimum of 10-feet from the edge of the rightof-
way or otherwise a minimum of 25-feet from the edge of pavement.
M. Maximum flow velocity in any pipe during the 25-year storm shall be 10 fps. When
the computed outlet pipe velocity is in excess of 10 fps, additional outlet protection
shall be employed. The minimum allowable flow velocity in a pipe or culvert during a
2-year storm event is 2 fps.
N. Maximum flow velocity in a vegetated channel is 3.5 fps during the 25-year storm
event. Maximum flow velocity in a rock lined channel is 6 fps during the 25-year storm
event. These swales shall be analyzed for stability during this storm event.
O. All culverts, including driveway culverts, shall be constructed with end treatments
(flared end section, headwalls, etc.).
Town of Candia, NH Major Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
35
P. A ditch or swale shall have a minimum 6-inches of loam and seed and a minimum
slope of 1.0-percent, except for treatment swales which shall have a minimum slope of
0.5-percent.
Q. Minimum pipe diameter in a closed drainage system is 12-inches. Minimum pipe
diameter in an open drainage system is 15-inches.
R. Standard roadway catch basin grates shall be limited to a design inlet flow of 2-CFS
unless manufacturer’s data (based on transverse and longitudinal slopes) indicates
greater capacity at a gutter line depth of 2-inches.
S. When two different diameter culverts enter one basin, the crown inverts shall be
matched.
T. The compatibility of grate capacity, pipe capacity and design flow must be considered
in closed drainage system design.
U. Test pits or boring logs stamped and signed by a professional Engineer registered in
the State of New Hampshire in the roadway cut sections shall be taken, as required or
ordered by the Town’s Engineer, to locate the Seasonal High Water Table (SHWT)
and determine the need for underdrain pipe. This pipe shall be perforated PVC or
HDPE with a minimum diameter of six (6) inches, placed one (1) foot outside the edge
of pavement at a centerline depth of four (4) feet.
V. Catch basins shall be spaced less than or equal to three hundred feet between basins.
W. The Applicant shall provide the following information in the drainage report/analysis
with adequate description of the drainage system features. Submission shall include
pre- and post-drainage plans with catchments (area, slope, length and flow path) and
other drainage system components clearly identified.
1. Detention/Retention Ponds: Elevations, incremental storage capacity, stagedischarge
relationship, areas, critical depth, flood elevation, inflows, outflows,
outlet information.
2. Pipes and Culverts: Inlet and outlet inverts, base flows, material, slope, length,
dimensions, roughness, restrictions, and special conditions.
3. Channels: Inlet and outlet inverts, base flows, stability, construction and lining,
slope, length, dimensions, roughness, restrictions, and special conditions.
4. Catchments: Also known as “subcatchments.” Slope, average length, changes in
flow modes, soils, CN, condition, time of concentration, area, rainfall information,
description of specific location.
5. Modeling should include the entire storm event with a minimum time of twentyfour
(24) hours.
Town of Candia, NH Major Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
36
X. Detention/Retention Ponds
1. Both retention and detention ponds shall provide a minimum of 1-foot of freeboard
at peak elevation during the 50-year storm event.
2. Detention and retention ponds shall be provided with an emergency overflow with
an invert at the peak elevation of the 50-year storm event preferably provided as
part of the outlet control structure. Overflow weirs are permitted if designed with
erosion protection for the 50-year storm event.
3. Slopes shall have 6-inches of loam and be fully grassed. Permanent fencing (4-foot
minimum) and a locking gating (minimum 12-foot width) shall be required if the
pond permanently retains more than 12-inches of water or the peak depth (measured
from the invert of lowest outlet to the invert of the emergency overflow) is greater
than 6-feet.
4. Slopes and contouring are critical to a drainage system. Maximum slopes, directly
relating to the construction of ponds, swales, or diversions, and cut slopes
intercepting the estimated seasonal high water table, shall be limited to 3:1 unless
the design Engineer provides a geotechnical evaluation showing that steeper slopes
are stable and sustainable in a saturated and surcharged condition. The evaluation
shall examine all failure modes and provide calculations with supporting
documentation based on individual soil types, compaction requirements, surcharge
loads, and moisture content. Other methods providing additional structural support
and stability to a proposed slope may be approved by the Board on a case-by-case
basis.
5. Test pits and percolation rates shall be taken at the proposed depth and shall be
provided in the drainage report when infiltration is being considered as part of the
drainage system design. When infiltration is included as part of the drainage
calculations the Applicant shall also demonstrate that the proposed drainage
system(s) are sized appropriately for no infiltration.
15.07 Sewage Disposal Design:
The design of sewage disposal systems for all subdivisions shall meet the requirements of
Article 11.07.
ARTICLE 16. SEDIMENT AND EROSION CONTROL
16.01 Purpose:
The purpose of this article is to control soil erosion and to prevent the resulting
sedimentation from occurring in subdivision areas by requiring proper provision for water
disposal and protection of soil surfaces during and after construction, in order to promote
the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the community.
16.02 Standards:
The following standards shall be observed by the subdivider in the design, layout and
construction of the subdivision:
Town of Candia, NH Major Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
37
a. Stripping of vegetation, regarding or other development shall be done in such a way
that will minimize on-site and off-site soil erosion.
b. Whenever practical, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and
supplemented.
c. The disturbed area shall be kept to a minimum, and the duration of exposure shall
not exceed six (6) months.
d. Temporary seeding and/or mulching shall be used to protect exposed critical areas
during development.
e. The subdivider shall make provisions to accommodate the increased runoff caused
by changed soil and surface conditions during and after development.
f. The subdivider shall make reasonable effort to trap sediment in the runoff water
until the disturbed area is stabilized by the use of sediment basins or other
acceptable methods.
g. Diversion, sediment basins and other erosion control mechanisms shall be
constructed by the subdivider prior to any on-site grading or disturbance of
existing surface material.
16.03 Sediment and Erosion Control Plan:
The Board shall require the filing of a plan incorporating the standards outlined in Article
16.02, and the proposed facilities. Plans developed for the State of New Hampshire Dredge
and Fill and/or Site Specific Approval may be acceptable for this purpose.
16.04 Notice of Intent to Initiate Construction Activity:
A Permit must be submitted to the EPA prior to the Pre-Construction meeting with the
Town.
ARTICLE 17. DISPOSITION OF EXCAVATION MATERIALS
17.01 Disposition and Excavation of Materials:
Disposition of stumps, rubble, road construction material and brush which are unsuitable
to be used as embankment fill shall be wasted to a designated area within the subdivision.
Said wasting area shall not be within an undivided lot or the proposed street right-of-way.
The wasting area shall be located by plan, copies of which shall be given to the Board and
the eventual property Owner. Waste areas shall be above ground water and capped with
fill, loam and seeded. All Local, State and Federal regulations pertaining to disposal of
solid wastes shall be met. Wasting areas shall be subject to the approval of the Board.
17.02 Disposition of Construction Generated Materials:
Construction generated materials shall not be wasted or burned on site.
Town of Candia, NH Major Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
38
17.03 Hazardous Waste:
Hazardous waste shall be disposed of in accordance with all applicable local, state, and
federal regulations and not within the subdivision.
SECTION IV: STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION CONSTRUCTION
ARTICLE 18. ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
18.01 Administrative Authority:
During construction of an approved subdivision the Planning Board is the administrative
authority for all regulations, not specifically the authority of the Selectmen.
18.02 Administrative, Legal and Engineering Fees:
Any expenses incurred by the Planning Board in the direct or indirect supervision,
administration or evaluation of a subdivision construction shall be paid by the subdivider.
Final approval for any proposed subdivision shall be conditional upon such payment.
18.03 Time for Completion of Construction:
The subdivider shall construct the subdivision and shall comply with all requirements of
the Final Plat within four (4) years from the date of signing the plat.
18.04 Performance Bond:
The subdivider shall execute and deliver to the Selectmen, in form acceptable to Town
Counsel, a bond or letter of credit to ensure performance of all terms and conditions of
Final Plat approval. The bond shall be provided in incremental amounts corresponding with
construction cost estimates for each phase of the project.
A. Amount of Bond: The Town Engineer and Road Agent shall furnish to the Board
an estimate of the full cost of all improvements for each phase of the project. Such
estimate shall be reviewed by the Board's designated agent who will recommend
the amount of the bond to the Board. The Board shall determine the final amount
of the bond and shall notify the Board of Selectmen accordingly.
B. Surety or Security: The subdivider's obligations as set forth in the performance
bond shall be secured by surety or security at the value determined by the Town’s
Engineer and approved by the Selectmen, in form acceptable to Town Counsel. All
documents evidencing or establishing the surety or security shall be prepared at the
subdivider's expense and approved by Town Counsel.
C. Reduction of Security: The security may be reduced by the Board of Selectmen
during the course of construction in such amounts as deemed by the Planning Board
to be in the best interest of the Town, but on the condition that the remaining
security shall be sufficient to complete all remaining construction and provide
adequate retainage. The subdivider may provide a construction completion
schedule and the Board may partially release the bond in stages corresponding with
completion of construction at predetermined intervals. Said release shall be in
increments corresponding to the bonded increments required in 18.04.
Town of Candia, NH Major Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
39
D. Release of Bond: 90% of the performance bond shall be released when the
Selectmen are satisfied that the subdivider has complied with all requirements as
set forth in the Final Plat. The decision to release the bond shall be based upon as
assessment of the plans, the Engineer's preparatory work for construction,
engineering inspection during construction, the record drawing survey and the final
plans on completed work. The Selectmen shall notify the Board that all conditions
of the bond have been performed and shall have the authority to release the bond
unless, after notification, the Boards directs otherwise.
E. Retainage: The Board shall retain 10% of the total of the original bond to guarantee
correction of latent defects and potential damage from erosion and sedimentation
as required in Article 18.11.
F. Enforcement of Bond: If the subdivider has not totally complied within four (4)
years of the date of the recording of the final plat in the Rockingham County
Registry of Deeds, the Town shall enforce its rights under the performance bond
and the surety or security given it to secure it. In the event that the Town is required
to enforce the bond, it shall be entitled to have reasonable Attorney's fees paid by
the subdivider and awarded by the Court.
18.05 Modification of Design and Improvements:
All alterations or modifications of the plans not approved by the Town Engineer, Road
Agent, or Fire Chief require approval by the Planning Board, and copies of the proposed
changes shall be submitted and approved by Planning Board, the Road Agent and Town
Engineer prior to the alterations being made. If at any time before or during the
construction of the subdivision the Applicant determines that unforeseen conditions make
it necessary or desirable to modify the location or design of any of the proposed
improvements or installations, the Board may authorize such modification which shall be
set forth in writing and signed by the Chairman of the Planning Board. No revision to
approved plans shall be valid or binding until approved by the Planning Board.
18.06 Inspection of Construction:
Prior to commencing construction, the subdivider shall pay to the Town an amount of
money estimated by the Town’s Engineer to fully compensate the Town for all inspection
and testing charges deemed necessary. The subdivider shall submit a construction schedule
and shall update and resubmit said schedule as required or as requested by the Town. Prior
to the start of construction, the subdivider shall request and attend a pre-construction
meeting with the Town’s departments and Town’s Engineer. Work performed that has
been identified as requiring inspection by the Town’s Road or the Town’s Engineer without
the presence of either parties is subject to be removed and reconstructed at the discretion
of the Road Agent.
18.07 Certification of Compliance:
The subdivider shall notify the Board in writing when all requirements of the Final Plat
have been met. At the Board’s discretion, the Town’s Engineer shall perform and
inspection and shall certify compliance with the Final Plat, including total and/or partial
recertification’s of any original installations, guarantee of installation improvements or
correction of deficiencies.
Town of Candia, NH Major Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
40
18.08 Correction of Deficiencies:
If it is determined that any of the required improvements have not been completed in
accordance with the plans and specifications as filed by the subdivider and as required by
the Town, the Selectmen shall notify the subdivider in writing of any such deficiencies.
The subdivider shall rectify all deficiencies at the expense of the subdivider. If the
subdivider does not substantially rectify all deficiencies within a reasonable time as
determined by the Town, the Town shall take all necessary actions to protect and preserve
the Town's rights and interests including suspension or revocation of Final Plat approval.
In the event of legal action, the Town shall be entitled to have reasonable Attorney's and
Engineer's fees paid by the subdivider and awarded by the court.
18.09 Guarantee of Installation of Improvements:
For a period of two (2) years after completion of all improvements or one year after the
correction of all deficiencies as described above, whichever comes last, if the Selectmen
determine that the improvements have failed for any reason or do not meet the
specifications as filed by the subdivider and as required by the Town, the Selectmen shall
notify the subdivider in writing of such failure and the subdivider shall rectify all failures
at the expense of the subdivider. If the subdivider does not substantially rectify all
deficiencies within a reasonable time as determined by the Town, the Selectmen shall take
all necessary action to protect and preserve the Town's rights and interests. In the event of
legal action, the Town shall be entitled to have reasonable Attorney's and Engineer's fees
paid by the subdivider and awarded by the court.
18.10 Damage to Adjacent Public and Private Property, Drainage Facilities, Waterways,
Streams and Brooks:
If at any time before all public improvements are finally accepted by the Town and before
the performance bond is totally released should any conditions within the approved
subdivision cause damage to adjacent public or private property, drainage facilities and
waterways, streams and brooks, including but not limited to soil erosion and damage to
standing vegetation, the Selectmen shall notify the subdivider in writing of such damage
and the subdivider shall correct all damage within a reasonable period of time as set forth
in the notice by the Town, the Town shall take all action necessary to protect and preserve
its rights and interests including injunctive relief. The Town shall be entitled to have
reasonable Attorney's and Engineer's fees paid by the subdivider and awarded by the court.
18.11 Correction of Defects:
Upon completion of improvements and acceptance by the Town, the subdivider shall
furnish a bond sufficient to correct defects and make required improvements for a period
of two years from completion as may be required by the Selectmen in an amount based on
the cost of such improvements. Said bond shall include an amount to correct any potential
damage resulting from erosion or sedimentation, and shall be a minimum of 10% of the
total of the original bond.
18.12 Erosion Control after Construction:
For a period of eighteen (18) months after completion of all improvements, the subdivider
shall be responsible for the control of soil erosion and any resulting sedimentation, in
accordance with the requirements of Article 16.
Town of Candia, NH Major Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
41
18.13 Subdivision Record Drawing Plans:
Following completion of all improvements, the subdivider shall submit to the Town Record
Drawings. This plat shall be drawn to scale and shall indicate by dimensions, angles and
distances, as applicable, the location of sewer and drain Y-branches, laterals, manholes,
catch basins, hydrants, valves, curb shut-offs, road profiles and center line elevations, and
final grading plan showing swales and ditches. The plan shall show easements, dedicated
roadways and roadbeds. The Record Drawing Plan shall be evaluated by the Road Agent,
the Town’s Engineer and the Planning Board, any expenses associated or expense related
to required revisions shall be paid by the subdivider.
18.14 Monuments:
Permanent survey monuments shall be set in the boundary of rights-of-way at intersecting
streets, point of curvature, and point of tangency of curves; the point of intersections of
short curves may be used instead, where such is practical, at the discretion of the Board.
Monuments shall be placed on one side of the street only and at only one corner of
intersecting streets. Adjacent monumental points shall be in sight of one another.
Monuments shall be referenced to a public street intersection, USGS benchmark or other
recognized existing monument. Monument locations and benchmark locations and
elevations shall be of granite, set adjacent to an iron detection pin, and not less than 4-
inches in diameter or square, and not less than 48-inches long. Iron pipes shall not be
considered permanent monuments for the purpose of these Regulations. When a bound is
to be placed in an existing stone wall, the monumentation may be an offset bound of a type
acceptable to the Board.
All boundary markers to be set with thirty (30) days of the plan being recorded. If this
cannot be accomplished prior to recording, the cost of the marker shall be bonded for an
amount and type to be recommended by the Planning Board.
18.15 Offer of Cession:
Before signing the final approval for the construction of the subdivision, the subdivider
shall convey all necessary deeds and documents pertaining to easements and right-of-way
as may be required.
The road within the subdivision will not be considered to be accepted until the Planning
Board and the Board of Selectmen have voted to accept the road and the selectmen have
accepted the deed at a public hearing. As per Article 2:11 the Town will not be liable for
any maintenance until the deed is accepted. An agreement may be made with the Town
for winter maintenance at the developer’s expense.
ARTICLE 19. CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS
19.01 Conformance with Construction Standards:
Compliance with the construction standards set forth below is required as a condition of
acceptance of newly developed roads and improvements dedicated for public ownership.
Town of Candia, NH Major Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
42
19.02 Settlement of Design & Road Construction Questions:
The State of NH Department of Transportation Regulations shall be the final authority on
any issues related to design and road construction.
19.03 Pre-Construction Conferences:
Least fourteen (14) days before any construction begins the subdivider will schedule a preconstruction
meeting with the Board or its designated agent, Road Agent and Town
Engineer. The purpose of the meeting will be to review the Owner's schedule, means,
methods and materials in relation to the construction of the subdivision, and to introduce
all parties by opening the lines of communication. All technical submittals for the project
shall be provided by the Developer at the pre-construction meeting.
19.04 Clearing and Grubbing:
Right-of-way width shall be cleared and grubbed to the minimum extent necessary to
facilitate construction of the roadway surface and required drainage features. Trees, stone
walls and other natural features shall be preserved whenever possible.
A. Limits: The limits of clearing and grubbing areas shall be clearly defined prior to
the pre-construction meeting defined in 19.03.
B. Clearing: All trees, down timber, brush, bushes and debris within 5-feet of a cut
and fill area shall be cleared by cutting and proper disposal as described in Article
17.01.
C. Grubbing: Stumps, roots, duff, grass, turf, debris and other unsuitable material
will be removed within all excavation limits and fill limits where the embankments
are to be made to a depth not more than 5-feet below subgrade. Removal and
disposal of all material shall be in conformance with Article 17.01.
D. Inspection and Approval: All clearing and grubbing shall be pre-marked prior to
cutting and shall be conducted under the supervision of the Board or its designated
agent.
19.05 Excavation and Embankments:
All material will be of suitable nature with no stumps, roots, sod or frozen lumps permitted.
All excavation and embankments shall be brought within required lines and grades. Fine
grading of the sub-grade shall be within 1/2" of the final grade.
A. Suitable Material: Suitable material is free of debris, pieces of pavement, organic
matter, topsoil, wet or soft muck, peat, clay, silt and all excavated ledge or rocks
over 6-inches in largest dimension. Suitable material for re-use shall be approved
for said re-use by the Board or its designated agent.
B. Earth Excavation: Earth excavation shall consist of all material not classified as
rock. Any suitable material may be used to flatten slopes where possible.
C. Earth Embankments: Earth embankments shall consist of all suitable material
other than rock. The soil shall be placed in layers not exceeding 12-inches in depth.
Town of Candia, NH Major Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
43
Each layer shall be compacted to a minimum of 95% before successive layers are
placed. Compaction tests shall be performed a minimum of one (1) test per 300-
feet of roadway.
D. Rock Excavation: Rock excavation, required for the preparation of road sub-grade,
shall consist of the removal of all solid rock which requires for its removal: blasting,
wedging or sledging. In roadways, rock removal shall be to a depth of 2-feet below
roadway sub-grade. For utilities trenches or proposed stormwater systems rock
removal shall be performed to a minimum depth of 12-inches below the proposed
feature or utility.
E. Rock Embankment: Rock embankments shall consist of solid rock placed in not
more than 12-inch lifts. Rocks shall be placed to the best advantage of roadway
construction. All rock embankment plans, under roadways, shall be designed and
stamped by a Registered Professional Engineer and shall incorporate use of a filter
fabric or material needed to control particle migration between road bedding and
rock embankment.
F. Muck or Organics Excavation: Muck excavation shall consist of the removal and
disposal of organic matter, which is not suitable for roadway foundation material.
In those locations where the road alignment crosses swamp or marshlands or other
similar soil that is incapable of supporting expected loads, such inadequate soil shall
be entirely removed and replaced with suitable material. The Board or its
designated agent shall require the subdivider to submit evidence either by boring
tests or other investigation to determine the depth of composition and stability of
the subgrade. In roadways all muck shall be removed below the in roadway subbase.
For utility trenches or proposed stormwater systems all muck shall be
removed below the bottom of the utility trench.
19.06 Drainage:
All culverts shall be reinforced concrete pipe class IV or V. Pipe shall be bell and spigot
or tongue and groove type with elastomeric oil resistant compression ring jointing. All
pipes shall have a minimum cover of 3-feet. Minimum culvert size shall be 15-inches.
Class IV shall be allowed under shoulder and green areas, class V under roadways and fill
areas deeper than 15-feet. All roadway culverts shall be a minimum 32-foot length.
19.07 Structural Design Requirements :
A. Catch Basins and Culverts:
i. Catch basins shall be constructed of precast reinforced concrete and
shall be designed to withstand HL-93 wheel loadings, or as directed by
the Board or its designated agent.
ii. All culverts, catch basins and headwalls shall be backfilled with suitable
material in maximum 12-inch lifts to 95% compaction when compared
to the suitable materials standard optimum proctor value.
iii. All materials supplied for the project shall be in compliance with
subdivision and Town Regulations pertaining to the material, and shall
be so certified by the vendor.
Town of Candia, NH Major Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
44
B. Retaining Walls:
a. Retaining walls are discouraged within the Town right-of-way. If a retaining is
to be allowed, as determined by the Planning Board, a typical detail of the
proposed retaining wall must be included in the plans. The following
requirement must be included with the typical detail: “The stamped shop
drawings and calculations for the actual retaining wall must be provided for
review and approval at or prior to the project’s required preconstruction
meeting.”
b. All retaining walls shall be designed by a professional Engineer with expertise
in this field. A note must appear on the plans requiring that the provided plans
and supporting calculations address the following criteria:
i. Design calculations stamped by a Professional Engineer of the
appropriate discipline, licensed in New Hampshire;
ii. Stability calculations (including bearing capacity, global stability,
overturning and sliding);
iii. Geogrid pullout and other pertinent data & evaluations;
iv. Construction installation specification;
v. Lateral earth pressure coefficient;
vi. Surcharge load, embedment depth;
vii. Both a plan and profile of each wall section;
viii. Guardrail / handrail installation details and geogrid penetration
procedures; and
ix. Location of the required pedestrian barrier.
c. If requested by the Planning Board or the Town Consulting Engineer, a
pedestrian barrier, (i.e. 4-foot chain link fence), must be installed at the top of
the proposed retaining wall. If guardrail is also proposed, the requested
pedestrian barrier must be installed between the guardrail and the top of the
retaining wall.
d. A note must appear on the approved plans and the stamped shop drawings
requiring the design Engineer, after the retaining wall construction is
completed, provide a stamped letter certifying that: “the retaining wall was
fully constructed per the approved design plans and will function as intended.”
C. Box Culverts, Bottomless Spans, Bridges, Headwalls, and Wingwalls:
a. A typical detail of the proposed structure(s) must be included in the design
plans. The following requirement must be included with the typical detail: “The
stamped shop drawings and calculations for the actual structure(s) must be
provided for review and approval at or prior to the project’s required
preconstruction meeting.”
b. All structural designs shall meet or exceed HL-93 loading.
Town of Candia, NH Major Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
45
c. These structures shall be designed by a professional Engineer with expertise in
this field. A note must appear on the plans requiring that the provided plans and
supporting calculations must address and/or include the following criteria:
i. Hot dipped galvanized hardware connection details;
ii. Cementitious patching of all hardware pockets;
iii. Flexible sealant (i.e. Sika 1A or equal), specified between structure
sections;
iv. Connection details for headwalls and/or wingwalls;
v. Specify steel shimming material;
vi. Cast in place concrete minimum design strength equal to 4,000 psi;
(vii). Precast concrete minimum design strength equal to 5,000 psi;
vii. Note requiring the structure to also meet NHDOT roadway and bridge
design standards;
viii. Design elevations such as top/bottom of footing, top of structure, finish
grade, select gravel and pavement thicknesses, etc.;
ix. Dimensions for all pieces;
x. Backfill specifications and compaction requirements;
xi. Subgrade preparation requirements, minimum of 12-inches of crushed
gravel;
xii. Epoxy coated rebar to be used for all bridge decks and box culverts with
less than 5-feet of cover and all rebar to be 60 grade steel; and
xiii. Applicable membrane and/or coatings for both backfilled and exposed
surfaces.
19.08 Sub-Base Specifications:
Roadway sub-base material shall consist of a minimum of 12-inches of sand and 12-inches
of gravel. Sand and gravel shall meet the following specifications:
SAND:
Sand shall be consistent with the material specifications and gradation of NHDOT Item#
304.1 Embankment Fill.
GRAVEL:
Gravel sub-base shall be consistent with the material specifications and gradation of
NHDOT Item#304.2 or 304.5.
19.09 Base Material:
Roadway base material shall consist of a minimum of 6-inches of crushed gravel. Crushed
gravel shall meet the following specifications.
CRUSHED GRAVEL:
Crushed gravel shall be consistent with the material specifications and gradation of NHDOT
Item#304.3 or 304.4.
Town of Candia, NH Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
46
19.10 Compaction:
Finish grade and sub-base grade material shall be thoroughly compacted in lifts not to
exceed 6-inches. Final compaction shall be equal to or greater than 95% of the base or
sub-base standard optimum proctor value.
19.11 Surface Course:
Surface layer shall consist of one (1) 2.5-inch layer of Type B binder course, and one (1)
1.5-inch layer of Type E wearing course. Surface course work shall conform to all
requirements listed in Section 401 of the NHDOT standard specifications including the
requirements for materials, batch and drum plants, hauling, placing, compacting, joints,
and surface tolerances.
A. Approval of Paving Materials and Contractor: The Planning Board or its designated
agent shall approve the paving material and Contractor to be used on the project.
B. Representation: A representative from the Town or the Town’s Engineer shall be
present prior to and during all paving operations. The Town shall be notified a
minimum of seventy-two (72) hours prior to scheduled paving to coordinate
inspections.
19.12 Profiles:
Typical road profiles are shown in Appendix B.
19.13 Miscellaneous Items:
A. Utilities: Utilities will be placed after the project has been brought to subgrade and
rough slope work has been completed. The lines will be inspected by their respective
companies and letter of acceptance will be provided to the Board or its designated
agent.
B. Bituminous Concrete Sidewalk: All bituminous concrete Sidewalk pavement shall be
placed in two (2) courses and shall meet the current NHDOT construction standards
for 2-inch bituminous sidewalk. Bituminous sidewalks shall have a base course
consisting of a minimum 9-inch deep layer of crushed gravel meeting the gradation
requirements of 19.09.
C. Guard Rail: Guardrail shall be provided for all locations where side slopes exceed 3-
feet horizontal and 1-foot vertical, for a vertical drop greater than 5-feet. All proposed
guardrail limits, end sections, materials and details shall meet all NHDOT roadway
and bridge design standards.
D. Topsoil: Topsoil shall consist of a loose friable soil with no admixture, refuse or
material toxic to plant growth. Topsoil shall be free from stones, lumps, stumps or
similar objects larger than 2-inches in greatest diameter. Prior to stripping material to
be used as topsoil, it shall have demonstrated by the occurrence upon it of healthy crops,
grass or other plant growth, that it is of good quality and reasonably free drainage. All
Town of Candia, NH Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
47
topsoil material shall be approved for use by the Board or its designated agent. All
disturbed areas shall receive a 6-inch layer of approved topsoil.
E. Seeding: All graded areas shall be seeded with the Rockingham County Slope mix
(USDA approved) at the rate of 65-lbs. per acre.
F. Offsite Improvements: The Board may require that existing public streets, sidewalks
and utilities providing access to the subdivision be upgraded and improved to
accommodate the additional burden placed on the streets, sight distance, sidewalks and
utilities by proposed subdivision. The subdividers share of such cost for off-site
improvements shall be determined by the Town’s Engineer.
G. Fertilizer: All seeded areas shall be fertilized with an appropriate type of fertilizer and
application rate for the existing soil type.
H. Mulch: All seeded areas shall be mulched within twenty-four (24) hours of seeding. A
good quality of mulch hay shall be used and applied at the rate of 2-tons per acre.
I. Temporary Signage: The developer shall obtain and post signs to warn motorists of
construction and construction vehicles in the area of the proposed roadway
construction. All signage shall be in accordance with the Manual of Uniform Traffic
Control Devices published by the Federal Highway Administration. The subdivider
shall post a sign stating “Road Not Approved or Maintained by the Town” until the
roadway has been accepted by the Town.
19.14 Fire Protection:
An adequate fire suppression water source is required for any of the following:
1. A major subdivision creating nine (9) or more dwelling units;
2. A major subdivision more than 1,000-feet from an arterial road;
3. A subdivision with multi-family structures of three or more dwelling units; or
4. Any commercial and/or industrial subdivision.
For residential subdivisions, an additional water supply may be included as specified in
Section 19.14 A per each addition of houses up to nine (9) as determined by the Fire
Department. The water supply requirements can be met by cisterns, individual building
sprinkler systems, or an approved fire pond if a natural water supply is present on the site.
Actual water supply requirements will be determined by the Fire Chief in conjunction with
the Town’s engineering consultant based on the use, type of construction, and fire load
inside the building(s) or of the number of residential units within a development after plan
review by the Fire Department.
If cisterns are chosen as the water supply, the volume and construction of the cistern shall
be a minimum supply consisting of a 30,000 gallon, 30 year warranty fiberglass tank which
Town of Candia, NH Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
48
the property Owner shall be responsible for maintaining and maintaining access to. The
required number of cisterns shall be as follows:
# of houses # of cisterns
3-9 1
10-18 2
19-27 3
Additional cisterns may be required for the specific subdivision and lot spacing as
determined by the Fire Department.
If sprinkler systems are chosen to meet the water supply requirements, the systems shall be
designed and installed in accordance with NFPA Standard 13 for commercial and industrial
buildings, NFPA Standard 13D for single family structures and NFPA Standard 13R for
multi-family structures.
The fire department may, at the discretion of the Chief, require the developer to contribute
the cost for the installation of the determined adequate fire suppression water source to the
Town of Candia Water Supply Capital Reserve Fund if it is determined that this option will
improve the overall fire protection of the Town. The cost basis for this contribution shall
be as estimated by the Town’s engineering consultant.
A. Adequacy: A water supply using a cistern is deemed adequate if it is capable of
providing 30,000 gallons of water during the driest time of the year. Fire
suppression ponds shall contain a minimum of 90,000 gallons of water. More than
nine (9) homes may require an additional water supply at the discretion of the Fire
Chief.
B. Upgrading an existing source: If a fire suppression water source is located on a
proposed subdivision but is not deemed adequate by the Chief of the Candia Fire
Department, it will be the responsibility of the subdivider to upgrade the storage
capacity to conform with article 19:14 A. Costs incurred for the upgrading will be
the responsibility of the subdivider.
C. All new driveways shall have a minimum 10-foot drivable surface capable of
supporting fire apparatus. There shall be a 3-feet clear area on both sides of the
driveway with a minimum clearance height of 12-feet, and a maximum grade of
10%.
D. Street address numbers shall be a minimum of 4-inches high with a contrasting
background and posted on a minimum 4 x 4 post or mailbox within 10-feet of the
roadway. Existing structures less than 20-feet from the road may display the
address numbers on the building. The street address shall be obtained from the Fire
Department prior to obtaining a building permit and be posted prior to the
Town of Candia, NH Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
49
commencement of any construction activity Temporary markers shall be allowed
with prior approval of the Fire Department.
E. For major residential subdivisions, if individual sprinkler systems are chosen as the
means to meet these Regulations, deed restrictions shall be required as part of the
subdivision approval. The subdivision approval shall be contingent upon the
recorded deed restrictions.
19.15 Construction of a Fire Suppression Water Source:
All construction for a Fire suppression water source shall meet the following specifications:
A. The piping system will be constructed of schedule 40 steel piping and fittings.
B. Piping for dry hydrants and cistern supply lines will be schedule 40 steel with a
minimum diameter of 8-inches to be reduced at the dry hydrant steamer connection.
C. The dry hydrant head will be equipped with a female N.S.T. 6-inch diameter fire
department hydrant connection, and will be no higher than 24-inches nor less than
20-inches from the finished grade, to the outlet center line.
D. Finished grade will be no less than 4-inches or more than 10-feet above the high
water table.
E. The piping will be equipped with an inlet strainer, capable of a minimum of 1,500
G.P.M. to be constructed of the same non-corrosive material.
F. The top of the inlet strainer will be no less than 18-inches from the bed of the water
supply and will have a minimum of 36-inches between the strainer surface and the
low water line.
G. The dry hydrant will be located not less than 22-feet or more than 24-feet from the
edge of the paved roadway or as per Town of Candia requirements.
H. The dry hydrant will be located at the inner edge of a pull off area. Pull off areas
are to be constructed with the same material and specifications required for the
roadway, with a minimum width of 25-feet and a minimum length of 40-feet to be
parallel with the roadway or as per Road Agent. All pull off areas are to be on a
level area unless a waiver is granted by the Fire Chief.
I. The fire suppression system will be constructed so as not to create any life-safety
or traffic hazards.
J. Where there is an existing acceptable water source; it may be utilized in place of
constructing one, provided a hydrant and pull off area are constructed.
Town of Candia, NH Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
50
K. Gallonage required for a fire pond is 25,000 gallons for each living unit, (one family
is one unit, four families are four units), with a minimum of 125,000 gallons and a
maximum of 500,000 gallons. A fire pond must fill naturally and shall be fenced
in with an access gate in the front for the fire department, if in the opinion of the
Fire Chief; the pond presents an undue hazard to public safety. Cisterns will be
filled and maintained originally by the Applicant. Cisterns are to be filled with
clean water, not pond or swamp water.
L. Piping will have a minimum of 5-feet earthen coverage, (suitable frost free
material) laid in a manner eliminating all potential pockets.
M. The subdivider/developer is responsible for the construction of the fire suppression
water source.
N. All subdivisions of nine (9) or more living units or with the future potential of 9
or more units will have sources of water for fire suppression.
O. The Town shall have a deeded right-of-way to allow access and repair to the
system.
P. System shall be in place and approved prior to the issuance of any Certificate of
Occupancy.
Q. Beaver ponds and seasonal wetlands are not considered acceptable as fire
suppression water sources.
R. All detention ponds, fire ponds, and cisterns shall be deeded to the Town with
access to the area for upkeep and repair and shall not be included in the acreage
for the lot where they are located.
19.16 Permanent Cul-de-Sac Turnaround:
Permanent Cul-de-Sac turnarounds shall be constructed in conformance with the following
design standard:
Town of Candia, NH Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
51
19.17 Temporary Turnaround Design:
A) Left and Right Hatchet Designs:
Town of Candia, NH Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
52
Town of Candia, NH Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
53
SECTION V: DEFINITIONS
ARTICLE 20. DEFINITIONS
Abutter: Shall mean any person whose property is located in New Hampshire and adjoins or is directly
across the street or stream from the land under consideration by the Planning Board. For purposes of
receiving testimony only and not for purposes of notification, the term "abutter" shall also include any
person who is able to demonstrate that such person’s land will be directly affected by the proposal under
consideration.
Approval: Shall mean recognition by the Planning Board, certified in written endorsement on the plat, that
the Final Plat submission meets the requirements of these Regulations and satisfies, in the judgment of the
Planning Board, all criteria of good planning and design.
Approval, Conditional: Shall mean an expression by the Planning Board that the plat is approved, but
requires additional information or must meet specific conditions for the approval to be valid. Conditional
approval does not constitute, nor should be construed as approval, either implied or granted, of the Final
Plat, nor does it bind the Planning Board to approval of the Final Plat.
Board: Shall mean the Planning Board of the Town of Candia, New Hampshire.
Bond, Performance: Shall mean a bond filed with the Board of Selectmen whose purpose is to ensure that
work specified by the Planning Board is completed satisfactorily. The amount of the bond shall be
recommended by the Planning Board with such assistance as it deems necessary. This amount shall be
sufficient to cover all costs for completion of the work by the Town in the event that the Applicant defaults.
In all other respects, the action of the Board shall be governed by NH RSA 674:36.
Boundary Agreement: A Boundary Agreement is an agreement between adjoining owners of real estate
for the purpose of establishing a common boundary.
Condominium: Real Property and any interests therein, lawfully submitted through the recording of
condominium instrument pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 356:9 NH Revised Statutes Annotated. No
project shall be deemed a condominium unless the undivided interests in the common area(s) (all portions
of the condominium other than the units) are vested in the unit owners.
Certified Soil Scientist: A person qualified in soil classification and mapping, who is certified by the State
of New Hampshire Board of Natural Scientists.
Cluster Subdivision: Shall mean when permitted by zoning ordinance is an optional form of subdivision
which provides for lots of reduced dimensions and the sharing of open space.
Driveway: Shall mean a vehicular entrance to public or private land built for direct access to a garage,
residence, business, or off-street parking area serving not more than two (2) adjacent dwelling units.
Maximum number of driveways (curb cuts) per lot shall be two.
Easement: Shall mean an acquired privilege or right of use acquired in the land of another and is used to
create facilities for access, space for emplacement of public utilities and right-of-way, both in favor of the
municipality and/or in favor of its residents. It shall include, without limitation, streets and roads, electronic
Town of Candia, NH Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
54
telephone utilities, vehicular and pedestrian traffic, sidewalks, water, storm drainage and sanitary sewer
utilities, pipelines, street lighting, slopes, ingress and egress, construction and conservation easements.
Endorsement: Shall mean certification of approval of a Final Plat, as evidenced by the signatures of the
Chairman of the Planning Board and three Board members, on the Final Plat.
Engineer: Shall mean an individual licensed to practice engineering in the State of New Hampshire.
Erosion: Shall mean the wearing away of land surface by the action of wind, water or other natural forces.
Final Plat: Shall mean the final drawing or drawings on which a plan of subdivision is indicated, prepared
as required under the provisions of Article 10 of these Regulations.
Lot: Shall mean a single parcel of land in the same ownership throughout as shown on or described in an
instrument recorded in the Registry of Deeds.
Lot Line: Shall mean the property line dividing a lot from a street right-of-way, a body of water or adjacent
property.
Lot Line Adjustment: A Lot Line Adjustment is an exchange of land or the transfer of part of one lot to
the adjoining landowner where such exchange or transfer does not convey an area of land equal to the
minimum lot size.
Manufactured Housing Cluster Subdivision: An optional form of subdivision for manufactured housing
allowing the division of land into lots of reduced dimensions and the sharing of open space.
Master Plan: Shall mean the comprehensive plan or plan of development for the community as adopted
by the Planning Board under RSA 674:4.
Official Map: Shall mean the Zoning Map for the Town of Candia, New Hampshire.
Open Space: Shall mean a recreational area that includes either private or public facilities for both active
and passive types of recreation including playgrounds, parks and undeveloped land of all types and at all
levels.
Planned Residential Development: a form of subdivision intended for mixed housing types, from singlefamily
to multi-family, in which buildings are grouped in patterns which allow a large percentage of open
space to be retained for common use.
Plat: Shall mean Final Plat.
Preliminary Layout: Shall mean a plan of a proposed subdivision prepared as required in Article 10 of
these Regulations and submitted to the Board for consideration prior to preparation of the Final Plat.
Right-of-Way: Shall mean a strip of land used for or intended to be used for a street, cross-walk, water
main, sanitary or storm sewer main or for other special use including public use. The usage of the term for
land platting purposes in these Regulations shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter established and
shown on a recorded plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots and parcels adjoining such right-ofway,
and is not to be included with the dimensions or areas of such other lots or parcels.
Town of Candia, NH Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
55
Sediment: Shall mean solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being transported
or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or gravity as a product of erosion.
Subdivision: Shall mean the division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, plats, sites or
other division of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, rent, lease, condominium
conveyance, building development or other form of conveyance. When appropriate to the context,
subdivision refers to the process of subdividing, or to the land subdivided. The division of a parcel of land
held in common and subsequently divided into parts among the several owners shall be deemed a
subdivision. A division of land resulting from the laying out of a public street or streets shall be considered
a subdivision.
Surveyor: Shall mean a person duly registered and licensed as such under the laws of the State of New
Hampshire.
Town: Shall mean the Town of Candia, New Hampshire.
Zoning Ordinance: Shall mean the Zoning Ordinance for the Town of Candia, New Hampshire.
Town of Candia, NH Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
APPENDIX A
Subdivision Application
PLANNING BOARD
TOWN OF CANDIA, NEW HAMPSHIRE
INSTRUCTIONS FOR MAKING APPLICATION FOR MINOR SUBDIVISION
I. DEFINITION: A minor subdivision of land into three or fewer lots with no potential for resubdivision
and requiring no new roads, utilities or other municipal improvements.
II. SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS: The subdivider shall file a complete application for Final Plan
approval with the Land Use Assistant at least 30 days prior to the public meeting at which time the
application is to be considered for acceptance by the Planning Board. All plans must also be
submitted electronically via e-mail or approved storage media in the portable document format
(PDF) with a maximum file size of 10 M.B.
III. PROCEDURE: 1) The plat shall be drawn in permanent blue or black ink on permanent
reproducible polyester film. It shall be submitted in 2 polyester film copies and 4 blue/black line
paper prints. Sheet sized shall be in accordance with the requirements of the Rockingham County
Register of Deeds. Space shall be reserved on the plat for endorsement by the Chairman and 3
other board members. The Final Plat shall contain the following:
“The Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Candia and Notice of Action are a part of
this plat, and approval of the plat requires the completion of all the requirements of said
subdivision regulations, excepting only any relaxation of requirements granted in writing
by the board.”
2) Complete attached application for subdivision. Provide necessary supporting
statements and pay required application fee.
IV. STANDARDS: All minor subdivisions shall conform to the requirements of Article V and Article
X (where referenced by Article V) of the Candia Subdivision regulations.
V. ACTION OF THE BOARD: After acceptance of the application by the assistant, within 30 days
the board shall begin formal consideration of the application at a noticed public hearing. The
board shall act to approve, disapprove or approve with modifications within 90 days of the date of
acceptance of the application by the board. The board may apply to the Board of Selectmen prior
to expiration of the 90-day period, for an extension of time not to exceed 90 days before acting to
approve or disapprove the application. The subdivider may consent to an extension of time for the
board to act beyond the initial 90 day period on the condition that such consent shall be in writing
and shall be made part of the board’s records.
APPROVAL: The board shall notify the subdivider by notice in writing signed by the Chairman,
of its actions on the final plat.
DISAPPROVAL: In case of disapproval, the grounds for such disapproval shall be set forth in the
notice which shall become part of the records of the board.
The subdivider shall acknowledge receipt of the notice and acceptance of all provisions set forth
therein and shall return a signed copy of same to the board for its records. Until such
acknowledgements and acceptance has been filed with the board, no further action shall be taken
with regard to the final plat. Failure to acknowledge receipt of the Notice of Action will cause
approval to lapse.
CPB rev. 3/2007, 1/2009
APPLICATION FOR MINOR SUBDIVISION – SCHEDULE A
1. Name and street address of subdivider ____________________________________________
_____________________________________________________phone #________________
2. Name and street address of property owner ________________________________________
_________________________________________________________phone #_______________
3. Name and street address of authorized agent (if any) ________________________________
_________________________________________________________phone #______________
4. Name and street address of land surveyor ________________________________________
_________________________________________________________phone # _____________
5. Location of subdivision: Street ________________________________________________
Tax Map and Lot # ________________________________________
Total number of acres in parcel ______________________________
6. Number of new lots to be created _______ Acreage of each _________________________
7. Intended use: Commercial ______ Residential ________ Industrial _________________
8. Name and street address of abutters – complete attached abutters list – also show all abutters
names and addresses on plat
9. Statement of intent ___________________________________________________________
THIS APPLICATION MUST BE ACCOMPANIED BY THE FOLLOWING
A. Subdivision plat – 4 blue line/black line paper prints
B. Completed abutters list
C. Approval from Department of Public Works and Highways for driveways (if land to be
Subdivided abuts state highway) or driveway permit from Road Agent
D. Notarized statement authorizing agent to represent owner at hearings*
E. Payment to the Town of Candia for the following application fees:
1. application fee $100.00
2. lot origination fee ($75.00 per newly created lot) $
3. abutter notices ($7.67 per abutter) * $
4. legal notice fee $ 100.00
5. Mylar recording fee *$26 per sheet $
L-Chip fee $25 per set – delivery fee may apply $
5. total all fees $
*Postal rates plus $1
• IF AN APPLICANT IS NOT THE OWNER OF THE LAND TO BE SUBDIVIDED, A
NOTARIZED STATEMENT GIVING AUTHORITY TO THE APPLICANT TO SUBDIVIDE
THIS LAND MUST BE SUBMITTED WITH THIS APPLICATION. THIS STATEMENT
MUST INCLUDE ANY CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS SET FORTH BY THE OWNER,
AND AN EXPIRATION DATE, IF ANY.
10. Signature of applicant ___________________________ Date _________________________
11. Date of receipt of application with all required information ___________________________
12. Application classified as _______________________________________________________
CPB rev. 3/2007
SCHEDULE A – ABUTTERS LIST
* Include property owner, agent and surveyor/engineer on the abutters list *
Subdivider/applicant ______________________________________________________________
Property owner __________________________________________________________________
Property Tax Map and Lot No. _____________________________________________________
ABUTTER NAME AND STREET ADDRESS LOT#
1. ___________________________________ _____
___________________________________ ____
___________________________________ ____
2. __________________________________ ____
__________________________________ ____
__________________________________ ____
3. __________________________________ ____
__________________________________ ____
__________________________________ ____
4. __________________________________ ____
__________________________________ ____
__________________________________ ____
5. __________________________________ ____
__________________________________ ____
__________________________________ ____
6. __________________________________ ____
__________________________________ ____
__________________________________ ____
7. __________________________________ ____
__________________________________ ____
__________________________________ ____
8. __________________________________ ____
__________________________________ ____
__________________________________ ____
9. __________________________________ ____
__________________________________ ____
__________________________________ ____
ABUTTER NAME AND STREET ADDRESS LOT#
10. __________________________________ ____
__________________________________ ____
__________________________________ ____
11. __________________________________ ____
__________________________________ ____
__________________________________ ____
12. __________________________________ ____
__________________________________ ____
__________________________________ ____
13. __________________________________ ____
__________________________________ ____
__________________________________ ____
14. __________________________________ ____
__________________________________ ____
__________________________________ ____
15. __________________________________ ____
__________________________________ ____
__________________________________ ____
16. __________________________________ ____
__________________________________ ____
__________________________________ ____
17. __________________________________ ____
__________________________________ ____
__________________________________ ____
18. __________________________________ ____
__________________________________ ____
__________________________________ ____
Applicant bears full responsibility that all required abutters notices were given. The Planning Board
reserves the right to continue the hearing if proper notice was not given (Ref. RSA 672:3).
APPLICATION FOR MINOR SUBDIVISION – SCHEDULE B
INFORMATION REQUIRED ON FINAL PLAT AND PLAT CHECKLIST
For Minor Subdivision, the plans shall contain or be accompanied by the following maps and information.
Maps shall be drawn at a scale of no more than 100 feet per inch unless otherwise specified by the Planning
Board.
*TO BE COMPLETED BY THE APPLICANT*
5.06a ______ 1. Name of municipality
______ 2. Name of subdivision (plat title)
______ 3. Name and addresses of subdivider, designer or engineer
5.06b ______ 1. Name and addresses of abutting property owners
______ 2. Subdivision buildings within 200 feet of the parcel to be subdivided
______ 3. Roads, streets and driveways within 200 feet of the parcel to be subdivided
5.06c ______ 1. Name and seal of the licensed State of New Hampshire engineer and/or land surveyor
surveyor who prepared the Final Plat.
5.06d ______ 1. General site location map locating the proposed Minor Subdivision boundaries in
relation to major roads.
______ 2. A vicinity map showing the location of the proposed subdivision in relation to abutting
properties and existing streets, highways, or municipal facilities.
5.06e ______ 1. Boundaries and areas of the entire parcel referenced to a public street intersection or
USGS benchmark, north point, bar scale, date and dates of any revisions. (The Board
may waive the requirement of a perimeter survey for the entire parcel and may require
specific data only for lots for which sale or lease is contemplated, in such instances, the
Final Plat shall include a general map insert which indicates approximately the size
and shape of the entire parcel to be subdivided.)
5.06f ______ 1. Approximate contour lines at 5 foot intervals for the entire parcel, sketched from a
standard USGS map or a Town base map.
5.06g ______ 1. Existing and proposed building sites and lot lines, angles and dimensions, lot sizes in
square feet and acres, consecutive numbering of lots.
5.06h ______ 1. Existing and proposed easements
______ 2. Deed restrictions or covenants
______ 3. Building set-back lines
______ 4. Parks and other open space
______ 5. Water courses, stone walls and significant natural and manmade features. This
includes culverts, and the direction of flow indicated by arrows through those
culverts.
5.06i ______ 1. Where individual on-lot sewage disposal systems are proposed or in existence, the
subdivider shall present evidence of State approval of the suitability of each lot for onsite
sewage disposal for building purposes. For lots greater than 5 acres, an opinion
by a registered Professional Engineer that a suitable site for a subsurface disposal
system exists may be substituted for state approval. For lots greater than 10 acres, a
request for a wavier from this requirement may be made when supported by
appropriate soil data. In all instances shall specifically indicate on each such lot that
state approval for an on-site subsurface disposal system has not been applied for nor
has been granted.
5.06j ______ 1. Where the minor Subdivision is to be supplied by public water supply or sewers, the
Plat shall show the location of such existing service. A statement from the municipal
department or company involved attesting to the availability of such service shall be
submitted.
5.06k ______ 1. A statement from the Candia Tax Collector indicating whether the property is under
current use taxation status or not.
5.07
When in judgment of the Board additional information is required to serve the purposes of these
Regulations, the Board may require such other information as set forth in Articles 10.06, 10.11, and
10.12, Final Plat Requirements.
This Minor Subdivision Application is accepted as complete this ________day of _____________, 20 __.*
By: _________________________
Candia Planning Board
ACCEPTANCE OF THE APPLICATION DOES NOT IMPLY APPROVAL OF THE SUBDIVISION
Other information
______ Correct new lot numbers
______ WSPCD approval for subdivision (for new lots less than 5 acres)
______ Article 12.04 requires that all new lot corners be marked with granite blocks and adjacent iron
detection pins prior to recording of the final plat.
CPB rev. 3/2007, 1/2009
CANDIA PLANNING BOARD
INSTRUCTIONS FOR MAKING APPLICATION FOR PRELIMINARY LAYOUT AND REVIEW – MAJOR SUBDIVISION
I.
II.
III.
IV.
DEFINITION:
PROCEDURE:
STANDARDS
ACTION OF
THE BOARD
NOTE:
NOTE:
NOTE:
A major subdivision is the subdivision of land into four or more plats, lots or other
sites for the purpose whether immediate or future, of sale or building
development.
1. Description of Layout: The preliminary layout shall be drawn in pencil or ink
and submitted in 4 black line paper prints. Dimensions may be approximate,
date may be tentative, but plan shall be sufficiently clear to establish the
basis of, and to clarify the design requirements for the subdivision Final Plat.
Maps shall be at a scale of no more than 100 feet per inch unless otherwise
specified by the Board. All plans must also be submitted electronically via email
or approved storage media in the portable document format (PDF) with
a maximum file size of 10 M.B. Additional required information is shown on
the attached checklist.
2. Complete attached application for subdivision. Provide necessary supporting
statements and pay required application fees.
3. Submit 1 and 2 above to the Land Use Office.
All major subdivisions shall conform to the requirements of Articles 11 through
17, Standards for Subdivision Design, and to Articles 18 and 19, Standards for
Subdivision Construction, of the Candia Subdivision Regulations. Copies of the
regulations are available at the Land Use Office.
After review of the preliminary layout by the Board, the Board shall submit in
writing, its recommendations and reservations with respect to the proposed
subdivision and the advisability of preparing a Final Plat.
All items on the attached checklist shall be completed and submitted
before the proposal is scheduled for a meeting with the Planning Board.
For a major subdivision, there are two application forms, this preliminary
application and a final application. Submission of both in their completed
form is a requirement that must be satisfied prior to noticing of the second
required public hearing on the proposal.
The final plat shall contain the following statement:
“The Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Candia and Notice of Action within
90 days are a part of this plat, and approval of the plat requires the completion of
all the requirements of said Subdivision Regulations, accepting only any
relaxation of requirements granted in writing by the Board.”
CPB rev. 2/90 & 7/03
Hrs. rev. 6/99 & 2002
Rev. 1/2009
APPLICATION FOR PRELIMINARY LAYOUT AND REVIEW – MAJOR SUBDIVISION –
SCHEDULE A
1. Name and address of subdivider_______________________________________________
_______________________________________________________ phone # ______________
2. Name and address of property owner ___________________________________________
_______________________________________________________ phone # ______________
3. Name and address of authorized agent __________________________________________
_______________________________________________________ phone # ______________
4. Name and address of surveyor preparing plat _____________________________________
______________________________________________________ phone # _______________
5. Location of subdivision: Street ______________________ Total acreage _______________
Tax Map # ___________ Lot # ______________
6. Number of new lots to be created __ Acreage of each_______________________________
7. Intended Use: Commercial ______ Residential ______ Industrial ______
8. Name and address of abutters: (complete attached list) include property owner, agent and
surveyor
9. Statement of intent: _________________________________________________________
THIS APPLICATION MUST BE ACCOMPANIED BY THE FOLLOWING:
A. Subdivision plat prepared by licensed land surveyor – 4 black line paper prints. All plans must
also be submitted electronically via e-mail or approved storage media in the portable
document format (PDF) with a maximum file size of 10 M.B.
B. Completed abutters list
C. Approval from Department of Transportation (if land to be subdivided abuts state highway) or
approval from Candia Road Agent for driveway permit
D. Notarized statement for property owner to agent for representation at public hearings*
E. Payment to the Town of Candia for the following application fees:
1. APPLICATION FEE $150.00
2. LOT ORIGINATION FEE ($75 PER NEWLY CREATED LOT) $
3. ABUTTERS NOTICES ($7.67 PER ABUTTER*) $
4. LEGAL NOTICE FEE $100.00
5. TOTAL ALL APPLICATION FEES $
*Postal rates plus $1
IF AN APPLICANT IS NOT THE OWNER OF THE LAND TO BE SUBDIVIDED, A NOTARIZED
STATEMENT GIVING AUTHORITY TO THE APPLICANT TO SUBDIVIDE THIS LAND MUST
BE SUBMITTED WITH THIS APPLICATION. THIS STATEMENT MUST INCLUDE ANY
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS SET FORTH BY THE OWNER, AND AN EXPIRATION
DATE, IF ANY.
10. Signature of subdivider _____________________ Date _____________________________
11. Date of receipt of required information ___________________________________________
12. Application classified as ______________________________ By _____________________
Additional Notes:
Rev. 11/97, 2/88, 1/31/01, 7/1/01 P.O, 6/30/02 & 2003, 1/2009
SCHEDULE A – ABUTTERS LIST
* Include property owner, agent and surveyor/engineer on the abutters list *
Subdivider/applicant ______________________________________________________________
Property owner __________________________________________________________________
Property Tax Map and Lot No. _____________________________________________________
ABUTTER NAME & STREET ADDRESS LOT # ABUTTER NAME & STREET ADDRESS LOT #
1. _________________________________________ ________ 10. _______________________________________ _______
_________________________________________ ________ ______________________________________ _______
_________________________________________ ________ ______________________________________ _______
2. _________________________________________ ________ 11. _______________________________________ _______
_________________________________________ ________ _______________________________________ _______
_________________________________________ ________ _______________________________________ _______
3. _________________________________________ ________ 12. _______________________________________ _______
__________________________________________ ________ _______________________________________ _______
__________________________________________ ________ _______________________________________ _______
4. __________________________________________ ________ 13. _______________________________________ _______
__________________________________________ ________ ______________________________________ _______
__________________________________________ ________ ______________________________________ _______
5. __________________________________________ ________ 14. _______________________________________ _______
__________________________________________ ________ ______________________________________ _______
__________________________________________ ________ ______________________________________ _______
6. __________________________________________ ________ 15. ______________________________________ _______
__________________________________________ ________ _____________________________________ _______
__________________________________________ ________ _____________________________________ _______
7. __________________________________________ ________ 16. ______________________________________ _______
__________________________________________ ________ ______________________________________ _______
__________________________________________ ________ _____________________________________ _______
8. __________________________________________ ________ 17. _____________________________________ _______
_________________________________________ ________ _____________________________________ _______
_________________________________________ ________ _____________________________________ _______
9. _________________________________________ ________ 18. _____________________________________ _______
_________________________________________ ________ _____________________________________ _______
_________________________________________ ________ ______________________________________ _______
All the above names and addresses must be shown on the site plan, for a definition of an abutter refer to RSA 672.3. Applicant bears
full responsibility that all required abutters notices were given. The Planning Board reserves the right to continue the hearing if proper
notice was not given.
CPB rev. 2/88 & 11/15/00
APPLICATION FOR PRELIMINARY LAYOUT AND REVIEW – MAJOR SUBDIVISION
SCHEDULE B
INFORMATION REQUIRED ON PLANS AND PLAN CHECKLIST
For Preliminary Layout, the plans shall contain or be accompanied by the following maps and information. Maps shall be
drawn at a scale of no more than 100 feet per inch unless otherwise specified by the Board.
• THIS LIST TO BE COMPLETED BY THE APPLICANT *
10.06a
______ 1. Name of municipality
______ 2. Name of subdivision
______ 3. Name and address of subdivider, designer and agent
______ 4. Name and addresses of abutters
10.06b
______ 1. General site vicinity map (map may be shown on plat)
______ 2. Subdivision boundaries
______ 3. Proposed streets in relation to existing streets, highways, abutting parcels of land or other features
shown on the town highway map
10.06c
______ 1. Boundaries and area of entire parcel, in acres and square feet, referenced to a public street
intersection or USGS bench mark
______ 2. North Point
______ 3. Bar scale
______ 4. Dates of revision
10.06d
______ 1. Boundaries and designation of zoning districts
______ 2. Municipal boundary, where applicable
______ 3. Land use designation from zoning ordinance
10.06e
______ 1. Approximate contours at 5’ intervals taken from a standard USGS map or a town map.
Contour lines should be shown on a separate page.
10.06f
______ 1. The subdivision plan shall provide soil maps and information in accordance with Site Specific Soil Maps
for New Hampshire Special Publication No. 3, June, 1997, and as amended. Maps prepared by field
examination shall be prepared and stamped by a Certified Soil Scientist and include the date of the field
examination. All costs of preparing soil data shall be borne by the applicant.
10.06g
______ 1. Subdivision buildings within 200 feet of parcel to be subdivided
______ 2. Roads, streets and driveways within 200 feet of the parcel
CPB rev. 2/88 & 11/15/00
INFORMATION REQUIRED ON PLANS AND PLAN CHECKLIST – CONTINUED
10.06h
______ 1. Location of parks and other open space
______ 2. Watercourses and flood prone areas
______ 3. Stone walls
______ 4. Significant natural and man made features (large boulders, cemeteries, etc.)
10.06I
______ 1. Existing and proposed lot lines
______ 2. Existing and proposed easements
______ 3. Deed restrictions
______ 4. Deed covenants
______ 5. All buildings and accessory buildings
10.06k
______ 1. Preliminary road profiles showing grades, existing and proposed street r.o.w. lines, (including
side slopes), width of streets
______ 2. Drainage structures and drainage ways
______ 3. Existing and proposed telephone, electricity, water and sewer lines
______ 4. Fire protection facilities
______ 5. Other proposed facilities or utilities
10.06l
______ 1. Preliminary drainage analysis
______ 2. Watershed areas
10.06m
______ 1. A statement from the Assessor’s Office indicating whether or not the property is under current use
taxation status (if yes, then include a note on the plan, too)
10.06n _____ 1. A Letter from the Fire Chief and the Police Chief regarding safety issues is required.
12.04 - Requires that all new lot corners be marked with granite blocks and adjacent iron detection pins unless
a written waiver is granted by the Board
OTHER INFORMATION: NH State Septic Approval # for all new lots less than 5 acres in size ______
Correct new lot numbers ______
This Preliminary Layout Application is accepted as complete this __________day of ____________, 20 __.
By: _________________________________
Candia Planning Board
______* Also required is an approved local or state driveway permit for each new lot created.
CPB rev. 2/88, CPB rev 10/99
CANDIA PLANNING BOARD
INSTRUCTIONS FOR MAKING APPLICATION FOR FINAL PLAT APPROVAL – M,AJOR SUBDIVISION
A. PROCEDURAL INSTRUCTIONS
I. Submission Requirements: The subdivider shall file the application for Final Plat approval with the Land Use
Assistant at least 30 days prior to the public meeting at which the application is to be considered for acceptance by
the Board. Before any review of the proposed final subdivision application, the Board shall first determine if the
application is complete. All plans must also be submitted electronically via e-mail or approved storage media in the
portable document format (PDF) with a maximum file size of 10 M.B.
The application shall be presented to the Board by the subdivider at a public meeting of the Board for which notice
has been given. The Board, by motion, shall accept or reject the application at the public meeting or an
adjournment session thereof, and such action shall be noted on the application and in the records of the Board.
II. Hearing on Final Plat: The accepted application shall be deemed to be submitted to the Board as of the date on
which the Board accepted the application. Within 30 days of such date, the Board shall begin formal consideration
of the application at a public hearing for which notice has been given. The Board shall act to approve, approve with
modification, or disapprove the application within 65 days of the date of submission.
III. Notice of Action on Final Plat: The Board shall notify the subdivider by notice in writing signed by the Chairman, of
the action on the final plat. In case of disapproval, the grounds for such disapproval shall be set forth in the notice,
which shall become part of the records of the Board. In case of approval, the Notice of Action shall set forth the
following:
1. A copy of any deed restrictions submitted by the subdivider and accepted by the Board.
2. All requirements for off-site improvements
3. A description of the land, if any, to be dedicated to widen existing streets.
4. A description of any relaxation of requirements granted to the subdivider
5. Requirements, if any, relative to underground utilities
6. When applicable, the statement described in Article 11.08 concerning liability for public use of land
7. All agreements, if any, between the subdivider and the Board concerning matters not required by the
Subdivision Regulations
8. A statement that the subdivision shall be completed and constructed in conformance with the Final Plat and
the Subdivision regulations as set forth in Article 10.19 and Article 19.
IV. Performance Bond: When the Board agrees to accept a performance bond, the subdivider shall submit a
performance bond providing for and securing to the Town, the completion of the actual construction and installation
of all improvements and utilities within 4 years from the date of acknowledgement and acceptance of the Notice of
Action. The bond shall be in an amount recommended by the Planning Board and in conformity with the
requirements of Article 18.04.
V. Description and Recording of Final Plat: The subdivider shall submit to the Board one mylar copy and three
black line prints of the approved final plat. Sheet sizes shall be in accordance with the requirements of the
Rockingham County Register of Deeds. Space shall be reserved on the plat for endorsement by four Board
members. The Final Plat shall contain the following statement:
“The Subdivision Regulations and the Notice of Action of the Town of Candia are a part of the plat, and approval
of this plat requires the completion of all the requirements granted in writing by the Board.”
The Board shall cause one copy of the plat to be recorded in the Rockingham County Register of Deeds and shall
deliver a second copy to the Town for its records. All graphic material and presentations shall be on the surface of
the mylar plat which is suitable for writing. The act of recording an approved subdivision plat shall not in itself
constitute acceptance by the Town of any street or easement shown thereon.
CPB rev. 2/88, 7/03, 1/2009
CANDIA PLANNING BOARD
INSTRUCTIONS FOR MAKING APPLICATION FOR FINAL PLAT APPROVAL – MAJOR SUBDIVISION
A. PROCEDURAL INSTRUCTIONS
Page 2
VI. Failure to Record: No sale or transfer of land within the subdivision may be entered into until an
approved subdivision final plat has been recorded in the Rockingham County Register of Deeds.
Approval of a final plat shall lapse if such plat is not recorded in the Register of Deeds within three years
(Section 10.20 ), unless the Planning Board extends the time.
B. INFORMATION REQUIRED
I. Completed Application Form: See Schedule C attached.
II. Information required on Final Plat: See Schedule D attached.
III. Additional Information for Final Plat: See Schedule E attached.
CPB rev. 2/88, 1/2009
CANDIA PLANNING
APPLICATION FOR FINAL PLAT APPROVAL – MAJOR SUBDIVISION
SCHEDULE C
Note: This application shall conform in all respects to the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Candia and shall be
submitted to the Land Use Assistant with 4 black line paper prints of the final plat 20 days prior to the public meeting
at which the application will be considered by the Board. The charge for the newspaper notice and abutters
charges must accompany the application. A filing fee (mylar recording fee), determined by the fee schedule, shall
accompany this application.
1. Date on which Preliminary Layout was accepted by the Board ________________________________________.
2. The undersigned hereby makes application for approval of a Final Plat entitled ___________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________________, for
Tax Map ________ Lot No. ________, for which: (circle one of the following)
A. included on the Final Plat is all area of the entire parcel to be subdivided.
OR
B. included on the final plat is only phase ______ of the subdivision, as there is the potential for subdivision on
lot ______, containing ________ acres.
3. The proposed final plat is submitted and contains all information as required and in accordance with the Candia
Subdivision Regulations. All requests, if any, for the relaxation of requirements under 3.01 are contained herein.
Date _______________________ Signed ______________________________________________________
Property Owner
Signed ______________________________________________________
Authorized Agent, if applicable
4. I hereby acknowledge receipt of the Application for Final Plat approval.
Date ________________________ Signed _____________________________________________________
Land Use Assistant
*5. This Application for Final Plat approval is accepted as complete this __________________________________
day of ______________________, 20 __.
Signed _____________________________________________________
Candia Planning Board
* ACCEPTANCE OF THE APPLICATION DOES NOT IMPLY APPROVAL OF THE SUBDIVISION
CPB rev. 2/88 & 7/03
CANDIA PLANNING BOARD
INSTRUCTIONS FOR MAKING APPLICATION FOR FINAL PLAT APPROVAL – MAJOR SUBDIVISION
SCHEDULE D – INFORMATION REQUIRED ON FINAL PLAT AND PLAT CHECKLIST
The Final Plat shall contain or be accompanied by all of the following information listed in Article 10.06 for the
Preliminary Layout. In addition, the Final Plat shall contain the following maps and information. Maps shall be
drawn at a scale of not more than 100 feet per inch unless otherwise specified by the Planning Board.
______ 10.11a – boundary survey certified and identified by a seal of a New Hampshire licensed land surveyor
______ 10.11b – contour lines at 5 foot intervals for the entire parcel to be subdivided, preferably shown on a
separate plan
______ 10.11c – soil test data, sewage disposal information and approvals, as required in Article 11.07
10.11d:
______ 1) existing and proposed lot lines and building sites
______ 2) angles and dimensions
______ 3) lot sizes in acres and square feet
______ 4) consecutive numbering of new lots
10.11e:
______ 1) existing and proposed street r.o.w. lines
______ 2) dimensions of tangents, chords and radii
______ 3) location of all monuments to be set at street intersections
______ 4) points of curvature and tangency of curved streets
______ 5) angles of all lots
______ 6) names of existing and proposed streets
______ 10.11f – wasting site noted on plat, as required in Article 17
______ 10.11g - A Statement that all lots contain a minimum of 1 ½ acres of contiguous non poorly drained soils
shall be placed on the final plan
______ 10.12 c – Fire protection and Emergency Access Plan: This Plan shall be submitted to show conformity
with the recommendations of the Candia Police and Fire Departments, and shall comply with
Article 19.14.
______ 12.04 - Requires that all new lot corners are to be marked with granite blocks and adjacent iron detection
pins, unless otherwise written waiver is granted by the Planning Board
______ * Also required is an approved local or state driveway permit for each new lot
CPB rev. 2/88 & 11/15/00
CANDIA PLANNING BOARD
INSTRUCTIONS FOR MAKING APPLICATION FOR FINAL PLAT APPROVAL – MAJOR SUBDIVISION
SCHEDULE E
1. Subdivision Grading and Drainage Plan: See Article 10.12a of the Subdivision Regulations for complete details.
2. Subdivision Street and Utility Plan: See Article 10.12b of the Subdivision Regulations for complete details.
3. Fire Protection and Emergency Access Plan: See Article 10.12c of the Subdivision Regulations for complete
details.
4. Request for Waiver or Relaxation of Requirements: as described in Article 3.01, shall be in writing and included
with the application.
5. Cost Estimate of all Improvements and a description of the surety or security to be offered to secure the
performance bond: See Article 10.12e of the Subdivision Regulations for complete details.
6. Other Plans: The Board may require such other information as it deems necessary to sense the purpose of these
regulations. See Article 10.12f of the Candia Subdivision regulations for complete details.
CPB rev. 2/88
CANDIA PLANNING BOARD
INSTRUCTIONS FOR MAKING APPLICATION FOR FINAL PLAT APPROVAL – M,AJOR SUBDIVISION
A. PROCEDURAL INSTRUCTIONS
I. Submission Requirements: The subdivider shall file the application for Final Plat approval with the Land Use
Assistant at least 30 days prior to the public meeting at which the application is to be considered for acceptance by
the Board. Before any review of the proposed final subdivision application, the Board shall first determine if the
application is complete. . All plans must also be submitted electronically via e-mail or approved storage media in the
portable document format (PDF) with a maximum file size of 10 M.B.
The application shall be presented to the Board by the subdivider at a public meeting of the Board for which notice
has been given. The Board, by motion, shall accept or reject the application at the public meeting or an
adjournment session thereof, and such action shall be noted on the application and in the records of the Board.
II. Hearing on Final Plat: The accepted application shall be deemed to be submitted to the Board as of the date on
which the Board accepted the application. Within 30 days of such date, the Board shall begin formal consideration
of the application at a public hearing for which notice has been given. The Board shall act to approve, approve with
modification, or disapprove the application within 65 days of the date of submission.
III. Notice of Action on Final Plat: The Board shall notify the subdivider by notice in writing signed by the Chairman, of
the action on the final plat. In case of disapproval, the grounds for such disapproval shall be set forth in the notice,
which shall become part of the records of the Board. In case of approval, the Notice of Action shall set forth the
following:
1. A copy of any deed restrictions submitted by the subdivider and accepted by the Board.
2. All requirements for off-site improvements
3. A description of the land, if any, to be dedicated to widen existing streets.
4. A description of any relaxation of requirements granted to the subdivider
5. Requirements, if any, relative to underground utilities
6. When applicable, the statement described in Article 11.08 concerning liability for public use of land
7. All agreements, if any, between the subdivider and the Board concerning matters not required by the
Subdivision Regulations
8. A statement that the subdivision shall be completed and constructed in conformance with the Final Plat and
the Subdivision regulations as set forth in Article 10.19 and Article 19.
IV. Performance Bond: When the Board agrees to accept a performance bond, the subdivider shall submit a
performance bond providing for and securing to the Town, the completion of the actual construction and installation
of all improvements and utilities within 4 years from the date of acknowledgement and acceptance of the Notice of
Action. The bond shall be in an amount recommended by the Planning Board and in conformity with the
requirements of Article 18.04.
V. Description and Recording of Final Plat: The subdivider shall submit to the Board one mylar copy and three
blackline prints of the approved final plat. Sheet sizes shall be in accordance with the requirements of the
Rockingham County Register of Deeds. Space shall be reserved on the plat for endorsement by four Board
members. The Final Plat shall contain the following statement:
“The Subdivision Regulations and the Notice of Action of the Town of Candia are a part of the plat, and approval
of this plat requires the completion of all the requirements granted in writing by the Board.”
The Board shall cause one copy of the plat to be recorded in the Rockingham County Register of Deeds and shall
deliver a second copy to the Town for its records. All graphic material and presentations shall be on the surface of
the mylar plat which is suitable for writing. The act of recording an approved subdivision plat shall not in itself
constitute acceptance by the Town of any street or easement shown thereon.
CPB rev. 2/88, 7/03, 1/2009
CANDIA PLANNING BOARD
INSTRUCTIONS FOR MAKING APPLICATION FOR FINAL PLAT APPROVAL – MAJOR SUBDIVISION
A. PROCEDURAL INSTRUCTIONS
Page 2
VI. Failure to Record: No sale or transfer of land within the subdivision may be entered into until an
approved subdivision final plat has been recorded in the Rockingham County Register of Deeds.
Approval of a final plat shall lapse if such plat is not recorded in the Register of Deeds within three years
(Section 10.20 ), unless the Planning Board extends the time.
B. INFORMATION REQUIRED
I. Completed Application Form: See Schedule C attached.
II. Information required on Final Plat: See Schedule D attached.
III. Additional Information for Final Plat: See Schedule E attached.
CPB rev. 2/88, 1/2009
CANDIA PLANNING
APPLICATION FOR FINAL PLAT APPROVAL – MAJOR SUBDIVISION
SCHEDULE C
Note: This application shall conform in all respects to the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Candia and shall be
submitted to the Land Use Assistant with 4 blackline paper prints of the final plat 30 days prior to the public meeting
at which the application will be considered by the Board. The charge for the newspaper notice and abutters
charges must accompany the application. A filing fee (Mylar recording fee), determined by the fee schedule, shall
accompany this application.
1. Date on which Preliminary Layout was accepted by the Board ________________________________________.
2. The undersigned hereby makes application for approval of a Final Plat entitled ___________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________________, for
Tax Map ________ Lot No. ________, for which: (circle one of the following)
A. included on the Final Plat is all area of the entire parcel to be subdivided.
OR
B. included on the final plat is only phase ______ of the subdivision, as there is the potential for subdivision on
lot ______, containing ________ acres.
3. The proposed final plat is submitted and contains all information as required and in accordance with the Candia
Subdivision Regulations. All requests, if any, for the relaxation of requirements under 3.01 are contained herein.
Date _______________________ Signed ______________________________________________________
Property Owner
Signed ______________________________________________________
Authorized Agent, if applicable
4. I hereby acknowledge receipt of the Application for Final Plat approval.
Date ________________________ Signed _____________________________________________________
Land Use Assistant
*5. This Application for Final Plat approval is accepted as complete this __________________________________
day of ______________________, 20 __.
Signed _____________________________________________________
Candia Planning Board
* ACCEPTANCE OF THE APPLICATION DOES NOT IMPLY APPROVAL OF THE SUBDIVISION
CPB rev. 2/88 & 7/03
CANDIA PLANNING BOARD
INSTRUCTIONS FOR MAKING APPLICATION FOR FINAL PLAT APPROVAL – MAJOR SUBDIVISION
SCHEDULE D – INFORMATION REQUIRED ON FINAL PLAT AND PLAT CHECKLIST
The Final Plat shall contain or be accompanied by all of the following information listed in Article 10.06 for the
Preliminary Layout. In addition, the Final Plat shall contain the following maps and information. Maps shall be
drawn at a scale of not more than 100 feet per inch unless otherwise specified by the Planning Board.
______ 10.11a – boundary survey certified and identified by a seal of a New Hampshire licensed land surveyor
______ 10.11b – contour lines at 5 foot intervals for the entire parcel to be subdivided, preferably shown on a
separate plan
______ 10.11c – soil test data, sewage disposal information and approvals, as required in Article 11.07
10.11d:
______ 1) existing and proposed lot lines and building sites
______ 2) angles and dimensions
______ 3) lot sizes in acres and square feet
______ 4) consecutive numbering of new lots
10.11e:
______ 1) existing and proposed street r.o.w. lines
______ 2) dimensions of tangents, chords and radii
______ 3) location of all monuments to be set at street intersections
______ 4) points of curvature and tangency of curved streets
______ 5) angles of all lots
______ 6) names of existing and proposed streets
______ 10.11f – wasting site noted on plat, as required in Article 17
______ 10.11g - A Statement that all lots contain a minimum of 1 ½ acres of contiguous non poorly drained soils
shall be placed on the final plan
______ 10.12 c – Fire protection and Emergency Access Plan: This Plan shall be submitted to show conformity
with the recommendations of the Candia Police and Fire Departments, and shall comply with
Article 19.14.
______ 12.04 - Requires that all new lot corners are to be marked with granite blocks and adjacent iron detection
pins, unless otherwise written waiver is granted by the Planning Board
______ * Also required is an approved local or state driveway permit for each new lot
CPB rev. 2/88 & 11/15/00
CANDIA PLANNING BOARD
INSTRUCTIONS FOR MAKING APPLICATION FOR FINAL PLAT APPROVAL – MAJOR SUBDIVISION
SCHEDULE E
1. Subdivision Grading and Drainage Plan: See Article 10.12a of the Subdivision Regulations for complete details.
2. Subdivision Street and Utility Plan: See Article 10.12b of the Subdivision Regulations for complete details.
3. Fire Protection and Emergency Access Plan: See Article 10.12c of the Subdivision Regulations for complete
details.
4. Request for Waiver or Relaxation of Requirements: as described in Article 3.01, shall be in writing and included
with the application.
5. Cost Estimate of all Improvements and a description of the surety or security to be offered to secure the
performance bond: See Article 10.12e of the Subdivision Regulations for complete details.
6. Other Plans: The Board may require such other information as it deems necessary to sense the purpose of these
regulations. See Article 10.12f of the Candia Subdivision regulations for complete details.
CANDIA PLANNING
FINAL MAJOR SUBDIVISION FEES
Note: This application shall conform in all respects to the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Candia and shall be
submitted to the Land Use Assistant with 4 blackline paper prints of the final plat 30 days prior to the public meeting
at which the application will be considered by the Board.
The charge for the newspaper notice and abutters charges must accompany the application. A filing fee (Mylar
recording fee), determined by the fee schedule, shall accompany this application.
FILING FEES:
A. Payment to the Town of Candia for the following application fees:
1. ABUTTERS NOTICES ($7.67 PER ABUTTER*) $
2. LEGAL NOTICE FEE $100.00
3. MYLAR RECORDING FEE $26.00 per sheet (22” x 34”) $
L-CHIP CHARGE $25.00 per set $25.00
Delivery fees may apply – check with the Land Use Office $
4. TOTAL FEES $
*Postal rates plus $1
CPB rev. 2/88
Town of Candia, NH Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
APPENDIX B
Design Specifications
INDEX SHEET
DMB
BMR
RL
NONE
FIGURE:
PLOT SCALE:
CAD FILE: 195113265
APPROVED BY:
CHECKED BY:
DRAWN BY: TOWN OF CANDIA, NEW HAMPSHIRE
DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS
REV. DATE:
REV. DATE:
SCALE:
DATE:
INDEX OF SHEETS
DETAIL NO. DESCRIPTION
INDEX SHEET
A TYPICAL CUL-DE-SAC DETAIL
B TYPICAL ROADWAY SECTION OPEN DRAINAGE
C PRECAST DRAIN MANHOLE DETAIL
D TYPE A FRAME AND GRATE DETAIL
E TORRENT FRAME AND GRATE DETAIL
F TYPE C CATCH BASIN DETAIL
G TYPICAL ELECTRIC AND COMMUNICATIONS TRENCH DETAIL
H TYPICAL STORM DRAIN TRENCH DETAIL
I TYPICAL WATER TRENCH DETAIL
J TYPICAL SEWER TRENCH DETAIL
K TYPICAL 30,000 GALLON FIRE CISTERN PLAN AND DETAILS SHEET 1
TYPICAL 30 000 GALLON FIRE CISTERN PLAN AND DETAILS SHEET 2
JULY 2017
TYPICAL CUL-DE-SAC DETAIL
DMB
BMR
RL
JULY 2017
FIGURE: A
PLOT SCALE:
CAD FILE: 195113265
APPROVED BY:
CHECKED BY:
DRAWN BY: TOWN OF CANDIA, NEW HAMPSHIRE
DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS
REV. DATE:
REV. DATE:
SCALE:
DATE:
1"=50'-0"
TYPICAL ROADWAY SECTION OPEN DRAINAGE
DMB
BMR
RL
JULY 2017
FIGURE: B
PLOT SCALE:
CAD FILE: 195113265
APPROVED BY:
CHECKED BY:
DRAWN BY: TOWN OF CANDIA, NEW HAMPSHIRE
DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS
REV. DATE:
REV. DATE:
SCALE:
DATE:
NONE
PRECAST DRAIN MANHOLE DETAIL
DMB
BMR
RL
JULY 2017
FIGURE: C
PLOT SCALE:
CAD FILE: 195113265
APPROVED BY:
CHECKED BY:
DRAWN BY: TOWN OF CANDIA, NEW HAMPSHIRE
DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS
REV. DATE:
REV. DATE:
SCALE:
DATE:
NONE
(NEENAH R-3570)
GRATE SECTION
GRATE SECTION
GRATE SECTION
TYPE A FRAME AND GRATE DETAIL
DMB
BMR
RL
JULY 2017
FIGURE: D
PLOT SCALE:
CAD FILE: 195113265
APPROVED BY:
CHECKED BY:
DRAWN BY: TOWN OF CANDIA, NEW HAMPSHIRE
DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS
REV. DATE:
REV. DATE:
SCALE:
DATE:
NONE
(NEENAH R-3588-LL)
GRATE SECTION 2 GRATE SECTION 3
PLAN
TORRENT FRAME AND GRATE DETAIL
DMB
BMR
RL
JULY 2017
FIGURE: A
PLOT SCALE:
CAD FILE: 195113265
APPROVED BY:
CHECKED BY:
DRAWN BY: TOWN OF CANDIA, NEW HAMPSHIRE
DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS
REV. DATE:
REV. DATE:
SCALE:
DATE:
NONE
TYPE C CATCH BASIN DETAIL
DMB
BMR
RL
JULY 2017
FIGURE: F
PLOT SCALE:
CAD FILE: 195113265
APPROVED BY:
CHECKED BY:
DRAWN BY: TOWN OF CANDIA, NEW HAMPSHIRE
DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS
REV. DATE:
REV. DATE:
SCALE:
DATE:
NONE
TYPICAL ELECTRIC AND COMMUNICATIONS
TRENCH DETAIL
DMB
BMR
RL
JULY 2017
FIGURE: G
PLOT SCALE:
CAD FILE: 195113265
APPROVED BY:
CHECKED BY:
DRAWN BY: TOWN OF CANDIA, NEW HAMPSHIRE
DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS
REV. DATE:
REV. DATE:
SCALE:
DATE:
NONE
TYPICAL STORM DRAIN TRENCH DETAIL
DMB
BMR
RL
JULY 2017
FIGURE: H
PLOT SCALE:
CAD FILE: 195113265
APPROVED BY:
CHECKED BY:
DRAWN BY: TOWN OF CANDIA, NEW HAMPSHIRE
DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS
REV. DATE:
REV. DATE:
SCALE:
DATE:
NONE
TYPICAL WATER TRENCH DETAIL
DMB
BMR
RL
JULY 2017
FIGURE: I
PLOT SCALE:
CAD FILE: 195113265
APPROVED BY:
CHECKED BY:
DRAWN BY: TOWN OF CANDIA, NEW HAMPSHIRE
DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS
REV. DATE:
REV. DATE:
SCALE:
DATE:
NONE
TYPICAL SEWER TRENCH DETAIL
DMB
BMR
RL
JULY 2017
FIGURE: J
PLOT SCALE:
CAD FILE: 195113265
APPROVED BY:
CHECKED BY:
DRAWN BY: TOWN OF CANDIA, NEW HAMPSHIRE
DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS
REV. DATE:
REV. DATE:
SCALE:
DATE:
NONE
30,000 GAL. FIRE CISTERN TANK - PLAN VIEW
30,000 GAL. FIRE CISTERN TANK - ELEVATION
30,000 GAL. FIRE CISTERN TANK - SECTION
DEADMAN - DETAIL PIPE SUPPORT - DETAIL
FIGURE:
PLOT SCALE:
CAD FILE: 195113265
APPROVED BY:
CHECKED BY:
DRAWN BY: TOWN OF CANDIA, NEW HAMPSHIRE
DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS
REV. DATE:
REV. DATE:
SCALE:
DATE:
TYPICAL 30,000 GALLON FIRE CISTERN PLAN
AND DETAILS - SHEET 1
DMB
BMR
RL
JULY 2017
K
NONE
SHEET 1 OF 2
FIRE CISTERN - SITE PLAN
TYPICAL LEVEL
INDICATOR DETAIL
TYPICAL 30 000 GALLON FIRE CISTERN PLAN
AND DETAILS - SHEET 2
DMB
BMR
RL
JULY 2017
FIGURE: ----
PLOT SCALE:
CAD FILE: 195113265
APPROVED BY:
CHECKED BY:
DRAWN BY: TOWN OF CANDIA, NEW HAMPSHIRE
DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS
REV. DATE:
REV. DATE:
SCALE:
DATE:
NONE
SHEET 2 OF 2
Town of Candia, NH Subdivison Regulations April 3, 2019
APPENDIX C
SCHEDULE OF FEES
A. Application for Subdivision - Minor $100.00
- Major $150.00
B. Lot Origination Fee $75.00
per lot/ dwelling unit
C. Engineering Review Fee $ at cost
D. Compliance Inspection Fee $ at cost
E. Boundary Line Adjustment $50.00
F. Site Plan Review - Minor $75.00
- Major $150.00
G. Legal Notice (per hearing) $100.00
H. Abutters (include owner and agent) $7.80*
* Or Current rates established by the US Postal Service
I. Driveway Permit $25.00
J. Gravel Pit Permit $100.00
K. Mylar Recording Fees: (22” x 34” sheet) $45.00 plus $26.00 per sheet
L-Chip Charge (6/2008 new fee) $25.00
Delivery to Registry Charge add $20.00
L. Fire Dept. Inspection Fee
For Major Subdivisions $50.00
Rev. 4/3/2019

1
ZONING ORDINANCE AND MAP
FOR CANDIA, NH
2019 REVISION
2
ARTICLE I: TITLE, PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION: --------------------------------------------------------------6
Preamble: ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------6
Section 1.01: Short Title: ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------6
Section 1.02: Purpose: ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------6
Section 1.03: Interpretation:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------6
ARTICLE II: GENERAL PROVISIONS: --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------8
Section 2.01: Required Conformance with Regulations: --------------------------------------------------------------------------8
Section 2.02: Non-conforming Uses and Structures: -------------------------------------------------------------------------------8
Section 2.03: Visibility at Intersections: ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------8
Section 2.04: Driveways: ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------8
Section 2.05: Buildings on 1 lot: ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------8
Section 2.06: Temporary Use of Manufactured Housing: -------------------------------------------------------------------------9
Section 2.07: Temporary Use of an Unfinished Structure: ------------------------------------------------------------------------9
Section 2.08: Lots Recorded Prior to the Adoption of this Ordinance: ----------------------------------------------------------9
Section 2.09: Contiguous or Attached Property: ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------9
Section 2.10: Impact Fee Ordinance: -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------9
ARTICLE III: DEFINITIONS: --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------10
ARTICLE IV: ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS: ----------------------------------------------------------------------14
Section 4.01: Division of Districts: --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------14
Section 4.02: Zoning Maps: ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------14
Section 4.03: Zoning Districts: ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 14
See Article XI: Groundwater protection for authority, purpose, definitions, groundwater protection district,
applicability, performance standards, permitted uses, prohibited uses, conditional uses, existing non-conforming
uses, exemptions, relationship between State and Local regulations, maintenance and inspection, enforcement
procedures and penalties, savings clause and effective date: ---------------------------------------------------------------- 15
Section 4.04: Interpretation of District Boundaries: ------------------------------------------------------------------------------15
ARTICLE V: USE REGULATIONS: -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------16
Section 5.01: Use Regulations: ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------16
Section 5.02: Table of Use Regulations: ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 17
Section 5.03: Accessory Uses: -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------21
Section 5.04: Conditional Use Permit:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------21
Section 5.05: Conditional Use Permit Review Criteria: ------------------------------------------------------------------------- 22
Section 5.06: Conditional Use Permit Standards: --------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 23
ARTICLE VI: DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS: ----------------------------------------------------------------------- 26
Section 6.01: Areas Included in Table of Dimensional Requirements: --------------------------------------------------------26
Section 6.02: Table of Dimensional Requirements -Min. Setbacks & Dimensions, Max. Heights allowed: -------------26
Section 6.03: Floor Area: -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------26
3
ARTICLE VII: MANUFACTURED HOUSING, MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISIONS & PARKS: -----------------27
Section 7.01: General Provisions for Manufactured Housing: -------------------------------------------------------------------27
Section 7.02: Mobile Home Subdivision & Mobile Home Parks: ---------------------------------------------------------------27
ARTICLE VIII: SIGN REGULATIONS: ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------30
Section 8.01: Sign Permits: ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------30
Section 8.02: Signs not advertising Use of Lot on which located: ----------------------------------------------------------------30
Section 8.03: Temporary Signs: -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------30
Section 8.04: Flashing or Animated Signs: -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------30
Section 8.05: Size Restrictions -Residential District: -------------------------------------------------------------------------------30
Section 8.06: Size Restrictions -Commercial, Light Industrial District: --------------------------------------------------------- 30
Section 8.07: Signs with Legal Non-Conforming Use: -----------------------------------------------------------------------------30
Section 8.08: Government Exception: ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 30
Section 8.09: Integration of Multiple Signs on a Free-Standing Structure: ------------------------------------------------------30
ARTICLE IX: OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS: -------------------------------------------------------------31
Section 9.01: Parking Requirements: -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------31
Section 9.02: Location Requirements: ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------31
Section 9.03: Commercial & Light Industrial: ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------31
Section 9.04: Off-Street Loading Parking: -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------31
Section 9.05: Lighting Restrictions: ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------31
Section 9.06: Schedule of Required Off-Street Parking Spaces: -------------------------------------------------------------------31
ARTICLE X: WETLANDS PROTECTION: -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------32
Section 10.01: Purpose and Intent: ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------32
Section 10.02: Definitions: --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------32
Section 10.03: District Boundaries: ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------33
Section 10.04: Relation to Other District: ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------33
Section 10.05: Permitted Uses: ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------33
Section 10.06: Buffer Provisions: ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------34
Section 10.07: Filled and Pre-Existing Uses -Non-Residential: ------------------------------------------------------------------34
Section 10.08: Exemption for Residential Structures: ------------------------------------------------------------------------------34
Section 10.09: Conditional Uses: ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------35
Section 10.10: Exceptions: -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------35
Section 10.11: Other Provisions: -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------36
ARTICLE XI: GROUNDWATER PROTECTION: --------------------------------------------------------------------------36
Section 11.01: Authority: --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------36
Section 11.02: Purpose: ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------36
Section 11.03: Definitions: -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------36
4
Section 11.04: Groundwater Protection District: ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------37
Section 11.05: Applicability: -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------37
Section 11.06: Performance Standards: -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------37
Section 11.07: Permitted Uses: -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------37
Section 11.08: Prohibited Uses: -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------38
Section 11.09: Conditional Uses: ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------38
Section 11.10: Existing Non-Conforming Uses: ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------38
Section 11.11: Exemptions: -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------39
Section 11.12: Relationship Between State & Local Requirements: --------------------------------------------------------------39
Section 11.13: Maintenance and Inspection: -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------39
Section 11.14: Enforcement Procedures and Penalties: ----------------------------------------------------------------------------39
Section 11.15: Saving Clause: ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------39
Section 11.16: Effective Date: ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------39
ARTICLE XII: TELECOMMINICATIONS/PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES: -----------------40
Section 12.01: Purpose and Intent: ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------40
Section 12.02: Applicability: ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------40
Section 12.03: Definitions: -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------40
Section 12.04: District Regulations: --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------42
Section 12.05: Severability: ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------47
Section 12.06: Administration and Enforcement: -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------47
ARTICLE XIII: LAND USE REGULATION: ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------47
Section 13.01: Purpose: ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------47
Section 13.02: Building Year: --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------47
Section 13.03: Regulation: -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------47
ARTICLE XIV: BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT: --------------------------------------------------------------------------------48
Section 14.01: Authority: --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------48
Section 14.02: Powers: ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------48
Section 14.03: ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------48
Section 14.04: ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------48
Section 14.05: ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------48
Section 14.06: ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------48
ARTICLE XV: SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES: ------------------------------------------------------------------------------49
Section 15.01: Authorized Uses: -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------49
Section 15.02: Special Exception Standards: --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------49
Section 15.03: Special Exception Conditions: --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------49
Section 15.04: Specific Special Exception Uses: -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------49
5
Square footage of dwelling shall not exceed square footage of commercial use: -----------------------------------------51
ARTICLE XVI: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT: ---------------------------------------------------------51
Section 16.01: --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------51
Section 16.02: Building Permits and Certificates of Occupancy Required: ---------------------------------------------------51
Section 16.03: Planning Board Review: --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------52
Section 16.04: Violations and Penalties: -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------54
Section 16.05: Amendments: ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------55
Section 16.06: Validity: ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------55
Section 16.07: Conflict with other Laws: -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------55
Section 16.08 Repealed: ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------55
Section 16.09: Effective Date: --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------55
6
ARTICLE I: TITLE, PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION
Preamble
Be it ordained, by Town Meeting of the Town of Candia, pursuant to Chapters 672 - 677, Revised Statutes
Annotated of New Hampshire, as amended, the following Ordinance is hereby enacted:
An Ordinance regulating and restricting the height, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures,
the size of yards, and other open spaces, the density of populations and the location and use of buildings,
structures and land for trade, industry, residence or other purpose, and for any or all of said purposes dividing
the town into districts.
Section 1.01: Short Title
The Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the “Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Candia, New
Hampshire” referred to herein as “this Ordinance”.
Section 1.02: Purpose
• This Ordinance is designed in accordance with a master plan for the following purposes:
• To provide for the orderly and planned growth of our town;
• To lessen congestion in the streets;
• To secure safety from fires, panic and other dangers;
• To promote health and the general welfare;
• To provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land;
• To avoid undue concentration of population;
• To facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, park and other public
requirements;
• To prevent pollution of air and water; to conserve and protect land values and amenities, to encourage
existing and proposed agricultural activities, recognizing that agricultural activities are a beneficial and
worthwhile feature of Candia’s landscape and shall not be unreasonably limited by use of planning and
zoning powers or the unreasonable interpretation of such powers;
• To provide architectural standards for development or renovation of commercial, industrial, and
institutional structures that ensure an esthetically pleasing structure that compliments the traditional New
England heritage of Candia.
Section 1.03: Interpretation
In interpreting and applying this Ordinance, its provisions shall be held to the minimum requirements adopted
for the purposes set forth above.
7
Left Blank Intentionally
8
ARTICLE II: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 2.01: Required Conformance with Regulations:
No building or other structure shall be constructed or altered, nor land used except in conformity with this Ordinance
unless such building or structure or use is a valid non-conforming use as defined in this Ordinance.
Section 2.02: Non-Conforming Uses and Structures:
A. Right to Continue:
Any legal use or structure or use of a structure or part thereof that existed on the effective date of this Ordinance or any
amendments thereto, but which would not be permitted under the provisions herein may continue as a legal nonconforming
use.
B. Change and Expansion:
No legal non-conforming use shall be changed to another non-conforming use and no non- conforming use shall be
enlarged or extended.
C. Destroyed:
Any legal non-conforming use and/or structure that is damaged or destroyed by catastrophe may be rebuilt to its former
extent of non-conformance. Reconstruction must begin within 2 years.
D. Abandonment:
Any legal non-conforming use or structure that is discontinued or abandoned for a period of one year or more cannot be
resumed but can be replaced by a conforming use.
E. Use of Non-conforming Lot:
An existing non-conforming lot as defined by this Ordinance in Article III: Definitions may be used for the purposes
provided in the District in which the property is located provided:
1. That the lot is not adjacent or contiguous to other property in the same ownership;
2. That the lot has at least 60' frontage as defined in Article III: Definitions of this Ordinance, as shown on a survey
done by a New Hampshire licensed land surveyor and that the applicant has obtained a driveway permit;
3. That any proposed structure meets current yard and wetland setback requirements for the District in which it is
located; and;
4. That the lot receives approval from the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services by the Water
Supply and Pollution Control of the Department of Environmental Services for a septic disposal system disposal
system capable of supporting the proposed use. Use of septic holding tanks shall not be considered a septic
disposal system for the purposes of this section as provided for under the New Hampshire Code of Administrative
Rules, ENV-WS 1 - ‘Subdivision and Individual Sewage Disposal System Design Rules”;
5. A non-conforming lot may only be enlarged to become a conforming lot.
Section 2.03: Visibility at Intersections:
In any District, no fence, planting, building, or structure shall be permitted that would substantially obstruct visibility at
exits or entrances to a public street and the intersection of any two travel ways.
Section 2.04: Driveways:
The entrance of driveways and other accesses to the public way shall be done in accordance with RSA 236:13 and shall be
inspected by the Road Agent. Access to the public way shall be on the bound of the lot used for “lot width and frontage”
(6:02). Access to public way from another bound other than that used for frontage may be allowed by the Planning Board
only upon a showing of public safety concern.
Section 2.05: Buildings on One Lot:
There shall be only one residential building on a lot unless otherwise approved under Innovative Land Use Controls. See
Section 15.04 E.
9
Section 2.06: Temporary Use of Manufactured Housing:
The Building Inspector may issue a temporary Certificate of Occupancy for use of manufactured housing for
dwelling or office use while rebuilding after an unforeseen disaster, such as fire. The temporary use shall be for
no more than six (6) months but may be renewed for up to six (6) months as Long as construction is actively
pursued. For temporary use while building a new dwelling application shall be made to the Board of
Adjustment requesting a Special Exception. To be granted a Special Exception the applicant must have an
approved driveway permit and building permit for the new structure and on-site water and septage disposal
facilities to service the manufactured home. The Board of Adjustment may require other reasonable conditions
and safeguards in order to minimize any injurious effect upon the neighborhood to protect contiguous property
and to ensure that the use will be a temporary expedient. The temporary Certificate of Occupancy, to be issued
by the Building Inspector, shall be for a period to be determined by the Board of Adjustment but shall not
exceed six (6) months. On request to the Building Inspector and with good cause shown, the temporary use may
be extended for up to six (6) more months.
Section 2.07: Temporary Use of an Unfinished Structure:
The Building Inspector may issue a temporary Certificate of Occupancy for the use of an unfinished structure
for single family residential purposes only. The temporary use may be for a period of no more than 6 months
but may be renewed once for up to 6 months provided construction is actively pursued subject to the following
restriction to the area being occupied:
1. Water and septage facilities are installed and approved;
2. Electrical and plumbing facilities are installed and approved; and
3. All other safety and health standards are addressed.
Section 2.08: Lots Recorded Prior to the Adoption of This Ordinance:
Refer to section 2:02 E.
Section 2.09: Contiguous or Attached Property:
No lots of record adjacent or contiguous to other lots of record in the same ownership shall be required to be
combined or attached for any purpose except that of the owner/s of said properties.
Section 2.10: Impact Fee Ordinance:
See Section 145.03:C: C
10
ARTICLE III: DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Ordinance, words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number includes the
plural, and the plural includes the singular. The word "lot" shall include "plat" or "parcel". The word "structure" shall
include the word "building", where the context requires. The word "used" shall include "arranged, designed, rented,
leased, intended to be used, and occupied". The word "shall" is mandatory; and the word "may" is permissive. Certain
other terms or words shall be interpreted as follows:
Accessory Dwelling Unit: A second dwelling unit attached which is permitted by a land use control regulation to be
located on the same lot, plat, site or other division of land as the principal dwelling unit. RSA 674.21. (2019)
Agriculture: Shall be that use delegated by RSA 259:3: "The words "agriculture" and "farming" shall mean all operations
of a farm such as the cultivation, conserving, and tillage of the soil, dairying, greenhouse operations, the production,
cultivation, growing and harvesting of any agricultural, floricultural, sod or horticultural commodities, the raising of
livestock, bees, fur-bearing animals, fresh water fish or poultry, or any practices on the farm as an incident to or in
conjunction with such farming operation, but no necessarily restricted to, the following, preparation for market, delivery
to storage or to market, or to carriers for transportation to market, of any products or materials from the farm; the
transportation to the farm of supplies and materials; the transportation of farm workers; forestry or lumbering operation,
the marketing or selling at wholesale or retail or in any other manner any products from the farm and of other supplies that
do not exceed in average yearly dollar volume the value of products from such farm.
Arterial Street: Reference in this ordinance to arterial street(s) shall mean: Route 27 from the Hooksett town line to the
Raymond town line; Route 43 (Deerfield Road) from the intersection of Business Route 101 to the Deerfield town line;
Business Route 101 from the intersection of Brown Road to the intersection of Route 27.
Board of Adjustment: The Zoning Board of Adjustment of the Town of Candia.
Buildable: As applied to land does not include very poorly drained soils, or standing water, steep slopes over 25%, or any
part of the lot considered not buildable.
Buildable Lot: A lot, intended for placement of a dwelling which meets the acreage requirements for the district in which
it is located, and which is capable of providing adequate septage and water supply systems for the intended use.
Building: Any independent structure having a roof with structural supports for the shelter or enclosure of persons,
animals, or property.
Building, Accessory: A building subordinate to and located on the same lot with a main building, the use of which is
clearly incidental to that of the main building, such as a detached garage or barn.
Cellar: An area partly underground having more than one half of its clear ceiling height below the average finished grade
level at the foundation.
Collector Street: Reference in this ordinance to collector street(s) shall mean those streets which carry traffic directly to
arterial streets, including the principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within such
a development.
Common Area: Common area shall be any parcel of land and/or water area set aside under a residential cluster
subdivision plan which is not designated for individual ownership. The common area includes areas designated as open
space. Common areas may contain accessory structures for education, recreation, social or other uses by the owners of the
dwelling units within the residential cluster subdivision.
Condominium: Real property and any interests therein, lawfully submitted through the recordation of condominium
instrument pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 356-B New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated. No project shall be
deemed a condominium unless the undivided interests in the common area(s) [all portions of the condominium other than
the units are vested in the unit owners].
11
Condominium Unit: A dwelling unit together with the undivided interest in the common area pertaining to that unit.
Day Care Center: A commercial or non-profit, non-resident center providing care for more than six (6) children. Such a
center may include teachers and staff.
Dwelling: A building or portion thereof containing one or more dwelling units.
Dwelling, Multi-Family: A building or portion thereof containing 3 or more dwelling units.
Dwelling, Single Family Attached, Duplex: A single family dwelling superimposed or attached by a common wall or
other means to one other single-family dwelling.
Dwelling, Single Family Detached: A structure designed for and occupied by not more than one family and which is not
attached to any other dwelling unit by any means.
Dwelling Unit: A building or portion thereof providing complete living, cooking, sanitary, and sleeping facilities.
Elderly Housing: Housing intended for, and 100 percent of the dwelling units are occupied solely by, persons 55 years of
age or older, featuring small single-family detached or attached dwelling units and apartments. In no event shall more than
four (4) occupants live in any dwelling unit of an elderly housing development.
Essential Services: The erection, construction or major alteration by public or private utilities or municipal or other
governmental agencies of underground or overhead gas, electrical, sewer, steam or water transmission or distribution
systems, collection communication, supply or disposal systems; including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes
conduits, cables and similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith, and including buildings reasonably
necessary for the furnishing of adequate service or for the public health, safety or general welfare. For the purpose of this
Ordinance, essential services shall not include the replacement of facilities (other than buildings) or minor relocation or
minor additions such as streetlights, hydrants, wires, alarm boxes, communications boxes, pipes.
Family: One or more persons living as a single house-keeping unit.
Family Day Care Home: A residence occupied by a day care provider in which a maximum of six (6) children are cared
for on a full-time basis. The maximum includes any children under six (6) years old who live in the home and any
children related to the provider who are received for childcare.
Floor Area: The internal heated living space area of a single dwelling unit. It shall not include any garage, shed, porch or
similar structure or accessory use.
Frontage: The contiguous distance along the lot line dividing a lot from either a) a public highway, excepting limited
access highways as defined by RSA 230:44 and Class VI highways; or b) a road shown on an approved and recorded
subdivision plan.
Gasoline Station: Building and premises where gasoline, oil, grease, batteries, tires, automobile accessories and
incidentals are sold at retail and where minor servicing and repairs take place. Major mechanical and body work,
straightening condition, or other work involving noise, glare, fumes, or smoke are not included in this definition.
Height: The vertical distance between the average finished grade at the base of a building or structure and the highest
point of the roof of a building or structure.
Junkyard: As defined in RSA 236:112.
Lot: A tract of land, in the same ownership throughout, as described by metes and bounds on a deed or plat properly
registered with the Rockingham County Registrar of Deeds. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed as requiring the
selectmen to, or preventing the selectmen from, consolidating lots on the Candia, New Hampshire tax maps for the
purpose of assessment or taxation.
12
Lot, Corner: A lot with frontage on two or more streets at their intersection, where the interior angle of the intersection is
less than one hundred and thirty-five (135) degrees.
Lot Area: The area in square feet or acres enclosed by the lot lines of a single lot.
Lot Depth: The average distance from the front lot line to the rear lot line.
Lot Width: The average distance from between the side lot lines at right angles to the depth.
Lot Line, Rear: The lot line most distant from the front lot line, except that in the case of a corner lot, the owner shall
have the option of choosing which of the lot lines shall be the rear lot line.
Major Recreational Equipment: Boat and boat trailers, travel trailers, pick-up campers or coaches, motorized dwelling,
tent trailers, and similar devices.
Manufactured Housing: The term manufactured housing shall mean "any structure transportable in one or more sections
which, in the traveling mode is 8 body feet or more in width and 40 body feet or more in length or when erected on site, is
320 square feet or more, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to required utilities, which include plumbing, heating and electrical systems
contained therein, excluding pre-site built housing as defined herein."
Manufactured Housing Subdivision: Any subdivision created for the placement of manufactured housing on
individually owned lots.
Manufactured Housing Parks: A tract of land consisting of not less than 16 acres used to accommodate two (2) or more
occupied manufactured homes each of which shall have its own lot space within the tract for which a rental fee is charged
for such accommodation. The term "Manufactured Housing Park" shall not be construed to include a tract of land
whereupon unoccupied manufactured homes are parked for display and sale as a commercial business. Travel trailers as
defined in this Ordinance shall not be maintained as dwelling units within approved manufactured housing parks.
Master Plan: A document prepared and/or adopted by the Planning Board to guide the long-range development of the
Town.
Non-Conforming Lot: A lot of record at the time this Ordinance becomes effective, but which does not conform with the
regulations for the district in which it is located.
Non-Conforming Use, Valid: A use of land or a structure lawfully existing at the effective date of this Ordinance or any
subsequent amendment thereto that is not in conformity with the current provisions of this Ordinance.
Open Space: Land required to be permanently left in its natural state. Acceptable conservation practices when used to
maintain the natural qualities of this land are permitted ana encouraged.
Parking Spaces: An off-street space, whether inside or outside of a structure, to be used primarily as parking area for a
vehicle.
Planning Board: The Planning Board of the Town of Candia.
Pre-Site Built Housing: Any structure designed primarily for residential occupancy which is wholly or in substantial part
made, fabricated, formed or assembled in off-site manufacturing facilities in conformance with HUD minimum property
standards and local building codes, for installation or assembly and installation, on the building site. Pre-site built housing
shall not include manufactured housing as defined herein.
Set-Back: A line beyond which the foundation wall and/or any covered porch or other portion of a building shall not
project.
Sign: A structure, device or inscription that is arranged, intended, designed or used as an advertisement, announcement, or
direction, but not including those structures, devices, or inscriptions erected and maintained by any public agency in
exercising its duties.
13
Sign, Area of: The entire surface area of a sign within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of
writing representation, emblem or figure but excluding the supports on which the sign is placed. The area of one side of a
double-faced sign shall be regarded as the total area of the sign.
Special Exception Use: A use which may be permitted in certain locations within certain specified districts by the Board
of Adjustment in accordance with Articles XII and XIII of this Ordinance. Such uses shall be construed to be conforming
uses under this Ordinance.
Special Use Permit: A permit issued by the Planning Board for development under Innovative Land Use Controls.
Story: That portion of a building included between the floor and floor or roof next above. A half-story is a partial story
under a sloping roof, the wall plates of which on two exterior walls are not more than two (2) feet above the floor of such
partial story.
Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which demands its permanent location on the land, except minor
installations such as fences, mailboxes, flagpoles, portable screen houses and the "like".
Subdivision: In accordance with Chapter 672:14 New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated, to mean the division of a
lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, plats, sites, or other divisions of land for the purpose whether immediate
or future, of sale, rent, lease, condominium conveyance or building development. It includes re-subdivision and, when
appropriate to the context, relates to process of subdividing or to the land or territory subdivided. The division of a parcel
of land held in common and subsequently divided into parts among the several owners shall be deemed a subdivision.
Travel Trailer: A vehicular, portable structure designed to be used for temporary recreational housing.
Use: The principal purpose for which a lot or the principal building thereon is designed, occupied, maintained, or intended
to be used.
Use, Change or Expansion of Use of a Site: Any multifamily or nonresidential use which substantially differs from the
previous use of a building or land. Any activity which in the opinion of the Building Inspector, constitutes a change or
expansion of the use of a site may be subject to Planning Board approval under the Candia Site Plan Review Regulations.
Use, Accessory: A use of land, building, or portion thereof, normally incidental to the permitted principal use of the
premises.
Yard, Front: Area is defined as the portion of the lot facing the Street or Road where the lot frontage is located.
14
ARTICLE IV: ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
Section 4.01: Division into Districts:
The Town of Candia, New Hampshire, is hereby divided into six (6) Zoning Districts to be designated as follows:
Full Name Short Name
Residential R
Commercial C
Light Industrial 1 LI-1
Light Industrial 2 LI-2
Mixed Use MX
Wetlands Conservation W
Groundwater Protection GPD
The restrictions and regulations especially applicable to each of the above-mentioned Districts are shown in Article V and
VI, which use the short name for each District and Article X (Wetlands Conservation). General restrictions and
regulations applicable to all Districts are included throughout this Ordinance.
Section 4.02: Zoning Maps:
The location and boundaries of the Districts are as shown on "The Zoning Map of the Town of Candia, New Hampshire"
dated January 2006 as prepared by the Southern New Hampshire Planning Commission and "The Town of Candia
Wetlands Conservation District Map" dated December 2005 as prepared by the Southern New Hampshire Planning
Commission. Both the Zoning Map and the Wetlands Conservation District Map are a part of this Ordinance.
The Zoning Map and Wetlands Conservation District Map shall be kept on file with the Office of the Town Clerk. For
purposes of identification, the date of adoption and the signature of the Planning Board Chair shall be placed on both
maps. The Planning Board shall be responsible for maintaining and updating the maps as amended. All amendments shall
be so noted and dated on each map.
Section 4.03: Zoning Districts:
A. Zone R - Residential District
The Residential District is designed for the protection of areas that have been and are being developed
predominantly for single-family detached dwellings.
B. Zone C - Commercial District:
The purpose of the Commercial District is to provide a centralized area for the provision of shopping facilities,
offices, banking and other commercial and retail establishments where road systems can accommodate high
traffic volumes. The Commercial district shall provide for convenient access, adequate parking and lighting, and
good design to promote public safety. All residential dwellings that existed prior to the effective date and
establishment of this District may continue as legal permitted uses in the District subject to the requirements of
Section 2.02 of this Ordinance.
A vegetative buffer of trees and shrubs 100 feet wide shall be maintained along the eastern boundary of the
Commercial District to separate commercial buildings from existing residential dwellings. A vegetative buffer of
trees and shrubs 150 feet wide shall be maintained within the Commercial District to protect the adjacent Branch
River.
C. Zone L1 - Light Industrial:
The purpose of this district is to provide a location for the establishment of light manufacturing and related
small-scale light service industries that will not conflict with the uses of other areas. All residential dwellings that
existed prior to the effective date and establishment of this District may continue as legal permitted uses in the
District subject to the requirements of Section 2.02 of this Ordinance.
A vegetative buffer of trees and shrubs 150 feet wide shall be maintained within the Ll-Light Industrial District
to protect the adjacent Branch River.
15
D. Zone L2 - Light Industrial:
The purpose of this district is to foster the diversification of the Town’s economic base by encouraging a variety
of light manufacturing uses and light industries with good access to transportation facilities, thereby improving
employment opportunities within the community and making a valuable contribution to the Town’s tax base. All
residential dwellings that existed prior to the effective date and establishment of this District may continue as
legal permitted uses in the District subject to the requirements of Section 2.02 of this Ordinance.
A vegetative buffer of trees and shrubs 100 feet wide shall be maintained along the boundary of the district to
separate light industrial use from existing residential dwellings.
E. Zone MX - Mixed Use:
The purpose of this district is to provide for a greater variety and mixture of land uses, the blending of which is
not otherwise possible in the Town’s other zoning districts. The intent is to provide for a mixture of land uses
that can be designed and arranged in an efficient manner in keeping with the goal of making Candia an attractive
town. Residential and commercial uses may combine within a principal structure on a lot within this district. All
pre-existing uses in existence prior to the adoption of this ordinance shall be allowed to continue as a permitted
use in this district even if they are not denoted as “Permitted By Right” in Section 5.02: Table of Use
Regulations.
F. Zone W - Wetlands Conservation:
See Article X: Wetlands Protection for purpose and intent, definitions, district boundaries, relation to other
districts, permitted uses, buffer provisions, filled and pre-existing uses - non- residential, exemption for
residential structures, conditional uses and exceptions.
G. Zone GPP- Groundwater Protection:
See Article XI: Groundwater protection for authority, purpose, definitions, groundwater protection district,
applicability, performance standards, permitted uses, prohibited uses, conditional uses, existing non-conforming
uses, exemptions, relationship between State and Local regulations, maintenance and inspection, enforcement
procedures and penalties, savings clause and effective date.
Section 4.04 Interpretation of District Boundaries:
Where any uncertainty exists with respect to the boundary of any District as shown on the Zoning Map, the following
rules shall apply:
A. Where a boundary is indicated as a highway, street, alley, railroad, watercourse, or Town boundary, it shall be
construed to be the center line thereof for such District Boundary.
B. Where a boundary is indicated as approximately parallel to a highway, street, alley, railroad, watercourse, or
Town boundary, it shall be construed as parallel thereto and at such distance from the center line thereof as shown
on the Zoning Map.
C. If no dimension is given on the Zoning Map, the location of any boundary shall be determined by use of the scale
shown on the Zoning Map.
D. Where a boundary coincides within 10 feet or less with a lot line, the boundary shall be construed to be the lot
line.
E. Where a boundary divides a lot of record, district regulations governing either portion of the severed lot may be
extended not more than 100 feet into the adjoining district.
F. All boundary questions not covered by A though E above shall be resolved by appeal to the Board of Adjustment
as provided in Section 14.02A.
16
ARTICLE V: USE REGULATIONS
Section 5.01: Use Regulations:
In any District, uses of land and buildings shall be permitted as indicated in Section 5.02, the Table of Use
Regulations which is part of this Ordinance, and as regulated below:
A. Sand, Gravel and Borrow Excavating Operations:
1. No excavation of earth shall be allowed in the R District or MX District except those uses
specifically allowed in RSA 155-E:2 and RSA 155E:2a.
2. An excavation A permit from the Planning Board shall be required for excavating operations in
the C, LI and L2 Districts. Said permit shall be subject to the permit process under RSA 155-E.
and the Town of Candia’s Earth Excavation Regulations, adopted in 1989, and as amended by
the Planning Board.
B. Junkyards:
No junkyard shall be located in the R, C, MX or LI Districts. A license to operate, establish or maintain
shall be obtained from the Board of Selectmen in the manner set forth in RSA 236:111-129.
C. Performance Requirements for Industrial Uses and Utilities:
Industrial uses and utilities permitted under Section 5.02 of this Ordinance shall be regulated such that
noise, vibrations, electro-magnetic transmission, odor, air pollution, and all other emissions shall not be
perceptible without instruments at the boundary of the District in which the use is permitted.
D. Parking, Storage, or use of Major Recreational Equipment:
No such equipment shall be parked or stored in the front yard area in the R district, nor shall not be used
for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes in any district within the Town of Candia. (2019)
E. Storage Trailers or Containers:
No storage trailers or containers will be allowed to be parked in front yard areas in the R District
(Front yard area is defined as the portion of the lot facing the Street or Road where lot frontage is
located).
17
Section 5.02: Table of Use Regulations:
In this table for each use and each District:
(P) Shall denote a use PERMITTED BY RIGHT
(S) Shall denote a use PERMITTED ONLY BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION granted by the Board of Adjustment
(C) Shall denote a use PERMITTED ONLY BY CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT granted by the Planning Board
(-) a dash shall denote a use that is EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED
Type of Land Use Zoning Districts
A. Residential: R C MX LI-1 LI-2
1. One-family dwelling P - P - -
2. Accessory Units, subject to provisions of 15:04E S - S - -
3. Two-family and multi-family dwellings subject to S - S - -
provisions of Section 15.04B
4. Dwelling in building used for commercial purposes - S P - -
subject to provisions of Section 15.04F
5. Boarding, rooming and short-term rental accommodations S P P - -
not to exceed 184 consecutive days subject to the provisions
of Section 15.02 (2019)
6. Home Occupation P - P - -
7. Home Offices P - P - -
8. Seasonal Home P - P - -
9. Residential Cluster Subdivision - - - - -
10. Manufactured Housing Subdivision P1 - - - -
11. Manufactured Housing Park P2 S - - -
12. Elderly Housing subject to provisions of C - C - -
Sections 5.04, 5.05, and 5.06
13. Home Shop (2019) S - S - -
P1 -Location of Manufactured Housing Subdivisions in the R District are designated as follows:
Tax Map: Lot #(s):
406 186
406 191
413 028
408 060 & 066
*Because of the lack of access on lot 66, these two parcels are designated as a single development unit. Any proposed
development of the two lots must therefore be within the context of an overall Master Development Plan, which may be phased.
P2 -Locations for Manufactured Housing Parks in the R District are designated as follows:
Tax Map: Lot #(s):
404 088
404 079
*This is the presently existing Manufactured Housing Park -Country Lane Manor, Rt. 27
18
Section 5.02: Table of Use Regulations:
Type of Land Use Zoning Districts
B. Commercial: R C MX LI-1 LI-2
(b-1) Farm produce stand provided that display of goods P P P - -
shall be located at least twenty (20) feet from any
street (right-of-way) line
(b-2) Tourist home, hotel and motel - P P P -
(b-3) Service establishments and retail stores serving local S P P S P
neighborhood needs including barber and beauty
shops, real estate office, drug stores and the sale of
groceries, baked goods and the like. Where permitted
as Special Exceptions in the R District the conditions
set forth in Sections 15.03 and 15.04A shall apply
(b-4) General service and retail establishments, supermarkets, - P P P P
laundromat, florist, the sale of appliances, electrical parts
and supplies, housewares, hardware, furniture, toys and
novelties, sporting goods, apparel, office supplies and
garden supplies
(b-5) Funeral home. Where permitted as Special Exception in S P P - -
the R District, the conditions set forth in Sections
15.03 and 15.04A shall apply
(b-6) Business and professional offices and banks. Where S P P - P
permitted as Special Exceptions in the R District, the
conditions set forth in Sections 15.03 and 15.04A shall
apply. Will now allow retail and professional offices,
banks, beauty and barber shops in the LI-2 zone
(b-7) Restaurant for consumption indoors at the premises, - P P P P
indoor commercial recreation such as bowling
(b-8) Drive-in restaurant and refreshment stand - P - P P
(b-9) Outdoor commercial recreation facility such as - P - P P
drive-in theatre, golf driving range and swim club
(b-10) Gasoline station - S - - P
(b-11) Car wash, establishment for the sales and service of - P - P P
automobiles, trucks, mobile homes, travel trailers, and
major recreational equipment, but excluding the repair
of heavy motorized equipment, or the dismantling and
storage of inoperative motor vehicles or other material
or equipment held only for discard
(b-12) Boatyard and marina for the construction, warehousing, - - - P P
and storage of boats
(b-13) Animal hospital or commercial kennel provided that such - P - P -
use shall not be within 50 feet of any dwelling and within
200 feet of any residential district and the kennel area shall
be completely enclosed within a wall or fence
(b-14) Sexually Oriented Business subject to provisions of Section 15:04D - S - - -
19
Section 5.02: Table of Use Regulations:
Type of Land Use Zoning Districts
C. Industrial and Transportation: R C MX LI-1 LI-2
(c-1) Manufacturing, assembly, processing, packaging, - - - - P
research and testing operations including the following
uses, provided that such operations shall be conducted
entirely within an enclosed building or structure
(c-1-a) Products developed from previously refined or similarly - - - P P
processed materials such as bone, ceramic, cloth, grass,
leather, metals, plastics, paper, rubber (except tires)
(c-1-b) Electrical and mechanical instruments and appliances, - - - P P
optical goods
(c-1-c) Cosmetics, toiletries, and pharmaceutical products - - - P P
(c-1-d) Administrative offices, data processing centers and S P P P P
laboratories for scientific and industrial research
including testing and product development. Where
permitted by Special Exceptions in the R District, the
conditions set forth in Section 15.04A shall apply
(c-2) Craftsman's or contractor's shop including a carpenter’s - P - P P
shop, welding shop, ornamental iron works electrical and
machine shop excavating and heavy equipment operation
(c-3) Open storage of lumber and building materials - P P P P
(c-4) Warehouse including self-storage facilities, bottling - P - P P
plant, establishment, and similar distribution center
(c-5) Planning mill, sawmill and similar uses - - - - P
(c-6) Metal working, but not reduction, smelting, and refining; - - - S P
manufacture and assembly of metal products but not
including heavy structural steel operation; paint manufacture
not employing a boiling or rendering process
(c-7) Storage for coal, fuel oil, bottled gas, and similar materials, - - - S P
provided that such use shall not be located nearer than
300 feet to any existing or permitted dwelling and that such
use snail be subject to any state or local laws relating to the
storage of such materials. Fuel storage tanks shall be
surrounded by a dyked area sufficient to contain stored fuels
20
Section 5.02: Table of Use Regulations:
Type of Land Use Zoning Districts
D. Communications and Utilities: R C MX LI-1 LI-2
(d-1) Essential Services S P P P P
(d-2) Radio or televisions tower, provided that any portion - P - P P
of the structure shall be at least 200 feet away from any
residential district
(d-3) Telecommunications/Personal Wireless Services Facilities S P S P P
E. Public and Institutional: R C MX LI-1 LI-2
(e-1) Church or other place of worship, parsonage - S P - -
(e-2) Cemetery S S - - -
(e-3) Hospital, nursing home - P P P P
(e-4) Golf course, country club, tennis club and the like P P - P P
(e-5) Social clubs of non-profit organizations - P P P P
(e-6) Public or private schools including recreational facilities S S S S -
connected therewith, but not including dormitories
(e-7) Library, museum and the like - P P P -
(e-8) Day Care Center - S P S -
F. Rural and Agricultural:
(f-1) Small scale part-time agricultural operations whether P P - - -
commercial or not, including the keeping of livestock
and poultry
(f-2) Large scale full-time agricultural operations including S S - P -
animal husbandry
(f-3) Growth and harvesting of forest products, tree nursery, P P P - -
orchards, and similar uses including the sale of produce
grown on the premises
(f-4) Commercial greenhouses S P P P P
(f-5) Farmers markets (non-residential use shall be subject S P P - -
to Site Plan Review approval under provisions
of Article 15.03)
21
Section 5.03: Accessory Uses:
The following accessory uses may be allowed subject to the requirements herein. All accessory uses require a Certificate of
Occupancy.
A. Home Occupation:
Customary home occupations such as barber and beauty shops, limited to one chair; dressmaking; photography; teaching; art
studio; home cooking; Justice of the Peace; Family Day Care Home; crafts; and the like, operated and staffed solely by a person
or persons resident on the premises and no more than one outside employee, are allowed in the R District provided such use is
not carried on in a detached accessory building and does not occupy more than one-third the area of the dwelling unit in which
it is located. The use shall not cause any additional vehicular traffic between the hours of 9:00p.m. and 6:00a.m.
B. Home Office:
Offices within a single-family detached dwelling for an office occupation of a resident therein shall be allowed provided that
not more than one person not resident on the premises shall be employed therein. The use must not cause any additional
vehicular traffic between the hours of 9:00p.m. and 6:00a.m. Such use shall not have an enclosed floor area in excess of 600
square feet and must conform to Section 9:06M regarding parking.
C. Home Shop:
Customary home shops for the repair of electrical appliances, clocks, firearms, furniture and the like may be allowed by Special
Exception subject to the following:
1. Use is clearly an accessory use.
2. Use does not change the character of the dwelling.
3. Use is carried out within the dwelling.
4. Use shall not utilize outdoor storage or display visible to surrounding properties.
5. Use employs not more than one person who is not resident in the dwelling.
6. Use does not cause undue nuisance to neighbors by reason of noise, dust, glare, traffic, vibration or other disruptive
influence.
7. Retail sale of new products shall not be considered a home shop.
8. Use does not cause any additional vehicular traffic between the hours of 9:00p.m. and 6:00a.m.
Section 5.04 Conditional Use Permit:
1. Authority -Conditional Use Permits may be granted by the Planning Board as authorized by RSA 674:21 II, Innovative
Land Use Controls for the uses identified in Section 5.02, Table of Use Regulations.
2. Conditions -In granting a Conditional Use Permit, the Planning Board may impose conditions to the extent the Board
concludes such conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the proposed use on adjoining properties,
and preserve the intent of the Board’s Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations as well as the Town of Candia’s Zoning
Ordinance and Master Plan.
3. Procedure -The Planning Board shall act upon the application for a Conditional Use Permit in accordance with the
submission and the procedural requirements of the Board’s Site Plan Regulations and the Board’s Subdivision
Regulations, as applicable.
4. Decisions -All applications for Conditional Use Permits must comply with the Town of Candia Zoning Ordinance
including the Planning Board’s Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations, as continuation of article v: use regulations
applicable. Possible decisions rendered by the Board include Approval, Approval with Conditions, or Denial. All
decisions shall be in writing and shall be based upon substantial evidence contained in the written record.
5. Standards Considered in Granting Conditional Use Permits -In the review of Conditional Use Permit applications,
the applicant and the Planning Board shall address all applicable Standards in the Board’s Site Plan and Subdivision
Regulations, including the Conditional Use Permit Review Criteria and Conditional Use Permit Standards as provided
in Sections 5.05 and 5.06 below.
6. Modification of Conditional Use Permits -All alterations or modifications of the plans shall be in accordance with
Section 18.05 of the Subdivision Regulations.
7. Fees -The Planning Board has established and from time to time may amend a schedule of fees. The Planning Board
shall not accept a site plan or subdivision application for a Conditional Use Permit, unless it includes the appropriate
fees as established by the Board’s formal fee schedule.
22
8. Special Investigative Studies -In the review of a Conditional Use Permit application, the Planning Board may also
assess the applicant reasonable fees to cover the Board’s administrative expenses and costs of special investigative
studies and the review of documents and other matters which may be required in the review of particular applications.
All fees shall be paid prior to final approval.
9. Performance Security -Prior to the granting of a Conditional Use Permit, the applicant shall execute and deliver a
performance security to the Board of Selectmen in accordance with Section IV: Standards for Subdivision
Construction, Article 18. Administrative Provisions, Section 18.04 Performance Bond.
10. Waivers -Compliance with the individual provisions of this ordinance shall constitute the conditions required for the
issuance of a Conditional Use Permit. Any provision of this ordinance may be waived, when, upon the application by
the applicant to the Planning Board, the Board shall determine in its sole discretion 1) that requiring compliance with
the particular provision for the granting of a Conditional Use Permit would create an unreasonable hardship and 2) that
the application would be consistent with the spirit and intent of this ordinance. Requests for waivers must be written
and the Planning Board must vote on each waiver request at a properly noticed public hearing.
Section 5.05: Conditional Use Permit Review Criteria:
Elderly Housing: A Conditional Use Permit for Elderly Housing may be issued by the Planning Board provided all of the
following review criteria are met:
1. The proposed development shall be consistent with the general purpose, goals and objectives of the Town of Candia
Master Plan.
2. The proposed development shall be consistent with all applicable provisions of the Town’s Zoning Ordinance and the
Planning Board’s Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations.
3. The proposed development shall be designed to provide facilities and services to meet the social or physical needs of
older persons such as services designed to assist residents with the maintenance and upkeep of buildings and grounds,
programs designed to provide a social and recreational life for residents, an accessible physical environment, access to
common lands and open space, access to public or private transportation services, if available, and other similar
services, facilities and considerations.
4. The design and site layout of the proposed development shall compliment and harmonize with the rural character of the
Town of Candia and shall maximize the privacy of dwelling units and preserve the natural character of the land.
5. The size and scale of the proposed development shall not have an adverse impact upon adjacent property nor diminish
the capacity and safety of adjacent streets in terms of, traffic conditions, utility placement, and other areas related to
public health, safety and general welfare.
6. No portion of the proposed development that is altered, cleared or within 50 feet of the outside face of a building or
edge of road shall be located within an identified floodplain or area designated as having a 1% annual chance of
flooding as provided on the FEMA flood insurance maps prepared for the Town of Candia.
23
Section 5.06 Conditional Use Permit Standards:
Elderly Housing: A Conditional Use Permit for Elderly Housing may be issued by the Planning Board provided all of the
following general standards are met:
1. Residency Restrictions -The applicant/developer shall provide deed restrictions, use limitations, covenants, or some
other legally enforceable instrument, which shall permanently restrict occupancy of all the elderly dwelling units to
persons who meet all applicable restrictions regarding age. All deed restrictions and instruments shall be subject to
review of Town Counsel and shall be recorded at the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds prior to issuance of the
Conditional Use Permit. The applicant/owner of the development shall also incorporate a written enforcement
mechanism satisfactory to the Planning Board and Town Counsel whereby on an annual basis, a written age-based
census of the existing Occupants shall be provided to the Board of Selectmen. Upon any change in ownership or
tenancy, the age of any new Occupants shall be given to the Board of Selectmen within thirty (30) days of
tenancy/occupancy changes.
2. Maximum Amount of Elderly Dwelling Units -The total number of dedicated elderly dwelling units in the Town of
Candia shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the total number of existing dwelling units in the Town at the time of
application acceptance by the Planning Board. The total number of existing dwelling units shall not include those
dwelling units already set aside for elderly housing. Elderly housing shall be those dwelling units which meet the
definition of elderly housing and are subject to permanent deed restrictions requiring the maintenance of the dwelling
unit for exclusive occupancy by individuals 55 years of age or older. The Planning Board will determine whether the
number of dwelling units in an elderly housing project exceeds the maximum percentage described above.
3. Architectural Design -Architectural renderings showing the exterior facades of all sides of the proposed buildings
shall be submitted and approved by the Planning Board. Building design and style shall be distinctly residential in
character, drawing on historical design elements that are consistent with rural New England architecture such as
pitched roofs, clapboard or shingle style siding, raised panel exterior doors and divided light windows.
4. Landscaping -All elderly housing developments shall be landscaped to enhance their compatibility with surrounding
areas, with emphasis given to the utilization of natural features wherever possible. A detailed landscape plan with a
planting schedule (identifying all landscaping quantities, sizes and locations) shall be prepared by a landscape architect
and submitted for approval by the Planning Board. This plan may include typical unit landscape plan options for
individual lots within the development. Prior to granting of a Conditional Use Permit, a performance security for all
landscaping shall be submitted to the Board of Selectmen in a form acceptable to Town Counsel in accordance with
Subdivision Regulations, Section IV: Standards for Subdivision Construction, Article 18. Administrative Provisions,
Section 18.04 Performance Bond.
5. Minimum Tract Area -The minimum tract area or parcel for an Elderly Housing development shall be at least twenty
(20) acres in size.
6. Frontage -All elderly housing developments shall maintain a minimum of two hundred (200) feet of frontage on an
Arterial Street as defined by the Town of Candia’s Zoning Ordinance.
7. a. Maximum Density for Multi-Family -The maximum number of dwelling units within an elderly housing
development containing 3 or more dwelling units per building shall be based on the distance the further extent of the
property is from the commonly known “Four Corners” intersection of NH 27 and NH 43 as follows:
One mile or less 1 dwelling unit per 1 buildable acre
Greater than one mile but less than two miles 1 dwelling unit per 2 buildable acres
Greater than two miles 1 dwelling unit per 3 buildable acres
Buildable shall be as defined in Article III, Definitions of this Zoning Ordinance.
b. Maximum Density for Detached Single-Family and Attached Duplex Single-Family Dwellings -The maximum
number of detached single-family dwellings or attached duplex single-family dwellings containing 1 or 2 dwelling
units per building shall be based on the distance the further extent of the property is from the commonly known “Four
Corners” intersection of NH 27 and NH 43 as follows:
One mile or less 1 dwelling unit per 1 buildable acre
Greater than one mile but less than two miles 1 dwelling unit per 2 buildable acres
Greater than two miles 1 dwelling unit per 3 buildable acres
Buildable shall be as defined in Article III, Definitions of this Zoning Ordinance.
24
8. Maximum Number of Units per Building -There shall be no more than six dwelling units per structure.
9. Minimum Lot Frontage -In the case of Elderly Housing not under a condominium form of ownership, minimum lot
frontage shall be 100 feet
10. Minimum Setbacks -Minimum front, side and rear setbacks for buildings, internal roads, and parking lots from all
external property lines shall be fifty (50) feet.
11. Lot Coverage -Lot coverage, including roofs, roadways, sidewalks and parking areas shall not exceed 50% of the total
lot area.
12. Maximum Number of Bedrooms -No dwelling unit shall contain more than two (2) bedrooms.
13. Minimum Dwelling Unit Size -Each dwelling unit shall contain at least eight hundred (800) square feet of living
space.
14. Maximum Building Height -All buildings shall be single story above grade in height.
15. Minimum Building Separation -A minimum horizontal separation of one hundred (100) feet shall be maintained
between all multi-family buildings.
16. Buffer -A fifty (50) foot wide no cut buffer zone consisting in whole or in part of existing natural vegetation shall be
provided and maintained along all sides of the proposed development abutting adjoining properties.
17. Parking -Adequate on-site space shall be provided to allow one- and one-half off-street parking spaces for each
dwelling unit.
18. Roads. Access Drives, Parking Lots and Walkways -All roads, access drives, parking lots and walkways shall be
built according to Town standards and maintained by the Homeowners’ Association (as described in Section 5.06 28.).
All parking areas, including driveways, shall be paved in accordance with Town regulations. Roads are encouraged to
be curvilinear in design and looped as opposed to being dead ended at a cul-de-sac.
19. Pedestrian Access -Provisions for pedestrian access (including amenities such as benches, street and path lighting)
shall be provided within the development and, to the extent possible, to off-site community facilities.
20. Lighting -Lighting shall be provided along access roads, parking areas, and walking paths that shall be appropriately
sized and shielded for the residents of the development.
21. Signage -All elderly housing developments shall comply in all respects with Article VIII: Sign Regulations of the
Town’s Zoning Ordinance.
22. Community Facility -One common community facility to be used for Homeowners’ Association meetings or general
community activities shall be provided as part of one of the housing structures or as a stand-alone building.
23. Drainage and Snow Removal -Adequate provisions for drainage and snow removal shall be provided in accordance
with Town standards.
24. Water Supply and Wastewater Disposal -The water supply and wastewater disposal systems, serving the residential
dwelling units shall be owned, operated and maintained by a Homeowners’ Association (as described in Section 5.06
28.). All residential dwelling units shall be sprinkled and shall be installed with a monitored fire alarm system. The
applicant shall prove that adequate water supply and water capacity is available prior to Planning Board approval of an
Elderly Housing development. Water supply and wastewater disposal systems shall be approved by the New
Hampshire Department of Environmental Services.
25. Building Codes -All dwelling units shall be built in accordance with applicable federal, state and local codes. Within
any elderly housing development, a minimum of ten (10) percent of the dwelling units shall be compliant with current
edition of International Building Code Type B dwelling.
25
26. Common Land/Open Space -Common land/open space shall be set aside and covenanted to be maintained
permanently as open space. The required amount of open space for all elderly housing developments shall be calculated
as no less than forty (40%) of the gross area of development. In calculating open space, the following shall not be
included: public rights-of-way, parking lots, the footprints of all structures and the area within fifty feet of the
structures. In addition, no more than twenty (25%) of the open space, shall consist of very poorly drained soils,
wetlands, water bodies, and slopes greater than 20%. Sixty (60%) of the common land/open space should be contiguous
throughout the development
Use of common land shall be restricted to recreational uses such as parks, swimming pools, tennis courts, a common meeting
facility, or conservation. If the buffer zone is considered part of the common land, none of the above uses shall be allowed
within the buffer zone nor any other uses that would disturb the natural vegetation within this zone. These restrictions of the use
of open space (including the buffer zone) shall be stated in the covenants running with the land. Access to common land/open
space shall be provided by a suitable trail or pathway within the development.
Open space, common areas, common facilities, private roadways, and other features within the elderly housing development
shall be protected by covenants running with the land and shall be conveyed by the property owner(s) to a homeowners
association, or each owner within the subdivision is to own an undivided interest in the common property so as to guarantee the
following:
a. The continued use of the land for the intended purposes.
b. Continuity of proper maintenance for those portions of the development requiring maintenance.
c. The availability of funds required for such maintenance.
d. Recovery for loss sustained as a result of casualty, condemnation or otherwise.
e. Creation of a homeowner’s association with automatic membership and obligation of the residents of the
elderly housing development upon conveyance of title or lease to single dwelling units. Homeowners
association shall include lien provisions and shall be subject to review of Town Counsel and approval by the
Planning Board.
27. Homeowners’ Association -It shall be the responsibility of the developer/builder of each elderly housing development
to establish a Homeowners’ Association and to prepare and adopt appropriate Articles and By-Laws, which are to be
submitted in advance to the Planning Board and Town Counsel for their review and approval. In preparing the Articles
and By-Laws, particular consideration shall be given to accommodating the unique needs of the elderly citizens and to
ensuring that residents of such developments are guaranteed adequate and appropriate services. The creation of the
Homeowners’ Association and the Articles and By-Laws shall be at the sole expense of the developer/builder and the
costs for the review by the Planning Board and Town Counsel shall also be borne by the developer/builder. Any
association formed for the purpose of elderly housing must have stipulated in the By-Laws and Declaration of
Covenants, that the Association will at all times be in compliance with current ordinances of the Town governing
elderly housing.
28. Limitations on Approval -All requirements of conditional approval of Conditional Use Permits shall be met within
one year. If all conditions are not met within one year of approval a new application may be required.
26
ARTICLE VI: DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Section 6.01: Areas Included In Table Of Dimensional Requirements:
Lot area; front, side and rear yard areas; and height restrictions shall be as specified in Section 6.02 of this Ordinance with
the following special provisions:
A. Building Set-back: On streets with less than 50-foot rights-of-way, the set-back requirement shall be 75 feet from
the center line of the right-of-way.
B. Location of Accessory Buildings: In any district, no permanent or temporary accessory building or structure shall
be permitted in any required setback area.
C. Frontage Requirements for Lots on Cul-de-Sac: In the case of lots fronting on the ends of cul- de-sacs, the
required lot frontage shall be applied 100 feet from the street line, provided that in no case shall the frontage along
the cul-de-sac be less than 100 feet.
D. Structures Excluded from Height Requirement: Height restrictions shall not apply to necessary appurtenant
structures such as church spires, belfries, cupolas, domes, smokestacks, flagpoles, antennae, or similar structures.
E. Lot Width: Lot widths must be maintained for at least a depth of 100 feet from the lot lines.
F. Lot Shape: Lots shall be compact and regular in shape. No irregularly shaped portion of a lot narrower than 50 feet
shall be used to satisfy the minimum lot size.
G. Tower Setbacks: No buildings, roads or driveways that are not part of the tower site shall be built within 150% of
the height of any tower that is located in any zone. Towers must be set back a distance equal to 150% of the
height of the tower from any unaffiliated structure, parking areas or lots, driveways, roads, developed areas or
property lines.
Section 6.02: Table of Dimensional Requirements: 

District Minimum Lot Area Minimum Lot Width Front Side Rear Height Stories
RR 3 acres  200 50 25 25 35 2.5
C/L1/L2 2 acres 200 50 25 25 35 2.5
MX 2 acres 200 50 25 25 35 2.5

Section 6.03: Floor Area:

A single family detached, or single family attached, duplex dwelling shall contain 800 square feet of floor area per
dwelling unit if one story or 672 square feet on the first floor if two stories.

ARTICLE VII:
MANUFACTURED HOUSING, MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION, AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
Section 7.01: General Provisions for Manufactured Housing:
In subdivisions, where Manufactured Housing or Mobile Homes are to be located on individually owned lots, said
Manufactured Housing or Mobile Homes shall comply with lot size, frontage requirements, space limitations and other
reasonable controls that conventional single-family housing in the same area must meet.
Section 7.02: Mobile Home Subdivision and Mobile Home Parks:
A. Definitions:
1. A trailer or trailer coach means any vehicle or similar portable structure having no foundation other than wheels,
jacks, or skirting, and having none of the following: running water, sanitary water, sanitary facilities, bath
facilities and toilet.
2. A trailer park means a plot of ground upon which two or more trailer coaches, occupied for dwelling or sleeping
purposes, are located, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodations.
3. A mobile home is a home which is mobile, a unit similar to a trailer, it is equipped with running water and
sanitary facilities, bath facilities and toilet.
4. A semi-dependent mobile home is a unit similar to a trailer which is equipped with some but not all of the
following: running water, sanitary facilities bath facilities and toilet.
5. A mobile home park is land upon which two or more mobile homes are parked and occupied for living purposes
regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodations
B. Sanitation:
All specifications as stated within the Sanitary Laws and Regulations of N.H. State Department of Health for Mobile
Homes and Trailer Parks must be met.
C. Use of Land:
The use of land for the accommodations of a trailer or trailers and/or a mobile home or mobile homes is prohibited except
by permit and as provided in Section 2.06 of this Ordinance.
D. Application:
The above applies only to trailers and/or mobile homes utilized for residential purposes, and is not intended to cover,
single trailers owned by residents and stored or parked during periods of non-use on the premises of the owner.
E. Special Exception:
Mobile Home Parks may be permitted as a Special Exception in a "C" District (see 5.02) by the Board of Adjustment,
after two public hearings, upon compliance with the procedure specified in Section F hereof and meeting the requirements
of Sections G through L hereof.
F. Procedure:
1. Any person or legal entity desiring to establish and/or operate a mobile home park shall apply to the Selectmen for a
renewable license therefore as hereinafter provided.
2. The application form for the establishment of a mobile home park must be obtained from the Selectmen of the Town of
Candia and must be accompanied by a fee of not less than $25.00 per proposed mobile home. This fee will be in lieu of
any inspection and other fees but not in lieu of local taxes. The annual renewal fee for a license to operate a mobile
home shall not be less than $5.00 per original proposed mobile home in the original application.
3. The application form must also include a plot plan approved by the Planning Board showing the size of the mobile
home park, roads, streets, location, size and shape and identification numbers of mobile home lots or spaces, locations
of sanitary provision and the name of abutting property owners according to the Register of Deeds of the County of
Rockingham, New Hampshire.
4. Any mobile home lots or sites in addition to those now existing in parks heretofore approved, or in addition to those
now showing in the initial application for a mobile home park shall require a new application and be subject to all of
the provisions governing mobile home parks.
28
5. The above fees may be changed from time to time at the discretion of the Selectmen.
6. The initial license and fee shall be effective until the next March 31st, thereafter a renewal license and fee shall be
required on each April 1st.
7. Revocation of License: The Town of Candia licensing authority may revoke or suspend any license to maintain a
mobile home park when the licensee has been found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction, of violating any
provisions of this Ordinance. After such revocation, the license shall be reissued if the circumstances leading to
conviction have been remedied and the park is being maintained and operated in compliance with this Ordinance.
G. Sanitary Requirements:
1. In any mobile home park where there are two or more single family units per acre, a central sanitary sewage treatment
facility must be provided. This facility must be approved by the State Water Supply and Pollution Control Board.
Individual septic tanks and leaching fields will not be allowed in any mobile home parks where there are two or more
single units per acre. In any event, all systems must be approved by the State Water Supply and Pollution Control
Board.
2. Sewage-treatment plant effluents shall not be discharged into any waters of the state except with prior approval of the
State Water Pollution Commission. The disposal plant shall be located where it will not create a nuisance or health
hazard to the mobile home park or to the owner or occupants of any adjacent property. The approval of the State Board
of Health shall be obtained on the type of treatment proposed and on the design of the disposal plant prior to
construction.
3. Each mobile home space shall be provided with at least a 3-inch diameter sewer connection. The sewer connection shall
be provided with suitable fittings, so that a watertight connection can be made between the mobile home drain and the
sewer connection. Such individual mobile home connections shall be constructed so that they can be closed when not
linked to a space and shall be trapped in such a manner as to maintain them in an odor-free condition.
4. Where the sewer lines of a mobile home or trailer park are not connected to a public sewer, the means of disposal of all
sewage must be approved by the State Board of Health.
5. All mobile home park operators must provide suitable refuse containers conveniently located throughout the park
providing easy accessibility by all tenants. These refuse containers must be of such design to be rodent free and not to
create a health hazard. Refuse must be picked up not less than twice weekly by the park operator.
H. Water Supply:
1. Public water supply is that water which is supplied to the residents as a municipal service of the Town.
2. Private water supply is that water which is supplied to the residents of a mobile home park by a private concern or
operator or by an individual for his own use.
3. In the absence of a public water supply and when water must be provided by a mobile home park operator, a well must
be driven and the water must be tested pure for human consumption. This well must be capable of supplying 425
gallons per day per single family unit in any development or mobile home park at a minimum pressure of 30 psi.
4. In any mobile home park where there will be more than 10 housing units confined in an area of less than 5 acres, one
fire hydrant will be installed for each 10 housing units or fraction thereof.
I. Facilities:
1. Each mobile home space shall have water and sewage connections.
2. An electrical entrance supplying at least 230 volts, 100 amps shall be provided for each mobile home and trailer space.
The installation shall comply with all National electrical codes. Such electrical outlets shall be weatherproof.
3. Liquefied petroleum gas shall not be used at individual mobile home or trailer spaces unless the containers are properly
connected by copper or other suitable metallic tubing. Liquefied petroleum gas cylinders, connecting tubing and
regulating devices shall be securely fastened in place.
4. Fuel oil containers shall be properly connected. Racks to hold such containers shall be of a design which will prevent
tipping or accidental overturning.
5. Space under each trailer unit shall be adequately enclosed.
29
J. Roads and Streets:
1. All roads within a mobile home park shall have a base of not less than 12 inches of bank gravel with 2 inches of
compacted asphalt as finished surface. The minimum surface shall be 20 feet in width where off-street parking is
provided and 30 feet in width with street parking. Main entrances and exits to a mobile home park will have a
paved surface of not less than 30 feet in width.
2. All streets will be well graded and proper drainage will be installed.
3. Streetlights shall be provided for each five mobile home sites exclusive of park entrances and exits.
4. Electric, telephone and other transmission or utility lines shall be installed underground per specifications of
public utility companies involved.
5. Plans for roads and streets must be approved by the Planning Board before a license can be issued.
K. Additional Specifications:
1. Mobile home parks must be compatible with the character of the surrounding and existing traffic considerations
2. Design plans for the park layout must be submitted for approval by the Board of Adjustment.
3. Total area of park site must not be less than 16 acres.
4. A minimum of 10,000 square feet shall be provided for each mobile home space.
5. A minimum of 300 feet must be provided between park boundaries and nearest permanent residential buildings
outside the park.
6. Each mobile home space shall be at least 70 feet wide and shall abut on a roadway of not less than 40 feet, if offstreet
parking is provided; otherwise 50 feet. Such spaces shall be clearly defined and mobile homes shall be
parked in such spaces so that there will be a minimum of 40 feet between mobile homes and so that no mobile
home will be less than 30 feet from the edge of the roadway and less than 25 feet from the exterior boundary of
the park nor less than 300 feet from a public road.
7. A suitable fence will be installed along the outside boundary lines of the mobile home park so as not to offend any
abutters.
L. Mobile Home Park Operator/Owner Shall Provide Performance Guaranty:
1. As a condition precedent to final approval of any mobile home park application, the owner/operator shall file with
the Planning Board at the time of submission of the application, a certificate by the Town Clerk that the mobile
home park owner/operator has complied with one of the following alternatives: to assure his faithful performance
in constructing all utilities and improvements as are specified in the applications.
a. Has posted a certified check payable to the Town of Candia, or;
b. Has posted a faithful performance bond running to the Town of Candia and issued by a Surety Company
acceptable to the Selectmen. In either alternative, the posted surety guaranty shall be in an amount of
money to be determined by the Selectmen with the advice of the various Town Departments concerned, to
be equal to the total of the costs of construction of all streets and construction and installation of such
other utilities and improvements as specified in the applications. The surety bond shall be approved as for
form and surety by the Town Attorney, and conditioned upon the satisfactory completion by the Mobile
Home Park Owner/Operator of such streets and improvements within such period, not exceeding 5 years
from the date of such bond, as may be prescribed by the Board.
M. Repeal of Inconsistent Ordinances:
All ordinances inconsistent with or contrary to the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed and nothing in this
Ordinance shall be interpreted so as to conflict with state legislation regulating mobile home or trailer parks.
N. Violation of Ordinance:
Penalty: Any person found guilty of violating this Ordinance or any provision thereof shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than $25.00, nor more than $50.00, and each day such violation exists shall be
construed as a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
30
ARTICLE VIII: SIGN REGULATIONS
Section 8.01: Sign Permits:
Signs are not permitted in any district except pursuant to the regulations contained in this article and no sign
may be erected without a permit from the Building Inspector.
Section 8.02: Signs Not Advertising Use of Lot on Which Located:
Signs shall refer only to a use or activity carried out on the lot upon which they are located d except that the
Board of Adjustment may grant a Special Exception for erection off the premises of a limited number of signs
providing the following conditions are met:
1. Each sign shall not exceed 2 square feet in area on each of two sides.
2. The sign is intended solely to give local directional information.
3. Multiple signs shall share a common post.
Section 8.03: Temporary Signs:
A temporary sign not exceeding 20 square feet in area advertising the sale of or construction on the premises on
which it is located shall be permitted in any District until such time as the sale or construction is completed.
Section 8.04: Flashing or Animated Signs:
No flashing or animated signs shall be allowed in any District.
Section 8.05: Size Restrictions - Residential District:
In the “R” District, one sign shall be allowed not exceeding two square feet in area for each residence, not
exceeding four square feet in area for each home occupation, not exceeding twenty square feet in area for any
public or institutional or other permitted uses. Signs for such uses permitted only as Special Exceptions shall be
subject to such conditions as the Board of Adjustment may impose.
Section 8.06: Size Restrictions - Commercial, Light Industrial:
In Commercial and Light Industrial Districts signs totaling not greater than forty square feet in overall area may
be permitted, or of greater area by Special Exception and may nave continuous, non-flashing illumination,
provided that no such light is visible on the boundary of any residential property located in the "R" District after
11:00 P.M.
Section 8.07: Signs with Legal Non-Conforming Use:
Any sign advertising and located on the same premises with a legal non-conforming use may be maintained and
replaced during the life of the non-conforming use but shall not be enlarged or extended.
Section 8.08: Government Exception:
Provisions of this Ordinance shall not apply to conventional directional and identification signs and markers
erected by federal, state or local government agencies.
Section 8.09: Integration of Multiple Signs on a Free-Standing Structure:
Where more than one place of business activity exists on a single lot, the Planning Board shall be authorized
when reviewing all sign permit applications to require that all advertising signs, whether permanent or
temporary, be integrated and coordinated so as to limit any unnecessary proliferation of advertising on the
premises. The surface area of the sign shall be no longer that 50 (fifty) square feet plus an additional 5 (five)
square feet for each additional business advertised thereon not to exceed 100 (hundred) square feet.
31
ARTICLE IX: OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Section 9.01: Parking Requirements:
Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided for every new structure and the enlargement of an
existing structure, the development of a new land use or a change in an existing land use in accordance with the
off-street parking standards as provided for by this Article and as stated in the Planning Board’s Site Plan
Regulations, following requirements. Each parking space shall be nine (9) feet by eighteen (18) feet, excluding
driveways and aisles. This provision shall not apply to one family dwellings.
Section 9.02: Location Requirements:
Off-street parking spaces required by this Ordinance shall not be located within a required front yard in the "R"
and "LL1/L2I-1/LI-2" Districts; and in any District such spaces shall be at least ten (10) feet from the side and
rear lot lines except as provided in Section 9.03. This provision shall not apply to one family dwellings.
Section 9.03: Commercial and Light Industrial:
Required off-street parking spaces for commercial and industrial uses are contained within the Planning Board’s
Site Plan Regulations.
New commercial and light industrial development shall provide ample parking and loading spaces on the
premises to accommodate vehicles of employees and customers, spaces to be located not closer than ten (10)
feet from any lot line unless as a continuation of a parking area on a contiguous lot, and shall be designed so as
to require no backing or maneuvering in a public street.
Section 9.04: Off-Street Loading Parking:
No required off-street parking area shall be used as off-street loading area.
Section 9.05: Lighting Restrictions:
Illumination fixtures shall be so arranged as to direct light away from streets and away from premises used for
residential
purposes.
Section 9.06: Schedule of Required Off-Street Parking Spaces:
USE No. Parking Spaces Required
(a) Dwelling Use 2 Per Unit
(b) Home Occupation 1 Per Employee PLUS Dwelling Unit
(c) Commercial & Industrial Uses Refer to Site Plan Review Regulations for requirements
32
ARTICLE X: WETLANDS PROTECTION
Section 10.01: Purpose and Intent:
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety and general welfare by controlling and guiding the use
of land areas which have been found to be saturated or subjected to high water tables for extended periods of time,
including established and seasonal wetlands. It is the intent that this article shall:
A. Prevent the development of structures and land uses on naturally occurring wetlands which will contribute to
pollution of surface and ground water by sewage or toxic substances or sedimentation.
B. Prevent the destruction of, or significant changes to, natural wetlands which provide flood protection, provide
filtration of water flowing into ponds and streams, or augment stream flows that are connected to the ground or
surface water supply during dry periods.
C. Protect unique and unusual natural areas.
D. Protect wildlife habitats, maintain ecological balance and enhance ecological values such as those cited in RSA
483 A:1.
E. Protect potential water supplies and existing aquifers (water bearing stratum) and aquifer recharge areas.
F. Prevent unnecessary or excessive expense to the Town for the purpose of providing and/or maintaining essential
services and utilities which might be required as a result of misuse or abuse of wetlands.
G. Encourage those low intensity uses that can be harmoniously, appropriately or safely located in wetlands.
H. Preserve and enhance the aesthetic values associated with wetlands in the Town of Candia.
I. Prevent damage to structures and properties caused by inappropriate development in wetlands.
Section 10.02: Definitions:
A. NHDES Site Specific Soils Maps for New Hampshire, Standards and Origins:
The most recent document prepared by the Society of Soil Scientists of Northern New England detailing the standards
for making NHDES Site Specific Soils Maps. (2019)
B. Poorly Drained Soil:
As defined by the National Cooperative Soil Survey or further defined by NHDES Site Specific Soils Maps for New
Hampshire. (2019)
C. Qualified Soil Scientist:
A person qualified in soil classification and mapping who is recognized by the State Board for Licensure.
D. Very Poorly Drained Soil:
As defined by the National Cooperative Soil Survey or further defined by NHDES Site Specific Soils Maps for New
Hampshire. (2019)
E. Wetlands:
Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
under normal conditions do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions.
They include, but are not limited to, swamps, bogs, marshes, ponds, lakes and other water bodies, as well as soils that
are defined as poorly drained or very poorly drained.
33
Section 10.03: District Boundaries:
A. Establishment of a District:
The limits of the Wetlands Conservation District are hereby determined to be the following:
1. all areas of very poorly drained soils;
2. areas of poorly drained soils and; (2019)
3. areas of poorly drained soils of any size if contiguous to surface waters such as lakes, ponds and streams
subjected to high water tables for extended periods of time;
4. identified as a wetland meeting Army Corps of Engineers criteria, by wetlands scientist in conjunction with a
subdivision or site plan application. (2019)
B. Location of the District:
The District as herein defined is shown on a map designated as the "Town of Candia Wetlands Conservation District
Map" and is a part of the Official Zoning Map for the Town of Candia. This map is considered as a guide only. The
precise location of a wetland boundary in any particular case must be determined by on-site inspection of soil types
and vegetation. This data will be prepared by a qualified soil scientist using the standards of NHDES Site Specific
Soils Maps for New Hampshire. (2019)
C. Boundary Determinations:
1. In the event that the Planning Board or Conservation Commission questions the validity of the boundaries of a
wetland area on a specific parcel of land, or upon the written petition of the owner or any abutter of the said
property to the Planning Board, the Board may call upon the services of a qualified soil scientist to examine said
area and report the findings to the Planning Board for their determination of the boundary.
2. The Building Inspector may also call upon the services of a qualified soil scientist to determine the precise
wetland boundaries on a parcel of land, before issuing a building permit.
D. Soil Testing Procedures:
Any necessary soil testing procedures shall be conducted at the expense of the landowner or developer. Any costs
incurred through such appeals shall be borne by the landowner or developer.
Section 10.04: Relation to Other Districts:
Where the Wetlands Conservation District is superimposed over another zoning district, the more restrictive regulations
shall apply.
Section 10.05: Permitted Uses:
A. Poorly drained soils:
Permitted uses in areas of poorly drained soils are as follows:
1. Any use otherwise permitted by this Ordinance and State and Federal laws that does not involve the erection of a
structure, or that does not alter the surface configuration of the land by the addition of fill, or by dredging except
as a common treatment associated with a non-residential permitted use.
2. Agriculture, including grazing, hay production, truck gardening and silage production provided that such use is
shown not to cause significant increase in surface or ground water contamination by pesticides, commercial
fertilizers or other toxic or hazardous substances, and that such use will not cause or contribute to soil erosion.
3. Forestry and tree farming to include the construction of access roads for such purpose.
4. Wildlife habitat development and management.
5. Recreational uses consistent with the purpose and intent of this Article as defined in Section 10.01.
6. Conservation areas and natural trails.
7. Water impoundments and the construction of well water supplies.
8. Drainageways to include streams, creeks or other natural paths of normal runoff water.
9. Driveways for access to residential lots with proper drainage and culverts.
10. Open spaces as permitted in this Ordinance.
34
Section 10.05: Permitted Uses (continued):
B. Very poorly drained soils:
Permitted uses in areas containing very poorly drained soils, marshes, bogs, open water and major streams are as follows:
1. Uses specified under Section 10.05.A (1 through 10) shall be permitted except that no alteration of the surface
configuration of the land by filling or dredging and no use which results in the erection of a structure except as
provided for in Section 10.09 shall be permitted.
2. The construction offences, footbridges, catwalks and wharves, only provided:
(a) said structures are constructed on posts or pilings so as to permit unobstructed flow of water;
(b) the natural contour of the wetland is preserved, and;
(c) the Conservation Commission has reviewed and recommended the proposed construction.
C. Lot size determination:
Areas designated as having poorly drained soils may be used to fulfill up to 50% of the minimum lot size required by this
Ordinance and Subdivision Regulations, provided the non-wetland area is at least one and one-half (1 1/2) contiguous
buildable acres, and shall accommodate primary structures and required utilities such as sewage disposal and water
supply, including primary and auxiliary leach field locations. (2019)
No part of areas designated as having very poorly drained soils, or bodies of water may be used to satisfy minimum lot
size. Contiguous non-wetland portions of a lot shall be adjacent to or connected by no less than a 50-foot width of nonwetland
area.
Section 10.06: Buffer Provisions:
A. No septic system, leach field or other waste disposal facility shall be installed within 75 feet of the edge of any
wetland.
B. All construction, forestry and agriculture activities within 100 feet of any wetland shall be undertaken with special
care to avoid erosion and siltation into the wetlands. The Planning Board, pursuant to its site plan review
authority, may require an erosion control plan approved by the Rockingham County Conservation District for any
project undertaken up-grade of a wetland. No building activity (building does not include septic systems) shall be
permitted within 100 feet of any pond, flowing stream or very poorly drained soil and within 50 feet of any poorly
drained soil except as provided in subsection C of this section. Where required, permits from the Division of
Water Supply and Pollution Control of the Department of Environmental Services, under RSA 485-A:17
Wetlands Board under RSA 485-A:17 shall be obtained.
C. Where an existing building within the buffer zone is destroyed or is in need of extensive repair, it may be rebuilt
provided that such rebuilding is completed within two years of the event causing destruction; the new or rebuilt
structure shall not extend further into the wetlands or buffer area than the original foundation.
Section 10.07: Filled and Pre-Existing Uses - Non-Residential:
A. Lands which may have been wetlands but were filled under properly Ordinance shall be judged according to the
soils and flora existing at the site at the time application for building permit or subdivision is made.
B. Structures and uses existing at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance may be continued provided that such use
shall not be expanded to further encroach upon the wetlands or designated buffer areas.
Section 10.08: Exemption for Residential Structures:
Notwithstanding other provisions of this article, the construction of additions and extensions to one and two-family family
dwellings shall be permitted within the Wetlands Conservation District provided that:
1. The dwelling lawfully existed prior to the effective date of this article, and;
2. That the proposed construction conforms with all other applicable Ordinances and Regulations of the Town of
Candia.
35
Section 10.09: Conditional Uses:
A. A Special Use Permit may be granted by the Planning Board (RSA 674:21-11) for the construction of roads and other
access ways, and for pipelines, power lines and other transmission lines provided that all of the following conditions are
found to exist:
1. The proposed construction is essential to the productive use of land not within the e Wetlands Conservation
District.
2. Design, construction and maintenance methods will be such as to minimize detrimental impact upon the wetlands
and will include restoration of the site as nearly as possible to its original grade and condition.
3. No alternative route which does not cross a wetland or has less detrimental impact upon the wetland is feasible.
B. Prior to the granting of a Special Use Permit under this Section, the applicant shall submit a performance security to ensure
that all construction is carried out in accordance with an approved design. The security shall be submitted in a form and
amount, with surety and conditions satisfactory to:
(1) the Planning Board for site plan and subdivision applications and;
(2) the Board of Selectmen in all other cases.
In addition, Town Counsel approval must be acquired. The security shall be submitted and approved prior to issuance of any
permit authorizing construction.
C. The Planning Board, with the concurrence of the Conservation Commission may require the applicant to submit an
environmental impact assessment when necessary to evaluate an application made under this section. The cost of this
assessment shall be borne by the applicant. The Planning Board may also assess the applicant reasonable fees to cover the
costs of other special investigative studies and for the review of documents required by particular applications.
D. Economic advantage alone is not the reason for the proposed construction.
Section 10.10: Exceptions:
A. Water Impoundments:
Water impoundments for the enhancement of a wetland area with a permit from the New Hampshire Water Resource Board.
Where required, permits shall be obtained from the Division of Water Supply and Pollution Control of the Department of
Environmental Services under RSA 485-A:17, the Wetlands Board under RSA 482-A, and the United States Army Corp of
Engineers.
B. Non-Conforming Lots:
1. Special Exceptions to this Ordinance shall be permitted only upon authorization by the Board of Adjustment in the
manner prescribed in Article XIII of this Ordinance.
2. Special Exception Standards: In order to permit the erection of a structure and related site work within the Wetlands
Conservation District on vacant lots, the Board of Adjustment shall find that such exceptions comply with the
following requirements and other applicable requirements as set forth in this Ordinance:
a. that the lot upon which an exception is sought was an official lot of record, as recorded in the Rockingham
County Registry of Deeds, prior to the date on which this amendment was posted and published in the Town.
b. that the use for which the exception is sought cannot feasibly be carried out on a portion or portions of the lot
which are outside the Wetlands Conservation District.
c. that due to the provisions of the District, no reasonable and economically viable use of the lot can be made
without the exception.
d. that the design and construction of the proposed use will, to the extent practical, be consistent with the purpose
and intent of this article.
e. that the proposed use will not create a hazard to individual or public health, safety and welfare due to the loss
of wetland, the contamination of groundwater or other reason.
f. that the applicant shall provide to the Board a study prepared by a qualified consultant showing that the above
conditions have been met. The cost of such studies shall be borne by the applicant.
36
Section 10.11: Other Provisions:
A. The Building Inspector shall not issue any permits for construction within the Wetlands Conservation Overlay District
unless such activity conforms with the provisions of this article. The Board of Selectmen shall have the power to
enforce this article, and violations may be punishable by fines as provided by Article XIV Section 15.04 of this
Ordinance.
B. Any wetlands altered in violation of this Ordinance shall be restored at the owner's expense or the violator(s) as
provided by RSA 487-A:14.
C. No building, fill or other obstruction shall be permitted in any floodway where it is determined by the Town that such
encroachment will adversely affect the flood carrying capacity of the floodway or flood levels along the flood plain or
create a hazard to life and property. In making this determination, the Town may consult with the U.S. Army Corp of
Engineers or such other experts as deemed necessary.
D. The Town of Candia, as a governmental body, shall not be exempt from this Ordinance nor the rules and regulations
found therein.
ARTICLE XI: GROUNDWATER PROTECTION
Section 11.01: Authority:
The Town of Candia hereby adopts the following Article XI pursuant to the authority granted under RSA 674:16, in
particular RSA 674:16, II and RSA 674:21,1, (j) relative to innovative land use controls.
Section 11.02: Purpose:
The Town of Candia views existing and potential groundwater supply areas and surface waters as being a finite resource
within the Town of Candia. These resources are needed for both present and/or future public water supply within the
Town. The purpose of this Article is accomplished by regulating those land uses that could contribute pollutants to the
Town's present and/or future public water supply.
Section 11.03: Definitions:
A. Ambient Groundwater Quality Standards: Maximum concentration levels for regulated contaminants in
groundwater which result from human operations or activities, as delineated in RSA 485-C:6.
B. Aquifer: A geologic formation composed of rock, sand or gravel that contains significant amounts of potentially
recoverable water.
C. Green Yard: A junkyard which has been certified by the NH DES as a Green Yards Under Phase II: Compliance
Assurance and Certification component of the NH DES Green Yards Program.
D. Groundwater: Subsurface water that occurs beneath the water table in soils and geologic formations.
E. Impervious: Not readily permitting the infiltration of water.
F. Impervious Surface: A surface through which regulated substances cannot pass when spilled. Impervious surfaces
include concrete and asphalt unless unsealed cracks or holes are present. The following surfaces are not considered
impervious: earthen, wooden, or gravel surfaces; or other surfaces which could react with or dissolve when in contact
with the substances stored on them.
G. Junkyard: An establishment or place of business which is maintained, operated, or used for storing, keeping, buying,
or selling junk (ex. such as scrap metal, used appliances), or for the maintenance or operation of an automotive
recycling yard, and includes garbage dumps and sanitary landfills. The word does not include any motor vehicle
dealers registered with the Director of Motor vehicles under RSA 261:104 and controlled under RSA 236:126.
H. Loam: See NH Department of Transportation Section 641.
37
Section 11.04: Groundwater Protection District:
The Groundwater Protection District is an overlay district that is superimposed over the existing underlying zoning of the
entire Town of Candia.
Section 11.05: Applicability:
This Article applies to all uses in the Groundwater Protection District, except for those uses exempt under Section 11.11
of this Article.
Section 11.06: Performance Standards:
The following Performance Standards are in addition to the regulations set forth in the balance of this Article and apply to
all uses in the Groundwater Protection District unless exempt under Section 11.11:
1. For any use that will render impervious more than 15% or more than 10,000 square feet of any lot, whichever is
greater, a Stormwater Management Plan shall be prepared in a manner consistent with Stormwater Management
and Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Urban and Developing Areas in New Hampshire, Rockingham
County Conservation District, August 1992 and Best Management Practices for Urban Stormwater Runoff, NH
Department of Environmental Services, January 1996. The Planning Board shall determine whether or not the
Stormwater Management Plan is consistent with the above referenced standards and may reject any Management
Plan which fails to conform with the standards.
2. Stormwater management plans prepared pursuant to paragraph 1 above shall demonstrate that storm water
recharged to groundwater will not result in violation of Ambient Groundwater Quality Standards (Env-Ws
410.05) at the property boundary.
3. Animal manures, fertilizers, and compost must be stored in accordance with the Manual of Best Management
Practices for Agriculture in New Hampshire, NH Department of Agriculture, Markets, and Food, August 1998,
and subsequent revisions.
4. All regulated substances stored in containers with a capacity of 5 gallons or more must be stored in product-tight
containers on an impervious surface designed and maintained to prevent flow to exposed soils, floor drains, and
outside drains.
5. Facilities where regulated substances are stored must be secured against unauthorized entry by means of a door(s)
and/or gate(s) which are locked when authorized personnel are not present and must be inspected weekly by the
facility owner.
6. Outdoor storage areas for regulated substances must be protected from exposure to precipitation and must be
located at least 75 feet from surface water or storm drains, wetlands, private wells and outside the sanitary
protective radius of wells used by public water systems.
7. Secondary containment must be provided for outdoor storage of regulated substances if an aggregate of 275
gallons or more of regulated substances are stored outdoors on any particular property.
8. Containers in which regulated substances are stored must be clearly and visibly labeled and must be kept closed
and sealed when material is not being transferred from one container to another.
9. All land cleared and graded for the purpose of establishing lawns must be finish graded with at least 4 inches of
good quality loam or topsoil in order to reduce the demand for lawn irrigation.
Section 11.07: Permitted Uses:
All uses permitted by right, in the underlying district shall be permitted in the Groundwater Protection District unless
identified in Section 11.08. as a Prohibited Uses or Section I. as a Conditional Use. All Permitted Uses must comply with
the Performance Standards set forth in Section 11.06. unless specifically exempted under Section 11.11. Exemptions.
38
Section 11.08: Prohibited Uses:
The following uses are prohibited in the Groundwater Protection District:
1. The siting or operation of a hazardous waste disposal facility as defined under RSA 147-A.
2. The siting or operation of a solid waste landfill.
3. The siting or operation of a wastewater or septage lagoon. The siting or operation of a sludge monofill
or sludge composting facility.
4. The storage of regulated substances, unless in a free-standing container within a building, or above
ground with secondary containment adequate to contain 110% of the container's total storage capacity.
5. The storage of commercial fertilizers, unless such storage is within a structure designed to prevent the
generation and escape of runoff or leachate.
6. The siting or operation of junkyards, unless such facility is certified by the NH DES as a Green Yards
under the Phase II: Compliance Assurance and Certification component of the NH DES Green Yards
Program.
Section 11.09: Conditional Uses:
The issuance of a Conditional Use Permit is subject to Site Plan Approval by the Planning Board. The Planning
Board may grant a Conditional Use Permit for a use that is otherwise permitted within the underlying district, if
the permitted use is or is involved in one or more of the following:
1. Storage, handling, and use of regulated substances in quantities exceeding 100 gallons or 800 pounds
dry weight at any one time, provided that an adequate plan is in place to prevent, contain, and minimize
releases from catastrophic events such as spills or fires which may cause large releases of regulated
substances.
2. Any use that will render impervious more than 15% or 10,000 square feet of any lot, whichever is
greater. In granting such approval the Planning Board must first determine that the proposed use is not a
prohibited use and will be in compliance with the Performance Standards as well as all applicable local,
state and federal requirements. The Planning Board may, at its discretion, require a performance
guarantee or bond, in an amount and with surety conditions satisfactory to the Board, to be posted to
ensure completion of construction of any facilities required for compliance with the Performance
Standards. The amount of this bond shall be in addition to any other bond required by the Board under
either the subdivision or site plan regulations.
3. The siting or operation of a commercial composting facility.
4. The siting or operation of a snow dump from offsite sources.
5. The siting or operation of a commercial car wash. The facility must be designed and operated as a
closed-loop system.
Section 11.10: Existing Nonconforming Uses:
Existing nonconforming uses may continue without expanding or changing to another nonconforming use but
must be in compliance with all applicable state and federal requirements, including Env-Ws 421, Best
Management Practices Rules. However, under no circumstances will a nonconforming use be permitted when a
continuance of that use presents a risk to public health and/or safety.
39
Section 11.11: Exemptions:
The following uses are exempt from the provisions of this Article. This exemption shall not excuse compliance with all
other applicable local, state, and federal requirements:
1. Any private residence is exempt from all Performance Standards except for Section 11.06. 2, and 3.
2. Any business or facility where regulated substances are stored in containers with a capacity of five (5) gallons or
less is exempt from Performance Standard 11.06.5.
3. Storage of heating fuels for on-site use or fuels for emergency electric generation, provided that storage tanks are
indoors on a concrete floor or have corrosion control, leak detect F. 5 exempt from performance standard.
4. Storage of motor fuel in tanks attached to vehicles and fitted with permanent fuel lines to enable the fuel to be
used by that vehicle is exempt from Performance Standards 11.06.5 through 8.
5. Storage and use of office supplies is exempt from Performance Standards 11.06.5 through 8.
6. Temporary storage of construction materials on a site where they are to be used is exempt from Performance
Standards 11.06.5 through 8.
7. The sale, transportation, and use of pesticides as defined in RSA 430:29 XXVI are exempt from all provisions of
this Article.
8. Household hazardous waste collection projects regulated under NH Code of Administrative Rules Env-Wm
401.03(b)(1) and 501.01(b) are exempt from Performance Standards 11.06.5 through 8.
9. Underground storage tank systems and above ground storage tank systems that are in compliance with applicable
state rules are exempt from inspections under Section 11.13 of this Article.
Section 11.12: Relationship Between State and Local Requirements:
Where both the State and the municipality have existing requirements the more stringent shall govern. In the event that
there is a conflict between the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance and any other provision of the Town of Candia Zoning
Ordinance, or State law, the provision imposing the greater restriction or higher standard shall control.
Section 11.13: Maintenance and Inspection:
1. Inspections may be required to verify compliance with Performance Standards. Such inspections shall be
performed by the Code Enforcement Officer at reasonable times with prior notice to the landowner.
2. All properties within the Groundwater Protection District known to the Code Enforcement Officer as using or
storing regulated substances in containers with a capacity of 10 gallons or more except for facilities where all
regulated substances storage is exempt from this Article under Section 11.11., shall be subject to inspections
under this Section.
3. The Planning Board may require a fee for compliance inspections. The fee shall be paid by the property owner. A
fee schedule shall be established by the Planning Board as provided for in RSA 41-9: a.
Section 11.14: Enforcement Procedures and Penalties:
Any violation of the requirements of this Article shall be subject to the enforcement procedures and penalties detailed in
RSA 676.
Section 11.15: Saving Clause:
If any provision of this Article is found to be unenforceable, such provision shall be considered separable and shall not be
construed to invalidate the remainder of the Article.
Section 11.16: Effective Date:
This Article shall be effective upon adoption by the municipal legislative body.
40
ARTICLE XII:
TELECOMMUNICATIONS/PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES
Section 12.01 Purpose and Intent:
These regulations have been enacted in order to establish general guidelines for the siting of towers and antennas and to
enhance and fulfill the following goals:
• Preserve the authority of the Town of Candia to regulate and provide for reasonable opportunity for the siting of
telecommunications facilities.
• Enhance the ability of providers of telecommunications services to provide such services to the community
effectively and efficiently.
• Reduce the adverse impacts such facilities may create on, including, but not limited to migratory bird flight
corridors, impacts on aesthetics, environmentally sensitive areas, historically significant locations, health and
safety by injurious accidents to person and property, and diminution of property values.
This Article is structured to encourage carriers to locate on existing buildings and structures whenever possible. New
ground mounted telecommunications/personal wireless facilities are permitted, but only when the use of existing
structures and buildings are found to be infeasible. Co- location is encouraged for all telecommunications/personal
wireless service facility applications and the review of a telecommunications/personal wireless facility shall be on the
basis of the site being built using all positions on the mount.
Section 12.02 Applicability:
The terms of this Article and the Site Plan Review Regulations shall apply to telecommunications/personal wireless
service facilities proposed to be located on property owned by the Town of Candia, on privately owned property, and on
property that is owned by any other governmental entity that acts in its proprietary capacity to lease such property to a
carrier.
This Ordinance shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna that is under 70 feet in height and is owned
and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive-only
antennas. This Ordinance adopts the provisions and limitations as referenced in RSA 674:16, IV.
Essential Services & Public Utilities. Telecommunication facilities shall not be considered infrastructure, essential
services, or public facilities, as defined or used elsewhere in the Town’s ordinances and regulations. Siting for
telecommunications facilities is a use of land and is addressed by this Section. When a port ion of this Art icle or
simi lar language is included in the Si te Plan Regulat ions, this Art icle shal l govern.
Section 12.03 Definitions:
For the purpose of this Article, the following terms shall have the meaning given herein:
A. Antenna -The surface from which wireless radio signals are sent and/or received by a telecommunications
/personal wireless service facility.
B. Antenna Array -A collection of antennas attached to a mount to send and receive radio signals.
C. Average Tree Canopy Height -An average found by inventorying the height at ground level (AGL) of all trees
over twenty (20’) feet in height within a 150-foot radius of the facility. Trees that will be removed for
construction shall not be used in this calculation. In open areas without trees, the AGL shall be taken as 130’
within a 150’ radius of the facility.
D. Camouflaged -A telecommunications/personal wireless service facility that is disguised, hidden, part of an
existing or proposed structure, or placed within an existing or proposed structure.
E. Carrier -A Company that provides telecommunications/personal wireless services, also sometimes referred to as
a provider.
41
F. Co-location -The use of a single mount on the ground by more than one carrier (vertical collocation) or the same
carrier with multiple licenses, and/or the use of several mounts on an existing building or structure by more than
one carrier or the same carrier with multiple licenses.
G. Environmental Assessment (EA) -An EA is a document required by the Federal Communications Commission
(FCC) and the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) when a telecommunications/personal wireless service
facility is placed in certain designated areas.
H. Equipment Shelter -An enclosed structure, cabinet, shed, vault or box near the base of the mount within which
are housed equipment for telecommunications/personal wireless service facilities such as batteries and electrical
equipment. Equipment shelters are sometimes referred to as base transceiver stations.
I. Facility -See Telecommunications/Personal Wireless Service Facility
J. Fall Zone -A distance of 150% of the tower height measured from the outside edge of the tower base. See Zoning
Section 6.01 G.
K. Guyed Tower -A monopole or lattice tower that is secured to the ground or other surface by diagonal cables for
lateral support.
L. Height -The height above ground level (AGL) from the natural grade of a site to the highest point of the structure.
M. Lattice Tower -A type of mount with multiple legs and structural cross bracing between the legs that is selfsupporting
and free standing.
N. Mast -A thin pole that resembles a streetlight standard or telephone pole. A dual-polarized antenna is typically
deployed on a mast.
O. Monopole -A thicker type of mount than a mast that is self-supporting with a single shaft of wood, steel,
concrete, or other material, which is designed for the placement of antennas and arrays along the shaft.
P. Mount -The structure or surface upon which antennas are mounted, including the following four types of mounts:
a. Roof-mounted. Mounted on the roof of a building.
b. Side-mounted. Mounted on the side of a building.
c. Ground-mounted. Mounted on the ground.
d. Structure-mounted. Mounted on or in a structure other than a building.
Q. Telecommunications/Personal Wireless Service Facility -Telecommunications/Personal Wireless Service
Facility for the provision of telecommunications/personal wireless services facilities include a mount, antenna,
equipment shelter, and other related equipment as defined by The Telecommunications Act of 1996, as amended.
R. Personal Wireless Services -The three types of services regulated by this Ordinance: Commercial mobile radio
services, unlicensed wireless services, and common carrier wireless exchange access services as described in the
Telecommunications Act of 1996, as amended.
S. Radio Frequency (RF) Engineer -An engineer specializing in electrical or microwave engineering, especially of
radio frequencies.
T. Radio Frequency (RFR) Radiation -The emissions from telecommunications/personal wireless service
facilities.
U. Security Barrier -A wall, fence, or berm that restricts an area from unauthorized entry or trespass.
V. Separation -The distance between one carrier’s array of antennas and another carrier’s array.
W. Tower -Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more
antennas.
42
Section 12.04 District Regulations:
A. Location -Telecommunications/Personal wireless service facilities shall be permitted in all zoning districts except the
Wetlands Conservation District. Special exception by the Zoning Board of Adjustment is required for the residential
zoning district and Mixed-Use District. Applicants seeking approval for telecommunications/personal wireless service
facilities shall first evaluate existing structures for the siting of telecommunications/personal wireless service
facilities. Only after finding that there are not suitable existing structures pursuant to Section C (4) herein, shall a
provider propose a new ground mounted facility.
B. Existing Structures -Policy: Telecommunications/Personal wireless service facilities shall be located on existing
structures, including but not limited to buildings, water towers, existing telecommunication facilities, utility poles or
towers, and related facilities, provided that such installation preserves the character and integrity of those structures.
C. Existing Structures -Burden of Proof -The applicant shall have the burden of proving that there are no existing
structures which are suitable to locate its telecommunications/personal wireless service facility and/or transmit or
receive radio signals. To meet that burden, the applicant shall take all of the following actions to the extent applicable:
1. The applicant shall submit to the Zoning Board of Adjustment a list of all contacts made with owners of
potential sites regarding the availability of potential space for a telecommunications/personal wireless service
facility. If the Zoning Board of Adjustment informs the applicant that additional existing structures may be
satisfactory, the applicant shall contact the property owner(s) of those structures.
2. The applicant shall provide copies of all letters of inquiry made to owners of existing structures and letters of
rejection. If letters of rejection are not provided, at a minimum, unanswered “Return Receipt Requested”
forms from the U.S. Post Office shall be provided for each owner of existing structures that was contacted.
3. If the applicant claims that a structure is not capable of physically supporting a telecommunications/personal
wireless service facility, this claim must be certified by a licensed professional civil engineer. The
certification shall, at a minimum, explain the structural issues and demonstrate that the structure cannot be
modified to support the telecommunications/personal wireless service facility without unreasonable costs. The
estimated cost shall be provided to the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
4. Ground Mounted Facilities Policy -If the applicant demonstrates that it is not feasible to locate on an
existing structure, ground mounted telecommunications/personal wireless service facilities shall be designed
so as to be camouflaged to the greatest extent possible, including, but not limited to: use of compatible
building materials and colors, screening, landscaping and placement within trees.
5. Inventory of Existing Telecommunications/personal wireless facilities and Structures -Each applicant for
telecommunications/personal wireless facilities shall provide an inventory of existing telecommunications/
personal wireless facilities and Structures that are within the jurisdiction of the Town and those within two
miles of the border thereof. This shall include mapping these existing telecommunications/personal wireless
facilities and Structures on a U.S.G.S. Topographical Map and shall include specific information about the
location, Height, design of each telecommunications/personal wireless facility, as well as economic and
technological feasibility for Co-location on the inventoried telecommunications/personal wireless facilities.
The Town may share such information with other applicants applying for approvals or Special Exception
permits under this Ordinance or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of the
governing authority. By sharing such information, however, the Town is not in any way representing or
warranting that such sites are available or suitable.
6. Use of Alternative Telecommunication Sites -If the applicant is proposing to build a new
telecommunications/ personal wireless facility, the applicant shall submit written evidence demonstrating that
no existing telecommunications/personal wireless facilities or other Structure can accommodate the
applicant’s proposed telecommunications/personal wireless facilities. This evidence can consist of:
a. Substantial Evidence that no existing telecommunications/personal wireless facilities or Structures are
located within the geographic area required to meet the applicant’s engineering requirements,
provided that a description of the geographic area required is also submitted.
43
b. Substantial Evidence that existing telecommunications/personal wireless facilities are not of sufficient
Height to meet the applicant’s engineering requirements, and why.
c. Substantial Evidence that the existing telecommunications/personal wireless facilities or Structures do
not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant’s proposed antenna and related equipment.
d. Substantial Evidence that applicant’s proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference
with the antenna on the existing telecommunications/personal wireless facilities or Structures, or the
antenna on the existing telecommunications/personal wireless facilities or Structures would cause
interference with the applicant’s proposed antenna.
e. Substantial Evidence that fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share
the existing telecommunications/personal wireless facilities or Structure are unreasonable. Costs
exceeding new Tower Development are presumed to be unreasonable.
f. Substantial Evidence that the applicant can demonstrate other limiting factors that render existing
telecommunications/personal wireless facilities and Structures unsuitable.
D. Use Regulations -A telecommunications/personal wireless service facility shall require a building permit in all cases
and may be permitted as follows:
1. Existing Structures -Subject to the provisions of this Article and site plan review under RSA 674:43: III and
except as otherwise permitted. A carrier may locate a wireless service facility on an existing structure,
building, utility tower or pole or water tower. For the purposes of this section, new structures that are
conforming to all other district zoning requirements shall be considered as existing structures.
2. Ground Mounted Facility -A telecommunications/personal wireless service facility involving construction
of a ground mount shall require a site plan review and be subject to the provisions of this Article.
3. Completion Schedule -Any approval issued by the Planning Board will be in effect for nine (9) months from
the date of approval to allow for completion of construction. After nine (9) months, if construction is not
completed, a new application may be required.
E. Dimensional Requirements -Telecommunications/Personal wireless service facilities shall comply with the following
requirements:
a. Height, Maximum -In no case shall a telecommunications/personal wireless service facility exceed one
hundred fifty (150’) feet in height, unless the mount for the facility was greater than one hundred fifty (150’)
feet prior to the adoption of this Article.
b. Height, Existing Structures and Utility Poles -Carriers that locate new telecommunications/personal
wireless service facilities on water towers, electric transmission and distribution towers, utility poles and
similar existing utility structures, guyed towers, lattice towers, masts and monopoles may be permitted to
increase the height of those structures no more than twenty (20’) feet, or forty (40’) feet at the discretion of
the Planning Board, if the additional height will not materially impair the visual impacts of the site. This
increase in height shall only be permitted once for each structure.
c. Height, Other Existing Structures -The height of a telecommunications/personal wireless service facility
shall not increase the height of a structure by more than fifteen (15’) feet, unless the facility is completely
camouflaged: for example a facility completely within a flagpole, steeple, or chimney. The increase in the
height of the structure shall be in scale and proportion to the structure as originally configured. A carrier may
locate a telecommunications/personal wireless service facility on a building that is legally nonconforming
with respect to height, provided that the provisions of the Article are met.
d. Height, Ground-Mounted Facilities -Ground mounted telecommunications/personal wireless service
facilities shall not project higher than twenty (20’) feet above the average tree canopy to equipment,
whichever is greater.
44
e. Setbacks -All telecommunications/personal wireless service facilities, equipment shelters, and security
barriers shall comply with the building setback provisions of the zoning district in which the facility is
located.
f. Fall Zone for Ground Mounts -In order to ensure public safety, the minimum distance from the base of any
ground-mount of a telecommunications/personal wireless service facility to any property line, public road,
habitable dwelling, business or institutional use, or public recreational area shall be, at a minimum, the
distance equal to the fall zone, as defined in this Article. The fall zone may cross property lines, so long as the
applicant secures a fall zone easement from the affected property owner(s). The area of the easement shall be
shown on all applicable plans submitted to the Town, and the terms of the easement shall be provided as part
of the Site Plan Review.
g. Fall Zone for Non-Ground Mounts -In the event that an existing structure is proposed as a mount for a
telecommunications/personal wireless service facility, a fall zone shall not be required, but the setback
provisions of the zoning district shall apply. In the case of preexisting non-conforming structures,
telecommunications/personal wireless service facilities and their equipment shelters shall not increase nonconformities.
F. Height Simulations -During the ninety (90) day period following formal acceptance of an application, the Board
may, during its deliberations, require that the applicant erect a structure that would physically simulate the proposed
tower, thus enabling the Board to better assess the impact of a tower at a particular location. As an example, a crane
boom, extending one hundred (100’) feet vertically, would simulate a one hundred (100’) foot communications tower.
G. Performance and Design Standards:
1. Visibility:
a. Visual impacts are measured on the basis of:
1. Change in community scale, as exhibited in relative height, mass or proportion of the
telecommunications /personal wireless service facility within their proposed surroundings.
2. New visible elements proposed on a contrasting background.
3. Different colors and textures proposed against a contrasting background.
4. Use of materials that are foreign to the existing built environment.
b. Enhancements are measured on the basis of:
1. Conservation of opportunities to maintain community scale, e.g. buffering areas and low-lying
buildings should not be compromised so as to start a trend away from the existing community scale.
2. Amount and type of landscaping and/or natural vegetation.
3. Preservation of view corridors, vistas and view sheds.
4. Continuation of existing colors, textures and materials.
c. Visibility focuses on:
1. Eliminating or mitigating visual impact.
2. Protecting, continuing and enhancing the existing environment.
d. Camouflage for Facilities on Existing Buildings or Structures-Roof Mounts -When a telecommunications
/personal wireless service facility extends above the roof height of a building on which it is mounted, every
effort shall be made to conceal or camouflage the facility within or behind existing or new architectural
features to limit its visibility from public ways. Facilities mounted on a roof shall be stepped back from the
front facade in order to limit their impact on the building’s silhouette.
45
e. Camouflage for Facilities on Existing Buildings or Structures-Side Mounts -Telecommunications
/Personal wireless service facilities which are side mounted shall blend with the existing building’s
architecture and, if individual antenna panels are over five (5) square feet, the panels shall be painted or
shielded with material consistent with the design and materials of the building.
f. Camouflage for Ground Mounted Facilities -All ground mounted telecommunications/personal wireless
service facilities shall be surrounded by a buffer of dense tree growth that extends continuously for a
minimum distance of one hundred fifty (150’) feet from the mount, a security barrier, or designated clear area
for access to equipment, whichever is greatest, and screens views of the facility in all directions. These trees
must be existing on the subject property, planted on the site, or be within a landscape easement on an
adjoining site. The Planning Board shall have the authority to decrease, relocate, or alter the required buffer
based on site conditions. The one hundred fifty (150’) foot vegetative buffer area shall be protected by a
landscape easement or be within the area of the carriers lease. The easement or lease shall specify that the
trees within the buffer shall not be removed or topped, unless the trees are dead or dying and present a hazard
to persons or property.
2. Color -To the extent that any telecommunications/personal wireless service facilities extend above the height of
the vegetation immediately surrounding it, they shall be of a color which blends with the background or
surroundings.
3. Equipment Shelters -Equipment shelters for telecommunications/personal wireless service facilities shall be
designed consistent with one of the following design standards:
a. Equipment shelters shall be located in underground vaults; or
b. Equipment shelters shall be designed so that the shelters are architecturally consistent, with respect to
materials and appearance, to the buildings in the area of the telecommunications/personal wireless service
facility; or
c. Equipment shelters shall be camouflaged behind effective year-round landscape buffer, equal to the
height of the proposed building, and/or wooden fence. The Planning Board shall determine the style of
fencing and/or landscape buffer that is compatible with the neighborhood; or
d. If mounted on a roof top, the equipment shelter shall be concealed or camouflaged so that the shelter
either is not visible at grade or appears to be a part of the original structure.
4. Lighting, Signage, Security and Utilities:
a. Lighting -The mounts of telecommunications/personal wireless service facilities shall be lighted only if
required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). Lighting of equipment structures and any other
facilities shall be shielded from abutting properties.
b. Signage -Signs shall be limited to those needed to identify the property and owner and warn of any
danger. All signs shall comply with signage requirements of the Town of Candia Zoning Ordinance.
c. Security Barrier -The Planning Board shall have final authority on whether a ground mounted
telecommunications/personal wireless service facility should be surrounded by a security barrier.
d. Utilities -All utilities servicing a telecommunications/personal wireless service facility shall be placed
underground.
5. Historic Buildings:
a. A structure shall not alter the character or defining features, distinctive construction methods, or original
historic materials of the building.
b. Any alteration made to an historic structure to accommodate a telecommunications/personal wireless service
facility shall be fully reversible.
c. Telecommunications/Personal wireless service facilities authorized under this subsection shall be concealed
within or behind existing architectural features or shall be located so that they are not visible from public roads
and viewing areas.
46
6. Scenic Landscapes and Vistas -Ground mounted facilities shall not be located within open areas that are clearly
visible from public roads, recreational areas, or abutting properties. All ground mounted telecommunications
/personal wireless service facilities shall be surrounded by a buffer of dense tree growth as per Section G.
7. Driveways -If available, existing entrances and driveways to serve a telecommunications/personal wireless
service facility shall be utilized, unless the applicant can demonstrate that a new entrance and driveway will result
in less visual, traffic and environmental impact. New driveways to serve a telecommunications/personal wireless
service facility shall not exceed twelve (12’) feet in width and shall include provisions for turn offs to
accommodate emergency vehicles at a minimum spacing of 500 feet. A gravel or crushed stone surface is
encouraged.
8. Antenna Types -Any antenna array placed upon an existing or proposed ground mount, utility pole, or
transmission line mount shall have a diameter of no more than four (4’) feet, exclusive of the diameter of the
mount. A larger diameter antenna array may be permitted after a finding by the Planning Board that the visual
impacts of a large antenna array are negligible.
9. Hazardous Waste -No hazardous waste shall be discharged on the site of any telecommunications/personal
wireless service facility. If any hazardous materials are to be used on site, there shall be provisions for full
containment of such materials. An enclosed containment area shall be provided with a sealed floor, designed to
contain at least one hundred ten (110%) percent of the volume of the hazardous material stored or used on the site.
10. Radio Frequency Radiation (RFR) Standards -All equipment proposed for a telecommunications/personal
wireless service facility shall be fully compliant with the FCC Guidelines for Evaluating the Environmental
Effects of Radio Frequency Radiation (FCC Guidelines), under Report and Order, FCC 96-326, published on
August 1, 1996, and all subsequent amendments.
H. Monitoring, Maintenance and Verification:
1. Maintenance -The owner of the facility shall maintain the telecommunications/personal wireless service facility
in good condition. Such maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, painting, structural integrity of the
mount and security barrier and maintenance of the buffer areas and landscaping.
2. Monitoring -As part of the issuance of the site plan approval or building permit, the property owner shall agree
that the Town of Candia may enter the subject property to obtain RFR measurements at the expense of the carrier.
The Town shall provide reasonable written notice to the carrier and landowner and provide them the opportunity
to accompany Town representatives when the measurements are conducted.
3. Security for Removal:
a. Recognizing the hazardous situation presented by abandoned and unmonitored telecommunications
facilities, the Planning Board shall set the form and amount of security that represents the cost for
removal and disposal of abandoned telecommunication facilities in the event that a facility is abandoned
and the owner is unwilling or unable to remove the facility in accordance with Section I.
b. The amount of the security shall be based upon the removal costs plus fifteen (15%) percent provided by
the applicant and certified by a structural engineer licensed in New Hampshire. The owner of the facility
shall provide the Planning Board with a revised removal cost estimate and structural evaluation prepared
by a professional structural engineer licensed in New Hampshire every seven (7) years from the date of
the Planning Board’s approval of the site plan. If the cost has increased more than fifteen (15%) percent
the owner of the facility shall provide additional security in the amount of the increase.
4. Verification -The Zoning Board of Adjustment or Planning Board, at its discretion, may hire an expert of its
choice to review applications. Such experts may include, but are not limited to Planning Experts, Technical
Experts, Engineering Experts, Legal Experts and Surveying Experts. All such expenses shall be borne by the
applicant.
47
I. Abandonment or Discontinuation of Use:
1. Notification -At such time that a carrier plans to abandon or discontinue operation of a telecommunications /personal
wireless service facility, such carrier will notify the Town by certified U.S mail of the proposed date of abandonment or
discontinuation of operations. Such notice shall be given no less than thirty (30) days prior to abandonment or
discontinuation of operations. In the event that a carrier fails to give such notice, the telecommunications/personal
wireless service facility shall be considered abandoned upon such discontinuation of operations.
2. Removal -Upon abandonment or discontinuation of use, the owner of the facility shall physically remove the
telecommunications/personal wireless service facility within ninety (90) days from the date of abandonment or
discontinuation of use. “Physically remove” shall include, but not be limited to:
a. Removal of antennas, mount, equipment shelters and security barriers from the subject property.
b. Proper disposal of the waste materials from the site in accordance with local and state Solid Waste Disposal
regulations.
c. Restoring the location of the telecommunications/personal wireless service facility to its natural condition,
except that any landscaping and grading shall remain in the after condition.
3. Failure to Remove -If the owner of the facility does not remove the facility upon the Code Enforcement Officer’s
order, then the Board of Selectmen shall, after holding a public hearing with notice to the owners and abutters, issue a
declaration of abandonment. The owner of the facility shall dismantle and remove the facility within ninety (90) days
of receipt of the declaration of abandonment by the Board of Selectmen. If the abandoned facility is not removed within
ninety (90) days, the Town may execute the security to pay for this action.
J. Notifications -Additional written notification of a Special Exception request to the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be
made to all abutters within ¾ miles of the proposed site.
K. Easements -The owner of the proposed facility shall provide a draft permanent easement with the Town for review and
comment. The easement shall include sufficient area to access, maintain and remove the facility. Once approved by the
Town, the easement shall be recorded by the facility owner in the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds prior to the
issuance of a Building Permit.
Section 12.05 Severability:
The invalidity of any provision of this ordinance shall not affect the validity of any other provision.
Section 12.06 Administration and Enforcement:
It shall be the duty of the Board of Selectmen, and they are hereby given the power and authority, to enforce the provisions of
this ordinance. The Selectmen may appoint an agent to enforce this ordinance.
Upon any well-founded information that this ordinance is being violated, the Selectmen shall take immediate steps to enforce
the provisions of this ordinance by seeking an injunction in the Superior Court or by any other legal action.
ARTICLE XIII: LAND USE REGULATION
Section 13.01: Purpose:
The Land Use Regulation herein is based on the Master Plan of the Town of Candia. The purpose and intent is to regulate the
pace of growth of the Town so as to insure orderly growth at a rate consistent with the goals and objectives of, and the physical
and financial constraints and limitations upon, the Town identified by the Master Plan.
Section 13.02: Building Year:
As used herein, "Building Year" shall mean a year commencing March 14th and ending March 13th.
Section 13.03: Regulation:
The Candia Planning Board has the authority to review and approve a subdivision in its entirety. Limitations on development of
lots, currently 9 per year, shall be administered through the building permit process by the Building Inspector. For the purpose
of this regulation, lot shall mean lot, plat, site, or other division of land for the purpose of sale, rent, lease, or condominium
conveyance or building development.
48
ARTICLE XIV: BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
Section 14.01: Authority:
There shall be a Board of Adjustment as provided by the statutes of the State of New Hampshire.
Section 14.02: Powers:
The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers as well as any other powers conferred upon such boards by the
statutes of the State of New Hampshire.
A. Administrative Appeal:
Upon appeal from a decision by an administrative official, the Board of Adjustment shall decide any question involving
the interpretation of any provision of this Ordinance, including determination of the precise location of any district
boundary.
B. Special Exception:
The Board of Adjustment may authorize special exception uses as specified in this Ordinance.
C. Variances:
The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide requests for variances from the terms of this Ordinance. No variance may
be granted unless ALL of the following criteria are met:
1. The variance will not be contrary to the public interest;
2. The spirit of the ordinance is observed;
3. Substantial justice is done;
4. The values of surrounding properties are not diminished; and
5. Literal enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance would result in an unnecessary hardship.
Any conditions necessary to meet one or more of the foregoing standards may be attached to approval of the variance.
Any variance shall grant the minimum relief from the terms of this Ordinance that is necessary to relieve the unnecessary
hardship.
D. Building permit on Class VI Road:
The Board of Adjustment shall hear appeals pursuant to the provisions of RSA 674:41.
Section 14.03:
The Board shall adopt rules and regulations governing meetings, hearings, fees, and other matters for the proper
functioning of the Board.
Section 14.04:
Representations made at public hearing or material submitted to the Board by an applicant for a special exception or
variance concerning features of proposed buildings, structures, parking, or use which are subject to regulation pursuant to
this Ordinance snail be deemed conditions upon such special exception or variance.
Section 14.05:
No variance or special exception may be granted for premises on which outstanding violations of this Ordinance exist,
unless the effect of such a variance or special exception would be to remedy all such violations.
Section 14.06:
Variance and special exceptions shall expire unless used within a period of two (2) years from the date granted. The Board
may for good cause shown extend such period by as much as one year. (2019)
49
ARTICLE XV: SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
Section 15.01: Authorized Uses:
The Board of Adjustment may authorize the uses set forth in Section 5.02 of this Ordinance as Special Exceptions in
specified Districts.
Section 15.02: Special Exception Standards:
Special Exceptions shall meet the following standards provided by this Ordinance for the particular use:
1. No hazard to the public or adjacent property on account of potential fire, explosion or release of toxic materials;
2. No detriment to property value in the vicinity or change in the neighborhood on account of the location or scale of
buildings and other structures, parking areas, access ways, odor, smoke, gas, dust, or other pollutant, noise, glare,
heat, vibration, or unsightly outdoor storage of equipment, vehicles or other materials;
3. No creation of a traffic safety hazard or a substantial increase in the level of traffic congestion in the vicinity;
4. No excessive demand on municipal services, including, but not limited to water, sewer, waste disposal, police and
fire protection, and schools;
5. No significant increase of storm water runoff onto adjacent property or streets.
Section 15.03: Special Exception Conditions:
Special Exception approvals may be subject to appropriate conditions including the following:
1. Front, side, or rear yard in excess of the minimum requirements of this Ordinance;
2. Screening of the premises from the street or adjacent property by walls, fences, other devices;
3. Modification of the exterior features of buildings or other structures;
4. Limitations on the size of buildings and other structures more stringent than minimum or maximum requirements
of this Ordinance;
5. Limitations on the number of occupants and methods and times of operation;
6. Grading of the premises for proper drainage;
7. Regulation of design of access drives, sidewalks, and other traffic features;
8. Off-street parking and unloading spaces in excess of the minimum requirements of this Ordinance;
9. Regulation of the number, size, and lighting of signs more stringent than the requirements of this Ordinance.
Section 15.04: Specific Special Exception Uses:
A. Neighborhood Businesses and Professional Offices in Residential Districts:
Those commercial uses identified in Section 5.02:b3, 5.02:b5 and 5.02:b6 of this ordinance and specifically
referring to this section may be permitted as Special Exceptions in the Residential Zone provided that:
1. Such uses are located only on an arterial street as designated in Article III.
2. Such uses do not have an enclosed floor area in excess of 2000 SF.
3. Such uses do not detract from the rural aesthetics of the area.
50
B. Two-Family and Multi-Family Dwellings:
Purpose: It is declared to be in the public interest and for the general welfare of the Town of Candia to permit the development
of housing facilities specifically suited to address the needs of the elderly, handicapped, youth, and low-income families who
wish to reside in the Town of Candia. In order to achieve this goal, two family and multi-family dwelling uses identified in
Section 5.02: A.32 of this Ordinance and specifically referring to this section may be permitted as Special Exceptions in the R
District subject to the following safeguards:
1. Such uses shall be located on an arterial street as designated in Article III. (Business Routes 101, S.R. #43, S.R. #27)
2. Specifications:
a. Lot size shall contain no less than three (3) acres and have 200 feet of frontage. Lots greater than six (6) acres
may utilize existing legal right of ways providing private road access is built to town standards.
b. The dimensional requirements shall comply with Section 6.02 of this Ordinance. Specifically: front yards shall
be 50feet, side and rear yards shall be 25 feet, and maximum building height shall be 35 feet/2.5 stories.
c. Density shall be one dwelling unit for the first three acres and an additional dwelling unit for each additional
contiguous buildable acre. In accordance with Section 2:05 only one multi-family or two-family building will
be allowed per lot unless approved under innovative land use.
d. One-bedroom units shall contain a minimum of 600 square feet per unit. Two-bedroom units shall contain a
minimum of 800 square feet.
e. Two parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit.
f. All applications for 3 or more units shall be subject to site plan review.
g. A maximum of four dwelling units shall be allowed in any multi-family structure.
h. Multi-family dwellings shall be wholly located no more than 800 feet from the arterial street on which the lot
has frontage. Only this portion of the lot shall be used for calculating unit density as specified in 15.04: B.2.c.
C. Elderly Housing -Repealed
D. Sexually Oriented Business:
1. Purpose -It is the purpose of this section to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration
of sexually oriented businesses within the Town of Candia and to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the
citizens of the Town of Candia: that the regulations be utilized to prevent problems of blight and deterioration which
may accompany concentrations of sexually oriented businesses. The provisions of this amendment have neither the
purpose nor the effect of imposing limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including
sexually oriented materials. It is not the intent nor effect of this section to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually
oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually
oriented entertainment to their market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this section to condone or legitimize the
distribution of obscene material.
2. Definition -Sexually oriented business includes, but is not limited to, an adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video
store, adult cabaret, adult theaters, adult motels, nude model studio, sexual encounter center or any other business
which meets the definition of “harmful to minors” and/or sexual conduct as set forth in RSA 571-B:1 Allowed
locations and restrictions: Must be located in a commercial district
Must not be located within the Drug Free School Zone. Shall not be permitted within 1000 feet of any church, place of worship,
parish house, public or private school, kindergarten, day care center or public sports/recreation parks. Shall not be located
within 1000 feet of any Town Office Building or any public library. Shall not be located within 1000 feet of any private
residence and shall not be located within 500 feet of any other sexually oriented business.
For a use to be established under this section, the applicant must demonstrate that the proposed site satisfies all the site
requirements of Site Plan Review and must secure a Special Exception from the Zoning Board of Adjustment subject to the
requirements and procedures contained herein.
Severability: The invalidity of any section or provision of this Article shall not invalidate any other section or provision
thereof.
51
E. Accessory Dwelling Units:
Any single family dwelling unit in the residential or mixed use districts may be converted or constructed to
provide for one accessory dwelling unit subject to conformance with Section 15.02, Special Exception
Standards and any additional requirements imposed by the Board of Adjustment under Section 15.03, Special
Exception Conditions and subject to the following restrictions:
1. There shall be no more than one accessory dwelling unit for any single-family dwelling.
2. There shall be no more than two bedrooms in the accessory dwelling unit.
3. Adequate sewer and water service shall be provided. One septic system shall serve the entire property
and the adequacy of the system shall be certified by a licensed septic installer.
4. There shall be a maximum of 750 square feet for the accessory dwelling unit.
5. On-site parking for one additional vehicle shall be provided.
6. All existing set back requirements shall be met.
7. The accessory unit shall be within or attached to the main dwelling unit.
8. Architectural enhancements will be employed for the purpose of maintaining aesthetic continuity with
the principal dwelling unit resulting in both units appearing as a single-family dwelling unit.
9. Either the primary or the accessory dwelling unit shall be occupied by the owner of the property.
10. The current State Building and Fire Codes for two family dwellings shall apply.
F. Dwelling in Building Used for Commercial Purposes:
One dwelling unit may be built in a commercial building provided that:
1. The building is in a commercial district and is being used for commercial purposes.
2. That the commercial use will not be hazardous to health and safety of occupants.
3. No other residential building exists on the lot.
*Square footage of dwelling shall not exceed square footage of commercial use.
ARTICLE XVI: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section 16.01:
The Building Inspector Shall Administer the Provisions of this Ordinance.
A. Building Inspector -Duties:
It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to keep a record of all applications for permits issued with a notation of
special conditions involved. He shall file and safely keep copies of all plot plans submitted and the same shall form a
part of his records.
B. Inspection for Compliance:
It shall be the further duty of the Building Inspector to maintain a constant surveillance of the Town to ensure that the
provisions of this Ordinance are not being violated.
Section 16.02: Building Permits and Certificates of Occupancy Required:
A. Requirements to Commence Building -No building or structure shall be erected, added to or altered and no
excavation shall be started until a Building Permit therefore shall have been issued by the Building Inspector stating
that the building complies with all the provisions of this Ordinance.
52
B. Certificate of Occupancy -No land or building shall be occupied, used, or changed in use until a Certificate of
Occupancy shall have been issued by the Building Inspector stating that the proposed use of such land or building
complies with all the provisions of this Ordinance.
C. Application for Certificate of Occupancy -A Certificate of Occupancy shall be applied for at the same time
application is made for a Building Permit and shall be issued following an inspection of the premises by the Building
Inspector and his finding that all provisions of this Ordinance have been met.
D. Application Procedure and Requirements -Applications for Building Permits and Certificates of Occupancy shall be
made in duplicate on forms provided by the Building Inspector, each to be accompanied by a plot plan drawn to scale
showing all lot and required yard dimensions, the size and location of all buildings and uses, driveway locations, and all
other such information as may be required by the Building Inspector to process said applications. The proposed
handling of water supply and sewage disposal shall be described on all applications and shown on the plot plan.
E. Denial: Certificate of Occupancy -Except upon written order of the Board of Adjustment, no Building Permit or
Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for any construction or use which would be in violation of this Ordinance.
F. Denial: Notification Procedures -Where applications are denied by the Building Inspector, the specific reasons for so
doing shall be stated fully on the application and a copy returned to the applicant.
G. Period of Validity -All valid permits must be exercised within twelve (12) months after date of issue. If a valid permit
is not exercised, a renewal permit must be applied for.
H. Compliance with Noticed Changes: Pursuant to RSA 676:12 the Building -Inspector shall not issue any building
permit where application for such permit is made after the first legal notice of proposed changes in the building code or
the zoning ordinance has been noticed.
I. Limitation of Building Permits -The Building Inspector is authorized to issue no more than nine (9) permits per
building year per approved subdivision of land.
Section 16.03: Planning Board Review:
A. RSA Reference:
In accordance with Chapters 674:43, 674:44 675:8, New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated, the Planning Board shall
have the authority to review and approve site plans to the extent provided for in said chapters (NH RSA 674 & 675).
The planning board is authorized to review and approve or disapprove site plans involving change or expansion of use as
now provided in RSA 674:43-1 as amended by the 1987 session of the New Hampshire General Court.
B. Exemptions to site review procedures and requirements:
1. The construction or enlargement of any single family or two-family dwelling or building accessory to such
building.
2. Construction or alteration providing for not more than 200 square feet total area after construction.
3. Customary home occupations, home offices and home shops as defined in Article V, Section 5.03 A, B and C.
C. Impact Fees:
Purpose: This ordinance is enacted pursuant to RSA 674:21, and in order to:
• Promote the public health, safety, welfare and prosperity;
• Ensure that adequate and appropriate facilities are available to individuals who may come to be located in the
Town of Candia;
• Prevent scattered or premature development of land as would involve danger or injury to health, safety, or
prosperity by reason of the lack of water supply, drainage, transportation, schools, fire protection, or other public
services, or necessitate the excessive expenditure of public funds for the supply of such services;
• Provide for the harmonious development of the municipality and its environs;
• Ensure the proper arrangement and coordination of streets; and
• Ensure streets of sufficient width to accommodate existing and prospective traffic.
53
Definition of Impact Fee -A fee or assessment imposed upon development, including subdivision, building construction
or other land-use change, in order to help meet the needs occasioned by the development for the construction or
improvement of capital facilities owned or operated by the municipality, including and limited to water treatment and
distribution facilities; wastewater treatment and disposal facilities; sanitary sewers; storm water, drainage and flood
control facilities; public road systems and rights-of-way; municipal office facilities; public school facilities; the
municipality’s proportional share of capital facilities of a cooperative or regional school district of which the municipality
is a member; public safety facilities; solid waste collection, transfer, recycling, processing and disposal facilities; public
libraries; and public recreation facilities, not including public open space.
Authority to Assess Impact Fees:
• The Planning Board is hereby authorized to assess impact fees, as herein defined, and in accordance with the
standards herein set forth. The Planning Board shall have the authority to adopt regulations to implement the
provisions of this ordinance.
Assessment Methodology:
• The amount of any impact fee shall be a proportional share of municipal capital improvement costs which is
reasonably related to the capital needs created by the development, and to the benefits accruing to the
development from the capital improvements financed by the fee.
• Upgrading of existing facilities and infrastructures, the need for which is not created by new development, shall
not be paid for by impact fees.
• The amount of the impact fee shall be determined by an Impact Fee Schedule prepared in accordance with the
methodology established in a report by the Planning Board entitles impact Fee: Town of Candia”, and adopted by
the Planning Board.
Administration of Impact Fees:
• In order for the Planning Board to adopt an impact fee schedule, the Town of Candia must have enacted a capital
improvements program pursuant to RSA 674:5-7.
• Each impact fee shall be accounted for separately, shall be segregated from the Town’s general fund and shall be
exempt from all provisions of RSA 32, relative to limitation and expenditure of town monies, may be spent only upon
written order of the governing body, and shall be used solely for the capital improvements for which it was collected, or
to recoup the cost of capital improvements made in anticipation of the needs for which fees are collected to meet.
• The Town Treasurer shall record all fees paid, by date of payment and name of the fee payer and shall maintain an
updated record of the current ownership, tax map and lot reference number of properties for which fees have been paid
under this ordinance. At the end of each fiscal year, the Town Treasurer shall make a report to the governing body,
giving a particular account of all impact fee transactions during the year.
• All impact fees imposed pursuant to this section shall be assessed at the time of Planning Board approval of a
subdivision plat or site plan. When no Planning Board approval is required or has been made prior to the adoption or
amendment of the impact fee ordinance, impact fees may be assessed prior to, or as a condition for, the issuance of a
building permit or other appropriate permission to proceed with development.
• Between the date of assessment and collection, the Planning Board may require developers to post security, in the form
of a cash bond, letter of credit or performance bond so as to guarantee future payment of assessed impact fees.
• Impact fees shall be collected as a condition for the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. If no Certificate of
Occupancy is required, impact fees shall be collected when the development is ready for its intended use. In addition,
projects where off-site improvements are to be constructed simultaneously with a project’s development, and where the
Town has appropriated the necessary funds to cover such portions of the work for which it will be responsible, the
Town may advance the time of collection of the impact fee to the issuance of a building permit.
• No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for new development until the assessed impact fee has been paid, or until
the fee payer has established a mutually acceptable bond guaranteeing such payment with the Planning Board.
• The Planning Board and the assessed party may establish an alternate, mutually acceptable schedule of payment of
impact fees.
54
Credits -Land and/or public capital facility improvements may be offered by the impact fee payer as total or partial
payment of the required impact fee. The offer must be determined to represent an identifiable dollar value computed in a
manner acceptable to the governing body. The governing body may authorize the impact fee payer an impact fee credit in
the amount of the amount of the contribution. Any claim for credit must be made no later than the time application for the
building permit is made. Credits shall not be transferable from one project or development to another without written
approval of the governing body.
Additional Assessments -Payment of the impact fees does not restrict the Town of Candia or the Planning Board in
requiring other payments from the impact fee payer, including such payments relating to the cost of necessary highway,
drainage, and sewer and water upgrades or other infrastructure and facilities specifically benefiting the development as
required by the Town’s Subdivision or Site Plan Review Regulations.
Review -The impact fee schedule shall be reviewed periodically by the Planning Board. Such reviews may result in
recommended adjustments in one or more of the fees based on the most recent data as may be available from the US
Census Bureau, local property assessment records, market data, reflecting interest and discount rates, current construction
cost information for public capital facilities, etc. Adjustments shall be approved by the Planning Board. Schedule
adjustments which would change the methodology shall be made by the Planning Board.
Return of Impact Fee:
If the full impact fee assessed under this ordinance is not encumbered or otherwise legally bound to be spent for the
purpose for which it was collected within six (6) years, the fee shall be refunded to the assessed party, with any accrued
interest.
• Whenever the calculation of the impact fee has been predicated upon some portion of capital improvement costs
being borne by the Town, a refund shall be made upon the failure of the Town Meeting to appropriate the Town’s
share of the capital improvement costs within six (6) years from the date of payment thereof.
Applicability -This ordinance shall not be deemed to affect the existing authority of the Planning board over subdivisions
and site plans, including, but not limited to the authority to declare a development to be premature or scattered in
accordance with the regulations of the Board and in accordance with RSA 674:36, II(a).
Section 16.04: Violations and Penalties:
A. Notification:
If at any time the Building Inspector finds that any construction or use has been commenced in violation of this
Ordinance, he shall immediately notify the owner, agent and/or occupant of the nature of the violation in writing and order
the abatement of such violation.
B. Penalties:
Violations of this Ordinance, including conditions of any variance or special exception granted by the Board of
Adjustment shall be punishable either:
1. By a civil fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100) for each day that such violation is found by a court to
continue after the conviction date or after the date on which the violator receives written notice from the town that
he is in violation of this ordinance whichever is earlier, or
2. As a misdemeanor, if committed by a natural person, or a felony, if committed by any other person.
In addition, the Town may take any appropriate legal action to enjoin or abate any such violation or proposed violation
and may recover costs and attorney's fees as provided by statutes.
C. Filing of Complaints:
Wherever any violation of this Ordinance occurs, any person may file a complaint in regard thereto in writing to the
Building Inspector. The Building Inspector shall investigate said complaint, and, finding a violation to exist, shall act
according to paragraph 16.01A of this Ordinance. (2019)
D. Appeal:
Unless otherwise specified in this ordinance, any decision under an impact fee ordinance may be appealed in the same
manner provided by the statute for appeals from the officer or board making the decision, as set forth in RSA 676:5, RSA
677:2-14; or RSA 677:15 respectively.
55
Section 16.05: Amendments:
Amendments to regulations and District boundaries set forth in this Ordinance proposed by the Planning Board, Board of
Selectmen or petition of voters shall be acted upon in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 675:3 through
675:5 and 675:7, New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated.
Section 16.06: Validity:
Should any provision of the Ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of
the Ordinance as a whole, or any other section or provision thereof.
Section 16.07: Conflict with Other Laws:
Whenever the requirements of this Ordinance conflict with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules,
regulations, or ordinance, the most restrictive or higher standards shall apply.
Section 16.08: Repealed:
The Zoning Ordinance and Map adopted on March 9, 1965 together with all amendments thereto is hereby repealed.
Section 16.09: Effective Date:
This Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its passage.
*Original Ordinance Enacted:
March 8, 1960
Amended:
March 14, 1961; March 12, 1963
Repealed and Re-Enacted:
March 9, 1965
Amended:
March 14, 1967; March 11, 1969; March 9, 1971
Repealed and Adopted New Ordinance:
March 6, 1973
Amended:
3/14/78; 3/13/79; 3/11/80; 3/10/81; 3/9/82; 3/13/84; 3/14/86, 3/10/87; 3/8/88; 3/14/89; 3/13/90; 3/12/91; 3/10/92; 3/9/93;
3/8/94; 3/14/95; 3/12/96; 3/10/98; 3/9/99; 3/14/00; 3/13/01; 3/12/02; 3/11/03; 3/9/04; 3/8/05; 3/14/06; 3/13/07; 3/11/08;
3/10/09; 3/9/10; 3/8/11; 3/13/12; 3/16/17

MINOR SITE PLAN REVIEW REGULATIONS
TOWN OF CANDIA, NEW HAMPSHIRE
2010
Adopted January 29, 1992
Revised and Adopted July 19, 1995
Revised and Adopted December 3, 2003
Revised October 3, 2007
Revised August 4, 2010
HISTORY
Adopted ~ May 21, 1986
Revised & Re-adopted - April 26, 1989
Revised & Re-adopted- November 15, 1995
Revised & Re-adopted- December 3, 2003
Revised- October 3, 2007
Revised - January l 0, 2009
August 4, 2010
f }~
CANDIA PLANNING BOARD
PUBLIC HEARING NOTICE
The Candia Planning Board will hold a Public Hearing on August 4, 2010 at 7:00 p.m. in the Candia Town
Offices at 74 High Street to consider the following amendments to the Candia's Site Plan/Subdivision
regulations. The full text of all proposed Amendments are available for inspection and review atthe Land Use
Office during regular office hours. For additional information, please call the Land Use Office at 483-8588.
General Housekeeping Amendments:
Major Site Plans:
Amendment #1: Amend by updating "Article 5.00 Action by the Board' in accordance with RSA 676:4 regarding
procedures on Plats.
Amendment #2: Amend by adding new Article 12.00 "Appeals" as provided in RSA 677: 15 under Section V:
Miscellaneous Provision.
Amendment #3: Amend by adding new Article 13: "Active and Substantial development or Building' under Section
V: Miscellaneous Provisions.
Amendment #4: Amend by adding new "Article 7. 00 Development of Regional Impact", under Section II:
Procedures and Submission Requirements.
Amendment #5: Update and replace "Section 7. 07 Groundwater protection" in accordance with RSA 674:43 & 44,
to match with the Groundwater Protection Plan voted in March 2010.
Minor Site Plans:
Amendment #1: Amend by updating Article 5,00 Action by the Board in accordance with RSA 676:4 regarding
procedures on Plats.
Amendment #2: Amend by adding new Article 10.00 "Appeals" as provided in RSA 677:15 under Section VII:
Miscellaneous Provisions.
Amendment #3: Amend Section VII Miscellaneous Provisions by adding new Article 11 "Active and Substantial
development or Building'.
Amendment #4: Amend Section III: Procedures and Submission Requirements by adding new Subsection "3.04,
Development of Regional Impact".
Amendment #5: Update and replace "Section 7.07 Groundwater protection" in accordance with RSA 674:43 & 44,
to match the Groundwater Protection Plan voted in March 2010.
Subdivision Regulations:
Amendment #1: Amend by updating "Article 2: Administration and Enforcement, Section 2. 07 Penalties";
regarding transferring lots in an unapproved subdivision under RSA 674:35 II.
Amendment #2: Amend by adding new Subsection "2. I 3 Active and Substantial Development or Building' under
Article 2 Administration and Enforcement, per RSA 674:39.
Amendment #3: Amend by adding new Subsection "2.14 Development of Regional Impact', under Article 2
Administration and Enforcement per RSA 36:54.
Amendment #4 Amend by adding "Section 11.09 Groundwater Protection", in accordance with RSA 485-C; 2, to
correspond with the Groundwater Protection Plan voted in March 2010.
Earth Excavation Regulations: Repeal and replace the 1989 Earth Excavation Regulations with new regulations.
For additional information, please call the Land Use Office at 483-8588.
For the Planning Board,
Mary Girard, Chairperson
August 2010
Mmor :Stte Plan Kegulat1ons August 4, 'LUIU
MINOR SITE PLAN REGULATIONS TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION I: ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS------------------------·····-----·····------------- 3
Article
1. 01
1. 02
1. 03
1.04
1. 05
1 06
1.00 Authority, Adoption, and Amendment ------ --- ------------ ---- -3
Aut h ori t y : --------------------------------------- - ------------ - --- 3
Titl e : ------------------- -- -- ------------------ - ---- - ------------ - 3
Validity : ---- -------- -- - --- ---- ----------- ---- -------------------- 3
Ame n dment: -- - ------------------ - ------------------- --- ----------- - 3
Proh i b i t ion o f Con s truction Pri o r to Approva l . --------- - ---------- 3
Wa i ver Provi s i on: ----- - - - ---- - - ---- ------ - -- - - -- ---- - -------- - - --- 3
SECTION II: PURPOSE, SCOPE AND COMPLIANCE--------------·····-··-----·····--··----- 4
Article
2 .01
2 , 02
2 . 03
2 . 04
2 . 05
2 .06
2 . 07
2 .00 Purpose, Scope and Compliance with Other Ordinances -------- - 4
Purpo se : ------ - -------- - -- ---------------------------------------- 4
Scope : -- - - - --- ------- -- - - -------------------- - - - - -------------- --- 4
Compl iance with Oth e r Or d inances · - --------- - ----- - -- ---------- - --- 5
De fin i tion s : ---------------- - - ------------------- ------- ---- - ----- 5
Construction Sta ndards . --------- ------------ ------------------ -- -- 5
Change of Use Criteria : -- -- -- - - ---------- -- -- -- --------------- - --- 5
Na t i ona l Fl ood Insura nce Requireme nt s ------- ------- --------- - ----- 6
SECTION Ill: PROCEDURES AND SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS---------------------- 6
Article
3 .01
3 . 02
3 . 03
3 . 04
3.00 Procedure for Minor Site Plan Review - - --- - - - --------- ------- 6
Filing of Application ------- - - -- - - ----------- ---- - ----- ---------- - 6
No t i ce : - -------------- -- -------- ----------- --------- - - - ----------- 6
Fil ing Fees : - -- ------ --- ------ - ---- --------- - - - - --- - - - - - ----- -- - - - 7
Development o f Regi ona l Impact : -------------- --------- - ----------- 7
Article 4 . 00 General Informati on and Filing Requirements : --- - - - --- - ----- -8
4 . 01 Numbe r of Copies Requi red : -------- --------- ------- - - --- ---------- - 8
4 . 02 Gen e r al I n f orma t ion : ------ ------------------- --- - - - -- --------- - --- 8
4 . 03 Filing Requirements : ----- ------ ------------ ------ - ------------ - --- 8
4 . 04 The fol l owi ng inf o r mat ion must be shown on the fi nal minor s ite p l an
t o be approved by the Planning Boa r d : ----------- ---------- - - - ----------- - 8
SECTION IV: ACTION BY THE BOARD-·············---------------------------------------------- 9
Article 5.00 Action by the Board: ------------------------------------ - ----9
5 . 01 Ackn owledgment o f Receipt of Notice : --- -- - ------- - ------ ---------- 9
5 . 02 Pe riod f o r Commenc eme n t of Con st ruct i on and --- --- ----------- - - - -- 10
Completion of Work : ----------- - ----- -------------- - - - - ------------------- 10
5 . 03 Modi f i cation of Design a n d Improvements:--- - - --- - ---- - -------- - -- 10
5 . 04 Correct i on of Defici enc ies : - -------------- ---- ----------------- 10
Article 6 . 00 Certificate of Occupancy/Completeness: - - ------- - ------- ---- 10
SECTION V: STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR SITE DEVELOPMENT-----10
Article
7 . 01
7 02
7 . 03
7 . 04
7 . 00 Site Standard Requirements: --------- ----- - - - - ----------- ----10
Gen e ra l Re qu i r ements : - --- - - - --- - - - --------- - ---- - - --------------- 10
Si t e Characteristics : - ----- - ---- ---------- - - -- - - ------------ --- -- 11
Cons truction Standards : -- - ------- -------------- - ---- -- --------- -- 11
Coordi nation of Stre e ts , Park i ng , Loading , and Saf ety : -------- - - - 11
Mmor ~1te .Plan KegulatJons August 4 , 20 I U
7 . 05
7 . 06
7 . 07
7 .08
7 . 09
7 .10
Screening : ------------------------------------------------------- 12
Storm Drainage : -------------------------------------------------- 12
Groundwater Protection: - ------------------------------------------- 12
Disposi tion of Excavated Wa ste: -------------------------------- 12
Impervious Cover : -- -- ---------------------------- ---------------- 13
Underground Petroleum Storage Tanks : ----- --------- --------------- 13
SECTION VI: JOINT PROCEDURES PROVISIONS -------------------------------------------13
Article 8.00 Procedure When Subdivision Approval is Required : -------- - --13
8.01 Pr ocedure When Specia l Exception or Variance by the Board of
Adjustment is Required: --- - --------- -- -- --- ------ ---- ---------------- --- 13
Application shall be considered a major site plan review. -- ---------- - - - 13
8. 0] Procedure When Ea~th Excavation Permi t ~s Requ ired:-------- ~ ---- - 13
Application shall be considered a maj or site plan r eview.--------------- 13
SECTION VII: MISCELLANEOUS PROVIS 10 NS------------------------------------------------13
Article 9 .00 Fines and Penalties: ---------------------------------------13
Article 10.00 Appeals: -------------- ---- -- -------------------------- - ----13
Article 11 . 00 Active and Substantial Development or Building: ------------13
2
Mmor Site Plan Kegulat10ns August 4, 20 I u
SECTION I: ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
Article 1.00 Authority, Adoption, and Amendment
1.01 Authority:
The Candia Planning Board hereby adds Minor Site Plan Review Regulations to the Candia Site Plan
Review Regulations under the authority of NH Revised Statutes Annotated Chapters 674:43 and
674:44 and pursuant to the authorization from the Town of Candia by vote at town meeting on March
14, 1986 (Article 28) and by said Planning Board vote at their Meeting of May 5, 1986, and pursuant
to the authorization from the Town of Candia by vote at town meeting on March 14, 1989 (Article 2).
These Minor S~te Plan Review Regulations. are adopted by the Candia .Planning Board on July 19,
1995.
1.02 Title:
These regulations shall be known as the Town of Candia Minor Site Plan Review Regulations,
hereinafter refeued to as "these regulations"
1.03 Validity :
If any portion of these regulations is found for any reason to be invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of these regulations.
1.04 Amendment :
These regulations may be amended whenever such action is deemed advisable by the Board
following a duly noticed public hearing on the proposed amendment. All changes to these
regulations shall become effective when adopted and signed by the majority of the Planning Board
members and filed in a central file with the Office of State Planning.
1.05 Prohibition of Construction Prior to Approval:
No construction, change of use, land clearing or building development shall be initiated until the
final proposed site plan has been approved by the Board, as evidenced by the Board's Notice of
Decision.
1.06 Waiver Provision:
Upon the written request by the applicant, the Board may grant a relaxation of one or more of the
provisions under these regulations as it deems appropriate.
3
Mmor Site Plan Kegulat10ns August 4, :.W l U
SECTION II: PURPOSE, SCOPE AND COMPLIANCE
Article 2.00 Purpose, Scope and Compliance with Other Ordinances
2.01 Purpose:
The purpose of these regulations is:
A. To provide for the safe and attractive development of the site and to guard against such conditions as
would involve danger or injury to health, safety, or prosperity by reason of:
1. Inadequate drainage or conditions conducive to the flooding of the subject property or that
of another;
2. Inadequate protection for the quality of groundwater;
3. Undesirable and preventable elements of pollution such as noise, smoke, soot, particulates,
or any other discharge into the environment which might prove harmful to persons,
strnctures, or adjacent properties.
4. Inadequate provisions for fire safety, prevention, and control.
B. To require that the land indicated on plans submitted to the Planning Board shall be of such
character that it can be used for building purposes without danger to health; and
C. To include such provisions as will create conditions favorable for health, safety, convenience and
prosperity.
2.02 Scope:
The Planning Board shall review and approve or disapprove minor site plan review applications
using the following criteria in its determination on whether or not a proposal falls under the
jurisdiction of minor site plan review:
A. Definition:
A minor site plan review project is defined as a change or expansion of an existing legal nonresidential
use or a change from an existing residential use to a non-residential use in the
commercial zone, where the overall effect on a lot would be the lesser of either:
25% of existing floor space (outside dimensions); or
2. 2,000 square feet of total disturbed land, of which no more than 1,000 square feet is to be
new building floor space.
3. Disturbed land includes, but is not limited to parking, driveway, septic and leach field,
drainage pipes, drainage ditches, building footprint, etc.
4
Mmor ~1te Plan Kegulattons August 4, LU l U
B. Requirements:
For minor site plan review applications, the acreage, frontage, and set-back requirements of the
subject lot shall meet minimum Zoning Ordinance requirements for the district in which the lot is
located, and the proposed use/change is use shall be a permitted use in the district in which the
lot is located.
C. Exemption.:
Paving of an existing driveway and/or parking lot, 1,600 square feet in area or less, shall be exempt from
site plan review only, unless there is an enviromnental impact, as determined by the Building Inspector.
Appropriate pe1111its are required.
D. Validity:
The minor site plan review process shall be used only once in any 3-year period with respect to a
particular parcel. The 3-year period shall rnn from the date of approval.
2.03 Compliance wim 0th.et· Ordinances:
The Minor Site Plan Review procedures shall in no way relieve an applicant from compliance with the
Candia Zoning Ordinance, the Candia Subdivision Regulations, Earth Excavation Regulations, or any
other regulations or by-iaw which pertains to the proposed development. No minor site plan shall be
approved unless such plan complies with all applicable local ordinances and regulations.
2.04 Defiu.itfons:
For the purpose of the Minor Site Plan Review Regulations, the meaning of terms used herein shall
conform. to the definitim1s found in Article II of the Candia Zoning Ordinance and Article 20 of the
Candia Subdivrnion Regulations.
2.05 Construction St:uidardls:
All site imtJrovements, including parking area, shall be constmcted in conformance with the Candia
Subdivision Regulations, State of New Hampshire Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Constmction, and the Candia Building Code.
2.06 Change of Use Cdte1·ia:
Change or expansion of use of a site: any multi family or nonresidential use which substantially
differs from the previous use of a building or land. Any activity which in the opinion of the Building
Inspector constitutes a change or expansion of use of a site may be subject to Planning Board
approval under the Candia Site Plan Review Regulations.
The Building [nstJector &hall be guided by consideration of the extent to which the proposal relates to
any of the following types of circumstances each of which is subject to site plan approval.
Criteria:
A. Any increase in the size of an exi&ting off-street parking area of 50% or more when associated
with a multifamily or a nonresidential use;
B. The creation of an off-street parking area on a site, except when the off-street parking area is
associated with a single or two~family residential use;
C. Any change in the number or size of access points or any change in the location of the driveway
providing access to or from the adjoining highway when not covered by the regulations;
5
Mmor Stte Plan Kegulattons August 4, LU JU
D. Any occupancy for commercial, industrial or multifamily where prior use has been discontinued
for two years and where no prior site plan has been approved. Change of one land use
classification to another in accordance with the Standard Industrial Classification using the two
digit numerical code as a guideline.
2.07 National Flood Insurance Requirements
For site plans that involve land designated as "Special Flood Hazard Areas" (SFHA) by the
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP):
A The Planning Board shall review the proposed development to assure that all necessary
permit~ have been received from. those governmental agencies from which approval is.
required by Federal or State law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334.
B. The Planning Board shall require that all proposals for development greater than 50 lots or 5
acres, whichever is the lesser, include Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data within such
proposals (i.e. floodplain boundary and I 00-year flood elevation).
C. The Planning Board shall require the applicant to submit sufficient evidence (construction
drawings, grading and land treatment plans) so as to allow a determination that:
(i) all such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(ii) all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems
are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and,
(iii) adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
SECTION III: PROCEDURES AND SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
Article 3.00 Procedure for Minor Site Plan Review
3.01 Filing of Application
Filing a minor site plan review application and other information relevant to the minor site plan proposal
shall be made through the Land Use Office. Inquiries for advice concerning procedures, requirements, or
the status of a particular application may be made to the assistant during regular office hours. If all filing
requirements are satisfied, the assistant will schedule a public hearing on the proposal following the
procedures outlined in Article 3.02 of this Section. At the public hearing, the minor site plan application
will be submitted to the Board for acceptance or rejection.
3.02 Notice:
Prior to holding a public hearing, the Board shall give notice as follows:
A The notice shall include a general description of the proposed minor site plan which is the
subject of the application, shall identify the owner and the site location, and shall state the date,
time, and place of the public hearing.
B. A copy of the notice shall be sent to the owner and the abutters by certified mail.
C. For the purpose of these regulations in counting days, the day on which notice is given and the
day of the public hearing shall be excluded.
D. Notice shall be mailed at least ten days prior to the public hearing.
6
Mmor ~1te Plan Kegulatlons August 4, 20 l 0
E. Notice to the general public shall be given by one
publication of a legal public notice in a newspaper as designated by the Board, at least ten (10)
days prior to the public hearing, and in at least two public places in the Town of Candia.
F. The application shall include the names and street
addresses of the applicant and property owner, and all abutters as indicated in the town records
nor more than five days before the date of filing. Abutters shall also be identified on any plan
submitted to the Board.
G. The applicant shall pay the noticmg costs at the time of filing the minor site plan application.
3.03 Filing Fees:
The applicant shall pay all filing fees in advance, according to the following schedule:
A. Application Fee $ 75.00
B. Legal Notice Fee $ 50.00
C. Abutters Noticing Fees (each) $ as per schedule
D. Compliance Inspection Fee (if necessary) at cost
E. Fire Department Review Fee $ as per schedule
3.04 Development of Regional Impact:
A. Purpose.
I. Provide timely notice to potentially affected municipalities concerning proposed developments which are
likely to have impacts beyond the boundaries of the Town of Candia.
2. Provide opportunities for the regional planning commission and the potentially affected municipalities to
furnish timely input to the Town of Candia.
3. Encourage the Town of Catidia to consider the interests of other potentially affected municipalities.
B. Definitions:
Fulfill the statutory Definition -Any development which the Planning Board determines could reasonable
be expected to impact 011 a neighboring municipality, because of factors such as, but not limited to, the
following:
11. Relative size or 11umber of dwelling units as compared with existing stock.
b. Proximity to the borders of a neighboring community.
c. Transportation 11etworks.
d. Alllicipated emissions such as light, noise, smoke, odors, or particles.
e. Proximity to aquifers or surface waters which transce11d municipal boundaries.
f. Shared facilities such as schools and solid waste disposal facilities.
C Review Required:
Review Required: The Ca11dia Planning hoard, upon receipt of an application for subdivision, shall
review it promptly and determine whether or not the developme11t, if approved, reasonably could be
construed as having the potential for regional impact Doubt co11cerning regional impact shall he resolved
in a determination that the development has a potential regional impact
D. Procedure:
a. upon determination that a proposed development has a potential regional impact, the Candia Planning
Board shall afford the regional planning commission and the affected municipalities the status of
abutters as defined in RSA 672:3 for the limited purpose of providing notice and giving testimony.
b. Not more than 5 business days after reaching a decision regarding a development of regional impact,
the Candia Planning Board shall, by certified mail, furnish the regional planning commission "qnd the
affected municipalities with copies of the minutes of the meeting at which the decision was made. The
Candia Planning Board shall, at the same time, submit an initial set of plans to the regional planning
commission, the cost of wliich shall be borne by the applicant (fhis statute went into effect Jan. 1,
2010).
c. At least 14 days prior to public hearing, the Candia Planning Board shall notify, by certified mail, all
affected municipalities and the regional planning commission of the date, time, am/ place of the
hearing and their right to testify concerning the development
7
(
Mmor Site Plan Kegulat10ns August 4, :.w l U
d. Notwithstanding the foregoing, when the building inspector determines tlrat a use or structure
proposed in a building permit application will /rave tire potential for regional impact and no such
determination has previously been made by another local land use board, he or sire shall notify the
local governing body. The building inspector shall also notify by certified mail tire regional plamiing
commission and the affected municipalities, who shall be provided 30 days to submit comment to the
local governing body and the building inspector prior to the issuance of tire building permit.
Applicability: The provisions of this section slrall superseded any contrary or inconsistent provisions
of local land use regulations enacted under RSA 155-E and RSA 674. (August 4, 2010)
Article 4.00 General Information and Filing Requirements:
Site plans prepared for applications under these regulations are not required to be prepared by a
.professional engineer or licensed land surveyor. All plans must be drawn to scale.
4.01 Number of Copies Requh-ed:
The application for minor site plan review shall be submitted with three copies of the proposed site
plan to the Planning Board. In addition, copies of the plan must also be submitted to the Fire Chief,
Police Chief, Conservation Commission, and Building Inspector at the time of application.
4.02 General Information:
The following general information is required for all minor site plan applications:
A. name and address of propetty owner and authorized agent;
B. location of site, street address, tax map infonnation;
C. abutters list;
D. description of existing and proposed use/change in use;
E. statement of authorization, if applicable; and
F. all filing fees.
4.03 Filing Requirements:
The following minimum filing requirements are to be shown on the plan at the time of filing the
application:
A. name and address of person preparing the plan;
B. scale of plan, minimum 1 inch = 25 feet;
C. no1th arrow;
D. date of plan;
E. name and address of person preparing other data to be included in the plan (if different that
preparer of plan);
F. boundary of site within 100' of disturbed land, and set-backs;
G. total area of proposed building and disturbed land; and;
H. zoning district and ZBA Case # if applicable.
4.04 The following information must be shown on the final 111i1101· site plan to be approved by
the Planning Board:
A. vicinity sketch identifying location of site;
B. existing easements, if any;
C. use of abutting properties and special features, natural or man-made and other data, within 100
feet of proposed activity, such as bodies of water, streams and water courses, swamps, marshes,
wetlands, ~ooded areas, grave sites, discontinued roads;
D. miscellaneous data, such as gas and/or electric lines, paved areas, location and size of structures,
proposed driveways and parking spaces (in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance), location of
all utilities, and existing and proposed site drainage;
8
Mmor Site Plan Kegulatlons August 4, LU lU
E. additional lighting and signage proposed;
F location of existing and/or proposed water supply and septic system;
G. wetlands, if any, copies of state permits for filling or alteration of wetlands, if applicable;
I. completion schedule, and
J. landscaping shall not interfere with sightlines of entering/exiting traffic.
K. Approved fire suppression plan , if required, must be shown on site plan.
L. A signature block for signing by four members of the Board.
4.05 Representation at Public Hearings:
Representations made at public hearings or material submitted to the Board concerning features of
the proposed buildings, strnctures, parking or use which is subject to these regulations shall be
deemed conditions of the Board's approval of the minor site plan.
SECTION IV: ACTION BY THE BOARD
Article 5.00 Action by the Board:
"A. Review period"
"Jn accordance with RSA 676:4 I. (c )(1)" the Board shall act to approve, "approve" with modification, or
disapprove the proposed site plan within 00 "65" days following the public hearing at which the application was
deemed complete and accepted as presented, excepting that the Board may apply to the Board of Selectmen
"prior to the expiration of the 65 day period for an extension of time not to exceed" for an additional 90 day
period within which to act upon the application. "The applicant may consent to an extension of time for the
Board to act beyond the initial 65 day period on the condition that such consent shall be in writing and shall be
made part of the Board's record." (August 4, 2010)
"B. Issuance of Decision"
The Planning Board shall notify the applicant, in writing by means of an official Notice of
Approval/ Disapproval signed by the Chairman, of its action on the final site plan. In the case of
disapproval, the Board shall clearly set fotih in the notice to the applicant the reasons for its
action with specific reference to the standards contained in these regulations. "The minutes of
the meeting at which such vote is taken, including the Official Notice of Decision including all
conditions of approval, shall be placed on file in the Board's office and shall be made available
for public inspection within 5 business days of such vote. Whenever a plat is recorded to
memorialize an approval issued by the Board, the official Notice of Decision including all
conditions of approval shall be recorded with or on the plat." (August 4, 2010)
"C. Failure to Act
If the Board has not obtained an extension in accordance with RSA 676:4 (f) and has not approved or
disapproved the plat within 65 days from the date the plan was accepted as complete, the applicant may seek
relief in accordance with RSA 676:4 c (1) and (2)." (August 4, 2010)
5.0 l Acknowledgment of Receipt of Notice:
The applicant shall acknowledge receipt of the Notice and acceptance of all provisions set forth
therein and shall return a signed copy of same to the Board for its records. UnW such
acknowledgment has been filed with the Board, no further actions shall be taken with regard to the
final minor site plan. Failure to acknowledge receipt of said Notice and acceptance within 90 days of
mailing of the notice will cause approval to lapse.
9
(
Mmor :Site Plan Kegulat10ns August 4, :LU JU
5.02 Period for Commencement of Construction and
Completion of Work:
The applicant shall commence work on all required improvements within one year from date of acknowledgment
of Notice of Decision. Construction of all required improvements shall be completed within two years of the
date of acknowledgment unless a greater period shall be specified in the Notice of Decision (NH RSA 674:42).
5.03 Modification of Design and Improvements:
If, at the time before or during the construction of the proposed improvements to the site, the
applicant determines that unforeseen conditions make it necessary or desirable to modify the location
or design of any of the required improvements or installations, the Board may authorize such
modifications without further public hearing upon a determination by the Board that the proposed
modifications "do not significantly impact tlie original proposal. The Board may authorize such
modifications and said authorization shall be requested by the applicant and shall be set forth in
writing and signed by the Chairman of the Planning Board.
5.04 Correction of Deficiencies:
If it is determined that any of the required improvements have not been completed in accordance with
the plans and specifications as filed by the applicant and as required by the Town, the Selectmen
shall notify the applicant in writing of any such deficiencies. The applicant shall rectify all
deficiencies at the expense of the applicant. If the applicant does not substantially rectify all
deficiencies within a reasonable time as determined by the Town, the Town shall take all necessary
actions to protect and preserve the Town's rights and interests including suspension or revocation of
site plan approval. In the event of legal action, the Town shall be entitled to have reasonable
attorney's and engineer's fees paid by the applicant and awarded by the court.
Article 6.00 Certificate of Occupancv/Completeness:
The Building Inspector shall not issue a Certificate of Occupancy/Completeness under the Candia
Building Code for any building on a minor site plan which does not comply with the Board's Notice
of Decision on that project. The applicant shall not use or occupy the site until a Certificate of
Occupancy/Completeness has been issued by the Building Inspector.
SECTION V: STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR SITE
DEVELOPMENT
Article 7.00 Site Standard Requirements:
The Planning Board shall approve the proposed site plan upon determination that the following requirements
have been met:
7.01 General Requirements:
A. The site plan shall be of such a character that it can be used safely for the construction and
installation of the improvements proposed by the applicant without excessive grades, inadequate
drainage or other hazardous condition.
B. The plan shall provide for the safe and attractive expansion of a structure on the site and guard
against such conditions as would involve danger to health, safety, or property, by reason of
undesirable and preventable elements of pollution. The plan shall provide that:
1. smoke, soot, particulates and other discharge in to the air shall not exceed levels established
under the State Ambient Air Quality Standards: and
10
Mmor Site Plan Kegulahons August 4, 201 U
2. noise and vibrations at property boundaries shall not exceed levels as determined to be
harmful to health and welfare under regulations adopted by the Environmental Protection
Agency, under 42 USC Chapter 65, "Noise Control"_
7.02 Site Characteristics:
The development shall conform to the extent appropriate to the natural topography of the site. Site
clearing shall be kept at a minimum required for the expansion of buildings and improvements,
taking into consideration the need for pedestrian and vehicular safety and the need for lights and air.
Provisions shall be made for the protection of natural features and natural cover shall be retained to
supplement required landscaping to the extent possible and reasonable.
7.03 Construction Standards:
Any proposed site improvements including parking areas shall be constructed in conformance with
the Candia Subdivision Regulations, State of New Hampshire Standards Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction, and the Town Building Code.
A. Driveway and Parking Areas: Application shall not be required to pave the existmg or proposed
area.
B. Treatment of Disturbed Areas: All disturbed areas shall be covered, upon completion, with the
finish treatment of grass, asphalt, concrete, etc., as proposed by the applicant.
C Seeding and Mulching: Any disturbed area to be seeded shall be prepared in confonnance with
the Candia Subdivision Regulations regarding topsoil, seeding, fertilizer, and mulching.
D. Lighting: Soft lighting of the building exterior will be permitted, provided the light source is not
visible and that it complements the architecture. If free standing hght sources are used, the lights
shall not constitute any annoyance to adjacent properties, or a hazard to street or
highway driving.
E. Signage: If signs are to be changes or a new sign installed, an approved application for sign
permit from the Building Inspector will be required as part of the site plan proposal. Existing
standards shall be observed:
1. size::
2. height:
3. material:
4. set-back:
5. lighting:
maximum 40 square feet
maximum 10 feet
wood and/or stone masonry
minimum of 50 feet
shielded spot lighting
F. Flashing Signs: No flashing or animated signs having visible or moving parts or intermittent
lighting intended to create a visual effect are pe1mitted (Section 8.04 of the Candia Zoning
Ordinance).
G. Parking spaces shall be of adequate size and number to satisfy both the present and future
requirements of the site.
7.04 Coordination of Streets, Parking, Loading, and Safety:
A. The public highways providing access to the site shall be sufficient and adequate for the safety of
vehicles, pedestrians, and bicycles.
B. All loading areas shall be designed so as not to interfere with other planned vehicular and
pedestrian traffic of the site, and so as to provide adequate space and facilities.
11
I
Mmor Site Plan Kegulat1ons August 4, LU I u
7.05 Screening:
Expansion of storage areas, waste collection areas and service areas shall be fenced from on-site
areas and from neighboring properties. Sites adjacent to the residential district shall be adequately
screened with plantings of live trees, shrubs, etc., approved in advance by the Planning Board
through its designated agent.
7 .06 Storm Drainage:
Storm drainage of the site shall be designed and provided and shall be based on a 5 year storm design
flow. If the existing drainage system to which the site drainage system will be connected is
inadequate, provisions shall be made for the retention and gradual release of storm water in order to
meet the 25 year predevelopment storm design requirement.
7.07 Groundwater Protection:
A.
B.
c.
The quality of groundwater (reforeaee R£A 119: 1 VIII) is defined in RSA 485-c: 2 VIII shall not be
adversely affected by the proposed development. The applicant shall certify that the proposed
development does not violate the rules and regulations of the Water £upply aad Pollutioa Coatrol
CommissioR with regard to grouadwater aRd shall meet the follo"viRg requiremeats: of Chapter
485-C Groundwater Protection Act with regard to groundwater and shall meet the
following requirements.
Groundwater Pollution Monitoring Devices:
Any proposed or expanded site with the potential for contaminate leaching shall have provision
for suitably designed and approved monitoring wells installed around the perimeter of the site.
Said design and installation shall be approved by the Planning Board through its Town's
Engineer at the expense of the applicant.
Surface Drainage Control Measures:
Any proposed or expanded site with the potential for surface run off degradation shall have
provision for the containment and diversion of surface water runoff to suitable and approved
catchment facilities. Said design and construction to be approved by Planning Board through its
Town's Engineer at the expense of the applicant.
Disclosures:
Any application for site plan review which involves the proposed receiving, handling,
storing or processing of any regulated substance (as defined by RSA 339-A:2) shall
disclose this information as part of the application submission. Copies of all
appropriate state permits as required by the NH DES for the proposed use shall be
submitted to the Town of Candia Health Officer and Candia Fire Department as part
of the site plan application. Site plan applications which involve property
contaminated by hazardous or toxic materials (as defined by RSA 339-A:2) shall
disclose such information as part of the application. If the Planning Board finds that a
potential health risk or an environmental threat exists from a previous use or existing
use of the site, then the Planning Board shall require that any environmental
assessment that has been completed and submitted to NH DES shall be submitted
to and reviewed by the Town Health Officer (or 3rd party consultant of Board's choice
and applicant's expense) prior to any Planning Board action. (August 4, 2010)
7.08 Disposition of Excavated Waste:
All excavated waste, including boulders, rubble, and debris, shall be removed from the site unless the
Planning Board authorizes otherwise.
12
Mmor Site Plan Kegulattons August 4, :LUlU
7.09 Impervious Cover:
The area of the site to be finished with impervious cover shall be shown on the plan. The Board may
request a reduction in the impenneable surface area and/or the constmction of storm drains and catch
basins where warranted by condition of soil, slope, and groundwater.
7.10 Underground Petroleum Storage Tanks:
Copies of pennits obtained from the State of New Hampshire Water Supply and Pollution Control
Division shall be required when underground storage tanks are proposed whether for private or
commercial use. Plans shall evidence conformance with WSPCD rule WS 411 before final plan
approval.
SECTION VI: JOINT PROCEDURES PROVISIONS
Article 8.00 Procedm·e When Subdivision Approval is Required:
Application shall be considered a major site plan review.
8.01 Procedtu-e When Special Exception or Variance by the Board of Adjustment is Required:
Application shall be considered a major site plan review.
8.02 Procedure When. Earth. Excavation Permit is Required:
Application shall be considered a major site plan review.
SECTION VU: l\1ISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Article 9.00 Fines and Penalties:
Any violation of these regulations may be made punishable as provided in NH Revised Statutes
Annotated Chapter 676: 17.
Article 10.00 Appeals:
Any person aggrieved by an official action of the Board may appeal there from to the Superior Court
as provided in RSA 677:15. (August 4, 2010)
Article 11.00 Active and Substantial Development or Building:
In approving any application, the Planning Board may specifiy the threshold level of
work which shall constitute "active and substantial development or building" for the purpose of
determining the minimum amount of work required in order to satisfy the provisions of RSA
67 4: 3 9. Active and substantial development, in the absence of a specific finding of the Planning
Board shall mean the construction of one or more roads as shown on an approved and recorded
site plat in accordance with the construction specifications conatained within Article 19 of the
Town of Candia Subdivision Regulations. Such road construction shall be completed through
final wearing course, sufficient to cause eligibility for certificates of occupancy to be issued for
structures on those lots fronting the road. This active and substantial development would thus
entitle the site plan to the four-year exemption as provided under RSA 674.3." (August 4, 2010)
13
PLANNING BOARD
TOWN OF CANDIA
ADOPTION VERIFICATION
The attached regulations entitled Minor Subdivision Regulations have been adopted
by the Candia Planning Board after a duly noticed public hearing on August l, 2009.
Chairperson
Selectmen's Representative
Member
Member
Member
Member
c- <
Date filed with the Board of Selectm~ _ ---~"?f~r l ~ 1 J_.CJ l 0
DatefiledwiilitheTown~a.1i:;"0 J'¥t-. !51 /20 /(J
..... ~ , ,.,..
Date filed with the Office of State Planning -~~~.S-e~~~'·_ ,_··f-~21~__._/_S~' -,--..J~-~-f-')_/~b~---
'
CANDIA BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
BY-LAWS
Adopted
Amended
Amended
Amended
Amended
Amended
Amended
Amended
Amended
Amended
April 26, 1982
July 25, 1988
June 20, 1991
August 20, 1992
December 1 7, 1992
October 17, 1996
July, 22, 2008
April 26, 2011
July 28, 2015
March 26, 2019

CANDIA BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
BY-LAWS
TAB LE 0 F CONTENTS
Article I: AUTHORITY ........... .. ..... .... ...... ..... .............. ..... .................................................... 2
Article II: MEMBERS .. .... ......................... ................ ...... ..... ........ .......................................... 2
Article III: OFFICERS .............................................................................. ..... .............. ............ 3
Article IV: DUTIES OF OFFICERS & LAND USE SECRETARY ......................... .. .......... 3
Article V: MEETINGS ...................... ........................................................................... .......... 4
Article VI: APPLICATION PROCEDURE ............................................................................ 5
Article VII: PUBLIC HEARING PROCEDURE .... ........... ...... ...... .......................................... 6
Article VIII: DECISIONS .......................................... .......... ................................... ................... 8
Article IX: REHEARINGS ...... ..................................................................... ... ..... ................. .. 8
Article X: FEE SCHEDULE: ........................... ............ ........... ...... ........ ...... .......... .......... .... ... 9
Article XI: REIMBURSEMENT FOR ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES ............. ............... 9
Article XII: FINANCES ................ .............................. ...... ............. ... ..................................... 10
Article XIII: LEGAL ............... .................................................................................... ............. 10
APPENDIX !:A-APPEAL APPLICATION PROCESS ............ ........... ..................................... 11
APPENDIX 1 :B - Check List .......................... .................................. .......................................... 14
APPENDIX I: C - Application ..................... ............... .. ............................................................... 15
APPENDIX I: D -Abutters List .................................................................................................. 16
APPENDIX I:E - Owner's Affidavit ....... ......... ....... ....... ..................... ........................................ 17
APPENDIX II PUBLIC - NOTICE ..... ......................................................................................... 18
APPENDIX III NOTICE OF DECISION - Granted ................................................................... 19
APPENDIX IV NOTICE OF DECISION - Denied ....................... ...... ....................................... 20
Article I: AUTHORITY
These By-Laws governing the procedures of the Candia Board of Adjustment are adopted under the
authority of RSA 676: land Article 12.03 of the "Town of Candia Zoning Ordinance".
Article II: MEMBERS
l. The Board shall consist offive (5) members who shall be appointed by the Board of
Selectmen.
2. No more than three (3) alternate members may also be appointed by the Board of
Selectmen.
3. The term of office for Board of Adjustment members and alternates shall be three (3)
years, beginning after elections at annual Town Meeting and ending on the date of
Town Meeting for the appropriate term.
4. All Board members and alternates must reside in Candia.
5. Alternates serving in the absence or disqualifications of a Board member shall have
all the powers and duties of that regular member while sitting on a case or the
deliberation thereof.
6. A vacancy before the expiration of a member's term shall be filled by appointment by
the Board of Selectmen for the length of the unexpired term. The Board shall make a
recommendation to the BOS from their list of alternates.
7. Expired tenns: The Board shall make a recommendation to the Board of Selectmen at
least two (2) months prior to the expiration of a member's term on either the
reappointment or replacement of that member.
8. A member's or alternate's resignation from the Board shall be made in writing to the ZBA and the
Board of Selectmen.
9. After a properly noticed public hearing, a Board member or alternate may be removed
by the Board of Selectmen upon findings of neglect of duty, or
malfeasance in office. Written notice of such finding shall be given to said Board
member or alternate and a copy of same shall by filed with the Town Clerk.
l 0. A member or alternate unable to attend a meeting shall, at the earliest possible time, inform the
Chairman so that an alternate may be designated to sit in his/her place.
11. New members and New Alternates: It shall be the duty of the Chair to acquaint
new members and alternates with the Board's procedures and to provide them with
all petiinent reference materials.
Rev.2008,2015
2
Article III: OFFICERS
The officers of the Board shall be Chairman and Vice Chairman.
1. The officers shall be elected in the month of April by majority vote of the Board for a I year term
and shall be eligible for reelection.
Article IV: DUTIES OF OFFICERS & LAND USE SECRETARY
1. Chairman: The Chairman shall preside over all the meetings and hearings: shall
appoint such committees as directed by the Board; affix his/her signature where
required in the name of the Board; and designate the alternate to serve in the
absence or disqualification of a Board member.
2. Vice Chairman: The Vice Chairman shall preside in the absence of the Chainnan and
shall have the full powers of the Chairman on matters which come before the Board
in the absence of the Chairman.
3. Land Use Secretary shall be responsible for:
A. Maintaining records of all meetings, hearings, transactions, and decisions of the Board.
B. Checking all applications for appeal and/or rehearing to assure that correct procedures have
been followed.
C. Maintaining a record of all income and expenses and related budget matters.
D. Orienting new members and alternates, in consultation with Chairman.
E. The Land Use Secretary's signature may be affixed to the routing of procedural letters and
forms that are part of these By-Laws except denial letters which require the Chairman's
signature.
F. Carrying out such other duties as these procedures and/or the Board may direct.
G. Determining that all applications are complete.
H. Posting Public notice of meeting change/time (see P.3 V.5).
Rev.2008,2015
3
Article V: MEETINGS
I. Regular meetings shall be held on the fourth Tuesday of each month if there is business to be conducted
cun-ently at 7:00 p.m. in the town office building.
2. Other meetings may be held at the call of the Chairman provided public notice by posting at the Candia
Post Office and the Town Office and notice to each member is given at least 24 hours (excluding
Sundays and holidays), prior to such meeting.
3. A quorum for regular business shall consist of 3 members. The concurring vote of 3 members is required
to reverse any action of the administrative official or to decide in favor of the applicant.
4. If any member finds it necessary to disqualify himself/herself from sitting on a particular case, he/she
shall notify the Chai1man so that an alternate may be requested to sit in his/her place. The Chairman
shall announce the disqualification before that case is heard. The disqualified member shall absent
himself/herself from the board table during the public hearing and deliberation on the case.
5. Change of date ofregular meeting: If the date of the regular monthly meeting must be changed, notice
shall be given at least twenty-one days before the rescheduled date by posting at the Candia Post Office
and the Town Office and by putting a public notice in the paper. The notice shall contain the date
change, the reason for the change, and the new deadline for accepting applications for that meeting.
6. Cancelled meeting: If a meeting at which posted and noticed public hearings were to be held must be
cancelled due to unforeseen circumstances by the Board, all cases shall be rescheduled at the discretion
of the Chairman either at the next regular meeting or at another meeting, and re-noticed at no expense to
the applicant.
7. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. The use ofrecording devices is permitted.
8. Minutes of the meeting and information presented at public hearings shall be available for public
inspection in the Town Office within (5) business days following the day of the meeting. Such materials
may be copied but may not be removed from the office.
9. Order of business: The order of business for a regular meeting shall be:
a. Call to order, noting time
b. Roll call of members present
c. Approving minutes of previous meeting
d. Public hearing
e. Deliberation
f. Voting and disposition
g. Unfinished business
h. Communications and other business
t. Adjournment, noting time
The order of business may be varied at the discretion of the Chairman. The order of business for meetings held
at the call of the Chairman shall be detennined by the Chairman.
Rev.2008,2015
4
Article VI: APPLICATION PROCEDURE
l. Application to the Board shall follow the procedures and use the forms provided by the Board.
Applicants shall be provided with a packet containing infotmation on procedures, checklists and all
required forms. See Appendix I.
2. The application must be received twenty-one days before the date of the meeting at which it will be
heard, to allow time for the required posting and noticing.
3. No application for appeal shall be accepted unless it is deemed complete by the Clerk. A completed
application shall contain the following:
A. Application form correctly filled out.
B. Abutters list.
C. Denial from the Building Inspector or Planning Board.
D. Plot plan, drawn to scale, or plat.
E. Notarized letter or affidavit allowing applicant to represent owner/owners.
F. Full payment of all fees.
4. If the Land Use Secretary determines that the application is complete, a case number shall be
assigned starting with given calendar prefix, i.e. 08, 09, a public hearing date shall be set, and notice
of the same given.
5. If the Land Use Secretary determines that the application is not complete, the applicant shall be
notified in the most expedient manner as to what is incomplete or lacking.
6. If the Land Use Secretary believes that the same appeal had previously been before the Board,
he/she shall immediately notify the applicant that his application cannot be accepted until the Board
determines if circumstances have changed sufficiently to warrant acceptance of a reapplication. If
reapplication is denied, written notice shall be give the applicant and a copy placed in the original
case file.
Rev. 2008,2015
5
Article VII: PUBLIC HEARING PROCEDURE
1. Notice: Notice of a public hearing for all appeals to the Board shall be given as follows:
A. A legal notice shall be placed to appear in the newspaper of general circulation within the town
at least l 0 days before the date of the hearing, not including the date of the notice or the date of
the hearing. At the same time, the same notice shall be posted in the Candia Post Office and the
Town Office.
B. The applicant or the owner, if different, and all abutters shall be notified by certified mail at least
10 days before the date of the hearing. See Appendix II.
C. All other town officials and or/boards deemed by the Chair to have an interest in the case shall be
notified in writing of the hearing, and may be asked to appear to testify.
D. All notices shall contain the following information:
1. Date, time and place of public hearing
2. Case number
3. Applicant's name
4. Address and lot # of property
5. Section of the Zoning Ordinance being appealed
6. Brief description of the request
E. Copies of the notice to applicant and copy of the newspaper notice showing date it appeared shall
be placed in the case file.
2. Hearing: The public hearing shall be conducted according to the following procedures:
A. The Chairman shall request the Land Use Secretary to report the case.
The Land Use Secretary shall read the application, report on the manner
in which notice was given and list any supporting documents submitted with
the application.
B. The Chairman shall call the hearing to order. If applicable, the Chairman
shall inform those in attendance of the disqualification of a Board Member
from the case and designate the alternate, if one is present, to replace
him/her. The Chairman shall also explain to those in attendance the following
rules as to the conduct of the hearing:
1. First, the applicant shall state his case to the Board and respond to their questions.
2. Next, those appearing in favor of the appeal shall be allowed to speak.
3. Then, those appearing in opposition to the appeal shall be allowed to speak.
4. Then, rebuttals by both sides shall be allowed.
5. All abutters and non-abutters who may be affected by the appeal, and others as the Chairman
deems appropriate, may speak.
6. Those speaking shall identify themselves, their address and state their relation to the appeal.
7. Anyone present who desires a copy of the written decision of the Board shall give the Land
Use Secretary their name and address at the close of the hearing.
Rev.2008, 2015
6
C. The Chairman shall conduct the hearing. Board members may ask questions at any time during
the hearing. The Chainnan shall request the testimony of those requested to appear.
D. After all testimony has been heard, the Chairman shall summarize the facts on the appeal and
give the applicant the opportunity for a final statement.
E. The Chairman shall declare the case to be closed or to remain open if additional evidence had
been requested to be submitted subsequent to the hearing or if the appeal is a Special Exception
in which case the Chairman shall explain the requirements of Article XIII to the applicant.
F. The Chairman shall ask those wishing a notice of decisions to leave their name and addresses
with the Land Use Secretary.
G. The Chairman shall call the next case.
3. Records: The Land Use Secretary shall record the facts of the case; the claims made by each side; and
the names and interests of persons testifying. Said record shall be placed in the file.
Rev. 2008, 2015
7
Article VIII: DECISIONS
I. All decisions of the Board shall be based on findings that shall state all grounds for its decision and
records of same shall be placed in the case file.
2. The Board shall approve, approve with conditions, deny or defer its decision within 30 days after the
case has been declared closed. If not approved, the reasons for disapproval shall be stated on the
notice. See Appendices III and IV.
3. If approved, the decision notice shall state that representation and/ or material submitted to the Board
at the public hearing which are subject to the regulations of the Zoning Ordinances and shall be
deemed conditions of the approval.
4. Notice of the decision shall be mailed to the applicant, owner, if different, and those who requested it
at the public hearing. Notice shall also be given to the town officials and boards affected by the
decision. A copy shall be placed in the case file, and the action shall be recorded in the lot# file.
5. Notice of the decision shall be made available for public inspection within 5 business days fo llowing
the day after the meeting after the decision is made by posting the notice at the Town Office.
6. Approved variances and special exceptions shall expire unless used within one year from the date
granted. The Board may for good cause shown extend such period by as much as one year.
Article IX: REHEARINGS
l. Within 30 days of the receipt of the decision of the Board, anyone affected thereby may request a
rehearing.
2. Requests for a rehearing shall be in the form of a written request to the Board setting forth the
grounds on which it is claimed the decision is unlawful or unreasonable.
3. At the first regular meeting after receipt of a rehearing request, the Board shall, within 30 days, by
majority vote, grant or deny the rehearing request or suspend the decision pending further
considerations.
4. To be granted a rehearing, the Board must first determine that good reason or new evidence which
might affect the decision has been stated in the request.
5. If a rehearing is granted, the petitioner shall be notified in writing and the rehearing scheduled and
noticed in the same manner as the original hearing after the costs of noticing have been paid by the
petitioner.
6. If a rehearing is denied, the petitioner shall be so informed in writing stating the reasons for denial
and informing him/her of his/her right to appeal to the Superior Court.
Rev. 2008,2015
8
Article X: FEE SCHEDULE:
I. The Fee for all appeals to the Board shall be:
Application Fee: ---------$75.00
Noticing Fee: ---------$100.00
Abutters Fee: ----------$7.80 per abutter*
*noticing fee subject to postal rate changes
2. All fees shall be paid in full before a public hearing can be scheduled.
Article XI: REIMBURSEMENT FOR ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES
l. The Board may impose reasonable fees to cover its administrative expenses and costs of special
investigative studies, review of documents, cost of copying documents, mileage and other matters
which may be required by particular appeals or applications.
2. Any fees required by the Board will be paid in advance based on an estimate agreeable to both the
Board and the applicant. Said funds will be held by the Town until services are rendered and
payment required.
3. The Board shall require and provide the applicant with detailed invoices showing reasonable task
descriptions for services rendered. Upon request, the Board shall promptly provide a reasonably
detailed accounting of expenses or corresponding escrow deductions with copies of supporting
documentation.
Source: RSA 676:5 IV, et seq
Rev 2008, 2015, 20 19
9
Article XII: FINANCES
l. The Land Use Secretary shall keep a record of all income and expenses of the Board.
2. Budget: The Chair shall prepare and submit to the Board in November a financial statement showing
that year's income and expenses and the proposed budget for the next year which requires approval
from the Board before being presented to the Selectmen.
3. The Chair shall provide the Town Treasurer with a report of income, ifrequired .
4. Expenses: Expenses, other than those directly related to cases or approved capital
expenses, of more than $50.00 require a signed approval from the Chainnan.
5. Application fee: The application fee shall be reviewed as part of the budget process to
insure that it is adequate to cover the cost of administration.
Rev 2008, 2015
Article XIII: LEGAL
1. Forms: All forms prescribed herein and revisions thereto shall be adopted by resolution of the Board and
shall become part of these By-Laws.
2. Amendments: These By-Laws may be amended by a majority vote of the members at a regular meeting
providing that such amendment is read at two successive meetings preceding the meeting at which the
vote is to be taken. Amendments shall take effect upon passage.
3. Where filed: A copy of these By-Laws and amendments thereto shall be: placed with the Town Clerk for
public inspection; given to all Board members and alternates; and placed in the Board's files.
Adopted April 26, 1982
Amended July 25, 1988
Amended June 20, 1991
Amended August 20, 1992
Amended December 1 7, 1992
Amended October 1 7, 1996
Amended July, 22, 2008
Amended April 26, 2011
Amended April 5, 2015
Amended March 26, 2019
Rev.2008, 2015, 2019
10
APPENDIX I:A - APPEAL APPLICATION PROCESS
I STRUMENTS TO APPLICATIO S APPEALING TO THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
IMPORTANT: READ CAREFULLY BEFORE FILLING OUT ATTACHED APPLICATIONS
The Board strongly recommends that, before making any appeal, you become familiar with the Zoning
Ordinance, and also with the New Hampshire Statutes, Title LXIV, RSA chapters 672-677, covering
planning and zoning.
Three types of appeals can be made to the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
VARIANCE: A variance is a waiver or relaxation of a particular requirement of the zoning ordinance.
For a variance to be legally granted, you must show that your proposed use meets all five of the
fo llowing criteria;
(RSA 674:33)
1. The Variance will not be contrary to the public interest;
2. The spirit of the ordinance is observed;
3. Substantial justice is done;
4. The values of surrounding properties are not diminished; and
5. Literal enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance would result in an unnecessary
hardship.
If you are applying for a variance, you must first have some form of determination that your proposed
use is not permitted without a variance. Most often, this determination is a denial of a building permit. A
copy of the determination or denial must be attached to your application.
Rev. 2008,2015
11
APPEAL FROM AN ADMINISTRATIVE DECISION:
If you have been denied a Building permit or are affected by some other decision regarding the
administration of the Candia Zoning Ordinance, and you believe that the decision was made in error
under the provisions of the ordinance, you may appeal the decision to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment. The appeal will be granted if you can show that the decision was indeed made in error.
Appeals to the Zoning Board of Adjustment from administrative decisions pertaining to the Zoning
Ordinance must be made within 30 days of the date of the decision, and a copy of that decision appealed
from must be attached to your application.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION:
Certain sections of the Zoning Ordinance provide that: Particular use of property in a particular zone
will be permitted by special exception if the specified conditions are met. The necessary conditions for
each special exception are given in the Ordinance. You appeal will be granted if you can show that all
the conditions stated in the Ordinance are met.
If you are applying for a Special Exception, you will probably also need a site plan or subdivision
approval, or both, from the Planning Board. However, even if no Planning Board approval is needed,
you must still include a plot plan with your application. Plans shall be drawn to scale, showing the
location and dimensions of the lot, existing and proposed buildings and other structures and parking
spaces, traffic access and circulation drives, open space, landscaping and other such information as may
be necessary in order for the Board to make a decision.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION STANDARDS:
Special Exceptions shall meet the following standards:
l. No hazard to the public or adjacent property on account of potential fire, explosion or
release of toxic materials;
2. No detriment to property value in the vicinity or change in the neighborhood on account of
the location or scale of buildings and other structures, parking areas, access ways, odor,
smoke, gas, dust, or other pollutant, noise, glare, heat, vibration, or unsightly outdoor
storage of equipment, vehicles or other materials;
3. No creation of a traffic safety hazard or a substantial increase in the level of traffic
congestion in the vicinity;
4. No excessive demand on municipal services, including, but not limited to water, sewer,
waste disposal, police and fire protection, and schools;
5. No significant increase of storm water runoff onto adjacent property or streets.
Rev. 1990, 1992,2008,2015
12
APPENDIX I:A
PROCEDURE:
The Board meets and holds public hearings on the fourth Tuesday of every month. To insure that your
appeal may be heard by the Board at its next regularly scheduled meeting, your completed application
(including all exhibits and li sts of abutters) must be received at least fourteen days before the date of the
next meeting. If your completed application is received less than fourteen days before the Board's next
meeting, the hearing on your appeal may be delayed until the following months' regularly scheduled
meeting.
After you have submitted your application, accompanied by all other forms and paid the necessary fees,
a public hearing will be scheduled. Public notice of the hearing will be printed in a newspaper of general
circulation within the town, posted outside the Selectmen's office and mai led to you and to all abutters
by certified mail at least five days before the date of the scheduled hearing.
After the public hearing, the Board will reach a decision. You and all other parties to the case will be
sent a notice of decision.
Any person affected has a right to appeal this decision made by the Board. The motion for rehearing
must be received within 30 days of the Board's decision. The motion for rehearing made in the form of a
letter, must set forth all the grounds by which you claim the decision is unlawful or unreasonable. The
Board may grant such a rehearing if, in its opinion good reason is stated in the motion. Whether or not a
rehearing is held, you must have first requested one before you can appeal to the courts.
"You and all other parties will be invited to appear in person or by agent or counsel to state reasons why
the appeal should or should not be granted." During the rehearing, the same procedure is followed as for
the first hearing, including public notice and notice to the abutters. See RSA Chapter 677 for more detail
on rehearing and appeal procedures.
If your appeal is approved by the Board, you will have one year to implement the use permitted by yo ur
variance or special exception. If you have not undertaken the use granted by a variance or special
exception within one year, your variance or special exception will expire.
Rev. 1995, 2008, 2015
13
APPENDIX 1:8 - Check List
CHECKLIST FOR APPL YING TO THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
TOWN OF CANDIA, NEW HAMPSHIRE
Decide if you need a variance or special exception and exact Article and Section of the Zoning
Ordinance from which you seek relief. See attached instructions.
Fill out the application form completely. Be sure that you list the owner's name, what you propose to do,
and why the Board should allow it.
On the form provided, list the names and addresses of all abutters, including the name and the address of
the owner if he/she is not the applicant. These names can be obtained from the Selectmen's Office, but
the accuracy of the list is your responsibility.
Provide a copy of the denial which forms that the basis of your application (this will usually be the
Building Inspector's denial of your recent request for a building permit or the Planning Board's denial
letter of your request for subdivision or site plan approval).
Provide a plot plan drawn to scale on graph paper provided that will clearly show what you propose to
do.
If the applicant is not the owner, you must provide a notarized written statement of all owners
authorizing you to act on the owners' behalf (it is requested that you use the form provided by the Board
of Adjustment for this purpose).
Send or bring the completed application and abutters list and all other required additional information to
the Land Use Office accompanied by a check made out to the Town of Candia for $75.00 filing fee plus
$7.80* for each name on the abutters list, and $100.00 for the cost of the newspaper notice.
*Noticing fee subject to postal rate changes.
If you have not fully completed the application, including all the necessary exhibits and plot plans, or if
you have not paid in full the required fees, your case will not be scheduled until all infonnation is
received and all fees paid.
Your completed application must be in the Land Use Office not later than 3 0 days before the next
monthly meeting, if your appeal is to be scheduled for that meeting. Meetings are regularly scheduled to
be held on the fourth Tuesday of every month.
Attend the hearing prepared to state your case. If you or someone authorized to speak for you does not
appear, your case will not be heard and your appeal will not be considered.
Applicant will be responsible for advising the town if they are within the quarter mile Lamprey River
watershed corridor.
Revisions: 1986, 1987, 1991, 1995, 1996, 2008, 2015, 2019
14
APPENDIX I: C - Application
Town of Candia
Zoning Board of Appeals
APPLICATION FOR APPEAL
OFFICE USE ONLY
FEE: $175.00 plus abutters CASE# _ _________ ~
REC'D BY DA TE
---~ ---~
TOTALFEEPAID~~~~~~~-
HEARING DA TE ---------
(name) (address) (phone)
(name) (address) (phone)
(Tax Map, lot number and street name)
HAS THIS PROPERTY BEEN BEFORE A LAND USE BOARD PREVIOUSLY? Yes No
If yes, identify which Land Use Board(s), Case No.(s) of decision.
THE UNDERSIGNED HEREBY REQUESTS: Article
( ) Appeal from an administrative decision from
( ) A special exception as provided in
( ) A variance to waive terms as stated in
( ) Other ____ ________ _
Signature Date
Rev. 2008,2015, 2019
Section
15
APPENDIX I: D - Abutters List
Abutter:
Town of Candia
Zoning Board of Adjustment
Abutters List
Any person whose property adjoins
or is directly across the street or
stream from the land under
consideration by this board (RSA 372:3)
Abutters list (type or print)
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
Map/Lot # Name Address
Case # __ Map/Lot# _ _ _
Date Rec'd --- --
Fee$ ------ - -
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that the names listed as abutters are accurate and correct, and include all
persons who are abutters pursuant to the New Hampshire RSA 672:3 . I acknowledge that it is my responsibility
to insure that the names of all persons entitled to notice as abutters are included on the above list. I understand
that while the town may assist me in preparing this list, its accuracy and completeness are solely my
responsibility. I understand that I must pay a fee of $7.80* for each name appearing on this list, including every
abutter, the owner of the property and (if different from the owner) the applicant and $50.00 $100.00 to cover
the cost of the required newspaper notice. I also understand that these fees must be paid in full before the Board
can hear my case. *Noticing fee subject to postal rate changes.
Signature Date
Rev.1986, 1987, 1995, 1996, 2008, 2015
16
APPENDIX I:E - Owner's Affidavit
Town of Candia
Zoning Board of Adjustment
Owner's Affidavit
Case # -----
I, the undersigned owner of prope1iy located at _____________________ _
do hereby authorize---- ------- --------------------to
make the following request with respect to the above described property:
---------- -- New Hampshire,
Signature of Owner Date City or Town
County of __________ . Personally appeared the above named __________ _
before me, __________________ , and acknowledged the foregoing to be his/her
(Justice of Peace/Notary Public)
voluntary act & deed.
Rev. 2008,2015
17
(USE LOGO)
APPENDIX II PUBLIC - NOTICE
CANDIA ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
LEGAL NOTICE
AS AN ABUTTER OR INTERESTED PARTY, YOU ARE HEREBY NOTIFIED
Notice is hereby given that the Candia Zoning Board of Adjustment will conduct a public hearing on
________ beginning at
Date Time
Place
Concerning the following application:
Time Case # Applicant(s) & Owner(s) Location, Map/Lot #
Purpose Article & Section of the Zoning Ordinance
Applicant proposes to
For the Zoning Board of Adjustment
Secretary - ------
Date
Rev.2008, 2015
18
(USE LOGO)
APPENDIX III NOTICE OF DECISION - Granted
HEARING DATE:
LOCATION: MAP/LOT #:
APPLICANTS:
ZONfNG BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
NOTICE OF DECISION
CASE #: --- -----
-------------------------~
-----------------------------~
OWNERS: - ------------------------------
PURPOSE: - --------------- - ------------ --
DECISION: -------------------------------
CONDITIONS:
ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
Chairman
Date
Note: Any person affected has a right to appeal this decision. If you wish to appeal, you must act within thirty
(30) days of the date on this notice. The motion for rehearing shall be in writing and must set forth all the
grounds on which you will base your appeal, as per RSA 677.
Cc: file
Selectmen
BI/CEO
Planning Board
ZBA Members
Rev. 2008, 2015
19
(USE LOGO)
APPENDIX IV NOTICE OF DECISION - Denied
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
You are hereby notified that the appeal of ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
For a regarding Section of the
Zoning Ordinance has been DENIED for the reasons listed below, by a majority vote of the Board of
Adjustment.
REASONS FOR DENIAL:
Board of Adjustment
By:
~~~~~~~~~~
Date:
~~~~~~~~~
NOTE: Any person affected by this decision has the right to appeal by requesting a rehearing to the Board
within 30 days of the date on this notice. The written request for rehearing must set forth all the grounds on
which you will base your appeal.
RP/lg
cc: case file
Rev. 2008,2015,2019
20
TOWN OF CANDIA
CLASS VI AND PRIVATE ROAD POLICY
ADOPTED BY CANDIA BOARD OF SELECTMEN
JULY 23, 2007
i+-,15 _/og
p, +3 2-Dnt'4
Lo7f,Lf I
TOWN OF CANDIA
NEW HAMPSHIRE
CLASS VI AND PRIVATE ROAD POLICY
Under RSA 674:41, the Board of Selectmen has the discretion to authorize the
issuance of building permits on Class VI and Private town roads, after review and
comment by the Planning Board.
The Board of Selectmen has adopted this Class VI and Private Roads Policy to
help guide the decision-making process with such an application. It is
emphasized that the Board of Selectmen will consider any factor relevant to the
authorization of a building permit on an individual case basis. Therefore, this
statement is not intended to describe an exhaustive list of considerations, but to
be a policy for both the Board of Selectmen and applicants for such building
permits.
1. Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this policy to m1rnm1ze
development along Glass VI and Private town roads which might tend to
drain existing town services and force increased costs on the Town to
provide additional services. It is also the purpose of this policy to ensure
that any structures built on Class VI and Private town roads are accessible
to emergency vehicles so that the safety and property of people occupying
or using those structures will not be unreasonably placed at risk, nor will
the safety of emergency response personnel or their vehicles and
equipment be unreasonably endangered.
2. Aoolication. Application shall be received 20 days before scheduled
hearing. Applications to the Board of Selectmen requesting that the Board
authorize the issuance of a building permit on a Class VI or private town
road shall be made in writing and be accompanied by a site plan drawn to
scale showing:
a)
b)
c)
d)
The location and size of the lot and its relation to the Class VI or
private road and the Class V or better road which gives access
to the Class VI or private road;
The specific location of all proposed structures
The location and length of the driveway giving access to the
structures from the Class VI or private road;
Wetlands on or adjacent to the property that could be impacted,
and indicate if a State Wetlands Permit application has been
submitted;
1
e) Any other information which the Board of Selectmen may
reasonably require;
f) List of abutting property owners;
g) Certified Mail costs for each abutter and public notice costs
must accompany application.
3. Distance to Class V Road. It is the policy of the Board of Selectmen that
in the usual case, no building permit will be authorized if the driveway
access to the principal structure from the Class VI road or Private road
begins more than six hundred (600) feet from the intersection of the Class
VI road or Private road and the Class V or better road which gives access
to the Class VI or Private road. Applications that meet the six hundred
(600) foot distance will not be automatically approved, however. In
addition to any other relevant factors, the Board of Selectmen will consider
the following even where the six hundred (600) foot distance is met:
a) The nature, condition and grade of the Class VI or Private road;
b) The nature, condition and length of the driveway from the Class
VI or Private road to the proposed structure(s).
c) Road surface and condition: Condition of the roadbed with
regard to the depth and quality of gravels; steepness of the
grade on the portion of the road being considered; the existence
of large rocks or ledge in the roadbed; the existence of areas
which flood during seasonal rainy periods; the adequacy of
drainage along the road; the presence of wetlands; the
presence of bridges and culverts; the conditions of curves and
switchbacks; vertical and horizontal alignment; proximity of trees
to the traveled way; and any other conditions of the road which
would affect its suitability for development.
4. Improvements to Class VI Road.
a)
b)
c)
Before beginning any work within the limits of the Class VI or
Private road, the applicant must receive a written permit from
the Board of Selectmen pursuant to RSA 236:9-11, and shall be
subject to the penalties provided by RSA 236:14 for failure to
secure or comply with the terms of said permit.
Only a single dwelling unit without accessory units will be
considered.
Board of Selectmen shall review each application on an
individual case by case basis with the specific conditions of the
road in question and its ability to support the passage of
emergency and safety vehicles being the primary consideration.
In general terms the following minimum will apply:
2
1. Sixteen-feet (16') width with 2 foot shoulders
2. Twelve-inches (12") minimum of crushed gravel
3. No grades exceeding 10%
4. Pull off areas every 500 feet to allow large vehicles to
safely pass one another
6. Hammerhead turnaround at the end of roadway
6. Stop sign and street name at the intersection with Class
V road
7. Address all drainage issues
8. Pavement may be required depending on conditions
d) Beyond the physical standards of the Class VI or Private road,
the Board of Selectmen may:
1 : Seek a written road maintenance agreement if there is
more than one party who will be residing on the road in
question, or the applicant agrees in writing to assume
100% of the road maintenance costs for the portion of
Class VI or Private road affected.
e) The Board of Selectmen will require that the proper completion
of the improvements to the Class VI or Private road be secured
to Candia by providing financial security in the form and amount
to be determined by the Board of Selectmen.
5. Public Hearing. Prior to the issuance of its decision on the application, the
Board of Selectmen shall hold a public hearing with at least 10 days prior
notice sent certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant and to
each owner of property abutting the Class VI or Private road in question.
The notice shall also be posted in at least two (2) public places within the
Town. The applicant shall pay the costs of such notice, in advance. The
Board of Selectmen will also ensure that notice of the public hearing is
given to the Chairmen of the Planning Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment,
and Conservation Commissions, the Road Agent, Chief of Police, Fire
Chief and Building Inspector. All applications under this policy will be
forwarded to the Planning Board for its review and recommendation to the
Board of Selectmen before any final decision is reached.
6. Agreement to be Recorded. Prior to the actual issuance of any building
permit authorized by the Board of Selectmen, the applicant shall sign and
provide the Town with an executed release and agreement to be recorded
at the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds that the Town of Candia
neither assumes responsibility for maintenance of the Class VI or private
road nor liability for damages resulting from the use thereof, pursuant to
RSA 674:41, I (c) (3). Such notice shall be recorded at the expense of the
applicant.
3
7. Time Limitations.
a) Required road improvements associated with the Board of
Selectmen's approval of applications under these guidelines
must commence within six (6) months and
b) Applicants receiving approval from the Board of Selectmen
under these guidelines must apply for and be issued a building
permit within the first six (6) months of the Board of Selectmen's
Condition of Approval and construction must begin within six (6)
months from the date of issuance of the building permit or the
approved Application to build on a Class VI or Private road will
be void.
8. Occupancy Certificate. No Certificate of Occupancy will be issued by the
Town of Candia Building Inspector/ Code Enforcement Officer until the
road improvements have been met and approved by the Board of
Selectmen or their designee. If the building is occupied without a
Certificate of Occupancy, the occupants will be found in violation of local
ordinance and state statute, and will be subject to penalty as set forth in
RSA 676:17.
9. Other Permits. Should the Board of Selectmen grant approval for
applications under these guidelines, applicants are still required to secure
any other permits required under local, state or federal law regulations.
The Board of Selectmen's approval does not supersede any other
requirements by other entities.
10. Repeal. The adoption this policy shall operate as a repeal of any other
statement of policy adopted by previous Boards of Selectmen.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned members of the Candia Board of
Selectmen have set their hands this 23rd day of July, 2007
Fredrick Kelley, Chairma
~~
4
5
AGREEMENT AND RELEASE
NOW COME (hereinafter referred as "Landowner), of
_____ Road, Candia, New Hampshire, and the Town of Candia (hereinafter
referred to as "Town"), ~ .... New.. Hampshire municipal corporation, having a mailing
address of 74 High Strey(.Candia>tfew Hampshire, 03034, and agree as follows:
WHEREAS LLdowh~;)is a~\horized to act on the owners behalf for the real
property locat~ iO: .. "Gahdia, Ni\v. ... H~pshire, as described in a deed recorded in Book
_, Page _, at tq:~ R6,ckingi\ani"-·County Registry of Deeds (hereinafter the "Property
"), identified a~\Tax ·M..~pi_, ;Lot_, located on Road (the "Road");
WHE~~·S .. the ... porti'~~ .. o.(=.:;.~:~: . ~~bµ which the Property fronts is a Class VI or
Private Highway, as classi:(ied by New:.It~p~)lire revised Statues Annotated 229:5,
WHEREAS the T~\v.n, h~~.a~::~ w/is~u{;"·a. building permit for the construction
of one single family residen2e .. o.n the ~rope.:rtf upon::'.~P.e execution and recording of this
agreement, pursuant to New HmhpsJVr~ R,~ised ~t~tut~s"··Annotated 674:41;
NOW, THEREFORE, the ... ;d~·:· aµd· .. ·~~: ..... 2andoJfiet; .... on behalf of himself, his
heirs, legal representatives, successor aiid"'~ss~gtis, coyeriffi}t and\1.gree as follows:
1. The Town shall issue a buildi~~ .... pe~~~ .. ·"f~·/'the,....l~·~IJ.d6wµer to construct a
residence on the Property; provided t}.la{ all ~.o:6diti6ns a:r:J:~ ... requirements set
forth in Town ordinances and regulatiort-s. a~e"rnet·;",..... .... .. ...........
2. The Town assumes neither responsibility" (o-t""mainteii.~n~e, in~luding,...sn9_w
plowing, nor liability for any damages resµlt}ng from· the.u~e of fhe R,.ocid. ·:>
3. Landowner shall be responsible for m~i~taining acc·es~ to (h~ pr6'perty_...ar;_d
does hereby forever release and discharge. th~· Tdvfn, its ..offl'c\:}tS', ageµt( and
employees, from any obligation for maint~lning the .. Road '1;ntf from, .... any c:J.~i.µi
of any nature, whether it tort or otherwise, which LandptVner ha( pr"·ni~y i:U· ".. .
the future have, against the Town for any loss or damage.1 ..... inc~1i'ding ~h0s~. ...
incurred through failure to provide municipal services, 'i'nclu4ing .. ~riih(?u~'
limitation police, fire, and ambulance services, arising out of th~ co~diiiqn ·of i
the Road from the point where the Road becomes a Class V·~ or"·'P·tj\tate ............
Highway. Landowner shall hold harmless and indemnify the Towh .. .f.rom\a,Ily"·"
and all claims, suits, costs, and other expenses, including reisoiiable
attorneys' fees, whether brought by the Landowner or third parties, arising out
of the use and occupation of the Property and the maintenance or repair of the
Road.
4. Landowner assumes responsibility for transporting any children to the nearest
regular school bus stop.
5. Landowner assumes responsibility for maintenance and repair of the Road, to
be used solely as access to a single-family residence. In addition, the
Landowner agrees to clear and solely maintain the Road to a width of not less
than 20 feet, and to repair and maintain the traveled portion of the Road in a
good and passable condition at all times. Town shall have no responsibility
for obtaining coµtributiqn from other users of the Road for such costs of
maintenance ~cf repair. ... ..........
6. The obligatimi to th¢"Tqwn ·of the Landowner, if more than one, shall be joint
and sev.efal. \ \. ) )
7. An mfigin~(>of\ certift.~d ...... cq~y of the Agreement shall be recorded in the
Rockiµghatji Co'µnty R\egi~fry of Deeds. This Agreement shall be deemed to
touch \a,nd rtm ... with tlie P~9p.~rty and shall be binding on all successors to
Landow1wrs' intere§t-'in ill~ Pr~p·eq:y.
WHEREF~;;·~ .. ·~;~ .. ·;~~~~~:::·h~;¢ e:·~'puted this Agreement and Release as of
Witness
Witness
Witness
Witness Tom Giffen 
Witness James Brennan
Witness Richard Lazott
Witness Joe Duarte
· ..
2004 Class VI Road List
Prepared by Road Agent Dennis Lewis on 3/31/04
North Road-Approximately 900 feet West from Merrill Road Intersection
Baker Road- from High Street to Peter O'Neil's property known as Map 410, Lot
098 and from South Road to Tamara and Scott Cambell's property known as Map
410-103.
Donovan Road- from Chester Turnpike to the driveway entrance adjacent to the
residence located on the property owned by Richard and Priscilla Blevens known as
Map 404, Map 027.
Knowlton Road- approximately 200 feet from the intersection of High Street.
Libbee Road- from South Road to Flint Road
Flint Road- south from Libbee Road for approx. 900 feet.