






CHAPTER 1 PARKING REGULATIONS
100 Definitions
100.1 Abandoned Vehicles
For the purpose of this Chapter only, an abandoned vehicle is one that is
parked in violation of any provisions of this Chapter for a period of time
greater than 24 hours.
100.2 Bus or Taxi Stands
Areas and particular locations along traveled ways, which are officially
designated by signs indicating that only buses and taxis may stand or stop at
that location.
100.3 Crosswalk
Any portion of the roadway distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines
or other markings on the surface.
100.4 Districts
a. Business District: The territory contiguous to a highway in which fifty percent
or more of the frontage thereon for a distance of 300 feet or more is occupied
by dwellings or by dwellings and buildings in use for business.
b. Urban Residence District: The territory contiguous to a highway not
comprising a business district when the frontage on such highway for a
distance of 300 feet or more is mainly occupied by dwellings or by dwellings
and buildings in use for business.
c. Rural Residence District: The territory contiguous to a highway not
comprising a business or urban residence district, in which the frontage on
such highway for a distance of one-half mile or more, is mainly occupied by
dwellings or by dwellings and buildings in use for business on any one side.
100.5 Fire Lanes
The portion of a traveled way established or private property, devoted to
public use, where the parking of motor vehicles or other obstructions may
interfere with the ingress and egress of Fire Department or other emergency
vehicles at shopping centers, bowling lanes, theaters, hospitals, churches and
similar locations.
100.5 (a) Exemptions
Restriction described in this section shall not apply to vehicles engaged in
commercial loading and unloading where the vehicle is attended and no other
means of loading are available.
100.6 Intersection
The area bounded by the prolongation of the lateral curb lines or the lateral
boundary lines of two highways.
100.7 Official Time
Time designated herein shall be standard or daylight, whichever shall be in
force.
100.8 Persons, Drivers, Pedestrians
a. Person: Every natural person, firm, co-partnership, association or
corporation.
b. Driver: Every person who drives or is in physical control of a vehicle.
c. Pedestrian: A person on foot.
100.9 Police Officer
An officer of the municipal police department or any person authorized to
direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations or traffic regulations.
100.10 Railroads
a. Railroads: A carrier of persons or property; cars operated upon stationary
rails.
b. Railroad Train: A steam engine, electric, diesel or other motor vehicle with or
without cars coupled thereto, operated upon stationary rails.
100.11 Right-of-Way
The privilege of the immediate use of the road.
100.12 Safety Zone
The area or space officially set apart within a roadway as a safety zone for
the exclusive use of pedestrians and so marked or indicated by inadequate
signs as to be plainly visible at all times.
100.13 Traffic
Pedestrians, draft animals, cattle, sheep, goats, vehicle or other conveyances
while using the street for the purpose of travel.
100.14 Traffic Control Devices
a. All signs, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with these
regulations erected pursuant to proper authority for the purpose of
regulations, warning or guiding traffic.
b. Traffic signals, mechanically or electrically operated, by which traffic is
alternately directed to stop and proceed, erected pursuant to authority.
100.15 Traffic Movements
a. Stop: When required, means complete cessation of movement.
b. Stop or Stopping: When prohibited, means any stopping of a vehicle except
when necessary to avoid conflict with the other traffic or in compliance with
the direction of a police officer or traffic control sign or signal.
100.16 Traveled Ways
a. Street or Highway: The entire width between boundary lines of every public
way or place of whatever nature used by the members of the public for the
purpose of vehicular traffic.
b. Private Road or Driveway: Every way or place in private ownership and used
for traffic by the owner and those having express or implied permission from
the owner.
c. Roadway: That portion of the street improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel whether defined by a curbstone or not.
d. Curb: The lateral boundaries of that portion of the street improved, designed
or ordinarily used for vehicular travel whether defined by a curbstone or not.
e. Sidewalk: That portion of the street between the curb lines and adjacent
property lines, intended for pedestrian use.
f. Alley: A public, narrow passage or way between buildings within the compact
area of the town.
100.17 Vehicles
a. Vehicles: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway.
b. Motor vehicles: Every vehicle that is self-propelled.
c. Authorized Emergency Vehicles: Fire and Police Department vehicles and
such other vehicles so designated by the Director of the Division of Motor
Vehicles or the Board of Selectman of Exeter, New Hampshire.
100.18 Weekdays
Shall mean Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday.
101 No Parking Zones
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a motor vehicle at any
time contrary to any of the following provisions of this Section unless otherwise
directed by a Police Officer.
101.1 Parking Prohibited in Specific Places
a. on a public sidewalk
b. on a public crosswalk
c. within an intersection
d. in front of a public or private driveway
e. within 15 feet of a fire hydrant or sprinkler supply head
f. within 30 feet of an intersecting street or road
g. within 75 feet of a fire station entrance
h. along the side of or opposite any street or excavation or obstruction when
such parking will obstruct traffic.
i. upon any bridge or elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway
tunnel
j. at any place where official signs prohibit parking or stopping
k. within any designated fire lane
l. on the road side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb, of any
street
m. on the roadway when the vehicle, parallel parked, has its right wheels more
than 12 inches from the curb or edge of the road.
n. on railroad tracks
o. on the travel portion of any roadway so as to obstruct the movement of traffic
in the travel lane.
p. at a designated bus or taxi stop.
q. on a public way when any wheel of a parked vehicle is beyond the painted
lines in the roadway
r. in any posted area on Town Property
s. upon any roadway when the principal purpose is displaying the vehicle for
sale
t. in zones designed for handicapped parking.
u. in a designated loading or unloading zone
v. in a Town Office parking lot weekdays from 0600 to 1800 hours without valid
permit
101.2 Parking Prohibited on Specific Streets
Auburn Street Both sides of the street for a distance 350 feet easterly from
Portsmouth Ave.
Bow Street Southerly side of street from Court to South. Northerly side from
Court to Clifford.
Browns Court East side of street
Buzell Avenue East side of street
Cass Street
Center Street
Easterly side of street, entire length 7:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. on
school days only.
West side of the street between Front Street and the Municipal
Parking Lot. East side of the street 120 feet north from Front
Street.
Charter Street East side of street from Front Street to a point 90 feet south of
Vine Street. West side of street between Vine and Myrtle Streets
Chestnut Street East side of street from Pleasant Street to Jady Hill Avenue and
west side of street from 380' north of String Bridge to Jady Hill
Avenue.
Clifford Street East side of Street. Loading zone on west side of street.
Cottage Street East side of street.
Court Street East side of street from South Street to Front Street. West side of
street from intersection of Front Street to 180' feet south of Maple
Street. Southeast side of street from Elm Street to Elliot Street.
Northeast side of street no parking for 320 fee from Elm Street to
Elliot Street.
Elliot Street West side from Front Street to Grove Street.
Elm Street West side of street from 15' north of Gilman House parking lot
entrance to 15' south of entrance to Student Center/Library/Dining
Hall driveway; 15' north and south of entrance to parking area
behind Elm Street dining hall.
Epping Road
Extension
Both sides of street the length of Epping Road Extension.
Front Street South side of street for a distance of 60 feet west of Linden Street
and between Elm Street and Post Office driveway.
North side from Kossuth Street to B&M Railroad Crossing. From
Arbor Street to hydrant across from Inn at Exeter.
South side from point approximately 100 feet east of Pine Street
for approximately 25 feet in easterly direction. South side from
Elliot Street westerly for 50'. South side from Elliot easterly for
220'. South side from Elm Street westerly for 50'. North side from
Tan Lane westerly for 50'. North side from Tan Lane intersection
easterly for 80'. Northerly side of street from approximately 100
feet west of the PEA arches to Tan Lane.
Garfield Court Entire side of street.
Gill Street North side of Gill Street (extension) for a distance of 50 feet from
Linden. Entire south side of Gill Street (extension). Entire west
side from Front Street.
Gilman Street
Green Street
Both sides from Court Street to the entrance to the foot-bridge.
Southerly side of Green Street, entire length 7:30 a.m. to 3:30
p.m. on school days only.
Both sides 100 feet from intersection of Green and Cass Streets.
Hall Court Both sides of street from High Street to Hall Place.
Hall Place Both sides of street from Pleasant Street east 340 feet and 100
feet southerly.
Hampton Road Both sides of street from High Street to Exeter/Hampton town
line.
High Street Both sides of street from Clifford Street to Portsmouth Avenue.
North curb line from Portsmouth Avenue to Hampton Road.
South curb line from 180' east of Gardner Street to Hampton
Road. South curb line from 180' east of Gardner Street to
Hampton Road.
Highland Street South side from Portsmouth Avenue to Prospect Street.
Kossuth Street Both sides of street.
Linden Street East side of street from Pine Street to Gary Lane. West side of
street for a distance of 200 feet south of Gill Street and for a
distance of 80' south of Front Street.
Main Street Both sides of street from Harvard to Winter Street. North side
from Water to Cass Street; south side from Spring to westerly
property boundary of Main Street School. South side from
railroad tracks to Harvard Street.
Maple Street South side of street.
Marlboro Street
Marston Street
West side of street
West side of street
Mill Street Southerly from Front Street for 75 feet.
Pine Grove Road Within rotary, either side.
Pleasant Street East side of street, from High Street to Hall Place. West side of
street for a distance of 50 feet south from Library parking lot
entrance.
Portsmouth Avenue Both sides of street.
Prospect Avenue East side of street from Auburn to Highland Avenue
Prospect Street North side of street and south side for distance of 100 feet from
Portsmouth Avenue.
Railroad Avenue West side of street from Front to Winter Streets.
River Street West side of street.
Rockingham Street North side of street.
Spring Street West side of street.
School Street Westerly side from Front Street to Garfield Street.
South Street Both sides from Court to River Street Extension. Southerly side,
between Court Street and Senior Citizen's parking lot.
String Bridge Both sides of street from Water Street to Chestnut Street except
60 feet allowed on northerly and southerly sides opposite library.
Tan Lane East side of street.
Union Street Westerly side from Front Street to Garfield Street.
Vine Street North side of street, from Charter to Sanborn Streets.
Water Street West side of street, from Main Street to Green Street, and from
Center Street to the driveway of the Exeter Town Hall. West side
of street from Park Street to Main Street. East side of street utility
pole # 767 and utility pole # 770. Two loading zones designed &
posted in front of # 33 & # 159 except for loading purposes limited
to 30 minutes.
Waterfront Park Entrance to boat ramp except while loading/unloading.
Westside Drive Both sides of street, 180 feet east of the intersection of Front
Street.
Woodlawn Circle West side, 440 feet from Chestnut Street intersection.
101.3 Winter Parking
All night parking is permitted on Pleasant Street provided proper application is
made to the office of the Town Manager and permit is issued in compliance
with rules established by the Board of Selectman & Town Manager. All night
parking is permitted in designated areas, as marked, in Town Lots (Water St.,
Kossuth/Front streets, Train Station and Center Street) without a permit.
Winter parking ban is December 1 through March 15 each year. For
questions regarding snow removal, contact DPW or Police Dispatch.
101.4 Parking Prohibited
It shall be unlawful to park a boat trailer, utility trailer or camper in any
municipal parking lot between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00AM with
the exception of the parking allowed under Section 103.8.
102 Restricted Parking
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a motor vehicle
contrary to any of the following provisions of this section unless otherwise
directed by a Police Officer.
102.2 Winter Parking Ban
Within the Town of Exeter, from December 1 to March 15, no parking is
permitted on any public street between 12 midnight and 6:00AM. Refer to
101.3 for parking areas in town's R-O-W.
102.3 Parks and Commons
In any town-owned park, common, playground or recreational area between
the hours of 9:00PM and 6:00AM
102.4 School Hours Restrictions
On the following streets during the normal school hours: Linden Street. West
side from a point 200 feet south of Gill Street to the intersection of Gary Lane.
102.5 Public Safety Complex
Parking lot unless on official public safety business.
102.6 Snow Emergency
In the event of a predicted or on-going severe winter snowstorm requiring
enhanced actions maintaining snow plowing and/or removal as deemed
necessary by the DPW Director, a "Snow Emergency" shall be called by the
Police Chief. The Chief shall contact the news media, including local radio
station(s) to notify the public that a ban exists and shall specify the start of the
snow emergency and shall estimate when same will be called off. It shall be
unlawful for any person having the custody and/or control of any vehicle to
park or cause the same to be parked within the public R-O-W during a snow
emergency. Vehicles interfering with snow plowing and/or removal
operations shall be towed and stored at the owner's expense.
102.7 Emergency/Special Event Temporary Parking Restrictions
The Chief of Police is authorized and empowered, in coordination with the
Town Manager, to make and enforce temporary parking regulations to cover
emergencies, special conditions and special events.
103 Limited Parking
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a motor vehicle
contrary to the time restriction in this section unless otherwise directed by a
Police Officer.
103.1 Two – Hour Parking Limit
Center Street Both sides of street from Water Street to the municipal parking
lot.
Front Street Center Isle at the Bandstand: Westerly side from Water Street to
the driveway of Congregational Church. Easterly side from Water
to Court Street. Northerly side of the street beginning 20 feet from
the corner of Spring Street and running approximately 220 feet
southwest along Front Street.
Lincoln Street Westerly side of street beginning 175 feet from the corner of Main
Street and running approximately 530 feet Southwest along
Lincoln Street.
Spring Street From William's Court south 100' to Front Street, on east side.
String Bridge Both sides from Water to Chestnut in 60’ of spaces allowed
opposite Library.
Water Street Both sides from Clifford Street to Main Street except between
Center Street and Town Hall driveway.
103.2 Two – Hour Parking Limit School Hours
103.3 One – Hour Parking Limit
Franklin Street In front on Long Block on the northerly side.
Front Street North side of street for a distance of 80 feet west of Railroad
Avenue.
103.4 One – Hour Parking Limit School Hours
Gill Street North side of Gill Street (extension) from Gill Street to 50' from
Linden. Entire east side from Front Street.
Linden Street West side of street from Front Street to Gill Street.
103.5 30 – Minute Parking Limit School Hours
Linden Street West side in the designated spaces.
103.6 30 – Minute Parking Limit
Bow Street South side adjacent to the Public Safety Complex.
Front Street Monday through Saturday: North side from the driveway of First
Congregational Church to Center Street. South side from Court
Street to 5 spaces east of driveway of the U.S. Post Office. In
front of 148-152 Front Street, south side.
Front Street During State and Federal Elections, Primary and General. Center
Isle at the Bandstand; Westerly side from Water Street to the
driveway of Congregational Church. Easterly side from Water to
Court Street.
103.7 15 – Minute Parking Limit
Front Street South side, 4 spaces east of Post Office entrance, Monday
through Saturday.
103.8 Restricted Parking – Vehicles with boat trailers
Robert H. Stewart Park 4 designated spaces reserved for vehicles w/boat trailers
between April 1st and November 5th.
103.9 Restricted Parking – Motorcycle Parking Only
Front Street 1 designated space in front of 14 Front (up to 2 motorcycles)
Water Street 1 designated space in front of 55 Water St. (1 motorcycle only)
Water Street 1 designated space on southerly side of municipal parking lot (up
to 3 cycles)
103.10 Robert H. Stewart Park: Parking space at island to Boat Launch for Harbor
Master.
110 Penalties
A person violating any provision of Chapter 1 of the Traffic Code shall be
punished by a fine of not more than one hundred ($100) dollars for each
offense, except that optional procedures set forth in Section 110.1 may be
used in lieu of court proceedings for violations of Chapter 1.
110.1 Procedures in Paying Penalties for Extended Time Parking Tickets
The operator or owner may, within 72 hours of the time when a notice of a
violation of Chapter 1 was attached to the vehicles, pay to the Clerk of the
Exeter Police Department by mail or personal appearance the sum of ten
($10.00) dollars, for the first offense, as a penalty in lieu of court proceedings,
except in reference to 101.1 (t) where the penalty is a minimum of two
hundred fifty ($250.00) dollars per offense (eff. 1/1/04). In the case of a
second offense in the same day, the fine shall be fifteen ($15.00) dollars and
in the case of a third offense in the same day, the fine shall be twenty-five
($25.00) dollars.
Failure by the operator or owner to make such payment will result in a second
written notice of the violation. Failure by the operator or owner to make such
payment within five (5) days after the second notice is sent, may result in the
issuance of a summons to the operator to appear in Exeter District Court to
answer to changes of violating the ordinance.
110.2 Owner Responsibility
A person shall not allow, permit or suffer a vehicle registered in his name to
stop, stand or park in violation of any ordinances of the Town of Exeter
controlling the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles and the owner or
person in whose name such vehicle is registered shall be held prima-facie
responsible for such violation.
110.3 Towing
The Police Department is authorized to remove and tow away, or have
removed and towed away by commercial towing service, any abandoned
vehicle, or other vehicle illegally parked in a place where it creates or
constitutes a traffic hazard, blocks the use of a fire hydrant, blocks the use of
a driveway, either public or private, or obstructs or may obstruct snow
removal operations in a safe place, and shall be restored to the owner or
operator upon payment of all fees for towing and storage.






CHAPTER 5 HIGHWAY USE REGULATIONS TOWN OF EXETER, NH 03833-2792
CHAPTER 5 HIGHWAY USE REGULATIONS
501 Snow Removal
No person, firm or corporation engaged in the operation of snow plowing,
blowing or removing shall allow, or cause any accumulations of snow to
obstruct or impair any town-maintained street, roadway, sidewalk, parking lot or
right-of-way, unless such operations are approved by the Director of the Exeter
Public Works Department.
501.1 Fire Hydrants
No person, firm or corporation shall place any object, item or material, or allow
or cause any object, item or material to be placed upon any town-maintained
street, roadway, right-of-way, sidewalk or parking lot, so as to obstruct vehicle
or pedestrian traffic. Such objects shall include, but not be limited to, snow ice,
dirt, gravel, sand, signs or other obstructions.
502 Highway and Sidewalk Obstruction
No person, firm or corporation shall place any object, item or material, or allow
or cause any object, item or material to be placed, upon any town-maintained
street, roadway, right-of-way, sidewalk or parking lot, so as to obstruct vehicle
or pedestrian traffic. Such objects shall include, but not be limited to, snow, ice,
dirt, gravel, sand, signs or other obstructions.
502.1 Damage to Surface
No person, firm or corporation shall place any object, item or materials, or allow
or cause any object, item or material to be placed upon any town-maintained
street, roadway, right-of-way, sidewalk or parking lot so as to damage the
surface thereof.
502.2a Signs and Displays
502.2a(1) Sandwich board or A-frame signs are allowed only along the
Waterfront Commercial zone and along the following downtown streets: Water
Street between Great Bridge and Main Street, Center Street, and Front Street
from Spring Street to Water Street. Only one sandwich board sign per
business establishment shall be permitted. All sandwich board signs shall be
removed at the end of the business day for the respective business.
502.2a(2) Dimensions and placement
To encourage signs that are of a quality design, and are appropriate in size and
materials, sandwich board signs shall meet the following criteria:
(A) A sandwich board sign shall have dimensions no greater than 42 inches in
height, 24 inches in width, and shall extend into the right-of-way or sidewalk no
more than 24 inches.
CHAPTER 5 HIGHWAY USE REGULATIONS TOWN OF EXETER, NH 03833-2792
(B) No balloons, flags, illumination or other decorations may be placed upon a
sandwich board sign.
(C) Sandwich board signs may not be permitted on sidewalks where the width
of the sidewalk will be significantly diminished by placement of the sign.
(D) Business establishments requesting a permit for a sandwich board sign
shall demonstrate that the business has premises and general liability
insurance in the amount of $300,000/$1 million, which contains coverage for
said business’ use and activity upon the right-of-way or sidewalk, and shall
cause the Town of Exeter to be named as an additional insured under the
policy.
502.2a(3) Permit Required
Any person, firm or corporation seeking to place a sandwich board sign in or on
a public right-of-way or sidewalk under 502.2a shall apply to the Town’s
Building Inspector for a permit for such sign. Such application shall specify the
proposed location of the sign and the design and materials of the sign along
with a dimensioned drawing of the proposed sign. Any modifications to the sign
after approval by the Building Inspector must be re-submitted for approval.
If approved, the applicant will be issued a Town sandwich board sign sticker to
be placed prominently on the outside surface of the sign.
502.2a(4) Any person, firm or corporation seeking to place a merchandise
display in or on a public right-of-way or sidewalk shall apply to the Town’s
Building Inspector for a permit for such display. Such display shall also be
limited to 24 inches in width and shall extend into the right-of-way or sidewalk
no more than 24 inches.
(A) Any person, firm or corporation seeking the use of the sidewalk for an
infrequent sidewalk sale shall petition the Board of Selectman, in a regular
session, for permission to do so.
502.2b Directional Signs (“Blue Signs”)
Any person, firm or corporation seeking the installation of a directional sign,
also known as a “Blue Sign,” to a place or establishment shall petition the
Board of Selectman, in a regular session, for permission. Permission will only
be considered for purposes of directing the public to a place or establishment
that is not on a primary Town road. The petition shall clearly state the need of
the posting places affected, the duration of the posting and pay the cost of the
sign(s), which will be installed by the Department of Public Works after approval
by the Board.
502.2c Political Campaign Signs
Political campaign signs are allowed pursuant to RSA 664:17.
CHAPTER 5 HIGHWAY USE REGULATIONS TOWN OF EXETER, NH 03833-2792
502.2d Banners, Flags and Balloons
Flags, balloons or banner-type signs extending above or across the town’s
sidewalks are allowed provided that the lowest portion of any such object shall
be no less than 7 feet above a sidewalk, and in no event shall such object
extend over any town-maintained street, roadway or parking lot so as to
obstruct vehicle or pedestrian traffic or the view of the street, roadway or
parking lot. Any person, firm or corporation seeking the installation of a special
event banner extending across the town’s roadways or rights-of-way shall
petition the Board of Selectman, in a regular session, for permission.
502.2e Right-of-Way and Sidewalk Maintenance
All obstructions must be removed from town rights-of-way and sidewalks for
winter maintenance during inclement weather. This includes sandwich board
signs, planters, merchandise, tables, etc. In addition, all awnings must be
retracted during inclement winter weather to allow safe passage for the
maintenance vehicles and equipment.
502.2f Removal
Signs, flags or banners found in violation of this section shall be subject to
removal at any time by the Department of Works, the Code Enforcement Officer
or the Police Department. Such signs, flags or banners will be removed to the
Department of Public Works and stored for one week so that the owner may
retrieve the item. Items not retrieved after one week will be recycled or
disposed of.
502.2g Town signs and poles
No one shall affix any sign, flag or other material to a Town of Exeter street
sign, traffic sign or other town-owned structure located on town property or in
the public right-of-way.
502.3 Waiver and Appeal
Any person, firm or corporation seeking an exemption from this section shall
petition the Board of Selectman, in a regular session, for a waiver. The petition
shall clearly state the need of the posting places affected, and the duration of
the posting. Any person, firm or corporation having been denied a permit under
502.2a may appeal that denial to the Board of Selectmen in a regular session.
The written appeal petition shall clearly state the reasons why the denial should
be reversed and the permit should be granted.
South curb line from Portsmouth Avenue to Hampton Road.
503 Weight Limits
No person, firm or corporation shall operate any vehicle on or over any bridge
or elevated road-way in the Town of Exeter when such vehicle weighs more
than the weight limits posted by the Director of the Exeter Public Works
Department or the Commissioner of the NH Department of Public Works and
Highways.
CHAPTER 5 HIGHWAY USE REGULATIONS TOWN OF EXETER, NH 03833-2792
503.1 Prohibition of Through Trucks on Public Ways
No person, firm or corporation shall operate a truck with an empty weight in
excess of 8 tons on any public street or highway except under one of the
following conditions:
503.1.1 Vehicle being operated point to point in Exeter for the purpose of local
deliveries:
503.1.2 Vehicle is being operated to a designated point in Exeter to make a delivery.
503.1.3 Vehicle is being operated from a permanent base of operation in Exeter to the
designated truck route;
503.1.4 Vehicle being operated on the following named streets or highways:
Epping Road
Main Street
Pickpocket Road
Pine Road
Route 108
Route 111 from Kingston town line to Water St/Bandstand, so-called
Water Street from Spring Street to the Bandstand, so-called.
503.2 Exemptions
Restrictions described in this section shall not apply to emergency vehicles,
Town highway, building and maintenance vehicles, or school buses in the
normal process of their duties.
504 Excavation of Town Streets, Rights-of-Way
No person, firm or corporation shall excavate, construct, alter or conduct any
operations that alter or damage any town-owned or maintained streets,
roadways, sidewalks, parking lots or rights-of-way without a valid permit issued
by the Public Works Department.
Contractors excavating in town streets and/or rights-of-way must maintain
minimum insurance and surety coverage as follows:
1. Liability Coverage: General liability $500,000 combined Single Limit
Comprehensive Form; Broad Form Property Damage; Independent contractor's
Insurance, product/completed operations insurance. (If work involves the
following, appropriate coverage is necessary: explosion, collapse,
underground).
2. Vehicle Insurance: $500,000 Combined Single Limit, Comprehensive Form,
Owner, Hired/Non-owned.
3. Worker Compensation: Statutory limits, Employer liability $100,000.
CHAPTER 5 HIGHWAY USE REGULATIONS TOWN OF EXETER, NH 03833-2792
4. Letter of Credit: Each excavation permit and excavation shall be warranted by
a "Letter of Credit" in a format designated by Selectmen's policy 89-06. Said
letter of credit shall be in the minimum amount of $500 per excavation (for 100
sq. ft) plus an additional $500.00 per each 100 sq. ft. thereafter. Letter of
Credit will be for a minimum of a two year period.
504.1 Regulations Governing Methods
The Public Works Department shall develop strict rules on the methods of
protection of utilities and roadways affected and rules concerning backfill, base
preparation and final pavement replacement for any excavation.
504.2 Restrictions
No permit shall be issued between November 15 and March 15 annually unless
authorized by the Board of Selectmen. No permit shall be issued between
March 16 and April 1 annually unless specially approved by the Highway
Superintendent. Emergency repairs of existing utilities will be exempt from this
Section.
504.3 Fees Required
A minimum fee of fifty ($50.00) dollars will be required for every excavation
permit issued. Excavations in excess of one hundred (100) square feet shall
require an additional fee of two ($2.00) dollars per square yard for each
additional square yard.
504.4 New Streets or Connecting Streets & Driveways
No person, firm or corporation shall excavate and/or build a new driveway or
street access across or on a Town street or right-of-way without obtaining a
valid driveway permit from the Public Works Department prior to construction.
Specifications for construction of permitted acts under this Section shall be
those outlined in 504.1 above.
505 Covered Load
505.1 No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any way unless such vehicle is so
constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its load from dropping, sifting,
leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand may be dropped for
the purpose of securing traction, or water or other substances may be sprinkled
on a way in cleaning or maintaining such a way.
505.2 No person shall drive, on any way, any open vehicle loaded with earth, sand,
asphalt, stone, gravel, debris, trash, rubbish or other particulate substance
unless said load is covered and secured so as to prevent the escape of any
substance from said load onto the way.
505.3 The provisions of Section 505.1 and 505.2 shall not apply to a local farmer
transporting his own farm products or materials incidental to his farming
CHAPTER 5 HIGHWAY USE REGULATIONS TOWN OF EXETER, NH 03833-2792
operations, provided that such farmer shall not thereby be relieved of his duty
to exercise reasonable care in carrying on such operations.
505.4 The provisions of Section 505.2 shall not apply to the operation of municipal
maintenance equipment.
506 Loading and Unloading Trucks
Purpose: The declared intent and purpose of this section is to regulate the
hours that trucks may load or unload to insure the safe passage of emergency
vehicles through the congested areas of the Town during peak traffic hours.
506.1 No tractor-trailer combinations or any truck with a box body or platform over 16
feet long shall park, load or unload on Mondays through Thursdays or on
Saturdays, between the hours of 11:00 AM and 2:00 PM, and 4:00PM and
6:00PM, or on Fridays between the hours of 11:00AM and 2:00PM, and
4:00PM and 9:00PM upon the following streets within the Town of Exeter:
Lincoln Street
Water Street
These prohibitions shall not apply to the 2 loading zones on Water St.
referenced in subsection 101.2.
506.2 No tractor-trailer combination or any truck with a box body or platform over 16
feet long shall park, load or unload on Mondays through Thursdays, or
Saturdays between the hours of 11:00AM and 2:00PM, and 4:00PM to 6:00PM,
or on Fridays between the hours of 11:00AM and 2:00PM, and 4:00PM and
9:00PM upon Chestnut Street, unless such vehicle is parked parallel with the
curb or loading platform, and provides clear passage of vehicles on the traveled
portion of the said street.
506.3 The ordinance shall not apply to trucks being used upon said streets for
emergency purposes or while engaged on highway maintenance or repairs.
506.6 Trucks delivering perishable goods are exempt from the foregoing provisions of
this ordinance until the hour of 12 noon each day.
507 Loud, Unusual or Unnecessary Noise
The purpose and intent of this section is to prohibit any vehicle on any way in
the Town of Exeter from making loud, unusual or other unnecessary noise.
507.1 The words "loud, unusual or other unnecessary noises” shall include any noise
occasioned by any one or more of the following actions by the operator of any
vehicle.
a. Misuse of power exceeding tire-traction limits in acceleration, sometimes
CHAPTER 5 HIGHWAY USE REGULATIONS TOWN OF EXETER, NH 03833-2792
known as "laying down rubber" or "peeling down rubber".
b. Misuse of braking power exceeding tire-traction limits in deceleration where
there is no emergency.
c. Rapid acceleration by means of quick up shifting of transmission.
d. Rapid deceleration by means of quick downshifting of transmission gears with
either a clutch and manual transmission or an automatic transmission.
e. Racing of engines by manipulation of the accelerator, gas pedal, carburetor or
gear selection whether the vehicle is either in motion or standing still.
f. The blowing of any horn except as a warning signal or the use of any other
noise making device whether the vehicle is either in motion or standing still.
508 Traffic Flow in Construction Areas
The purpose and intent of this section is to ensure that safe and constant flow
of traffic is maintained in and around construction areas on public ways in the
Town of Exeter.
508.1 No person, business or corporation shall place equipment, vehicles, work
materials or personnel in such a way as to interrupt the safe and continuous
flow of vehicular and pedestrian traffic along a public way within Exeter without
taking specific safety precautions.
508.2 Definition
For purposes of this ordinance, "Construction" will be defined as activity on or
about a public way that involves laying or relaying of sewers, electrical,
telephone, gas lines, water or any type of communications equipment, cable TV
or any other type of underground utilities or the installation of above-ground
utilities; and construction, reconstruction, excavation, paving or other work
requiring cutting into the pavement, or street paving.
508.3 Responsibility of the Primary Contractor:
The primary contractor is responsible for the conduct of work performed upon
the site and will be required to establish safe travel lanes and flow of traffic for
any of the following conditions:
a. Construction, re-construction, excavation, paving or any other type of work on
existing streets, or the construction of new streets.
b. When the street traffic is primarily controlled by a traffic control signal which
will become ineffective in the proper control of traffic due to the existence of
construction activity.
CHAPTER 5 HIGHWAY USE REGULATIONS TOWN OF EXETER, NH 03833-2792
c. When any such activity significantly affects the flow of traffic.
508.4 Methods of Compliance:
To ensure normal and ordinary flow of traffic, the primary contractor shall:
a. Place traffic cones, flares, barricades or similar devices that clearly mark
travel lanes and hazards within the travel portion of the road in compliance
with NH DOT standards: and/or,
b. Place properly trained "Flagmen", wearing safety vests, at such locations that
are clearly visible from all approaches of the construction site and using such
hand signals and/or signage to safely control and direct the flow of traffic;
and/or,
c. Employ uniformed officers carrying out the same duties as a Flagman
particularly in high vehicle congestion areas, major intersections, or areas
where traffic signs/signals are overridden.
508.5 After Hours Construction Sites:
No incomplete construction site will be left unattended without adequate lighting
and barricades so as to allow free and unhindered movement for all travel lanes
and to ensure public safety.
508.6 Evaluation of Traffic and Safety Conditions:
For the purposes of public safety, the Public Works Director and/or the Chief of
Police, or their designees, may direct specific actions to be taken when a
primary contractor's steps taken thus far are deemed insufficient and continue
to unreasonably interfere with the normal and ordinary flow of traffic or present
conditions which adversely affect public safety and convenience.
508.7 Penalty:
In the event that any provision of Section 508 is violated, the Public Works
Director and/or chief of Police, or their designees, are empowered to issue a
cease & desist order against the contractor or his employees. Such order shall
remain in effect until there is strict compliance with this ordinance.
510 Penalties
A person violating any provision of Chapter 5 of this code shall be punished by
a fine of not more than one hundred ($100.00) dollars for each offense.
CHAPTER 5 HIGHWAY USE REGULATIONS TOWN OF EXETER, NH 03833-2792





CHAPTER 7 CONDUCT REGULATIONS TOWN OF EXETER, NH 03833-2792
CHAPTER 7 CONDUCT REGULATIONS
700 Purpose
The purpose of this Chapter is to define the various sections relative to public
conduct and action within the geographical limits of Exeter.
701 Unnecessary Noise
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make, create, maintain or
simulate any excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noises which are prolonged,
unusual and unnatural in their time, place and use effect, and are a detriment to
public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity of the residents of
the Town of Exeter.
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and
unnecessary noises in violation of the ordinance, but said numeration shall not be
deemed to be exclusive namely:
701.1 Radios, Stereos, etc: The using or operating of any radio receiving set, musical
instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for producing or reproducing
the sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the
neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for
convenient hearing for the person or persons who are in the room, vehicle or
chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who are voluntary
listeners thereto. The operation of such between the hours of eleven (11:00)
o'clock PM and seven (7:00) o'clock AM in such a manner as to be plainly
audible beyond the noisemaker's premises, building, structure or vehicle, as
applicable and which is unreasonable and offensive as above described shall be
prima facie evidence for a violation of this Section.
701.2 Loud Speakers, Amplifiers, Public Address Systems and etc., for Advertising.
The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio
receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker or other machine or
device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is used upon the public
streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the
public to any building or structure, without a permit and only between the hours of
8AM and 7PM.
701.3 Yelling, Shouting, etc: Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the
public streets between the hours of 11PM and 7AM or at any time or place so as
to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, or in any
dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity.
701.4 Exhausts and Unloading: Loading, unloading, opening boxes: The creation of a
loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or
the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers between the
hours of 11PM and 7AM.
Open Exhausts: The discharge into the open air of any unmuffled exhaust from
any engine, mobile or stationary or any compressor unit that emits a noise level
at a distance of 50 feet or greater.
CHAPTER 7 CONDUCT REGULATIONS TOWN OF EXETER, NH 03833-2792
701.5 Construction or Repairing of Buildings: The erection (including excavation),
demolition, alteration or repair of any building other than between the hours of
7AM and 10PM except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health
and safety, and then only with a permit from the Building Inspector should s/he
determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection,
demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and
highways between the hours of 10PM and 7AM and if he shall further determine
that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest, s/he may grant
permission for such work to be done within the hours of 10PM and 7 AM upon
application being made at the time the permit for the work is awarded or during
the progress of the work.
701.6 Schools, Courts, Churches, Hospitals: The creation of any excessive noise on
any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while the
same are in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with
the workings of such institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in
the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating
that the same is a school, hospital, church or court.
701.7 Pile Drivers, Hammers, etc: The operation between the hours of 10PM and 7 AM
of any pile driver, shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or
other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise
701.8 Exemptions: Public Works and Public Safety equipment required for the effective
delivery of public services shall be exempt from the provisions of this Section.
702 Loitering
Two or more persons shall not loiter, assemble or congregate on any public way
or sidewalk, or in any public place in the Town of Exeter, in such a way as to
impede the progress of, or cause annoyance to any person, nor shall any person
remain upon any public street after being ordered by a Police Officer to move on.
Violation of this Section shall be deemed disorderly conduct.
703 Public Drinking
No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage, or have in his/her possession
any open container of alcoholic beverage, while upon any public park,
playground, sidewalk, commons, town-owned property or any public way within
the geographic limits of Exeter. Exemptions to this section shall only apply to
events properly licensed under Chapter 809 of these Town Ordinances.
703.1 No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage, or have in his/her possession
any open container of alcoholic beverage while in any vehicle within the
geographical limits of Exeter.
704 Discharging Firearms
No person shall discharge any cannon, pistol or other firearms on the property of
GTE Osram/Sylvania located on Portsmouth Avenue in Exeter.
704.1 No person, firm or corporation shall fire or discharge any cannon, gun pistol or
other firearm, rocket or squibs within the compact area of the Town of Exeter.
CHAPTER 7 CONDUCT REGULATIONS TOWN OF EXETER, NH 03833-2792
No person, firm or corporation shall, while on the property of another, fire or
discharge any cannon, gun pistol or other firearm, rocket or squib within three
hundred (300) feet of a dwelling, building or person.
704.2 Compact Area Defined:
Compact area shall mean the area bounded by the Department of Public Works
and Highways compact zones.
704.3 Discharge of firearms on town property:
Notwithstanding the provisions of 704.1 above, no person, except a Law
Enforcement Officer in the proper execution of his duties, firm or corporation shall
fire or discharge any cannon, gun, pistol or other firearm, rocket or squibs upon
any property owned or leased by the Town of Exeter except that at the following
locations the following activities shall be permitted:
a. A designated firing range approved by the Board of Selectmen upon
recommendation of the Chief of Police with the concurrence of the Town
Manager at which instruction in the use of firearms shall be allowed as part of the
Police Department's training procedures:
b. The Sportsman's Club maintained on the Water Works property, so-called, off
Portsmouth Avenue, at which Sportsman's Club, the Club members shall be
allowed to carry out their customary firearms activities;
c. The following properties under the supervision of the Exeter Conservation
Commission, on which property hunting for birds and mammals according to New
Hampshire State Law shall be allowed:
Oaklands Town Forest
Little River Conservation Area
Smith-Page Conservation Area
Raynes Farm Conservation Area
705 Standard of Conduct – Municipal Officers
No Town officer, employee or agent shall solicit or accept any gratuity, favor or
anything of monetary value from any contractor or potential contractor with the
Municipality relative to the procurement of any State and/or federal grant funds;
and the offering and/or giving of any such matter of monetary value by such a
contractor or their agents to any Municipal Officer, employee or agent is hereby
prohibited. In addition to any penalties which may be provided by law, any
appropriate disciplinary action including, in the case of an officer, removal from
office; in the case of employees, termination of such agency.
706 Use of Waterways
The purpose of this ordinance is to regulate the activity on Town property
associated with bodies of water under the Town's control.
CHAPTER 7 CONDUCT REGULATIONS TOWN OF EXETER, NH 03833-2792
706.1 Areas affected:
Water Works Pond
Pickpocket Dam Pond
Brickyard Pond
Colcord Pond
Clemson Dam
706.2 Fishing allowed:
Fresh water line fishing will be allowed on these areas provided all persons
conform to NH Revised Statutes Annotated and Fish and Game Regulations.
706.3 Prohibited Acts:
No person, firm or corporation shall operate any boat, float, canoe, raft or kayak
with a motor on these water ways.
706.4 Prohibited Areas for Health & Safety Concerns:
Dikes, dams, berms, sewer lagoons, holding ponds and the structures of any
spillways shall be prohibited areas for persons fishing. Persons found in violation
of this Section shall be considered trespassing.
706.5 Other Laws Prevail:
Town and State laws and regulations governing littering, liquor laws, health and
open lewdness shall prevail and will be strictly enforced.
707 Use of Water Works Pond
707.1 No person, firm or corporation shall operate any vehicle on the open or ice
covered waters of the Water works pond, so-called.
707.2 No person, firm or corporation shall kindle a fire of any kind on the shores of or
on the ice covering of the Water Works pond.
707.4 No person shall fish within 300 feet of the Water Works Pond dam.
707.5 No person, while fishing, shall litter the waters of Water Works pond.
707.6 No recreational use of the public water supply known as "Water Works Pond" is
permitted with the exception of fishing from the shore of the Pond where not
excluded by other ordinance(s).
708 Smelt Shack Regulations
708.1 During temporary ice loss on the River, smelt shacks may be removed to the
Town parking lot adjacent to the landing. Such shacks shall be allowed to
remain there for no more than twenty-four (24) hours, at which time they shall
either be placed back on the ice or removed from the lot.
708.2 Smelt shacks not removed from the Town parking lot adjacent to the Town
landing within twenty-four (24) hours, will be removed to Town custody. Smelt
CHAPTER 7 CONDUCT REGULATIONS TOWN OF EXETER, NH 03833-2792
shacks will be released to their owners only upon payment of the penalty
described in 710 below, and costs assessed by Public Works.
708.3 Smelt shacks shall not be launched onto or removed from the ice from any townowned
or maintained property with the exception of Stewart/Waterfront Park Boat
Ramp.
708.4 Smelt shacks shall not be anchored or affixed to any town-owned or maintained
property.
709 Penalties
Any person violating any provision of Chapter 7 shall be punished by a fine of not
more than one hundred ($100) dollars for each offense.
710 Town Conservation Land
No person shall operate a motorized vehicle on posted Town Conservation Land
without the written permission of the Town Manager. Human powered wheeled
vehicles (such as bicycles) are permitted only on well-established, marked trails
where noted. Off trail biking is prohibited.
711 Drug Paraphernalia
It shall be a violation of this section for any person to retain or possess Drug
Paraphernalia with the intent to use, sell, employ or allow the same to be used,
sold or employed for an unlawful purpose. An Unlawful purpose shall mean any
act prohibited pursuant to RSA 318-B:2.
Drug Paraphernalia means any tool, equipment, product or implement adapted or
designed to make, store, dispense, ingest or conceal a controlled substance. The
definition of Drug Paraphernalia includes all equipment, products and materials
as described by RSA 318-B:1, X-a.
A controlled substance means any controlled drug or controlled drug analog as
defined by RSA 318-B:1, VI and VI-a.
The District Court having jurisdiction may order Drug Paraphernalia forfeited and
destroyed in the manner of controlled drugs prescribed by RSA 318-B:17.
CHAPTER 8 COMMERCE REGULATIONS TOWN OF EXETER, NH 03833-2792
CHAPTER 8 COMMERCE REGULATIONS
800 Purpose
This Chapter is intended to cover various regulations that will govern on the public
ways or in certain public and private buildings.
801 Dance Halls
The purpose and intent of this Section is to provide a mechanism whereby the
Town of Exeter may lawfully act to protect the health, safety and morals of its
residents by providing a limited regulatory structure for the operations of dance
halls, which are not licensed to serve alcoholic beverages.
801.1 Definitions: As used in this Ordinance, the below terms shall
have the following meanings:
Dance Hall: Any person and all structures where dancing, whether live or
recorded music, occurs, without regard to whether admission is by
membership or otherwise.
Excessive Noise: Such sound that is of volume and/or intensity above the
normal level prevailing in an area where a dance hall is located when said
dance hall is not in operation, as to have a significant adverse impact on
abutting neighbors or the general public.
Live Music: Sound produced by the human operations of a musical
instrument of any nature including, for example, electronic music,
synthesized and the human voice.
Recorded Music: Any reproduction of sound of whatever nature including
but not limited to tapes, records, or radio signals of said tapes, records, or
CD's.
801.2 Permit Required:
It shall be unlawful to operate a dance hall in the Town of Exeter without
having first obtained a dance hall permit as described in this ordinance.
801.3 Application and Fee:
The Chief of Police, with the concurrence of the Building Inspector, is
empowered to issue a permit renewable on a yearly basis on April 1st of each
succeeding year, to allow the use of a structure as a dance hall, upon
application, on forms to be prescribed by the Chief, by the owner of the
structure. If the owner is not the person or corporation to operate the structure
as a dance hall, the operator shall additionally make application. There shall
be a fee of fifty ($50) dollars for each such application to defray the expense of
review and processing.
CHAPTER 8 COMMERCE REGULATIONS TOWN OF EXETER, NH 03833-2792
801.4 Standards:
Before issuing a permit, the Chief of Police shall require that in addition to
being in conformance with all Planning, Zoning, Building, Health and Safety
and all other ordinances and regulations of the Town and State, the proposed
use of the structure as a dance hall will:
a. Not create a public nuisance by excessive noise, congregating of patrons,
parking or traffic congestion or otherwise, and;
b. Have specific hours of operation which shall be no longer than 12 noon to
the following: 1AM on all days except operation on Sunday, which is limited
to the hours of 6PM to 12 Midnight.
801.5 Revocation and Appeal:
Upon the issuing authority receiving written complaints of operation of any
dance hall in violation of the standards herein described, he may, after his own
independent investigation, revoke the permit of any dance hall subject to the
right of the permit holder to appeal the revocation to the Board of Selectmen.
Any such revocation shall be in writing, shall state the grounds thereof, and
shall be sent by certified mail to the last known address of the permit holder.
801.6 Hearing:
Upon appeal of revocation by any permit holder, the Board of Selectmen shall
promptly schedule a hearing with notice thereof, as above provided, which will
be open to the public. Unless it appears from the information presented at the
hearing that the decision to revoke the permit was unjust or unreasonable, the
revocation will be sustained.
801.7 Exemption:
Notwithstanding the definition of Section 801.7, the provisions of this
ordinance shall not be applicable to any private residential structure where
dancing by ten or fewer individuals occurs, nor shall this Ordinance be
applicable to any dance hall as defined herein which during actual hours of
operation is subject to regulation or license by the State of New Hampshire
under Title XIII of the Revised Statutes Annotated, Chapter 175-182, or their
successors.
801.10 Penalty:
The failure to obtain a permit as required by Section 801.3 of this Chapter shall
be punishable by a fine of not more than one hundred ($100) dollars with each
day of operation of a dance hall without a permit constituting a separate
offense. Additionally, the Chief of Police is empowered, upon approval of the
Board of Selectmen, to seek injunctive relief in the Rockingham County
Superior court to enforce the terms and conditions of this Chapter.
802 Ordinance to Regulate Vendors, Hawkers, Peddlers, Solicitors, and other
Itinerant Vendors, and Door-to-Door Solicitations and Canvassing
CHAPTER 8 COMMERCE REGULATIONS TOWN OF EXETER, NH 03833-2792
802.1 Requirement
No person, partnership, corporation, or other entity, whether maintaining
permanent location in the Town of Exeter or not, may sell, barter, purchase, or
otherwise carry on commerce in goods or services within the Town of Exeter,
or attempt to do so, through door-to-door solicitations, or on the streets,
sidewalks, or other property of the Town without first applying for and receiving
a permit to do so from the Town of Exeter.
802.2 Exemptions
No permit is required under this ordinance for the following:
a. The solicitation of signatures for political purposes.
b. Any public event sponsored by a non-profit organization, provided that any
concessions or sales must be directly connected to the event and must be
included in the public assemblage permit approved for the event under
Town Ordinance 807. A list of vendors must be provided to the Town
Office before the event.
c. Any event taking place in Town recreation areas and is part of a Townsponsored
event or has the express written permission of the Board of
Selectmen or designee.
d. Any event taking place on land owned or controlled by the public school
system and has the express written permission of the School Board or
Principal of the school in question.
802.3 Procedure for Obtaining Permit
Persons or entities subject to this Ordinance shall apply during normal
business hours (8:00AM-4:30PM at the Town Office) to the Office of the
Selectmen or designee for a permit, utilizing the application form prescribed. If
vending food, the applicant must first obtain all applicable licenses from the
Exeter Health Department located at the Exeter Fire Department.
The application for the permit shall include, but is not limited to, the following
information:
a. the name of the person applying and the name of the entity, if different, for
whom the application is made;
b. the local address of the person applying, the permanent address of the
person applying, and of the entity, if different, from the person making the
application;
c. the local and permanent telephone and fax numbers of said person and/or
entity;
d. the date of birth and social security number of all persons to be involved
CHAPTER 8 COMMERCE REGULATIONS TOWN OF EXETER, NH 03833-2792
and taxpayer's identification number of the entity;
e. vehicle information, including the license plate number, state of issue, and
physical description of all vehicles involved:
f. the nature of the goods or services involved;
g. the method of solicitation to be used and copies of any proposed contracts,
agreements, promotional materials, or other materials designed to be used
in solicitation.
h. the dates upon which solicitations, canvassing, or vending are to occur and
the location and times on each of those dates.
i. the names of Town parking lots, commons, or parks at which vending is
proposed to occur.
j. information required to be supplied under NH RSA 321:19 as to the
advertising, representing or holding forth of any sale as an insurance,
bankrupt, insolvent, assignee's, trustee's, testator's, executor's,
administrator's, receiver's, wholesale, manufacturer's or closing-out sale, or
as a sale of goods damaged by fire, smoke, water or otherwise, or in any
similar form, the following information is required to be supplied under NH
RSA 321:19- all the facts relating thereto, the reason for and the character
of such sale, including a statement of the names of the persons from whom
the goods were obtained, the date of their delivery to the applicant, the
place from which they were last taken and all the details necessary to
locate and identify them.
k. a non-refundable permit fee of twenty-five ($25) dollars per day, one
hundred ($100) dollars per week, or two hundred fifty ($250) dollars per
year or any part thereof, payable at the time of application.
802.4 Official Action on the Permit
A. Before granting any permit under this chapter, the Board of Selectmen of
the Town of Exeter, or designee shall:
i. determine whether the applicant has submitted a complete and
accurate application;
ii. determine whether the applicant has met all requirements and
purposes of this chapter;
iii. forward application and information to the Chief of Police or
designee for review.
CHAPTER 8 COMMERCE REGULATIONS TOWN OF EXETER, NH 03833-2792
B. After the application for a permit has been reviewed by the Board of
Selectmen or designee and the Chief of Police or designee, the permit will
be approved or disapproved. The decision to approve or disapprove will be
based on the findings of the Board of Selectmen or designee. A decision
shall be made no later than five (5) working days after receipt of
application. If the permit is denied, the Board of Selectmen or designee
shall provide reasons for the denial to the applicant.
C. Reasons for denial may include but are not limited to any one of the
following:
i. conviction of any offense which would warrant such denial;
ii. evidence that the permitee has accepted or solicited money,
otherwise than through a bonafide sale or barter of goods, wares, or
merchandise, or has in any manner solicited same from the public;
iii. evidence of any falsification of information on the application;
iv. evidence that the permitee is insane, a sexual psychopath, is or has
been guilty of assault upon others or whose conduct has been
otherwise disorderly and is of such violent or offensive demeanor
that to grant such permit would constitute a threat to the peace or
safety of the public;
v. the permitee is at large pending appeal from a conviction for a
violation of the law involving extreme moral turpitude; or
vi. failure to supply the information required under NH RSA 321:19
vii. any negative past experience with the organization's or individual's
conducting of activities either in the Town of Exeter or elsewhere,
that would require a permit under this ordinance.
802.5 Revocation of Permit
A. Upon receipt of any complaint concerning nuisance, hazard, annoyance, or
disorderly conduct concerning any section of this Chapter, any or all
solicitors may be asked to stop solicitation.
B. The Town of Exeter may amend or revoke a permit if any of the following
occur:
i. The existence of any of the reasons for denial listed above in
802.4C.
ii. Failure to supply the identification required under 802.8 below.
CHAPTER 8 COMMERCE REGULATIONS TOWN OF EXETER, NH 03833-2792
iii. The occurrence of any prohibited conduct as set forth below under
802.9
802.6 Appeal Process
A person may appeal to the Board of Selectman from the denial, revocation or
amendment of a permit by filing a written notice within five (5) working days of
denial, revocation or amendment of the permit. The Board of Selectmen may
affirm or reverse the decision, or attach such additional conditions to the
permit as will, in their best judgment, protect the health and safety of the public
and the persons required to apply for the permit.
802.7 Notification of Police
Upon the issuance of a permit to any person, firm, corporation, or other entity,
the Board of Selectmen or designee shall notify the Police Department of the
same.
802.8 Identification Required
Any person, firm, corporation, or other entity granted such a permit shall upon
demand show suitable identification to any person demanding same and shall
at each solicitation or inquiry identify the entity benefiting from the funds
received.
802.9 Prohibited Conduct under a Permit
A. No door-to-door solicitation or canvassing regulated under this chapter is to
occur before 9 AM or after 9PM on any given date.
B. Sidewalk Vendors: A vendor selling on the sidewalk shall not:
i. Vend at any location where the unobstructed sidewalk area after
deducting the area occupied by the stand is less than three (3) feet
in width;
ii. Vend within thirty (30) feet of any driveway entrance to a police or
fire station, or within ten (10) feet of any other driveway;
iii. Allow the stand or any other item relating to the operation of the
vending business to lean against or hang from any building or other
structure lawfully placed on public property, without the building or
structure owner's written permission.
C. Motor Vehicle Vendors: A vendor selling from a motor vehicle shall not:
1. Conduct his motorized business in such a way as would restrict or
interfere with the ingress or egress of the abutting property owner or
tenant, create or become a public nuisance, increase traffic congestion
CHAPTER 8 COMMERCE REGULATIONS TOWN OF EXETER, NH 03833-2792
or delay, or constitute a hazard to traffic, life or property, or an
obstruction to adequate access to Fire, Police or Town/State vehicles;
2. Stop, stand, or park his vehicle upon any street for the purpose of
selling or sell on any street under any circumstances during the hours
when parking, or stopping or standing has been prohibited or is
prohibited by statute by signs or curb markings or ordinance;
3. Remain in any one location for longer than is authorized by the parking
ordinances of the Town unless specifically authorized to do so. In
areas not covered by the parking ordinances, parking shall be limited to
thirty (30) minutes.
802.10 Penalty
Any person, partnership, corporation, or other entity that conducts activities
that require a permit under this chapter without a valid permit shall be guilty of
a violation punishable by a fine or not more than $200.00 for each violation.
805 Fireworks
No person shall possess any fireworks as defined in 160.1 New Hampshire
Revised Statutes Annotated unless said person is in the business of the sale of
fireworks for pyrotechnic displays as licensed by the Federal and State
Government, or holds a valid permit for display of fireworks as provided elsewhere
in this section.
805.1 Permit for Pyrotechnic Displays:
A permit for "fireworks" displays shall be issued by the Board of Selectmen for
special events in which a fireworks display is in the best interests of the
general public. No permits shall be issued without the approval of the Chiefs
of the Fire and Police Departments who will render a decision based on the
competence of the operator, the protection factors and the availability of
manpower and equipment.
806 Public Dances
No person, firm, corporation or organization shall conduct a public dance, carnival
or circus in which the attendance may be greater than two hundred (200) people
unless a police officer is on duty at such an event. When the attendance
increases by any group to three hundred (300) or more, a police officer shall be
on duty at such event for each three hundred (300) persons in attendance.
806.1 Costs:
The costs of such police services shall be paid by the person, firm or
corporation sponsoring the event.
806.2 Penalty:
Failure to comply with the provisions of Section 806 shall be guilty of a
violation, and shall be fined not more than one hundred ($100) dollars.
CHAPTER 8 COMMERCE REGULATIONS TOWN OF EXETER, NH 03833-2792
807 Special Events
No person, firm, corporation or group shall organize a parade, demonstration or
picketing process in the Town of Exeter without having first obtained a permit from
the Board of Selectmen.
807.1 Order and Public Convenience:
Any such person, firm, corporation or group receiving a permit shall make
provisions for suitable safety for persons engaged in the event and shall not
impede any traffic, motor vehicle, pedestrian or otherwise, nor shall anyone
engage in any unlawful acts against the peace and dignity of the community.
807.2 Added Costs to Town:
Any such person, firm, corporation or group receiving a permit shall be liable
for any additional costs incurred by the Town of Exeter because of such
parade, demonstration or picketing.
807.3 Competitive Races:
No person shall conduct or participate in any competitive race using a public
way unless such race is sponsored by a recognized organization and prior
written approval of the Board of Selectmen is granted. The Town may require
insurance, police coverage and other measures to insure the safety and
protection of the public.
807.4 Provisions included: The authority of New Hampshire Revised
Statutes Annotated 286.3, 286.4, 286.4-A and 47.17 shall be the guide for the
issuance and enforcement.
807.10 Penalty:
Failure to comply with the provisions of Section 807 shall be guilty of a
violation and shall be fined not more than one hundred ($100.00) dollars.
808 Public Auctions
No person, firm, corporation or group shall conduct an auction in the Town of
Exeter unless they have obtained a permit to do so from the Board of Selectmen.
808.1 Definitions: As used in this Chapter, the following words shall
have the following meanings:
a. Auctioneer means a person who engages in the Town of Exeter in the
business of selling for another real, personal or mixed property by auction.
b. Auctioneering means the business or act of selling for another real,
personal or mixed property by auction.
c. Board means the Board of Selectmen.
CHAPTER 8 COMMERCE REGULATIONS TOWN OF EXETER, NH 03833-2792
808.2 State Statues
Revised Statutes Annotated defines state laws relative to Auctioneers in New
Hampshire. No auctioneer shall operate in the Town of Exeter unless he is
properly licensed by the State of New Hampshire.
808.3 Application:
Local applications may be obtained at the office of the Town Manager. The
applicant shall state time, date, place of the event and the anticipated length,
as well as the number to be in attendance. Action on any application shall be
at a regular session of the Board of Selectmen. Applications shall be filed two
weeks in advance of the scheduled event.
808.4 Additional Services:
Should the size of the event require additional Town Emergency or Public
Services, the reasonable costs for such services shall be paid by the
auctioneer obtaining the permit.
808.5 Fees:
The fee for such local permit is $5.00.
808.10 Penalties:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of Section 808 shall be
punished by a fine of not more than one hundred ($100.00) dollars for each
offense.
809 Licensing of Alcohol Use on Town Property
809.1 In accordance with the provisions of sections 809.1 through 809.9,
and RSA 178:22(I), any voluntary non-profit organization seeking to serve and
offer alcohol for consumption on closed Town streets, in Town buildings and in
Town parks shall first apply for the applicable license with the Town Manager’s
office.
809.2 To qualify for a license under this Chapter, the voluntary non-profit
organization shall obtain a license from the New Hampshire Liquor
Commission under RSA 178:22(I).
809.3 The Town shall require a license application, which shall include
standards for issuance of the license to serve and offer alcohol for
consumption on Town property.
809.4 No license to serve and offer alcohol for consumption on Town
property shall be granted for the hours between 10:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.
809.5 Applications for a license under this section may be made at the
Office of the Town Manager.
809.6 The Police Chief, Health Officer and Parks/Recreation Director
CHAPTER 8 COMMERCE REGULATIONS TOWN OF EXETER, NH 03833-2792
(where applicable for Town Parks) shall review the application for completion
and transfer it to the appropriate authority for review and approval as follows:
a. License to serve alcohol on close Town streets, submitted by the Police
Chief and Health Officer to the Town Manager for review and approval;
b. License to serve alcohol in Town buildings submitted by the Police
Chief and Health Officer to the Town Manager for review and approval;
c. License to serve alcohol in Town Parks submitted by the Police Chief
and Health Officer to the Town Manager for review and approval
809.7 To the extent the applicant meets all of the standards for issuance of
a license, the Town Manager may conditionally issue the license,
which shall not become valid until the applicant provides the Town
Health Officer with an RSA 178:22(1) license from the New
Hampshire Liquor Commission for the applicable license issuance
time period.
809.8 The fee for said license shall be two-hundred ($200.00).
809.9 Appeals of a denial of a license under this section may be made to
the Exeter Board of Selectmen at a regular public meeting.
820 Alarms: Business, Residence, Burglary, Fire, Medical Emergency Alarm
Device or System
820.1 Definitions:
a. Alarm System: Any assembly of equipment and devices, arranged to
signal the presence of a hazard requiring the urgent attention and to which
public safety personnel and equipment are expected to respond. This shall
include any alarm system or device connected to the municipality-owned
Gamewell Fire Alarm System.
b. False Alarm: The activation of an alarm system through mechanical
failure, accidental tripping, malfunction or misuse of the owner or lessee of
an alarm system, or his employees or agents. A conclusive presumption
shall be made that a false alarm occurred upon the failure of the
responding town agency to find any evidence of a legitimate cause for
activation. False alarms shall not include alarms caused by severe
weather conditions, power outages, malfunction of telephone circuits or
other external causes beyond the control of the owner or lessee of the
alarm system.
820.2 Standards:
All fire alarms installed in the Town of Exeter shall conform to the standards
CHAPTER 8 COMMERCE REGULATIONS TOWN OF EXETER, NH 03833-2792
set forth in the following publications:
• NFPA 101 (Life Safety Code)
• The Fire Prevention Code (ALA)
• NFPA 72, 73 (Fire Alarms Systems): and Fire Rules & Regulations
Governing Master Box and Alarm System Installation
820.3 Direct Dial alarm Systems:
Direct Dial Alarm Systems (which automatically seize an Exeter Public Safety
telephone line) shall not be installed within Town of Exeter.
820.4 External Audible Alarms:
External Audible alarms devices shall have an automatic cut-off of no more
than ten (10) minutes.
820.5 Required Information:
Alarm owners and/or contractors must provide at least the following
information prior to the alarm system becoming operational:
a. name, exact address and phone number of alarm site;
b. directions or map and exact location of buildings(s);
c. a minimum of 3 persons who may be contacted in event of an emergency
and have the ability to gain entry into the building.
820.6 False Alarms:
Any individual, firm or corporation who causes, or attempts to cause, a false
alarm through the use of alarm-reporting equipment shall be assessed a
penalty of $100. RSA 644.3 shall supersede this section when fire alarms are
involved.
820.8 Appeals:
Any false alarm, fee or other action taken may be appealed to the Town
Manager.
820.10 Penalties:
No part of this ordinance shall supersede RSA 644:3.
a. Violation of 820.3 (Direct Dial Alarms) shall be $100 per activation.
b. Violations of 820.4 (Audible Alarms cut-off) shall be $25.00 per activation.
c. Violations of 820.1 (more than 3 false alarms at any one alarm site during a
calendar year) shall be as follows:
CHAPTER 8 COMMERCE REGULATIONS TOWN OF EXETER, NH 03833-2792
4-6 alarms $25.00 each
7-9 alarms $50.00 each
Each alarm in excess of 9 $100.00 each
d. An excess of 3 false activations of the Gamewell Fire Alarms system, in a
calendar year, shall be assessed a Fire Department response expense
determined by the Fire Chief on a case by case basis.
821 Exeter Development Commission
(originally Ordinance 5-68 dated 5/14/68)
The declared intent and purpose of this ordinance is to establish the Exeter
Development Commission in the Town of Exeter, for the purpose of encouraging
the welfare of local industries, promoting the establishment of new industries and
promoting the general business and economy of the Town of Exeter.
821.1 The Act:
An ordinance relative to the establishment of the Exeter Development
Commission is hereby ordained by the Selectmen of said Town of Exeter as
follows:
An ordinance relative to the establishment of the Exeter Development
Commission is hereby ordained by the Selectmen of said Town of Exeter as
follows:
a. The Development commission shall consist of nine (9) qualified members
who shall be residents of the Town of Exeter. They shall be appointed by
the Board of Selectmen for a term of four (4) years. The Chairman of the
Board of Selectmen, the Chairman of the Planning Board and the Town
Manager shall also serve as ex-officio members of the Exeter Development
Commission whose terms shall correspond to their respective tenure of
office.
b. The Development Commission may appoint a Development Specialist for
the promotion of industry and the economy, and shall have the authority to
expend funds, within its appropriation, to carry out the purposes set forth in
this ordinance.
c. All ordinances or sections of ordinances, inconsistent herewith, are
repealed.
821.2 Statement of Policy:
It shall be the policy of the Exeter Development Commission to protect and
promote the industrial, commercial and general economic progress of this area
in every way consistent with its By-Laws, the regulations and ordinances of the
Town of Exeter and the laws of the State of New Hampshire. In general, the
Commission proposes to work within the framework of the following eight-point
CHAPTER 8 COMMERCE REGULATIONS TOWN OF EXETER, NH 03833-2792
program to be undertaken in concert with other agencies, both local and
otherwise, for the establishment of plans and programs consistent with well
defined, balanced economic growth.
a. To assist in the retention and expansion of existing industries and
businesses in that area;
b. To assist in developing new industries and businesses of the types which
can supply and support those already established in the area;
c. To assist in attracting new and diversified industries and businesses which
will help to bring the economy of the area into better balance;
d. To initiate and assist in developing, whenever deemed possible, relative to
all important matters affecting the industrial business economy of the area
and community particular;
e. To establish a cooperative and coordinated effort involving all organizations
and individuals interested in the industrial and business development of the
community and area.
f. To publicize Exeter and the area as a good industrial and business
location;
g. To work toward the general improvement of the business climate of Exeter
and the area;
h. In promoting the economic progress of the area the Commission shall give
first consideration to the Town proper. However, since the political
boundaries of the Town do not coincide with its economic boundaries, the
Commission deems it necessary to work on a board basis.
821.3 By-Laws:
a. Name: This organization shall be known as the Exeter Development
Commission.
b. Objectives: This Commission is established to foster and protect the
industrial, commercial and general economic progress of the Town of
Exeter and the Seacoast Area.
c. Membership: The membership of the Exeter Development Commission
shall consist of nine members to be appointed by the Board of Selectmen
of the Town of Exeter. It shall be necessary that members of the
Commission be residents of the Town of Exeter. The Chairman of the
Board of Selectmen, Chairman of the Planning Board and the Town
Manager shall be ex-officio members of the Commission.
CHAPTER 8 COMMERCE REGULATIONS TOWN OF EXETER, NH 03833-2792
d. Officers: The officers of the Exeter Development Commission shall be a
chairman, a vice-chairman and a secretary who shall be elected by a vote
of the membership for a one year term, but may be re-elected to such
additional terms as is desired by the membership.
e. Duties of the Officers:
1. The Chairman shall preside at meetings, shall appoint committees as
deemed necessary, and shall carry out such other duties as are
assigned to him by the vote of the membership.
2. The Vice-Chairman shall preside at meetings and generally carry out
the duties of the Chairman in his enforced absence, or upon his
request.
3. The Secretary shall keep a true and accurate record of meetings and
shall present it to the membership. Monthly reports will be made to the
Selectmen.
4. The Officers of the Commission, within the appropriation of the Town of
Exeter, shall be authorized to hire qualified personnel for the purpose of
economic development and shall determine compensation, subject to a
majority vote of the committee and subject to the rules and regulations
covering expenditure of funds of the Town of Exeter. Said Agent of the
Commission shall be the Chief Administrative Officer and shall have the
power to appoint and discharge all other staff employees. Said agent
shall be responsible to the Commission through the Chairman.
f. Committees:
1. The Chairman shall appoint all committees unless otherwise specified
by vote of the members.
2. The authority and duties of such committees shall be determined by the
resolution authorizing their appointment.
3. Persons appointed to committees need not be members of the Exeter
Development Commission.
g. Meetings:
1. The annual meeting of this committee shall be held during the month of
October of each year on a date to be determined by the Chairman. A
majority of the membership shall constitute a quorum.
2. Meetings shall be held at such other times as the Chairman may
determine, or upon request of a majority of the members, but notice of
said meeting shall be given to members at least three (3) days prior to
CHAPTER 8 COMMERCE REGULATIONS TOWN OF EXETER, NH 03833-2792
the date of the meeting. A majority of the membership shall constitute a
quorum.
3. Any committees appointed by the Chairman are empowered to hold
meetings at which a majority shall constitute a quorum. No committee
shall have the power to put into effect any policy involving the
Commission until such policy has been approved by a majority of the
membership.
4. All meetings shall be conducted under Roberts Rules of Order.
h. Funds: Funds for the operation of the Commission shall be requested of
the Town of Exeter and any appropriations received shall be expended
according to the rules and regulations of the Town. Nothing herein shall be
construed to mean that the Commission is prevented from accepting funds
from other sources provided that it is consistent with the rules and
regulations of the Town of Exeter and the policies of this Commission.
i. Finance Committee: The commission shall appoint a Finance Committee
for the approval of vouchers for payment authorized by the Commission.
The Committee shall consist of three (3) members and approval of
payment vouchers shall require signatures of at least two (2) members of
the Finance Committee.
j. Amendments: These By-Laws may be amended by a majority vote of the
members present at any regular meeting, or any special meeting called for
that purpose or by membership referendum provided that proposed
amendments, alterations or repeals shall be plainly stated in the call for the
meeting, which must be sent out at least three (3) days prior to the meeting
at which they are to be considered or seven (7) days prior to the closing of
the referendum ballot.
830 License for Intelligence Offices
830.1 Pursuant to Revised Statutes Annotated 274:2, the Town of Exeter
adopts this ordinance to cover Employment Offices.
830.2 Provisions of the Law: It shall be unlawful to conduct a business as
defined by RSA 274:2 without having applied for and received a valid permit
from the Exeter Board of Selectmen.
830.3 Fee: The fee for such permit shall be ten ($10.00) dollars.
830.10 Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of
this section shall be guilty of a violation and shall be punished by a fine of not
more than one hundred ($100.00) dollars for each offense.












CHAPTER 11 - SANITARY LANDFILL, LITTERING, DUMPING AND OLLECTION OF
WASTE AND RUBBISH
1100 Scope of Chapter
This Chapter is intended to govern the use of the transfer station provided by
the Town of Exeter, and littering on Town properties or public ways or private
property, and the disposal of waste materials of any kind. This Chapter is
designed to interact with Revised Statutes Annotated 147 relative to sanitation
and all other Revised Statutes Annotated governing disposal sites.
1100.1 Definitions:
Compost Bin: The semi-enclosed bin, located at the Public Works Complex
and/or transfer station as designed.
Disposal Ticket: A non-transferable sticker issued by the Town Office
Receptionist authorizing the disposal of otherwise prohibited materials for a fee.
Said sticker will be permanently attached to the item being disposed of. The
Public Works Director will establish the fee for said ticket, based on the cost of
disposal.
Hazardous: A solid, semi-solid, liquid or contained gaseous waste, or any
combination of these wastes which, because of either quantity, concentration or
physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may cause or contribute to an
increase in mortality or an increase in irreversible or incapacitating reversible
illness, or pose a present or potential threat to human health or the environment
when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise
mismanaged.
Hours of Operation: The approved time during which the transfer station will
be opened to the general public.
Litter: Waste materials, shreds, fragments, items or clutter scattered about,
thrown or spread about carelessly.
Monitor: The Town employee or representative placed in charge of the transfer
station.
Permit: The document issued by the Town Office Receptionist allowing
applicant to use the transfer station
Public Trash Receptacle: Any waste product, solid or having the character of
solid rather than liquid, in that it will not flow readily without additional liquid,
which is composed wholly or partly of such materials as garbage, swill,
sweepings, cleanings, trash, rubbish, litter, industrial solid wastes or domestic
solid wastes; organic wastes or residue of animals sold as meat; fruit or other
vegetables or animal matter from kitchens, dining rooms, markets, food
establishments or any places dealing in or handling meat, fowl, fruits, grain or
vegetables; offal, animal excretion or the carcasses of animals; tree or shrub
trimmings, grass clippings, brick, plaster or other waste matter resulting from
the demolition, alteration or construction of buildings or structures, accumulated
waste material, cans, containers, tires, junk or other such substances which
may become a nuisance.
Trash: Worthless refuse, rubbish.
Trash Hauler: Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of
hauling garbage, manure, putrescible materials or refuse of any nature for hire.
1100.2 Exeter Refuse Only
Only persons, firms, corporation or business facilities inside the geographical
limits of the Town of Exeter may use the Exeter Transfer Station.
1100.3 Permitted Materials, with vehicle permit:
Unlimited number of blue bags containing non-hazardous waste, vehicle
batteries, water heaters, washers, dryers, dishwashers, microwave ovens,
stoves, aluminum, metals, iron, bicycle frames, mufflers, aluminum/metal door
& window frames with glass and/or wood removed.
Brush, stumps, unpainted/untreated wood - no longer than 5 feet in length.
Recycled oil from car, boat or lawnmower must be in clear or semi-clear
container with tight fitting cover. Label the container "used oil".
Items containing capacitors, such as refrigerators, freezers, air conditioners, ice
makers, humidifiers and dehumidifiers, and like appliances using CFC's, are
accepted at the Facility only with the approved appliance sticker attached to
same, purchased at the Town Office. A vehicle sticker is also necessary.
No permit is required to present the following:
Disposal of leaves and grass clippings in designated compost bin. No permit is
needed to obtain compost or woodchips when available.
1101 Permits Required
No person may utilize the Transfer Station without a valid Town of Exeter
permit, unless disposing of grass and/or leaves, or oil.
1101.1 Transfer Station Permit
Persons who reside in the geographical limits of the Town of Exeter may buy
transfer station permits that entitle the resident to dispose of refuse at the
facility. The permit for the resident's vehicle is non-transferable, valid for a
calendar year and shall expire upon termination of residency.
a. Issuance: Transfer Station permits shall be issued by the Town on an annual
basis for disposal of allowable refuse, upon display of current registration of
vehicle to be used. Refuse to be disposed of with the use of a resident permit
shall have been generated at property within the Town of Exeter by residents
of the property.
b. Display: The permit shall be permanently affixed to the windshield, on the
inside lower left corner, on each resident's vehicle utilizing the transfer station.
c. Proof of Residence: Permits shall be issued to those persons showing proof
of residence by documentation, such as NH Division of Motor Vehicle
registration certificate and/or an Exeter tax form, if property owner does not
reside in Exeter.
d. Fee Applicable: The fee for the permit shall be ten ($10.00) per calendar
year.
e. Replacement Permit: Residents who replace a vehicle and/or windshield
may apply for a replacement sticker at no cost provided they present to the
Town a substantial portion of the prior sticker and the registration of the new
vehicle.
f. New Residents:Persons establishing residence in the Town shall show
reasonable proof of their residence, such as utility contract, housing sale
agreement, water service notification, etc. Upon display of such identification
and motor vehicle registration, a permit shall be issued.
g. Temporary Permit: Residents may apply for a temporary permit to allow
persons "not for hire" to remove items from their property to the Transfer
Station, or for the resident's use of another's vehicle. The permit shall be for
a specific person, vehicle and date(s), no more than 5 days the facility is open
from date of issue. The fee for such temporary permit shall be $2.50.
h. Exeter Businesses: Resident permits may be issued to property owners in
the Town of Exeter who are not residents but who own and operate a
business in the Town. Such permit is valid only for conforming rubbish that
comes from businesses located in Exeter. Vehicle registration is required.
Proof of ownership of property shall be a paid property tax bill. Violations of
this Section shall result in revocation of the permit and prosecution under the
conditions of this Chapter.
i. Refuse Disposal Limitations:
1. Grass and leaves (compost bin); bush, stumps (stump dump)
2. Wet cell batteries
3. Heavy and light iron and appliances
4. Refuse placed in approved, tied, blue bags
1102 Transfer Station
The rules and regulations pertaining to the Transfer Station shall be available at
the Monitor's office, Town Office building and Public Works Complex. Any
person, firm or corporation using the Station shall obey the rules and regulations
and shall follow the directives of the monitor on duty with regard to the
enforcement of those rules and regulations. The Highway Superintendent and
his agents, including the monitor on duty, are authorized to order any person,
firm or corporation to leave the facility if there is a violation of any rule or
regulation. Failure to leave the facility, if so ordered, may be deemed
trespassing and can result in court action. No person, firm or corporation shall
dispose of refuse of any nature at the Transfer Station except in a manner and
location as directed by the Highway Superintendent and/or his agents, including
the Monitor.
1103 Compost Bin Facility
No person shall dispose of any materials or refuse in the compost bin other than
grass clippings, leaves or compostable bags from their residence, in the compost
bin located at either the Transfer Station or, during posted dates, at the Public
Works Complex. Grass and leaves from commercial Exeter properties are also
accepted without a permit.
1104 Littering
The word litter means all rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals or
other discarded materials of every kind and description, as per RSA 163-B:2. It
shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw or leave or
cause or permit the dumping, depositing, throwing or leaving of litter on any
public or private property, or in or on ice in any waters unless:
a. Such property is designated for the disposal of such litter, and such person is
authorized to use the property;
b. Such litter is placed into a litter receptacle or container installed on such property;
c. Such person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, or has
first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession or tenant in
lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of said
owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare, as per RSA
163-B: 3.
1104.1 Public Trash Receptacles:
No person, firm or corporation shall dispose of household, business or
industrial refuse in any public trash receptacle. Take out food and beverage
containers and wrappings are exempt from this section.
1105 Discarded Refrigerators
No person, firm or corporation who owns controls or has in his custody, a
container originally used for refrigeration purposes shall discard same before the
lid, or door or doors, have been removed.
1106 Regulations Relative to Collection of Waste and Rubbish
The purpose of this section is to establish reasonable and prudent regulations
pertaining to the collection of waste in the Town of Exeter.
1106.1 No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited any refuse or waste,
upon the rights-of-way of the Town of Exeter, except that refuse or waste
that shall be deposited for collection within the Town right-of-way and
confined with a tied official blue plastic bag, in accordance with the
following provisions:
a. Refuse or waste for the purpose of this ordinance shall mean household
rubbish, free from hazardous materials (see accepted materials 1100.3);
b. No blue plastic bag shall have a gross weight of more than forty-five (45)
pounds. All bags must be closed and tied, and have "Town of Exeter"
imprinted on the side.
c. Tied official blue plastic bags shall be placed on the outside of the sidewalk
as near as practicable to the street edge, no later than 7:00AM of the
collection day and no more than 24 hours prior to collection day. Persons
placing bags at the curbside more than 24 hours prior to collection day may
be issued a summons for littering (Section 1104).
d. Collections start at 7:00 AM each day, in each collection zone.
e. There will be no return trips for pickup service.
f. Upon placement at the street edge of official blue recycling bins, all materials
placed and contained in such bins shall become Town property and shall not
be removed except by persons authorized by the Town or the individual(s)
responsible for placing the recyclable in the bin.
1107 Suspension
Any person, firm or corporation found to be in violation of any section of this
Chapter may have their permit suspended for a period not to exceed thirty (30)
days.
1107.1 Revocation
Any person, firm or corporation who habitually violates one or more sections
of this Chapter may have their permit revoked for such continued violations.
1107.2 Hearing:
Any person, firm or corporation who has been cited under the provisions of
Section 1107 or 1107.1 may, within five (5) days, appeal such action to the
Board of Selectmen. Upon receipt of any appeal, the Board of shall conduct a
hearing on the merits of the incident and uphold or overrule the action.
1110 Penalty
Any person(s), firm or corporation violating any provision of this Chapter or any
requirements, rules, regulations or procedures that may from time to time be
promulgated by the Board of Selectmen of Exeter shall be guilty of a violation
and fined not in excess of one thousand ($1000) dollars. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed upon each day, or part thereof, during or in which a
violation occurs or continues.
1
1104 Littering
The word “litter” means all rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals
or other discarded materials of every kind and description, as per RSA 163-B:2.
Per RSA 163-B:3 It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump,
deposit, throw or leave or cause or permit the dumping, depositing, throwing or
leaving of litter on any public or private property, or in or on ice in any waters
unless:
a. Such property is designated for the disposal of such litter, and such person is
authorized to use the property;
b. Such litter is placed into a litter receptacle or container installed on such property;
c. Such person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, or has
first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession or tenant in
lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of said
owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare as per 163-B:
3
d. Per RSA147:4 Removal Notice: The Health Officer or agent of, may notify the
owner or occupant to remove any nuisance/litter as deemed by them, on
examination; per RSA 147:3 Investigations and Complaints; to be a nuisance or
injurious to the public health. RSA 147:5 and 6- Allows for assistance as
necessary for removal. RSA 147:7 and 7-a and 7-b allows for collection of
expenses for removal of the nuisance/litter from the owner or occupant.
1104.1 Public Trash Receptacles:
No person, firm or corporation shall dispose of household, business or
industrial refuse in any public trash receptacle. Take out food and beverage
containers and wrappings are exempt from this section.
1105 Discarded Refrigerators
No person, firm or corporation who owns, controls or has in his custody, a
container originally used for refrigeration purposes shall discard same before the
lid, or door or doors, have been removed.
1106 Regulations Relative to Collection of Waste and Rubbish
The purpose of this section is to establish reasonable and prudent regulations
pertaining to the collection of waste in the Town of Exeter.
Per RSA 147:13 Offensive Matter: If a person shall place, leave, or cause to be
placed or left, in or near a highway, street, alley, public place, or wharf or on a
private disposal site or shall allow to be exposed unburied, any animal or other
substance liable to become putrid or offensive, or injurious to the public health or
deposits garbage or refuse on premises not designated for waste disposal in
accordance with RSA 149-M or other provisions of law, such person shall be
2
guilty of a violation, and the health officer shall remove or cause to have removed
the same. Nothing in this section shall be construed as affecting authorized
collections of garbage or refuse for public dumping facilities.
The Health Officer may employ any of the following as deemed necessary to
protect the public health and safety:
RSA 147:3 Investigations and Complaints, RSA 147:4 Removal Notice, RSA
147:5 Assistants; Resistance, RSA 147:6 Removal Without Notice, RSA 147:7,
7-a, 7-b-Expenses, Notice to Owner, and Collection of Nuisance Abatement
Costs
1106.1 No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited any refuse or waste, upon
the rights-of-way of the Town of Exeter, except that refuse or waste that shall
be deposited for collection within the Town right-of-way and confined with a
tied official blue plastic bag, in accordance with the following provisions:
a. Refuse or waste for the purpose of this ordinance shall mean household
rubbish, free from hazardous materials (see accepted materials 1100.3);
b. No blue plastic bag shall have a gross weight of more than forty-five (45)
pounds. All bags must be closed and tied, and have "Town of Exeter"
imprinted on the side.
c. Tied official blue plastic bags shall be placed on the outside of the sidewalk
as near as practicable to the street edge, no later than 7:00AM of the
collection day and no more than 24 hours prior to collection day. Persons
placing bags at the curbside more than 24 hours prior to collection day may
be issued a summons for littering (Section 1104).
d. Collections start at 7:00 AM each day, in each collection zone.
e. There will be no return trips for pickup service.
f. Upon placement at the street edge of official blue recycling bins, all materials
placed and contained in such bins shall become Town property and shall not
be removed except by persons authorized by the Town or the individual(s)
responsible for placing the recyclable in the bin.
1107 Suspension
Any person, firm or corporation found to be in violation of any section of this
Chapter may have their permit suspended for a period not to exceed thirty (30)
days.
1107.1 Revocation
Any person, firm or corporation who habitually violates one or more sections
of this Chapter may have their permit revoked for such continued violations.
3
1107.2 Hearing:
Any person, firm or corporation who has been cited under the provisions of
Section 1107 or 1107.1 may, within five (5) days, appeal such action to the
Board of Selectmen. Upon receipt of any appeal, the Board of shall conduct
a hearing on the merits of the incident and uphold or overrule the action.
1110 Penalty
Any person(s), firm or corporation violating any provision of this Chapter or any
requirements, rules, regulations or procedures that may from time to time be
promulgated by the Board of Selectmen of Exeter shall be guilty of a violation
and fined not in excess of one thousand ($1000) dollars. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed upon each day, or part thereof, during or in which a
violation occurs or continues.
4
CHAPTER 12 HEALTH REGULATIONS
In accordance with R.S.A. 147:1 the Town of Exeter Board of Selectmen adopt the
current FDA FOOD CODE in accordance with the New Hampshire Rules for the
Sanitary Production and Distribution of Food He-P 2300; and all future revisions and
amendments.
1204.1(PART He-P 2301) DEFINITIONS
1204.1.01(He-P 2301.01 Definitions.) supplemental list to the FDA FOOD CODE
DEFINITIONS
(a) “Applicant” means the owner of a food establishment or an officer of the legal
ownership who applies for a license under these rules.
(b) “Approved source” means food that has been inspected by a federal, state, or
local agency that has the authority, responsibility, and the technical ability to
evaluate food for safety in protection of the public health.
(c) “Bed and breakfast” means a type of food service establishment that is a
transient lodging facility, which is the owner’s or innkeeper’s personal residence, is
occupied by the owner or innkeeper at the time of rental to an in-house guest, and
in which breakfast is the only meal served.
(d) “Beverage” means “beverage” as defined in RSA 143:9.
(e) “Bulk food” means processed or unprocessed food in aggregate containers
from which quantities desired by the consumer or the employee is withdrawn. The
term “bulk food” does not include fresh whole fruits or fresh whole vegetables.
(f) “Caterer” means a person or entity which provides meals or food at private
functions at off-site locations.
(g) “Change of ownership” means any time a controlling interest in a sole
proprietorship, joint venture, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or
any other kind of entity is transferred to another sole proprietor, joint venture,
partnership, corporation, limited liability company or any other kind of entity.
(h) “Commissioner” means the commissioner of the New Hampshire department
of health and human services, or his or her designee.
(i) “Continental breakfast” means a light breakfast that may include coffee, tea,
juices, toasts, breakfast cereals, assorted pastries, and uncut fruit.
5
(j) “Corrective action plan (CAP)” means a plan developed and written by the
licensee, which specifies the actions that will be taken to correct identified
deficiencies.
(k) “Department” means the Exeter Health Department.
(l) “Food” means “food” as defined in RSA 143-A:3, III.
(m) “Food establishment” means “food service establishment” as defined in RSA
143-A:3, IV, and “retail food store” as defined in RSA 143-A:3, VII. “Temporary
food service” as defined in RSA 143-A:3, VIII.
(n) “Food processing plant” means a type of food service establishment that is a
commercial operation that manufactures, packages, labels, or stores food for
human consumption, and provides food for sale and distribution to other business
entities such as other food establishments. Food processing plants shall not
include an operation that processes food under the oversight of NH Department of
Agriculture for RSA’s 426,427, 428,429, and 434
(o) “Food service establishment” means “food service establishment” as defined in
RSA 143-A:3, IV.
(p) “Foodborne disease outbreak” means the occurrence of 2 or more cases of a
similar illness resulting from the ingestion of a common food.
(q) “Homestead” means “homestead” as defined in RSA 143-A:12, which is a type
of food service establishment. The Town of Exeter allows only home food
manufacturers who prepare and package non-potentially hazardous foods (foods
that do not need time/temperature control).
(r) “Immediately endangers public health or safety” means that a condition exists
that is an imminent health hazard.
(s) “Imminent health hazard” means a significant threat or danger to health that is
considered to exist when there is evidence sufficient to show that a product,
practice, circumstance or event creates a situation that requires immediate
correction or cessation of operation to prevent injury based on the number of
potential injuries and the nature, severity, and duration of the anticipated injury.
(t) “License” means the document issued by the department or other regulatory
agency, which authorizes a license holder to operate a food establishment.
(u) “License holder” means the entity legally responsible for the operation of a
licensed food establishment, including, but not limited to, the owner, the owner’s
agent, or other person.
6
(v) “Mobile food unit” means a food service establishment mounted on wheels or
otherwise designed to be immediately moveable.
(w) “Person in charge” means the individual present at a food establishment who
is responsible for the operation of the establishment at the time of inspection,
including the duties described in section 2-103.11 of the FOOD CODE, and who
can demonstrate the knowledge required by section 2-1-2.11 of the FOOD CODE
with are pertinent to the risks inherent to the specific food establishment.
(x) “Poultry” means “poultry” as defined in RSA 143-A:14, III.
(y) “Poultry producer” means “poultry producer” as defined in RSA 143-A:14, IV.
(z) “Priority item” means a provision of the Food Code, marked with a superscript
P, whose application contributes directly to the elimination, prevention, or reduction
to an acceptable level, hazards associated with foodborne illness or injury and
there is no other provision that more directly controls the hazard.(critical violation)
(aa) “Public water system” means a public water system as defined in RSA 485:1-
a.
(ab) “Pushcart” means a type of food service establishment that is a non-self
propelled vehicle limited to serving non-time/temperature control for safety foods,
packaged time/temperature control for safety foods maintained at proper
temperatures, or limited to the preparation and serving of frankfurters.
(ac) “Rabbit” means “rabbit” as defined in RSA 143-A:14, VI.
(ad) “Rabbit producer” means “rabbit producer” as defined in RSA 143-A:14, VII
(ae) “Regulatory authority” means the local, state or federal enforcement body
having jurisdiction over the food establishment. The Town of Exeter Health
Department is the “regulatory authority” for the Town of Exeter.
(af) “Remodeled” means having undertaken construction, which includes, but is
not limited to, adding new seats, adding a food preparation area, or any
construction affecting the kitchen or any other part of a food establishment that
requires a plumbing modification.
(ag) “Retail food store” means “retail food store” as defined in RSA 143-A:3, VII.
(ah) “Risk Control Plan” means a plan developed and written by the licensee as a
part of a CAP, which specifies the actions that will be taken to correct the
uncontrolled hazards that were identified at inspection, and a repeat problem,
known to contribute to foodborne illness(uncontrolled hazards include the
7
occurrence of any risk factor or lack of public health interventions as described in
the FOOD CODE)
(ai) “Servicing area” means an operating base location to which a mobile food unit
or transportation vehicle returns regularly for such things as vehicle and equipment
cleaning, discharging liquid or solid wastes, refilling water tanks and ice bins, and
boarding food.
(aj) “Sewage” means “sewage” as defined in RSA 485-A:2, X, namely “the watercarried
waste products from buildings, public or private, together with such
groundwater infiltration and surface water as may be present.”
(ak) “Soup kitchen” means a food service establishment operated by a charitable
organization including religious societies and fraternal organizations organized
pursuant to RSA 292, RSA 306, and RSA 418, that prepares and serves meals to
the poor without charge.
(al) “Time/temperature control for safety (TCS) food” means a food that requires
time/temperature control for safety to limit pathogenic microorganism growth or
toxin formation. This term is also known as “potentially hazardous food.”
1204.2(PART He-P 2302) LICENSE REQUIRED
1204.2.01(He-P 2302.01 License Required.) Unless exempted under RSA 143-
A:5, RSA 143-A:5-a, or 1204.2.02(He-P 2302.02), no person shall operate a food
establishment within the town of Exeter, New Hampshire without obtaining a
license from the Town of Exeter Health Department
1204.2.02 Soup Kitchens Exempt from Licensure. In accordance with RSA 143-
A:5-a, soup kitchens shall be exempt from licensure by the department provided:
(a) They do not charge for meals; and
(b) They submit to the Exeter Health Department a written notice which:
(1) Identifies the name and address of the person operating the soup kitchen;
(2) Identifies the clientele served by the soup kitchen;
(3) Lists the hours the soup kitchen will operate; and
(4) Provides a description of the food to be served.
8
1204.3(PART He-P 2303) INCORPORATION OF THE 2009 CURRENT F.D.A. FOOD
CODE
1204.3.01(He-P 2303.01) Incorporation of the Current F.D.A. Food Code.
(a) All licensees shall comply with the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, Public Health Services, Food and Drug Administration, Food Code’s
most current edition, henceforth known as the Food Code, as amended in (b)
below, unless exempted in (c) or (d) below.
(b) The following amendments shall apply to the document incorporated:
(1) Amend section 3-201.11(A) so that (A) reads as follows: “Food shall be
obtained from sources that comply with the law, except that the
exemption under the Poultry Products Inspection Act at USC 464)c)(4)
shall not apply in New Hampshire”;
(2) Delete section 3-201.16
(3) Chapter 8 used for reference and procedure
(c) Those food establishments applying for or licensed as bed and breakfasts shall
comply with the Food Code. However, the exceptions to the Food Code listed in
1204.8.02(He-P 2308.02) shall apply.
(d) Those food establishments applying for or licensed as food processing plants
or homesteads shall be exempt from the requirements of the Food Code, and shall
instead comply with the requirements in 1204.9(He-P 2309) and 1204.10(He-P
2310), respectively.
(e) The F.D.A. Food Code is available on the web at
http://www.fda.gov/Food/FoodSafety/RetailFoodProtection/FoodCode/FoodCode20
09/
1204.4(PART He-P 2304) APPLICATION AND LICENSING PROCEDURE
1204.4.01(He-P 2304.01) Initial License Application Requirements.
(a) Each applicant for a license shall submit the following to the department:
(1) A completed application form entitled “Application for Annual Food
Service License”, “Application for Annual Food Processing Plant License”,
“Application for Annual Homestead License”, or “Application for Annual
Mobile Food Unit License”, as applicable, signed and dated by the applicant
or the person who represents the applicant certifying the following:
“I certify that all information provided in or attached to this application is
complete, accurate and up-to-date as of the date specified below. I further
9
certify that there are no willful misrepresentations of the answers to
questions herein, and that I have made no omissions with respect to any of
my answers to the questions presented. I understand that it is my
responsibility to immediately notify the Exeter Health Department with
regard to any changes, corrections or updates to the information provided.”;
(2) A check or money order for the applicable fees, in accordance with
1204.4.05(a) and (c) (He-P 2304.05(a) and (c));
(3) Water system documentation, in accordance with 1204.4.06(He-P
2304.06);
(4) Wastewater system documentation, in accordance with 1204.4.07(He-P
2304.07), except that food establishments applying to be licensed as a bed
and breakfast or a homestead shall not be required to submit such
documentation;
(5) A completed “Plan Review Application”, signed and dated by the
applicant or the person who represents the applicant, if required by
1204.4.12(a) (He-P 2304.12(a)), and if not already submitted for review,
except that food establishments applying to be licensed as a bed and
breakfast, homestead, shall not be required to submit such an application;
(6) If the application is for a mobile food unit which uses a servicing area,
one of the following:
a. Commissary (service area) agreement form.
b. A copy of the food establishment license, from the appropriate
regulatory authority, of the facility being used as a servicing area; or
c. A separate license application for the facility to be used as a servicing
area; and
d. All other items as required listed in this section (a)
(7) A HACCP plan if required by 1204.4.13(He-P 2304.13).
(b) The applicant shall mail or hand-deliver the documents to:
Exeter Health Department
20 Court St
Exeter, NH 03833
603-773-6132
1204.4.02(He-P 2304.02) Processing of Initial Applications and Issuance of
Licenses.
10
(a) Applications shall be processed in accordance with RSA 541-A:29.
(b) An application for an initial license shall be complete when the department
determines that all items required by 1204.01.(a)(He-P 2304.01(a)) have been
received.
(c) If an application does not contain all the items required by 1204.4.01(a)(He-P
2304.01(a)), the department shall:
(1) Not process that application; and
(2) Notify the applicant in writing of which items are required to be submitted
before the application can be processed.
(d) Any licensing fee submitted to the department in the form of a check or money
order and returned to the Town for any reason shall be processed in accordance
with RSA 6:11-a.
(e) Licensing fees shall not be transferable to any other application(s).
(f) Following an inspection, conducted pursuant to RSA 143:4 and in accordance
with 1204.5 (He-P 2305), a provisional license shall be issued if the department
determines that an applicant is in full compliance with RSA 143, RSA 143-A, and
these rules.
(g) Pursuant to RSA 143-A:6, I:
(1) A provisional license shall expire 90 days after the date of issuance; and
(2) If a license is not issued following the expiration of a provisional license,
the food establishment shall cease operation the day after the provisional
license expires and not operate until a license is obtained.
(h) If, within 90 days of issuance of a provisional license the department conducts
an inspection in accordance with 1204.5 (He-P 2305) and determines that an
applicant is in full compliance with RSA 143, RSA 143-A, and these rules, the
department shall issue to the applicant a license valid for a time period of one year
following the date of issuance of the provisional license.
(i) All licenses and provisional licenses issued in accordance with RSA 143-A shall
be issued for a specific license classification and category under 1204.4.04(He-P
2304.04).
(j) License holders shall operate in accordance with the class of license issued.
11
(k) All licenses and provisional licenses issued in accordance with RSA 143-A
shall be non-transferable by person or location.
(l) Licenses shall be posted at all times in an area of the food establishment that is
conspicuous to patrons.
1204.4.03(He-P 2304.03) License Expirations and Procedures for Renewals.
(a) All licenses issued shall be valid for one year following the date of issuance, or
one year following the date of issuance of a provisional license, as applicable.
(b) Each licensee shall apply to renew their license via an application form
pursuant to 1204.4.01(a)(1) (He-P 2304.01(a)(1)) at least 30 days prior to the
expiration of the current license.
(c) The licensee shall submit with the renewal application:
(1) The materials required by 1204.4.01(a)(1),(2), and (4) (He-P
2304.01(b)(1), (2), and (3)); and
(2) A request for renewal of any existing variances previously granted by
the department, in accordance with 1204.14 (He-P 2304.14), if applicable.
(d) A license shall be renewed if the department determines that the licensee:
(1) Submitted an application containing all the items required by (c) above,
as applicable, at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the current license;
(2) Has submitted a CAP that has been accepted by the department and
implemented by the licensee if deficiencies were cited at the last licensing
inspection; and
(3) Is found to be in compliance with RSA 143, RSA 143-A, and 1204/FDA
Food Code/He-P 2300 at a renewal inspection, as applicable.
(e) If a license holder fails to submit a complete application for renewal as required
under (b) and (c) above, the food establishment shall cease operation the day after
the license expires, and shall not operate until a license is obtained in accordance
with RSA 143-A.
(f) Any food establishment wishing to submit an application for a renewal license
whose previous license has been expired in excess of 90 days shall apply in
accordance with the requirements of an initial license in 1204.4.01 (He-P 2304.01).
1204.4.04(He-P 2304.04) License Classes.
12
(a) For the purpose of licensure, food establishments shall be divided into the
following classes:
(1) Class A which shall include:
a. Category A-1, food processing plants which commercially process
100,000 packages of food or more, per year;
b. Category A-2, food service establishments with 200 or more indoor
seats; or
c. Category A-3, retail food stores with 4 or more food preparation areas;
(2) Class B which shall include:
a. Category B-1, retail food stores with 2 to 3 food preparation areas; or
b. Category B-2, food service establishments with 100 to 199 indoor
seats;
(3) Class C which shall include:
a. Category C-1, retail food stores with one food preparation area,
including, but not limited to, an area for cutting cheese or fudge;
b. Category C-2, caterers serving food off-site;
c. Category C-3, food service establishments with 25 to 99 indoor seats;
d. Category C-4, bars/lounges with a food preparation area, excluding
areas used for preparing garnish such as limes and lemons; or
e. Category C-5, food processing plants which commercially process
less than 100,000 packages of food per year;
(4) Class D, which shall include:
a. Category D-1, food service establishments with 0 to 24 indoor seats,
including, but not limited to, bakeries;
b. Category D-2, mobile food units which cook or prepare food;
c .Category D-3, retail food stores that allow self-service of food,
including, but not limited to, coffee, hot dogs, or soft drinks;
d. Category D-4, servicing areas;
13
(5) Class E which shall include:
a. Category E-1, bed and breakfasts;
b. Category E-2, lodging facilities serving continental breakfasts; or
c. Category E-3, ice cream vendors who scoop ice cream;
(6) Class F which shall include:
a. Category F-1, home delivery services of packaged frozen food;
b. Category F-2, pushcarts and other mobile food units, including, but
not limited to, those serving packaged food and non-TCS/PHF
unwrapped foods only;
c. Category F-3, retail food stores with no food preparation areas;
d. Category F-4, wholesalers/distributors of TCS/PHF food;
e. Category F-5, on-site vending machines, which serve TCS/PHF food;
f. Category F-6, bakeries which do not serve TCS/PHF food and have no
seats;
g. Category F-7, Level 2 homestead-sells products at farmers’ markets,
farm stands, residents, retail food stores, on-line;
(7) Class G shall include:
a. Category G-1, bars/lounges without a food preparation area;
b. Category G-2, sellers of pre-packaged frozen meat or poultry that is
processed in a USDA –inspected plant;
c. Category G-3, canteen/theater concessions serving non-TCS food;
d. Category G-4, ice cream vendors/retail food stores serving prepackaged
ice cream;
e. Category G-5, institutions whose food service is operated by a private,
for-profit business, including but not limited to schools/public and private,
colleges, hospitals, long term care facilities, fraternities and sororities;
f. Category G-6, food processing plants that package non-TCS(PHF)
bulk food;
14
(8) Class H, Category H-1, shall include:
a. Category H-1, level 1 homesteads-homestead that sells products only
at farmers’ markets, farm stands, or residences;
b. Senior meal sites;
c. Institutions who prepare their own food, including but not limited to
schools/public and private, colleges, hospitals, long term care
facilities, fraternities and sororities
(b) When a food establishment operates more than one type of business, the
higher class shall determine the class of license, with Class A being the highest.
(c) When a food establishment has an additional food processing business, each
shall be licensed separately, requiring separate applications and separate fees.
(d) When a hospital or school offers food to the general public in addition to its
population, then the license class shall be determined by the number of seats the
food service establishment has.
1204.4.05(He-P 2304.05) Fees.
(a) For each class of license requested, the applicant shall pay the following
annual fees:
(1) Class A: $875;
(2) Class B: $450;
(3) Class C: $350;
(4) Class D: $225;
(5) Class E: $175;
(6) Class F: $150;
(7) Class G: $100;
(8) Class H: $50
(b) Licensees shall be charged up to, and shall pay up to $100 for each inspection
conducted after the second inspection conducted in any licensing period, except
15
that the inspections conducted during the provisional license period shall not be
included in this count.
(c) An applicant or licensee shall pay a fee of $25 for each plan review submitted
under 1204.4.12(He-P 2304.12).
(d) All fees shall be non-transferable and non-refundable.
(e) Payment of any fee to the department shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Payment shall be made in the form of check or money order made
payable to the “Town of Exeter, Health Dept.” in the exact amount due;
(2) Money order or certified check shall be required when an applicant or
licensee has issued payment to the department by check, and such check
was returned for insufficient funds; and
(3) Any payment made to the department by check which is returned for
insufficient funds, and which an individual, applicant, or licensee has not
made good by submitting a money order or certified check within 2 business
days of notification by the department, including any penalty assessment
allowed by RSA 6:11-a, shall be grounds for denial of the license.
1204.4.06(He-P 2304.06) Water System Requirements.
(a)Food establishments which own and operate their own public water systems,
as defined by RSA 485:1-a, XV, shall indicate, as part of their application for a
license, the Public Water System (PWS) identification number which has been
assigned by the New Hampshire department of environmental services (DES).
(b) For an application to be approved, food establishments which own and
operate their public water systems regulated by DES shall:
(1) Be in compliance with all applicable water quality standards and
monitoring and reporting requirements of Env-Dw 717 or successor rules in
Subtitle Env-Dw; or
(2) Be in compliance with the requested actions in a letter of deficiency, or
the required actions of an administrative order, issued by DES and
established to obtain compliance with the regulations cited in (1) above.
(c) Food establishments which are classified as public water systems, as defined
by RSA 485:1-a, XV, but whose water system infrastructure is owned by another
party, shall indicate, as part of their application for a license, the PWS
identification number which has been assigned by DES.
16
For an application under this paragraph to be approved, the owner of the water
system infrastructure shall:
(1) Be in compliance with all applicable water quality standards and
monitoring and reporting requirements of Env-Dw 717 or successor rules in
Env-Dw; or
(2) Be in compliance with the requested actions in a letter of deficiency, or
the required actions of an administrative order, issued by the DES and
established to obtain compliance with the regulations cited in (1) above.
(d) Food establishments which purchase their water from other public water
systems, as defined by RSA 485:1-a, XV, and therefore do not fall under (a)
above, shall indicate this information on the application.
(e) Food establishments which do not fall under (a) through (d) above, and are
instead served by a water source other than a public water system, shall submit
with the initial and renewal application the written results of a laboratory analysis of
the water intended for use, which tests the level of the following:
(1) Bacteria;
(2) Nitrates; and
(3) Nitrites.
(f) The analyses required by (e) above shall be conducted not more than 6 months
prior to the date of the application by a laboratory accredited by DES to perform
such tests in accordance with Env-C 300.
(g) For an application to be approved, the results of the water analysis shall be as
follows:
(1) The bacteria test required under (e) above shall not exceed the maximum
contaminant level (MCL) for drinking water prescribed by Env-Dw 700 and
(2) The nitrate and nitrite tests required under (e) above shall not exceed the
MCL for drinking water prescribed by Env-Dw 700 for those 2 contaminants.
1204.4.07(He-P 2304.07) Wastewater System Requirements.
(a) Food establishments which discharge their wastewater to either public or
private wastewater systems which hold either a state surface water discharge
permit or a groundwater discharge permit issued by the New Hampshire
department of environmental services (DES), shall indicate this information on the
application.
17
(b) Food establishments which do not discharge their wastewater as described in
(a) above shall submit, as part of their application, one of the following:
(1) Both:
a. A copy of the construction approval for the sewage or waste disposal
system that indicates that the system is sufficient in capacity to serve the
subject food establishment issued by DES in accordance with RSA 485-
A:29 and Env-Wq 1000; and
b. A copy of a statement signed by the applicant containing the following
language: “I certify that there has been no increase in the loading on the
wastewater system which would cause an exceedance of the capacity of
the system approved by the NH department of environmental services
under the provisions of Env-Wq 1000;” or
(2) A written statement signed by the applicant containing the following
language: “I certify that the private sewage or waste disposal system serving
this food establishment was constructed prior to 1971 and is presently not in
failure. I further certify that I have not been notified by either the NH
department of environmental services or the local health officer that the
system serving this food establishment is in violation of any state or local
statute, administrative rule, ordinance or bylaw.”
(c) If there is no increase in the loading of the waste disposal system serving the
food establishments in (b) above, and the applicant is unable to produce the
documentation required, the department shall inform DES that the applicant has
not complied with (b)(1) above. In this case, the requirement of (b)(1) above shall
be waived.
(d) Any increase in seating capacity in a licensed food establishment which has a
private wastewater system shall comply with Env-Wq 1000.
1204.4.08(He-P 2304.08) Change in Ownership of a Food Establishment.
(a) When there is a change of ownership of a food establishment, the new owner
shall submit the items required for initial license applicants under 1204.4.01 (He-P
2304.01) to the department at least 30 days prior to the change of ownership.
(b) Upon receipt and processing of the items required by (a) above, and after an
inspection conducted in accordance with 1204.5 (He-P 2305) which shall also
determine compliance with Chapters 4, 5, and 6 of the Food Code, the department
shall issue a provisional license reflecting the change in ownership.
(c) The issuance of a provisional license due to a change in ownership shall void
the license of the previous owner on the date the change of ownership occurs.
18
1204.4.09(He-P 2304.09) Change in Name of a Food Establishment.
(a) When a license holder intends to change the name of a food establishment,
that license holder shall submit a written request to the department for a new
license at least 30 days prior to the intended date of change in name.
(b) The written request shall include:
(1) The reason for requesting a new license;
(2) The name of the food establishment as it appears on the existing license;
(3) The name of the food establishment as the license holder requests it to
appear on the new license; and
(4) The date upon which the change in name is intended to occur.
(c) Following receipt of the items required by (b) above, the department shall issue
a revised license reflecting the change in name. The establishment number and
expiration date shall remain the same as it was on the immediately preceding
license.
1204.4.10(He-P 2304.10) Change in Location of a Food Establishment.
(a) When there is a change of location of a food establishment, the license holder
shall submit the items required for initial license applicants and plan review under
1204.4.01 (He-P 2304.01) to the department at least 30 days prior to the change of
location.
(b) Upon receipt and processing of the items required under (a) above, and after
an inspection conducted in accordance with 1204.5 (He-P 2305), the department
shall issue a provisional license reflecting the change of location.
(c) The issuance of a provisional license due to a change in location shall void the
previous license on the date the change of location occurs.
(d) This section shall not apply to mobile food units, pushcarts or vehicles used to
sell retail food.
1204.4.11(He-P 2304.11) Change in License Class.
(a) A license holder wishing to request an upgrade to a higher-level class of
license listed in 1204.4.04 (He-P 2304.04) shall:
(1) Be treated as an applicant for a new license; and
19
(2) Apply for a new license in accordance with 1204.4.01 (He-P 2304.01).
(b) The issuance of a provisional license due to an upgrade in license class shall
void the previous license on the date the upgrade occurs.
(c) A license holder wishing to request a downgrade to a lower level class of
license listed in 1204.4.04 (He-P 2304.04) shall submit a written request for
downgrade to the department.
(d) The written request in (c) above shall include:
(1) The reason for requesting a downgrade; and
(2) The date upon which the downgrade is intended to occur.
(e) Following receipt of the request under (c) above the licensee shall be issued a
revised license reflecting the downgrade in class of license. The establishment
number and expiration date shall remain the same as it was on the immediately
preceding license.
1204.4.12(He-P 2304.12) Submission of Plans and Specifications for New or
Remodeled Food Establishments.
(a) An applicant or license holder shall complete and submit a “Plan Review
Application” to the department for review and approval at least 45 days prior to:
(1) Constructing a new food establishment; mobile or pushcart unit;
(2) Converting an existing structure for use as a food establishment;
(3) Remodeling a food establishment which may include but is not limited to
the addition of seats, service, and lavatories; or
(4) Relocating a food establishment when the relocation also involves (1),
(2), or (3) above.
(b) Homesteads, and bed and breakfasts shall be exempt from submitting a plan
review application.
(c) An applicant or licensee shall pay a fee of $25, for each plan review application
submitted.
(d) The department shall review plans for construction, renovation or structural
alterations of a food establishment for compliance with all applicable sections of
RSA 143, RSA 143-A, and Town 1204(He-P 2300) and notify the applicant or
licensee as to whether the plan complies with these requirements. Plan includes
20
but is not limited to – menu, HACCP/Variance as needed, floor plan to scale,
location of all equipment with specifications, locations of food prep, storage,
refrigeration, sinks, lavatories, seating, etc.
1204.4.13(He-P 2304.13) Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point (HACCP)
Plan Requirements.
(a) The following applicants or licensees shall submit to the department a
complete HACCP plan for approval prior to engaging in an activity that requires
such a plan; such as but not limited to:
(1) Food processing plants;
(2) Any food establishment engaging in an activity that requires a variance as
specified under Food Code subparagraph 3-401.11(D)(3), § 3-502.11, or ¶ 4-
204.110 (B);
(3) Any food establishment engaging in a food preparation or processing
method that the department determines requires a variance, based on the
submission of plans and specifications in accordance with 1204.4.12(He-P
2304.12), an inspection finding, or a variance request; and
(4) Any food establishment engaging in an activity specified under Food
Code § 3-502.11 and 3-502.12.
(5) Any food establishment which is required to have a HACCP plan by law.
(b) A complete HACCP plan shall include the following:
(1) A categorization of the types of TCS foods that are specified in the menu
(2) A flow diagram by specific food or category type identifying critical control
points and providing information on the following:
a. Ingredients, materials, and equipment used in the preparation of that
food; and
b. Formulations or recipes that delineate methods and procedural control
measures that address the food safety concerns involved;
(3) Food employee and supervisory training plan that addresses the food
safety issues of concern;
(4) A statement of standard operating procedures for the plan under
consideration including clearly identifying:
21
a. Each critical control point;
b. The critical limits for each critical control point;
c. The method and frequency for monitoring and controlling each critical
control point by the food employee designated by the person in charge;
d. The method and frequency for the person in charge to routinely verify
that the food employee is following standard operating procedures and
monitoring critical control points;
e. Action to be taken by the person in charge if the critical limits for each
critical control point are not met; and
f. Records to be maintained by the person in charge to demonstrate that
the HACCP plan is properly operated and managed; and
(5) Additional scientific data or other information, as needed by the
department to make its determination under (c) below, supporting the
determination that food safety is not compromised by the proposal.
(c) The department shall review HACCP plans for compliance with all applicable
sections of RSA 143, 143-A, and Town 1204(He-P 2300) and notify the applicant
or licensee as to whether the plan complies with these requirements.
1204.4.14(He-P 2304.14) Variances.
(a) Applicants or license holders seeking variances from specific rules or Food
Code items shall submit a “Variance Request” to the:
Exeter Health Department
20 Court St
Exeter, NH 03833
603-773-6132
(b) The variance request shall include:
(1) Specific reference to the rule or Food Code item for which a variance is
being sought;
(2) Full explanation of why a variance is necessary;
(3) Full explanation of alternatives proposed by the applicant or license
holder, which shall be equally as protective of public health as the rule or
Food Code item from which a variance is sought; and
22
(4) A HACCP plan if required under 1204.4.13(He-P 2304.13).
(c) The department shall approve a request for variance if:
(1) The department concludes that authorizing deviation from strict
compliance with the rule or Food Code item from which a variance is sought
does not contradict the intent of the rule or Food Code item; and
(2) The alternative proposed by the applicant or license holder ensures that
the objective or intent of the rule or Food Code item from which a variance
is sought will be accomplished.
(3) An approved variance may not be applicable if there is a change in class
and/or menu item(s) change.
(d) If a variance is approved, the license holder’s subsequent compliance with the
alternatives approved in the variance shall be considered equivalent to complying
with the rule or Food Code item from which a variance was sought.
(e) A variance shall be approved for one year or until the expiration of the current
license or unless specified by the department. The variance is not transferable.
(f) No request for a variance concerning the rules of other state agencies which
are referred to in this chapter shall be approved.
1204.4.15(He P 2304.15) Trade Secrets and Confidentiality.
(a) The department shall treat as confidential, in accordance with RSA 350-B,
information that meets the criteria specified in RSA 350-B for a trade secret and is
contained on inspection report forms, in the plans and specifications submitted as
specified under 1204.4.12(He P 2304.12), and in any HACCP plans submitted.
(b) Consumer complaints received regarding illness or sanitation of a food
establishment shall have their name, address, and phone number or other
identifying information of the individual making the complaint maintained as
confidential and such information shall not be released without written permission
of the complainant.
1204.5(PART He-P 2305) INSPECTIONS AND COMPLIANCE
1204.5.01(He-P 2305.01) Inspections.
(a) For the purpose of determining compliance with RSA 143, RSA 143-A, and
Town 1204(He-P 2300), as authorized by RSA 143:4 and RSA 143-A:6, II, the
applicant or licensee shall admit and allow any department representative at any
time to enter and inspect the following:
23
(1) The licensed food establishment, including any mobile food units or
vehicles used by the licensee for the transportation or retail sale of food; and
(2) Any records required by RSA 143-A and Town 1204(He-P 2300), or
pertaining to food and supplies purchased and distributed by the food
establishment.
(b) At the time of inspection, or upon request, the applicant or licensee shall
provide the department with the following:
(1) A list of persons employed; and
(2) Samples of food for bacteriological, chemical, and physical examination.
(c) The department shall conduct an inspection to determine full compliance with
RSA 143, RSA 143-A, and Town 1204(He-P 2300), prior to:
(1) The issuance of a provisional license;
(2) The issuance of a full license:
(3) A change in ownership;
(4) A change in the licensee’s physical location;
(5) An upgrade in the license class;
(6) Occupation of space after construction, renovations or structural
alterations; or
(7) The annual renewal of a license.
(d) In addition to (c) above, the department shall conduct an inspection:
(1) Whenever the department has reason to believe a condition exists that
places the food establishment in non-compliance with RSA 143, RSA 143-A,
or Town 1204(He-P 2300); and
(2) As necessary to verify compliance with any corrective action plan (CAP)
and/or Risk Control Plan accepted by the department as part of an inspection.
(e) The applicant, owner, or person in charge shall be present at time of
inspection.
(f) Upon completion of the inspection, the department shall complete a written or
digital inspection report in accordance with Food Code Annex 7, Form 3-A and
24
Guide 3-B, or in the case of food processing plants and homesteads a “Food
Processing Plant Inspection Report”.
(1) It is the responsibility of the facility to download a digital inspection sent
via email.
(g) The inspection report shall contain:
(1) Specific factual observations of deficiencies which violate Town 1204(He-
P 2300) and/or the Food Code and which require correction; and
(2) For all food establishments except food processing plants, a color
designation, described in (i) below, based on the results of the inspection
findings.
(h) The applicant, owner, or person in charge shall acknowledge receipt of the
inspection report by signing the inspection report (paper copy or digital).
(i) Color Score Designation shall be as follows:
(1) Green if there are no priority item violations identified at the time of the
inspection (no priority/critical = no further action)
(2) Yellow if there are one to three priority/critical item violations and/or repeat
violations at the time of inspection; (priority/critical item will trigger a
follow-up inspection)
(3) Red if it is determined that an imminent health hazard exists at the time of
the inspection, there are four or more priority/critical item violations, or if
the food establishment is found to be operating without a current, valid
license.(follow-up inspection triggered and closure of facility possible)
1204.5.02(He-P 2305.02) Correction of Deficiencies Identified During an
Inspection.
(a) All deficiencies identified in the inspection report shall be corrected at the time
of inspection, as practicable.
(b) For all food establishments except food processing plants and homesteads, if
a priority item violation and/or a priority foundation violation is found during an
inspection and cannot be corrected immediately and permanently in the presence
of the inspector, the applicant or licensee shall:
(1) Agree to temporarily correct the priority item violation and to permanently
correct it in a specified time frame, not to exceed 10 calendar days after the
inspection; or
25
(2) Complete a CAP in the presence of the inspector in accordance with
1204.5.03 (He-P 2305.03) Repeat violations of the same code # violation will
be placed in a corrective action plan, or a Risk Control Plan for repeat risk
factor violations and lack of proper public health interventions
(c) For all food establishments except food processing plants and homesteads, if a
violation of any items in Chapter 4, 5, or 6 of the FOOD CODE is found during an
inspection for an initial license or change of ownership license, and it cannot be
corrected immediately in the presence of the inspector, the applicant or licensee
shall:
(1) Agree to temporarily correct the deficiency and to permanently correct it
in a specified time frame, not to exceed 10 calendar days after the inspection;
or
(2) Complete a CAP in the presence of the inspector in accordance with
1204.5.03 (He-P 2305.03).
(d) All core items shall be corrected in a timely manner a CAP may be completed
and accepted by the inspector); not to exceed a 6 month period for corrective
action.
(e) For food processing plants and homesteads, if any violation is found during an
inspection and cannot be corrected immediately and permanently in the presence
of the inspector, the applicant or licensee shall:
(1) Agree to temporarily correct the violation and to permanently correct it in a
specified time frame—
Priority items not to exceed 10 calendars days after the inspection
Priority foundation items not to exceed 10 calendar days after the
inspection
Core items shall be corrected in a timely manner, not to exceed 6 months.
(2) A CAP may be completed for a core item violation or a priority foundation
item, at the discretion of the inspector
1204.5.03(He-P 2305.03) Corrective Action Plan.
(a) When a deficiency identified in the inspection report cannot be corrected either
immediately and permanently in the presence of the inspector or permanently
within 10 calendar days after the inspection, pursuant to 1204.5.02(b), (c),(d), or
(e) (He-P 2305.02(b), (c), or (d)), the licensee shall complete, date, and sign, at
the time of inspection, a Corrective Action Plan form provided by the inspector,
including:
(1) How the licensee intends to correct each deficiency;
26
(2) The date by which each deficiency shall be corrected; and
(3) What measures will be put in place to ensure that the deficiency does not
recur.
(b) The department shall review and accept each CAP that:
(1) Achieves compliance with RSA 143, RSA 143-A, and Town 1204(He-P
2300);
(2) Addresses all deficiencies and deficient practices as cited in the
inspection report;
(3) Prevents a new violation of RSA 143, RSA 143-A, or Town 1204(He-P
2300) as a result of the implementation of the CAP; and
(4) Specifies the date upon which the deficiencies will be corrected.
(c) The department shall verify the implementation of any CAP that has been
accepted by:
(1) Reviewing materials submitted by the licensee;
(2) Conducting a follow-up inspection; or
(3) Reviewing compliance during a renewal inspection.
(d) If the department finds the licensee to be out of compliance with the CAP by
the specified completion date at the time of the next inspection, the department
shall:
(1) Impose applicable fines, in accordance with 1204.6.02(a)(13) (He-P
2306.02(a)(13));
(2) Revoke the license in accordance with 1204.6.03(a)(7) (He-P
2306.03(a)(7)); and
(3) Deny the application for a renewal of a license, as applicable, in
accordance with 1204.4.03(d)(2) (He-P 2304.03(d)(2)).
1204.5.04 RISK CONTROL PLAN AS PART OF THE CAP 1204.5.03(a)-(d)
(a) The Risk Control Plan will be indicated for repeat violations of the:
27
(1) 5 CDC Risk Factors: improper holding temperatures: inadequate cooking;
contaminated equipment; food from unsafe sources; and poor personal
hygiene and/or
(2) 5 Key Public Health Interventions: demonstration of knowledge; employee
health; controlling hands as a vehicle of contamination; time and
temperature parameters for controlling pathogens; and consumer advisory
(b) The Risk Control Plan will identify the risk factors, the uncontrolled process
step or CCP, the hazard, the critical limit and the corrective action when the critical
limits are not met: to establish active managerial control of the identified
uncontrolled/repeat hazards.
(c) The Risk Control Plan delineates what needs to be controlled and how it will be
controlled, along with necessary records and responsible personnel. It should also
indicate what training is necessary.
1204.6(PART He-P 2306) ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS
1204.6.01(He-P 2306.01) Enforcement Actions and Notice of Right to Appeal.
(a) The department shall impose enforcement actions for violations of RSA 143,
RSA 143-A, or Town 1204(He-P 2300), including the following:
(1) Imposing fines upon an applicant, licensee, or unlicensed individual;
(2) Denying a license application;
(3) Revoking a license; or
(4) Immediately closing the food establishment.
(b) When imposing a fine, denying a license application, or revoking a license, the
department shall send to the applicant or licensee a written notice that sets forth:
(1) The action to be taken by the department;
(2) The reasons for the action, including the identification of each deficiency
as applicable; and
(3) The right of the applicant or licensee to request a hearing in accordance
with RSA 541-A, He-C 200, and 1204.6.04 (He-P 2306.04) prior to the
enforcement action becoming final.
28
(c) No ongoing enforcement action shall preclude the imposition of any remedy
available to the department under RSA 143, RSA 143-A, RSA 541-A:30, III, or
Town 1204(He-P 2300).
1204.6.02(He-P 2306.02) Administrative Fines.
(a) The department shall impose fines as follows:
(1) For providing false or misleading information on or with an application, in
violation of 1204.4.01(a) (He-P 2304.01(a)), 1204.11.01(a) (He-P 2311.01(a),
or 1204.4.12(a) (He-P 2304.12(a)), the fine shall be $1,000;
(2) For failure to operate a food establishment only in the manner in which
licensed to do so, in violation of 1204.4.02(j) (He-P 2304.02(j)), the fine shall
be $500;
(3) For failure to cooperate during an inspection of a food establishment,
including but not limited to failing to allow department representatives or
inspectors to inspect food establishment premises, vehicles, and records at
all times, in violation of 1204.5.01 (He-P 2305.01), the fine shall be $2,000;
(4) For failure to notify the department by telephone within 24 8 hours of any
fire or other disaster that jeopardizes the safety or sanitation of food provided
in food establishments, in violation of 1204.6.06(a) (He-P 2306.06(a)), the
fine shall be $250;
(5) For failure to notify the department pursuant to 1204.4.08(a) (He-P
2304.08(a)) at least 10 days prior to a food establishment ownership change,
the fine shall be $500;
(6) For failure to notify the department pursuant to 1204.4.10(a) (He-P
2304.10(a)) at least 30 days prior to the change of location of a food
establishment, the fine shall be $500;
(7) For failure to submit a plan for review as required in 1204.4.12(a) (He-P
2304.12(a)), the fine shall be $300;
(8) For failure to discard food as required by Food Code 3-701.11, and in the
manner instructed to do so by the department, the fine shall be $500;
(9) For failure to cease operation upon notification by the department to do
so, the fine shall be $1000. Each day that a license holder fails to cease
operation shall be considered a separate offense subject to an additional
$500 fine;
29
(10) For failure to cease operation after a license has expired, when an
application has been denied, or when a license has been revoked, the fine
shall be $1,000. Each day that a license holder fails to cease operation shall
be considered a separate offense subject to an additional $500 fine;
(11) For a violation of the same priority item on more than 2 consecutive
inspections, the fine shall be $500;
(12) For failure to pay an administrative fine within 30 days of its imposition,
or within 30 days of the decision to uphold the imposition of a fine that was
appealed, the fine shall be $500. Each day until the expiration of the current
license, that a license holder fails to pay such a fine shall be considered a
separate offense subject to an additional $500 fine;
(13) For a failure to comply with any CAP or Risk Control Plan that has been
accepted by the department, the fine shall be $500;
(14) For operation of a food service establishment without obtaining a food
service license, as required by RSA 143-A:4, the fine shall be $1,000. Each
day that a food establishment operates without a license shall be considered
a separate offense subject to an additional $500 fine;
(15) For failure to submit a HACCP plan for review if required by the
department in accordance with 1204.4.13 (He-P 2304.13), the fine shall be
$500;
(16) For failure to display a valid license, in accordance with 1204.4.02(l)
(He-P 2304.02(l)), the fine shall be $200;
(17) For failure of a food protection certified applicant, owner, or person in
charge to be present at the time of inspection and demonstrate the
knowledge required by section 2-102.11 and certification by section 2-102.20
of the Food Code which are pertinent to the risks inherent to the specific food
establishment, in violation of 1204.5.01(e) ((He-P 2305.01(e)), the fine shall
be $250; and
(18) For violating a variance approved in accordance with 1204.4.14 (He-P
2304.14), the fine shall be $500.
(19) For failure to submit a timely renewal application, in violation of He-P
2304.03(b), the fine shall be $75;
(20) For failure of an exempt or non-exempt homestead food operation to
label products in accordance with He-P 2310.01(d) or He-P 2311.04, the fine
shall be $250 per product line;
30
(21) For failure of a poultry producer or a rabbit producer to comply with
training requirements of He-P 2313.02, the fine shall be $500;
(22) For failure to cooperate during an outbreak investigation in violation of
He-P 2313.01, the fine shall be $500;
(23) For failure to maintain files, for at least 90 days, on the receipt of
purchase of uninspected poultry or uninspected rabbits in accordance with
RSA 143-A:15, II, the fine shall be $500; and
(24) For failure to correctly label a menu relative to the sale of uninspected,
poultry or uninspected rabbits in accordance with He-P 2314(c), the fine shall
be $500.
(b) Each day that an individual or licensee continues to be in violation of the
provisions of RSA 143, RSA 143-A, or Town 1204(He-P 2300) shall constitute a
separate violation and shall be fined in accordance with this section.
(c) Payment of any imposed fine to the department shall meet the following
requirements:
(1) Payment shall be made in the form of check or money order made
payable to the “Town of Exeter” in the exact amount due;
(2) Money order, or certified check shall be required when an applicant or
licensee has issued payment to the department by check, and such check
was returned for insufficient funds; and
(3) Any payment made to the department by check which is returned for
insufficient funds, and which an individual, applicant, or licensee has not
made good by submitting money order or certified check within 2 business
days of notification by the department, including any penalty assessment
allowed by RSA 6:11-a, shall be grounds for revocation of the license.
1204.6.03(He-P 2306.03) Denial or Revocation of a License.
(a) The department shall deny an application or revoke a license if:
(1) The operation of the licensed establishment immediately endangers public
health or safety;
(2) An applicant or licensee has failed to pay any applicable fee in
accordance with 1204.4.05 (He-P 2304.05) or any administrative fine
imposed under 1204.6.02 (He-P 2306.02) or any other court authorized
sanction or fee;
31
(3) An applicant or a licensee has had a check returned to the department for
insufficient funds and has not re-submitted the outstanding fee and additional
charges in the form of money order or certified check within 2 business days
of notification by the department;
(4) After being notified of and given an opportunity to supply missing
information, an applicant or licensee fails to submit an application that meets
the requirements of 1204.4.02(c) (He-P 2304.02(c));
(5) An applicant, licensee or any representative or employee of the applicant
or licensee:
a. Provides false or misleading information to the department;
b. Prevents or interferes, or fails to cooperate with any inspection or
investigation conducted by the department; or
c. Fails to provide, upon request, information or documents to the
department;
(6) There is a deficiency identified in the inspection report and the applicant
or licensee does not either correct it or complete a CAP in accordance with
1204.5.02(b) or (c) (He-P 2305.02(b) or (c));
(7) The licensee fails to implement or continue to implement a CAP that has
been accepted by the department in accordance with 1204.5.03(d) (He-P
2305.03(d));
(8) The licensee is cited 2 or more times under RSA 143, RSA 143-A, or
Town 1204(He-P 2300) for the same critical/priority violation within the last 12
months or the last 5 inspections;
(9) A licensee has had a license revoked and submits an application during
the 3-year prohibition period specified in (b) below; and
(10) A food establishment fails to implement an approved HACCP plan in
accordance with 1204.4.13 (He-P 2304.13);
(b) When a food establishment’s license has been denied or revoked, the
applicant or licensee may be prohibited from reapplying for a food establishment
license for up to 3 years at a different location, if the enforcement action pertained
to their role in the food establishment.
(c) The prohibition period referenced in (b) above shall begin on:
32
(1) The date of the department’s decision to revoke or deny the license, if no
request for an administrative hearing is requested or if the request is
withdrawn; or
(2) The date a final decision upholding the action of the department is issued,
if a request for a hearing is made and a hearing is held.
(d) Notwithstanding (b) and (c) above, the department may consider an application
submitted after the decision to revoke or deny becomes final, if the applicant
provides proof that circumstances have changed and that the applicant has
obtained the requisite degree of knowledge, skills and resources necessary to
maintain compliance with the provisions of RSA 143, RSA 143-A, and Town
1204(He-P 2300).
(e) Reapplication for a license after revocation, pursuant to RSA 143-A:6, I, shall
require submission of:
(1) A written application for a license to the department, completed in
accordance with 1204.4.01 (He-P 2304.01);
(2) A corrective action plan, completed in accordance with 1204.5.03 (He-P
2305.03); and
(3) Written proof that subsequent to the revocation, the person in charge has
taken and passed a food safety class that meets the standards of The
Conference for Food Protection.
1204.6.04(He-P 2306.04) Request for an Administrative Hearing.
(a) An applicant or licensee shall have 10 calendar days after receipt of the notice
of an enforcement action to request in writing a hearing to contest the action.
(b) If a written request for a hearing is not received pursuant to (a) above, the
applicant or licensee waives his right to a hearing and the action of the department
shall become final.
(c) Hearings under this section shall be conducted in accordance with RSA 541-A
and He-C 200.
(d) For administrative fines, the fines shall be paid to the department no later than
30 days from the receipt of the notice, unless a hearing has been requested.
1204.6.05(He-P 2306.05) Effect of Denial of License Application, Revocation of
License, or Expired License.
33
(a) Any applicant who has been denied a license or renewal license shall not
operate or shall cease operation of the food establishment for which the license or
renewal license was denied within 10 calendar days after receipt of the denial
notice, unless a timely appeal is submitted.
(b) If a license is revoked by the department, the food establishment shall cease
operation of the food establishment within 10 calendar days after receipt of the
revocation notice, unless a timely appeal is submitted.
(c) If a food establishment is subject to immediate closure as defined in RSA
143:5-a, the food establishment shall immediately cease operation pending
reinspection and pursuant to the adjudicative proceedings provisions of RSA 541-
A.
(d) If a license expires without a timely application for renewal having been made,
the food establishment shall immediately cease operation of the food
establishment.
1204.6.06(He-P 2306.06) Closure.
(a) A licensee shall immediately discontinue operations and notify the department
at 603-773-6132, or if at night or during weekends at 603-772-1212, if an imminent
health hazard may exist because of an emergency such as, but not limited to:
(1) Interruption of water service that lasts for 2 or more hours;
(2) Whenever a drinking water sample is found to have E.coli bacteria or
exceed the MCL for nitrates or nitrites described by 1204.4.06(f) (He-P
2304.06(f));
(3) A failed sewer system or a sewage backup into the food establishment;
(4) Interruption of electrical service for 2 or more hours;
(5) A fire affecting a food establishment;
(6) Flooding in a food establishment;
(7) Chemical exposure in a food establishment;
(8) Any other natural disaster or catastrophic event that could result in
contamination of the food supply;
(9) An employee has been found to be infected with a communicable disease
as described in Food Code subparagraph 2-201.11 (A)(2); or
34
(10) Any other severe unsanitary conditions that threaten to contaminate the
food establishment and its food supply.
(b) A licensee shall not be required to discontinue operations in an area of the
food establishment that is unaffected by the imminent health hazard.
(c) If operations are discontinued as specified in (a) above, the licensee shall
obtain approval from the department before resuming operations.
(d) The department shall approve the resumption of operations if the imminent
health hazard no longer exists or the licensee has offered a plan to mitigate all
threats to health and safety
(e) The failure to include other violations, practices, circumstances, or events in
this section shall not be construed as a determination that other violations,
practices, circumstances, or events are not or shall not be considered an imminent
health hazard.
(f) The commissioner’s(Exeter Health Department’s) order of an immediate
closure of a food establishment shall be in accordance with the provisions of RSA
143:5-a.
1204.7(PART He-P 2307) EMPLOYEE HEALTH
1204.7.01(He-P 2307.01) Suspected or Confirmed Foodborne Disease Outbreaks.
(a) Pursuant to RSA 141-C:9, II, during a suspected or confirmed foodborne
disease outbreak, as determined by the department, all food employees in the
implicated food establishment shall submit biological specimens upon department
request.
(b) During a suspected or confirmed foodborne disease outbreak, as determined
by the department, any food employee who has had any of the symptoms specified
in Food Code subparagraph 2-201.11 (A)(1) within the previous 2 weeks shall be
excluded from work until the appropriate biological specimens requested by the
department under RSA 141-C:9, II, are submitted and found to be negative.
1204.7.02(He-P 2307.02) Reporting by the Person in Charge.
(a) The person in charge shall notify the department as well as the state
department’s bureau of communicable disease control at 603-271-4496, or if at
night or during weekends at 603-271-5300; the person in charge will also notify the
Exeter Health Department at 603-773-6132, of a food employee, or a person who
applies for a job as a food employee, who is diagnosed with, or suspected of
having, an illness or condition specified in Food Code subparagraph 2-201.11 (B),
including:
35
(1) Jaundiced;
(2) Norovirus;
(3) Hepatitis A virus;
(4) Shigella spp.;
(5) Enterohemorrhagic or shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli; or
(6) Salmonella Typhi.
(b) The person in charge shall report infectious and communicable disease as
required by He-P 301 Communicable Disease rules, as applicable.
1204.8(PART He-P 2308) SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR BED AND BREAKFAST
FACILITIES
1204.8.01(He-P 2308.01) Application Requirements. Food service establishments
applying for a license as a bed and breakfast facility shall comply with all of the
application requirements of 1204.4.01 (He-P 2304.01), except that they shall not
be required to submit a plan review application as required under 1204.4.01(a)(5)
(He-P 2304.01(a)(5)) and wastewater items as required under 1204.4.01(a)(4)
(He-P 2304.01(a)(4) and 1204.4.07(He-P 2304.07).
1204.8.02(He-P 2308.02) Basic Requirements. A bed and breakfast facility shall
comply with 1204.2 through 1204.7 (He-P 2302 through He-P 2307), however
the following exceptions to the Food Code shall apply:
(a) Commercial equipment shall not be required;
(b) The kitchen shall be equipped with either:
(1) A 2-compartment sink; or
(2) A residential model dish machine and a one-compartment sink;
(c) A sink used for food preparation shall not be required to be equipped with an
indirect waste line;
(d) A backflow device shall not be required for kitchen sinks provided with a spray
hose;
(e) Coved base at the juncture of the floor and wall shall not be required;
36
(f) Only those bathrooms which open directly into the kitchen or into any hallway
leading into the kitchen shall be required to have self-closing doors and
mechanical ventilation;
(g) The kitchen shall not be required to be separated from any living area or
sleeping area by complete partitioning or solid, self-closing doors; and
(h) Laundry facilities shall:
(1) Be allowed in the kitchen; and
(2) Not be used during processing, preparing, serving, or packaging of foods
related to the business.
1204.8.03(He-P 2308.03) Sanitization. Dishes, utensils, and food contact
equipment and surfaces shall undergo sanitization as required in Food Code 4-
703.11, except that sanitization, if done in the 2 compartment sink, shall occur in
the second compartment after the dishes, utensils, and food contact equipment
have been rinsed with clean water.
1204.9(PART He-P 2309) SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR FOOD PROCESSING
PLANTS
1204.9.01(He-P 2309.01) Application Requirements. Food service establishments
applying for a license as a food processing plant shall:
(a) Comply with all of the application requirements described in 1204.4.01 (He-P
2304.01);
(b) Submit with their application a list of all food products to be produced in the
food processing plant; and
(c) Submit a HACCP plan as part of the application as required by 1204.4.13 (He-
P 2304.13).
(d) Submit a finished product label with date code.
1204.9.02(He-P 2309.02) Basic Requirements. Food processing plants shall:
(a) Provide an updated list of food products to the department whenever new
products are added;
(b) If thermally processing and packaging low-acid foods in hermetically sealed
containers, comply with applicable federal regulations under the Code of Federal
Regulations in 21 CFR 113 and 21 CFR 110;
37
(c) If processing acidified foods, comply with applicable federal regulations under
Code of Federal Regulations in 21 CFR 114 and 21 CFR 110; and
(d) Maintain production records and distribution records of all products produced.
(e) Provide a written recall procedure.
1204.9.03(He-P 2309.03) Food Processing Plant Standards.
(a) Those food establishments licensed as food processing plants shall be exempt
from the requirements of the Food Code and shall instead comply with the
requirements in this section.
(b) All food shall be from an approved source-as defined 1204.1.01(b)(1)(2)(3)
(c) All food products shall be stored in original containers. If food products are
removed from the original container, they shall be stored in labeled and closed
containers. Containers shall be of a material that will not cause the food to become
adulterated.
(d) All food shall be in sound condition, free from spoilage, filth, or other
contamination, and shall be safe for human consumption.
(e) All TCS food shall be refrigerated at 41°F or lower, or held at 135°F or higher,
to control bacterial growth.
(f) Food storage facilities shall be kept clean and located to protect food from
unsanitary conditions or contamination from any source at all times.
(g) The floors, walls, ceilings, utensils, machinery, equipment, and supplies in the
food preparation area and all vehicles used in the transportation of food shall
be kept thoroughly clean.
(h) All food contact surfaces shall be kept clean and undergo sanitization as
frequently as necessary to protect against contamination of food—maximum 4
hour intervals
(i) All food contact surfaces shall be non-toxic, easy to clean, smooth,
nonabsorbent, and free of cracks or open seams. Sanitation shall comply with
applicable federal regulations under the Code of Federal Regulations in 21
CFR:110.
(j) All food shall be protected against insects and rodents at all times. Outside
doors, windows, and other openings shall be fitted with screens and self-closing
doors, if not otherwise protected. No dogs, cats, or other pets shall be allowed in
the room where food is prepared or stored.
38
(k) All garbage and refuse shall be kept in containers and removed from the
premises regularly to prevent insects and rodents, offensive odors, or health or fire
hazards. Garbage and refuse containers shall be durable, easy to clean, insectand
rodent-resistant, and of material that neither leaks nor absorbs liquid.
(l) Employees shall be free from contagious or communicable diseases, sores, or
infected wounds, and shall keep their hair covered and restrained.
(m) Employees shall keep themselves and their clothing clean. Hands shall be
washed as frequently as necessary to maintain good sanitation.
(n) Employees shall not smoke while handling or preparing food or in food
preparation or storage areas.
(o) All establishments shall have an adequate supply of hot and cold potable water
under pressure from an approved source.
(p) All establishments shall have toilet facilities, which do not open directly into
food processing areas, equipped with a hand washing lavatory, complete with hot
and cold potable water under pressure and hand soap. A supply of sanitary towels
or a hand-drying device providing heated air shall be conveniently located near the
hand-washing facility.
(q) Poisonous or toxic materials shall be stored so they cannot contaminate food,
equipment, utensils, linens, and single-service, and single-use articles.
(r) Hand sinks shall be conveniently located to all food processing areas.
(s) Adequate lighting shall be provided where food is stored, processed, or
examined
(t) Adequate ventilation shall be provided to eliminate objectionable odors and
vapors, including steam and constructed in such a manner as to avoid possible
contamination.
(u) Food processing plants shall comply with all provisions of the state plumbing
code as included as part of the state building code defined in RSA 155-A:1, IV,
as amended by the Building Code Review Board pursuant to RSA 155-A:10, V.
1204.9.04(He-P 2309.04) Labeling of All Packaged Foods. All packaged food shall
bear a label showing:
(a) The common or usual name of the product;
(b) The name and address of the manufacturer’s, packer’s, or distributor’s
business which shall:
39
(1) In the case of an individual, partnership, or association be the name
under which the business is conducted;
(2) In the case of a corporation, be the name of the parent corporation; or
(3) Where the food is not processed by the person whose name appears on
the label, the name on the label shall be qualified by a phrase which reveals
the connection such a person has with the food, including but not limited to,
“Manufactured for _____”, “Distributed by _____”, or any other wording which
expresses the facts;
(c) The ingredients in descending order of predominance by weight; and
(d) The net weight, volume, or numerical count in both U.S. customary and metric;
and
(e) A product code which includes date of manufacture, container size, and
product lot or batch number to aid in a recall of product in case of a public
health hazard; and
(f) Allergen information ie; WHEAT, SOY
(g) Directions as needed; reheat, refrigerate, cook in accordance with section 3-
201.11 Ref. CFR of the food code.
1204.9.05(He-P 2309.05) Recall Procedure.
(a) The food processing plant shall develop and maintain on file a written
procedure for the recall of their product, including procedures for the notification of
the department and consumers and the removal of the product from commerce.
(b) Production and distribution records shall be used to enable location of products
if a recall is initiated.
(c) A food processing plant shall recall any product which the food processing
plant or the department knows or has reason to believe might adversely affect the
health and safety of the public.
(d) A food processing plant that knows that the standard of quality has been
violated or has reason to believe that circumstances exist which might adversely
affect the safety of the product shall notify the department within 24 hours of
learning of the violation or circumstances.
(e) Circumstances in (d) requiring notification shall include, but are not limited to,
source contamination, spills, accidents, natural disasters, or breakdowns in
treatment processes.
40
(f) If the department determines that the circumstances present an imminent
health hazard and that consumer notification and/or product recall can significantly
minimize the threat to health and safety of the public, the department shall advise
the food processing plant to initiate a product recall.
(g) In cases of a product recall, the food processing plant shall disseminate
notification of the recall to all wholesale and retail outlets to which the product was
distributed.
(h) If directed by the department, the food processing plant shall issue notification
to consumers who might be affected by the recall using such methods, including
the media, as will assure timely notification to the consumers.
1204.10 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR LEVEL ONE AND LEVEL TWO
HOMESTEADS PRODUCING FOOD IN A RESIDENTIAL NON
COMMERCIAL KITCHEN
1204.10.01 Application Requirements.
(a) Food service establishments applying for a license as a level one or level two
homestead shall comply with all of the application requirements of 1204.2.04 (He-
P 2302.04) except that they shall not be required to submit the plan review
application required under 1204.4.01(a)(5) (He-P 2304.01(a)(5)) and wastewater
items required under 1204.4.01(a)(4) (He-P 2304.01(a)(4) and 1204.4.07(He-P
2304.07).
(b) Level One Homestead license holder-offers product only at a farm stand,
farmers’ market or from the holder’s residence/Class H-1 license
(c) Level Two Homestead license holder-may offer product to other food
establishments and retail food stores, as well as farmers markets, farm stands,
online, or license holder’s residence/Class D-4 license
(d) Finished product label
1204.10.02(He-P 2310.02) Approved Products. Only the following food products
shall be produced and sold from a homestead:
(a) Baked items, including, but not limited to, breads, rolls, muffins, cookies,
brownies, and cakes;
(1) Baked goods integrated with fruits or vegetables (i.e. banana bread,
zucchini bread) or other similar baked items require a process review.
(b) Double-crusted fruit pies;
41
(c) Candy and fudge;
(d) Packaged dry products, which include, but are not limited to, spices and herbs;
(e) Acid foods, including, but not limited to, vinegars and mustards; and
(f) Jams and jellies-process review required (1204.10.06/He-P 2301.05)
1204.10.03(He-P 2310.03) Prohibited Products. License holders producing food in
a homestead shall not produce or sell TCS food, including any food which requires
refrigeration.
1204.10.04(He-P 2310.04) Basic Requirements.
(a) Homesteads shall comply with all requirements of Town 1204.9.04(He-P
2309.04) and 1204.9.05(He-P 2309.05) regarding labeling of products and recall of
products respectively.
(b) Homesteads shall label each product with the following statement: “This
product is made in a residential kitchen”. Labels shall contain ingredients list in
order, Name and address for identification, all ingredients in descending order
by weight, net volume weight or count, food allergen information, and product
date code.
(c) Level Two Homesteads selling to retail shall also submit:
(1) Copies of all finished product labels
(2) A list of sources of all ingredients to be used
(3) A flow chart describing the manufacturing steps for each product to be
made
(4) A description of how each product is packaged; and
(5) A description of the records that are maintained during production
including but not limited to temperatures and pH readings, where
applicable
1204.10.05 Homestead Standards.
(a) Those food establishments licensed as homesteads shall be exempt from the
requirements of the Food Code, and shall instead comply with the requirements of
1204.9.03(He-P 2309.03) and the requirements in this section.
(b) Commercial equipment shall not be required.
(c) The kitchen shall be equipped with either:
(1) A 2-compartment sink; or
42
(2) A residential model dish machine and a one-compartment sink.
(d) A sink used for food preparation shall not be required to be equipped with an
indirect waste line.
(e) A backflow device shall not be required for kitchen sinks provided with a spray
hose.
(f) Coved base at the juncture of the floor and wall shall not be required.
(g) Only those bathrooms which open directly into the kitchen or into any hallway
leading into the kitchen shall be required to have self-closing doors and
mechanical ventilation.
(h) The kitchen shall not be required to be separated from any living area or
sleeping area by complete partitioning or solid, self-closing doors.
(i) Laundry facilities shall:
(1) Be allowed in the kitchen; and
(2) Not be used during processing, preparing, serving, or packaging of foods
related to the business.
1204.10.06(He-P 2310.05) Process Review Required
(a)Level One or Level Two homesteads producing foods listed in 1204.10.02(f)
that do not use recipes approved by the National Center for Home Food
Preservation shall comply with the following:
(1) A process review shall be conducted by a food processing authority on
each product prior to its being produced by the license holder. If the food
processing authority declares in writing that there are no biological
concerns with the food after evaluating the scheduled process, the food
shall be allowed to be produced;
(2) License holders shall keep records of all pHs on file and available for
review by the regulatory authority upon request;
(3) A process review shall be conducted for a product that has been
previously tested if the ingredients are altered or the process changes;
(4) License applicants shall submit process review documentation with the
license application in accordance with Town 1204.10.01;
43
(5) License holders shall keep all process review information on file and
available for review by the regulatory authority upon request.
1204.11(PART He-P 2312) OUT-OF-STATE FOOD PRODUCERS IN RESIDENTIAL,
NON-COMMERCIAL KITCHENS
1204.11.01(He-P 2312.01) Registration of Out-of-State Producers in Residential,
Non-Commercial Kitchens.
(a) All applicants registering their products in accordance with RSA 143:29 shall
submit the following to the department:
(1) A completed “Application for Registration of Out-of-State Producers in
Residential, Non-Commercial Kitchens” (OSPAPP, 01-01-11);
(2) One of the following:
a. A copy of a sanitary inspection conducted within the previous 12
months by the regulatory authority with jurisdiction;
b. A letter from the regulatory authority confirming compliance with local
regulations; or
c. A health certificate for the facility issued within the previous 12
months; and
(3) A fee in the amount of $25, pursuant to RSA 143:29, payable by check or
money order, in the exact amount of the fee made payable to the “Town of
Exeter”.
(4) A complete list of the products manufactured.
1204.11.02(He-P 2312.02) Processing of Registrations.
(a) The registration application required by 1204.11.01(He-P 2312.01) shall be
processed in accordance with RSA 541-A:29.
(b) If the registration application does not contain all of the items required by
1204.11.01(He-P 2312.01), the department shall:
(1) Not process the registration application; and
(2) Notify the registrant in writing that all required items shall be submitted
within 30 days in order for the registration application to be processed.
44
(c) If all the items required by 1204.11.01(He-P 2312.01) are received, the
application shall be deemed to be complete.
1204.11.03(He-P 2312.03) Registration Issuance and Duration.
(a) A registration shall be issued if the registration application meets the
requirements of 1204.11.01(He-P 2312.01).
(b) All registrations shall remain in effect until the first day of January of the year
following issuance unless revoked prior to that date.
(c) Registrations shall not be transferable with respect to persons or locations.
1204.11.04(He-P 2312.04) Denial of Registration Applications. The department
shall deny a registration application when the application submitted is incomplete
and any information requested in accordance with 1204.11.02(b) ((He-P
2312.02(b)) is not provided.
1204.11.05(He-P 2312.05) Renewal of Registrations.
(a) Registration applications for renewal of registrations shall be completed as
required in 1204.11.01(He-P 2312.01).
(b) There shall be no fee for renewal of registrations.
(d) Registration renewal applications shall be processed and issued or denied in
accordance with 1204.11.02(He-P 2312.02) through 1204.11.04(He-P
2312.04).
1204.12 TEMPORARY FOOD SERVICE EVENT PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
RSA143-A:3 VIII “Temporary food service establishment means any food service
establishment which operates at a fixed location for a temporary period of time not to
exceed 2 weeks, in connection with a fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition, or similar
transitory gathering”
The event may be held indoors or outdoors. Vendor types may include, but not limited
to one selling or offering any prepared, prepackaged potentially hazardous or nonhazardous
foods, as well as cooking.
The Coordinator of the event must submit a completed Coordinator’s Application at
least one month prior to the event to the Exeter Health Department.
All vendors must submit a completed Temporary Food Service Application at least 14
days prior to the event to the Exeter Health Department.
45
Applications not received in the Health Department by the deadline date will not be
considered for permitting.
Vendor and event requirements may include, but not limited to the following; having a
current food service license, commissary agreement, foods from an approved source,
hand wash station, ground covering, overhead protection, food thermometers, sanitize
solution, hot/cold hold equipment, single service customer items, extra utensils,
disposable gloves, garbage and trash disposal. This is not a complete listing.
The Health Department may impose additional requirements to protect against a health
hazard related to the conduct of the temporary food service establishment, prohibit the
sale of some or all potentially hazardous foods, and when no health hazard will result,
may modify requirements of the regulations when warranted.
1204.13 (PART He-P 2313) POULTRY PRODUCERS AND RABBIT PRODUCERS
SELLING POULTRY AND RABBITS TO RESTAURANTS LICENSED UNDER RSA
143-A
1204.13.01 (He-P 2313.01) Requirements for Poultry Producers and Rabbit
Producers to Sell to Restaurants Licensed Under RSA 143-A.
Poultry producers and rabbit producers who are exempt from food service licensure
under RSA 143-A:5, VIII, but who sell to restaurants licensed under RSA 143-A
shall:
(a) Register with the NH department of agriculture, markets, and food;
(b) Complete an education course meeting the requirements of He-P 2313.02 at a
minimum of every 5 years;
(c) Maintain production records showing that no more than 1,000 whole poultry or
1,000 rabbits are offered to restaurants within a calendar year;
(d) Label each poultry and rabbit with the following information:
(1) The name of the producer;
(2) The address of the producer;
(3) The date of slaughter of the poultry or rabbit; and
(4) Safe handling instructions as stated in the Food Code Section 3-201.11(F);
and
(e) Provide information to the department during an investigation of a foodborne
illness outbreak linked to any poultry or rabbits supplied by the producer.
46
(f) Prior to selling poultry or rabbit to restaurants, poultry and rabbit producers who
are exempt and meet the requirements of this section shall obtain documentation
from the NH department of agriculture, markets, and food that shows:
(1) Registration with NH department of agriculture, markets, and food; and
(2) Completion of the education course as set forth in He-P 2313.02 below.
(g) Documentation obtained in (f) shall be presented to any licensed restaurant to
demonstrate that the producer has met the requirements of RSA 143-A:16, RSA
143-A:17 and these rules.
1204.13.02 (He-P 2313.02) Education Requirements for Poultry Producers and
Rabbit Producers Exempt from Food Service Licensure.
(a) Producers shall complete department approved training, offered by UNH
Cooperative Extension or another training program which includes training in
required slaughtering, processing, packaging, handling, labeling, transportation
practices, and any other specific requirements for producers set forth in RSA 143-
A:14-16.
(b) Producers shall complete the training in (a) above every 5 years.
(c) A producer shall provide proof of successful completion of the required training
to the department of agriculture, markets and food with its registration.
(d) At a minimum, one individual involved in the producer’s, operations shall obtain
the required training.
(e) The producer shall maintain records of the completed training.
Source. #10867, eff 6-25-15
1204.14 (PART He-P 2314) REQUIREMENTS FOR RESTAURANTS LICENSED TO
SELL RABBIT OR POULTRY EXEMPT FROM INSPECTION
He-P 2314.01 Requirements for Restaurants Licensed Under RSA 143-A to Sell
Rabbit or Poultry That are Exempt from Inspection Pursuant to RSA 143-A:15.
(a) Restaurants shall only offer uninspected poultry or rabbits from poultry
producers or rabbit producers that meet the requirements of He-P 2313.
(b) Restaurants shall maintain receipts of purchase of uninspected poultry or
uninspected rabbits for 90 days, which include the following information:
47
(1) The date of purchase;
(2) The name of the poultry producer or rabbit producer;
(3) The address of the producer; and
(4) The phone number of the producer.
(c) The restaurant shall label any menu item containing uninspected poultry or
uninspected rabbits in font at least 10 point, and in a color that provides clear
contrast to the background, and which states the following: “This product has been
raised and processed on a New Hampshire farm and is exempt from state and
federal inspection.”
Severability:
To the extent that any provisions of this policy conflict with state law, the state law
shall prevail.
Approved this 25th day of September, 2017
Don Clement, Chairman Julie Gilman
Anne Surman, Vice Chair Dan Chartrand
Kathy Corson, Clerk
48
APPENDIX
RULE STATUTE RULE IMPLEMENTS
He-P 2301.01 RSA 143-A; RSA 143-A:3
He-P 2302.01 RSA 143-A:4; RSA 143-A:5; RSA 143-A:12, II
He-P 2302.02 RSA 143-A:5-a
He-P 2303.01 RSA 143-A:9, V
He-P 2304.01 RSA 143-A:6, I, V
He-P 2304.02 RSA 143-A:4, II; RSA 143-A:6, I-V
He-P 2304.03 RSA 143-A:6, I-V
He-P 2304.04 RSA 143-A:9, I; RSA 143-A:12, II
He-P 2304.05 RSA 143-A:6, V; RSA 143-A:9, I-a; RSA 143-A:13, V
He-P 2304.06 RSA 143:3; RSA 143-A:9, V
He-P 2304.07 RSA 143:3; RSA 143-A:9, V
He-P 2304.08 RSA 143-A:6; RSA 143-A:9, V
He-P 2304.09 RSA 143-A:6; RSA 143-A:9, V
He-P 2304.10 RSA 143-A:6; RSA 143-A:9, V
He-P 2304.11 RSA 143-A:6; RSA 143-A:9, V
He-P 2304.12 RSA 143-A:9, V
He-P 2304.13 RSA 143-A:9, V
He-P 2304.14 RSA 143-A:9, V
He P 2304.15 RSA 143-A:9, V
He-P 2305.01 RSA 143:4; RSA 143-A:6
He-P 2305.02 RSA 143:4; RSA 143-A:6
He-P 2305.03 RSA 143:4; RSA 143-A:6
He-P 2306.01 RSA 143:5-a; RSA 143-A:6; RSA 143-A:7; RSA 143-
A:9-a, I
He-P 2306.02 RSA 143:7-a; RSA 143-A:10-a
He-P 2306.03 RSA 143-A:6; RSA 143-A:7; RSA 143-A:9-a, I
He-P 2306.04 RSA 143-A:9, IV-c
He-P 2306.05 RSA 143-A:4; RSA 143-A:6; RSA 143-A:11
He-P 2306.06 RSA 143:5-a; RSA 143-A:9, V
He-P 2307.01 RSA 141-C:9, II; RSA 143:5
He-P 2307.02 RSA 141-C:6, III
He-P 2308.01 – He-P
2308.03
RSA 143-A:9, V
He-P 2309.01 – He-P
2309.05
RSA 143-A:9, V
He-P 2310.01 – He-P
2310.05
RSA 143-A:12-13
He-P 2311.01 – He-P
2311.05
RSA 143:29

Dated: February 17, 2017
Created by the E911 Committee
CHAPTER 14 ASSIGNING STREET NAMES AND NUMBERS
1401 Purpose
In accordance with RSA 231:133 and 231:133-a, the Selectmen of the Town of
Exeter hereby establish the following ordinance in order to develop a more uniform
street naming and street addressing system throughout the Town of Exeter to
enable people to locate addresses effectively for providing emergency services
and deliveries.
1401.1 Enforcement
Either the Building Inspector or Fire Department, or their designees, shall
enforce the provisions of this section. The Planning Board shall inform all
subdivision applicants of the provisions of this ordinance. A Certificate of
Occupancy shall not be issued until the provisions of this ordinance are
complied with.
1401.2 Street Names
Whenever a name is assigned to any new street, highway or right-of-way, or a
change is made in the name of an existing street, highway or right-of-way, the
Board of Selectmen shall make a return of the same to the Town Clerk, who
shall make a record of a new name or name change, and shall forward a copy
of such record to the Commissioner of Transportation, in accordance with the
requirements of RSA 231:133, or as the same may be subsequently amended.
In accordance with RSA 231:133, the Board of Selectmen may change the
name of any such street, highway, or right-of-way at any time when in its
judgment there is occasion for so doing. The Board of Selectmen may also
change the name of a private street, highway, or right-of-way when the name
change is necessary to conform to the requirements of the enhanced 911
telecommunications system.
In the process of assigning names to any street, highway, or rights-of-way, the
Selectmen shall apply the following guidelines to the extent practical:
a. All proposed names to streets, highways, or rights-of-way or a change
in the name shall be reviewed by the E911 Committee prior to a vote by
the Selectmen. The E911 Committee shall provide the Selectmen with
their written recommendation for Selectmen consideration. No proposed
name that receives a negative review by the E911 Committee shall be
utilized. The new street, highway, or right-of-way name recommended
by the E911 Committee shall be provisional until such time it is adopted
by the Selectmen.
b. No name shall be assigned to a street, highway, or right-of-way which
Dated: February 17, 2017
Created by the E911 Committee
shall duplicate the name of any other proposed or existing street,
regardless of the use of the suffix “street”, “avenue”, “way”, “lane”, drive,
or the like.
c. All proposed street, highway, or right-of-way names shall be
substantially different so as not to be confused in sound or spelling with
present names.
d. All proposed street, highway, or right-of-way names shall not include first
or last names, unless special exemptions are recommended by the
E911 Committee and approved by the Board of Selectmen.
e. The extension of a street, highway, or rights-of-way shall have the same
name as the existing street, highway, or rights-of-way name. (for
example, River Street Extension shall be River Street).
The Planning Board shall have the authority to assign a provisional name to all
streets, highways, or right-of-ways shown upon a subdivision or site plan being
considered for approval by the Planning Board, provided that no such
provisional name shall be assigned to such street, highway, or right-of-way until
such time as the Planning Board shall have followed the procedures set forth
herein.
The E911 Committee, may, from time to time, recommend a name change to
the Board of Selectmen when the name change is necessary to conform to the
enhanced 911 telecommunications system.
Changes to any existing street, highway, or right-of-way shall be provisional
only until such time as such name change is adopted by the Board of
Selectmen after posting of notice and holding of a public hearing. No public
hearing shall be required where the affected property owner(s) voluntarily
consent to their street, highway, or right-of-way being renamed as indicated by
Town records.
1401.3 Street Numbers
Pursuant to RSA 231:133, the Building Inspector or the Fire Department of the
Town of Exeter, or their designees, shall have the authority to assign numbers
to all existing or proposed residential and/or commercial structures and/or to
vacant lots. In assigning numbers, the Building Inspector, Fire Department, or
their designees shall employ the following criteria:
a. Even numbers shall be assigned to the right side of the street and the left side
shall be given odd numbers.
b. For every ten (10) feet of right-of-way frontage within the business district, there
shall be an individual number assigned and every door shall have its own
number. The business district shall be all structures located on either side of
Dated: February 17, 2017
Created by the E911 Committee
Water Street and the section of High Street between the Exeter River and the
intersection with Portsmouth Avenue. This provision may be applied in other
areas of Town outside the business district if deemed appropriate by the E911
Committee.
c. Separate numbers should be assigned to the entrance of a duplex or
townhouse.
d. Multi-unit structures shall receive one number with the units numbered in
accordance with the following:
i. Large multi-unit structures sub-addresses should numeric with the
first number in the sub-address indicating the floor of the unit or at a
minimum, some other type of floor designator. For example, in these
buildings, units on the first floor would receive sub-addresses
between 101 and 199; units on the second floor receive subaddresses
between 201 and 299. Basement floors should receive a
floor designator of B with sub-addresses between 01 and 99.
ii. Exception: On a case by case basis row houses, strip malls, or
downtown congested storefronts may be addressed at the front door
of each adjoining unit, and each unit treated as its own independent
building rather than part of a multi-unit structure.
e. Subordinate designation, such as half-numbers and alphabetical suffixes, shall
not be used.
f. For every fifty (50) feet of right-of-way frontage outside of the business district,
there shall be an individual number assigned.
g. The beginning of the street shall be at the end which intersects with a collector
street and, so far as possible, shall be the end closest in distance to String
Bridge.
Existing numbering patterns for existing streets, highways, or right-of-ways,
which do not comply with the provisions herein, may be assigned new numbers
by the Building Inspector, Fire Department, or their designees, as necessary to
conform to the requirements of the enhanced 911 telecommunications system.
The alteration of existing numbers by the Building Inspector, Fire department,
or their designees, shall be provisional only until such time as such alteration
is adopted by the Board of Selectmen after posting of notice and holding of a
public hearing. No public hearing shall be required where the affected property
owner(s) voluntarily consent to their property being renumbered as indicated
by Town records.
The owner of any building or structure shall affix an assigned number to his
mailbox, if any, and building or structure within thirty (30) days of written notice
Dated: February 17, 2017
Created by the E911 Committee
from the Town.
The E911 Committee, may, from time to time, recommend changes to an
existing numbering pattern to the Board of Selectmen when the change is
necessary to conform to the enhanced 911 telecommunications system.
1401.4 Location and Size
a. Street signs on roadways to be maintained by the Town shall conform to the
standards established by the Public Works Department.
b. Building numbers shall be at least 3.5" and of contrasting color to the mounting
surface and be in clear view from the public way that serves the building. If the
structure is too far from the road to be read by emergency personnel, a post or
similar device will be mounted at the curb line with the building number. All
building numbers shall be numerical and shall not be written out as a word (for
example “5” shall not be “Five”).
c. Businesses located within a block, shopping center or other configuration
where no number is apparent at the rear shall have numbers posted on or near
the rear exit(s).
1410 Penalty
Any person that remains in violation of this Chapter after thirty (30) days of
receiving written notice of said violation, shall be punishable by a fine of not more
than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each day the violation continues thereafter .
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 1 of 47
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1500 Purpose and Definitions .................................................................................... 3
1501 Use of Public Sewers Required ...................................................................... 11
1502 Sewer Connection Permits and Fees .............................................................. 12
1503 Connections to Sanitary Sewer ....................................................................... 13
1504 New Sewers or Sewer Extensions .................................................................. 17
1505 Variances ........................................................................................................ 18
1506 Powers of Assessment and Collection ............................................................ 18
1507 Restrictions on Discharge to Sewers .............................................................. 19
General Prohibitions .............................................................................................19
Specific Prohibitions..............................................................................................19
Additional Prohibitions ..........................................................................................20
Spills .....................................................................................................................21
Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards ........................................................21
Local Discharge Restrictions .................................................................................22
Best Management Practices .................................................................................24
Special Agreements ..............................................................................................24
Dilution .................................................................................................................25
Mass Based Limitations ........................................................................................25
Town’s Right of Revision ......................................................................................25
1508 Pretreatment of Wastewater ........................................................................... 26
Pretreatment Facilities ..........................................................................................26
Town Review and Approval ..................................................................................26
Grease, Oil, and Grit Interceptors .........................................................................26
Additional Pretreatment Measures ........................................................................28
Monitoring Facilities ..............................................................................................28
Accidental Discharge/Slug Control Plans ..............................................................29
Best Management Practices Plans .......................................................................29
1509 Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit (IDP) Application ............................. 30
Wastewater Characterization ................................................................................30
Permit Requirement ..............................................................................................30
State Indirect Discharge Request..........................................................................31
Permitting – Existing Connections .........................................................................31
Permitting – New Connections ..............................................................................31
Permit Application Contents ..................................................................................31
Signatories and Certification .................................................................................32
Hauled Wastewater ..............................................................................................32
1510 Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit Issuance .......................................... 32
Decisions ..............................................................................................................32
Duration ................................................................................................................32
Contents ...............................................................................................................32
Appeals.................................................................................................................33
Modifications .........................................................................................................34
Transfer ................................................................................................................34
Termination ...........................................................................................................34
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 2 of 47
Reissuance ...........................................................................................................35
Regulation of Waste Received from Other Jurisdictions ........................................35
1511 Reporting Requirements ................................................................................. 35
Periodic Compliance Reports ................................................................................35
Reports of Changed Conditions ............................................................................35
Reports of Slugs or Potentially Adverse Discharges .............................................36
Reports from Other Users .....................................................................................36
Notice of Violation / Repeat Sampling and Reporting ............................................36
Discharge of Hazardous Waste ............................................................................37
Analytical Requirements .......................................................................................37
Sample Collection .................................................................................................37
Timing ...................................................................................................................38
Recordkeeping......................................................................................................38
1512 Powers and Authority of Inspectors ................................................................ 38
1513 Confidential Information / Public Participation ................................................. 39
1514 Enforcement and Penalties ............................................................................. 40
Notice of Violation .................................................................................................40
Compliance Schedule Development .....................................................................40
Best Management Practices Plan Development ...................................................41
Show Cause Orders..............................................................................................41
Compliance Orders ...............................................................................................41
IDP Termination ....................................................................................................41
Termination of Discharge ......................................................................................42
Emergency Suspensions ......................................................................................42
Recovery of Expenses ..........................................................................................42
Penalties (Fines) ...................................................................................................42
Civil Penalties .......................................................................................................43
Criminal Penalties .................................................................................................43
Nonexclusive Remedies .......................................................................................43
1515 Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations ................................................. 44
Upset ....................................................................................................................44
Prohibited Discharge Standards ...........................................................................44
Bypass ..................................................................................................................45
1516 Conflict of Ordinance ...................................................................................... 46
1517 Interpretation of Requirements ........................................................................ 46
Interpretation ........................................................................................................46
Appeals.................................................................................................................46
1518 Modifications ................................................................................................... 46
1519 Bell and Flynn Agreement (Agreement terminated 12/19/94) ......................... 46
1520 Oak Haven Sewer District (Agreement terminated 04/03/95) ......................... 46
1521 Ordinance in Force ......................................................................................... 47
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 3 of 47
CHAPTER 15 SEWER REGULATIONS
1500 Purpose and Definitions
The rules and regulations herein set forth for the maintenance and operations of the Exeter
Municipal Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) established by the Selectmen of the Town
of Exeter as necessary or desirable for the efficient operation of said POTW and for
accomplishing the purposes of RSA 231, as amended, and for the protection of the health and
safety of the people of Exeter and for accomplishing the purposes of RSA 147 and RSA 485-A,
as amended.
Pursuant to RSA 149-I and RSA 147, or revisions thereto, and every other authority thereto
enabling, the Selectmen of Exeter enact and ordain the following Rules and Regulations.
Acronyms - The following acronyms, when used in these regulations, shall have the following
designated meanings:
• BOD - Biochemical Oxygen Demand
• CFR - Code of Federal Regulations
• COD - Chemical Oxygen Demand
• EPA - United States Environmental Protection Agency
• gpd - gallons per day
• IDP - Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit
• mg/L - milligrams per liter
• NHDES - New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services
• NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
• POTW - Publicly Owned Treatment Works
• RSA New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated
RSA 147 - Public Health / Nuisances; Toilets; Drains; Expectoration; Rubbish and
Waste
RSA 149-I - Public Health / Sewers
RSA 231 - Transportation / Cities, Towns and Village District Highways
RSA 31:39 - Towns, Cities, Village Districts, And Unincorporated Places / Powers
and Duties of Towns, Purpose and Penalties
RSA 485-A - Water Management and Protection / Water Pollution and Waste
Disposal
RSA 595-B - Proceedings in Criminal Cases / Administrative Inspection Warrants
• TSS - Total Suspended Solids
• U.S.C. - United States Code
• °F , °C - degrees Fahrenheit, degrees Celsius
Definitions – Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
and phrases used in these regulations shall be as follows:
Authorized Representative of the User:
1. If the user is a corporation:
a. The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in
charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar
policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or
b. The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities,
provided, the manager is authorized to make management decisions that govern
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 4 of 47
the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty
of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct
other comprehensive measures to assure long-term compliance with
environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are
established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for
control mechanism requirements; and where authority to sign documents has
been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate
procedure
2. If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor,
respectively.
3. If the user is a federal, State, or local governmental facility: a director or the highest official
appointed or designated to directly oversee the operation and performance of the activities
of the government facility, or their designee.
4. The individuals described in paragraphs (1) through (3), above, may designate another
authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the
individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the
discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the user,
and the written authorization is submitted to the Town.
Best Management Practices (BMPs): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices,
maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the pollutant control
prohibitions of these regulations. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating
procedures and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or
drainage from raw materials storage.
Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD): The quantity of oxygen expressed in milligrams per liter,
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures (as
prescribed in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater") in five (5) days at 20 degrees Centigrade.
Building Sewer: The connection between the tap at the Town sanitary sewer and the owner's
source of wastewater, and shall include all the pipe fittings and couplers necessary to make the
connections (including those portions located in the public right of way.)
Bypass: The intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a pretreatment or
wastewater treatment facility.
Categorical Pretreatment Standard: Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits
promulgated by EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1317) that applies to a specific category of industrial users and that are found in 40 CFR,
Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471.
Cleanout: A means for inserting cleaning tools, for flushing, or for inserting an inspection light
into sewers at bends.
Composite Sample: The sample resulting from the combination of individual wastewater
samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either flow or time.
Conservative Pollutant: A pollutant that is presumed not to be destroyed, biodegraded,
chemically transformed, or volatilized within the POTW. Conservative pollutants introduced to a
POTW ultimately exit the POTW solely through the POTW’s effluent and biosolids. Most metals
are considered conservative pollutants.
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 5 of 47
Dilution: Any increase in the use of water as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with a limitation on the discharge of pollutants.
Director: The Public Works Director who is the person designated by the Town to supervise the
operation of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by these
regulations, or a duly authorized representative.
Domestic Wastewater: See “Sanitary Sewage.”
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA):The United States Environmental Protection Agency
or, the Region 1 Water Management Division Director, or other duly authorized official of the
agency.
Easements: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
Equalization: The process of combining wastewaters to dampen fluctuations in flow or pollutant
discharges prior to release to the sanitary sewer or pretreatment facilities. Equalization is
normally accomplished in sumps, holding basins, ponds, or tanks.
Excessive: Amounts or concentrations or a constitution of a wastewater which, in the judgment
of the Director:
1. May cause damage to the Town wastewater treatment process;
2. May be harmful to a wastewater treatment process;
3. Cannot be removed in the Town treatment works to the degree required to meet the
limiting stream classification standards of the receiving water and/or EPA effluent
standards;
4. May otherwise endanger life, limb or public property;
5. May constitute a nuisance.
Floatable Oil: Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from
wastewater by treatment in an approved pre-treatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered
free of floatable oil if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the
collection system.
Force Main: A pipe or conduit constituting a part of the POTW where pumping is required;
providing a connection from a pump station to a pump station or gravity sewer, with limited
access from individual properties.
Garbage: Animal and vegetable waste from the domestic and commercial handling, preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
Grab Sample: A sample that is taken from a wastestream without regard to the flow in the
wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes.
Gravity Sewer: Any pipe or conduit constituting a part of the POTW used or usable for
wastewater collection purposes in which wastewater flows by gravity with no pumping required.
Grease: That material removed from a grease interceptor or grease trap serving a restaurant or
other facilities requiring such a device. Also means volatile and non-volatile residual fats, fatty
acids, soaps, waxes and other similar materials.
Human Excrement and other Putrescible Material: The liquid or solid matter discharged from
the human intestinal canal or other liquid or solid waste materials that are likely to undergo
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 6 of 47
bacterial decomposition; provided, however, that these terms shall not include garbage as
defined by RSA 485-A, or revisions thereto.
Improved Property: Any property located within the Town upon which there is erected a
structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or
animals and from which structure wastewater shall be or may be discharged.
Industrial Establishment: Any room, group of rooms, building or other enclosure used or
intended for use in the operation of one (1) business enterprise for manufacturing, processing,
cleaning, laundering or assembling any product, commodity or article and from which any
industrial wastewater, as distinct from Sanitary Sewage, shall be discharged.
Industrial User (or User): A person who discharges industrial wastewater to the sanitary sewer
of the Town.
Industrial Waste: Any liquid, gaseous or solid waste substance from any process or from
development of any natural resource by industry, manufacturing, trade, or business.
Industrial Wastewater: Any wastewater that contains industrial waste, as distinct from sanitary
sewage or unpolluted water.
Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit (IDP): The written permit between the Town and an
industrial user that discharges wastewater to the POTW, which outlines the conditions under
which discharge to the POTW will be accepted.
Instantaneous Maximum Allowable Discharge Limit: The maximum concentration of a
pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or
composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the
sampling event.
Interference: A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from
other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge
processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the Town's NPDES permit
(including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of biosolids
use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits
issued thereunder, or any more stringent State or local regulations: Section 405 of the Clean
Water Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any State regulations contained in any State biosolids
management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air
Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act;
and the 40 CFR Part 503 Standards for Sewage Sludge Use and Disposal.
Living Unit: Any portion of a dwelling consisting as a minimum: kitchen facilities, sanitary
facilities and sleeping quarters for one family or user.
Local Limits: Specific, enforceable numerical limits on the types and quantities of pollutants that
may be discharged to the POTW. Local limits are established by the Town and are distinct from
State and federal limitations on the discharge of industrial wastewater to the POTW.
May: Is allowed to (permissive); see also “Shall”.
Medical Waste: A waste that is generated or produced as a result of diagnosis, treatment, or
immunization of human beings or animals, medical research, or production or testing of bacteria,
viruses, spores, discarded live and attenuated vaccines used in human health care or research.
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 7 of 47
Examples include isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products,
pathological wastes, chemotherapy wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical
wastes and specimens, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, trauma scene wastes, sharps
waste and dialysis wastes.
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit: A permit issued pursuant
to Section 402 of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342).
Natural Outlet: Any channel for the passage of surface or groundwater into a watercourse, pond,
ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater.
Nonconservative Pollutant: A pollutant that is presumed to be destroyed, biodegraded,
chemically transformed, or volatilized within the POTW, to some degree.
Noncontact Cooling Water: Water used for cooling that does not come into direct contact with
any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product and is not degraded in
quality by mixing with or addition of industrial waste or pollutants other than heat.
Owner: Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or partial, or possession of
any improved property.
Pass Through: A condition that exists when a discharge contains substances or their reaction or
degradation products that exit the POTW in quantities or concentrations that, alone or in
conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any
requirement of the Town's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation.
Person: Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, association, society,
corporation, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or other legal entity; or their
legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, State, and local
governmental entities.
pH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration of a solution, expressed in
Standard Units. Solutions with pH values greater than 7 are basic (or alkaline); solutions with pH
values less than 7 are acidic.
Pharmaceutical Waste: Means a prescription drug, as defined by RSA 318:1, XVII, or a
nonprescription or proprietary medicine, as defined by RSA 318:1, XVIII, which is no longer
suitable for its intended purpose or is otherwise being discarded.
Pollutant: Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, garbage, wastewater
treatment sludges, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive
materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural
and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS,
turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).
Pollution Prevention: The use of processes, practices or products that reduce or eliminate the
generation of pollutants and wastes or that protect natural resources through equipment or
technology modifications; process or procedure modifications; reformulation or redesign of
products; substitution of raw materials; and improvements in housekeeping, maintenance,
training, or inventory control. The term "pollution prevention" does not include any practice that
alters the physical, chemical, or biological characteristics or the volume of a hazardous
substance, pollutant, or contaminant through a process or activity that itself is not integral to and
necessary for the production of a product or the providing of a service.
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 8 of 47
Pretreatment: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the
alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such
pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or
biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the
concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.
Pretreatment Requirement: Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment
imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard.
Pretreatment Standard or Standard: Prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment
standards, and local limits.
Private Sewer: Any collector system installed in a private road (not Town accepted) and/or as
part of a private subdivision. "Private Sewers" remain the property of the developers, other
private parties or their assigns. Until they are accepted by the Town through acceptance of the
private party who caused it to be constructed or its successors. "Private Sewers" shall be
constructed according to the Public Works Department's Standard Specifications for Construction
of Public Utilities in Exeter, NH.
Properly Shredded Garbage: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food
that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half (1/2) inch
(1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.
Public Sewer: A generic term for a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater, stormwater,
groundwater, subsurface water, or unpolluted water from any source, which is controlled by a
governmental agency or public utility.
Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW): A “treatment works,” as defined by Section 212 of
the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §1292) that is owned by the Town. This definition includes any
devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of
sanitary sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes the sewers, pipes, and
other conveyances that convey wastewater to the Town’s wastewater treatment facility. The term
also means the municipality that has jurisdiction over discharges to and the discharges from such
a treatment works.
Receiving Waters: Any watercourse, river, pond, ditch, lake, aquifer or other body of surface or
groundwater receiving discharge of wastewater.
Sanitary Sewage: Wastewater consisting solely of normal water-carried household and toilet
wastes or waste (such as human excrement and gray water [showers, dishwashing operations,
etc.]) from sanitary conveniences of residences, commercial buildings, and industrial plants, as
distinct from industrial wastewater and unpolluted water. See also: Industrial Wastewater.
Sanitary Sewer: A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, together with minor quantities of
ground, storm, and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally.
Screening Level: A numerical value for a pollutant concentration above which actions are
initiated to evaluate, prevent or reduce adverse environmental or health and safety impacts. A
screening level may be adjusted upward or downward within an IDP to account for site-specific
conditions at the point of discharge and administered as a local limit.
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 9 of 47
Septage: Any liquid, solid, or sludge pumped from chemical toilets, vaults, septic tanks, or
cesspools or other holding tanks, which have received only sanitary sewage.
Sewer: Ageneric term for a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater (including industrial
wastewater, sanitary sewage, or storm water, or groundwater, or subsurface water, or unpolluted
water) from any source.
Shall: Is required to (mandatory). See also "May.”
Significant Industrial User: Means an industrial user that meets one or more of the following
criteria (except as provided in paragraph 6 below):
1. Is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40
CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N;
2. Discharges an average of 10,000 gallons per day or more of industrial wastewater;
3. Discharges industrial wastewater which contributes 5 percent or more of the hydraulic or
organic loading to the Wastewater Treatment Facility;
4. Discharges medical/infectious waste, pharmaceutical waste, or radiological waste (unless
exempted by the Town under paragraph (6) of this definition); or
5. Is designated as such by the Town as having a reasonable potential for adversely
affecting the POTW’s operation or performance or for violating any pretreatment standard
or requirement.
6. Upon determining that a user meeting the criteria in paragraphs 3 or 4 of this definition
has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating
any pretreatment standard or requirement, the Town may at any time, on its own initiative
or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in
40 CFR 403.3(v)(3), determine that such user should not be considered a significant
industrial user
Significant Noncompliance (SNC): An industrial user is in significant noncompliance if its
violation meets one of the following criteria:
1. Chronic violations. A pattern of violating a numeric pretreatment standard or
requirement, including instantaneous limits (any magnitude of exceedance) sixty-six
percent (66%) or more of the time in a 6-month period;
2. Technical Review Criteria (TRC violations). Thirty-three percent (33%) or more of the
measurements exceed the same numeric pretreatment standard or requirement,
including instantaneous limits, by more than the TRC factor in a 6-month period [The
TRC factor is 1.4 for BOD, TSS, oil & grease and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH.];
3. For pH monitoring, excursions shall be considered significant noncompliance when:
a. An individual excursion from the allowable range of pH values exceeds 60 minutes;
or
b. An excursion occurs that the Town believes has caused, alone or in combination
with other discharges, interference or pass-through; or endangered the health of the
POTW personnel or the general public.
4. Any other discharge violation that the Director believes has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering
the health of POTW personnel or the general public;
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 10 of 47
5. Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to
the environment, or has resulted in the Director's exercise of emergency authority to halt
or prevent such a discharge;
6. Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule
milestone contained in an IDP or enforcement order for starting construction, completing
construction, or attaining final compliance;
7. Failure to provide within forty-five (45) days after the due date, any required reports,
including baseline monitoring reports, IDP applications, reports on compliance with
categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports
on compliance with compliance schedules;
8. Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
9. Any other violation(s) or group of violations, which may include a violation of Best
Management Practices, that the Director determines will adversely affect the operation or
implementation of the local pretreatment program.
Slug: Means:
1. Any discharge of water or wastewater that, in concentration of any given constituent or in
quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes, more
than five (5) times the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration or flow during normal
operation;
2. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration that could cause a violation of the prohibited
discharge standards in Section 1507 of these regulations]; or
3. Any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental
spill or a non-customary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause
Interference or Pass Through, or adversely affect the collection system and/or
performance of the POTW.
State: The State of New Hampshire.
Storm Drain or Storm Sewer: A drain or sewer which carries storm and surface waters and
drainage, but excludes wastewater and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted water.
Stormwater: Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and
resulting therefrom, including snowmelt.
Suspended Solids or Total Suspended Solids: Total suspended matter that either floats on
the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater or other liquids and that is removable by
laboratory filtering as prescribed in "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater" and that is referred to as that fraction not soluble in water. Also referred to as nonfilterable
residue.
Town: The Town of Exeter, Rockingham County, New Hampshire, a municipality of the State of
New Hampshire, acting by and through its Selectmen or in appropriate cases, acting by and
through its authorized representatives.
Unpolluted Water: Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water
that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by
discharge to the POTW.
User (or Industrial User): A person who discharges industrial wastewater to the sanitary sewer
of the Town.
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 11 of 47
Wastewater: The spent water of a community. Any combination of the liquid and water-carried
wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, governmental facilities, and
institutions, whether treated or untreated that is contributed to the POTW.
Wastewater Treatment Facility: That portion of the POTW that is used to provide treatment of
sanitary sewage and industrial wastewater.
1501 Use of Public Sewers Required
Pursuant to the provisions of RSA 147:8, and 147:11, and any other authority thereto enabling,
the owner of any improved property benefited, improved, served or accommodated by any sewer,
or to which any sewer is available, shall connect such improved property thereto in such manner
as the Town may require, within ninety (90) days after notice to such owner from the Town to
make such connection, for the purpose of discharge of all sanitary sewage and industrial
wastewater from such improved property into the POTW, subject to such limitations and
restrictions as shall be established herein or otherwise shall be established by the Town from
time to time. Each such owner shall, within the same time limit, cease and desist from all further
discharge of sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes into any other conduit or pre-existing
system whether privately or publicly owned.
1501.1. All sanitary sewage and industrial wastewater from any improved property, after
connection of such improved property to the POTW as required under Section 1501,
shall be conducted into a sanitary sewer, subject to such limitations and restrictions as
shall be established by these regulations or otherwise shall be established by the
Town, from time to time.
1501.2. No person shall place or deposit, or permit to be placed or deposited, upon public or
private property within the Town of Exeter, any sanitary sewage or industrial
wastewater in violation of Section 1501.
1501.3. No person shall discharge or permit to be discharged to any natural outlet within the
Town, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastewater, and/or pollutant in violation of
Section 1501, except where suitable treatment has been provided which is satisfactory
to the Town, and the NHDES.
1501.4. No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle shall be used and
maintained at any time upon any improved property which has been connected to the
POTW or which shall be required under Section 1501 to be connected to the POTW.
The use of portable chemical toilets is allowed at construction sites and for other
temporary purposes provided the wastes are properly disposed off site.
1501.5. No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle at any time shall be
connected to the POTW.
1501.6. No person shall discharge into any public sewer of the Town, or into any fixture that
thereafter discharges into any public sewer, any waste or substance until all applicable
approvals and permits have been obtained.
1501.7. Except as specifically designated by the Town with reference to some particular sewer,
sanitary sewers shall be used only for the conveyance and disposal of sanitary
sewage, and for industrial wastewaters that are not objectionable as hereinafter
provided. No sanitary sewer shall be used to receive and convey or dispose of any
storm or surface water, subsoil drainage, or unpolluted water. No industrial wastewater
shall be directed to a sewer that is not connected to the POTW.
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 12 of 47
1501.8. No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway
drains, or other surface runoff, ground water or unpolluted water to a building sewer or
building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer
unless such connection is approved by the Town for purposes of disposal of polluted
surface drainage.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to storm sewers, if
available, or to a natural outlet approved by the Town. Unpolluted industrial cooling
water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the Town, the
NHDES and EPA to a storm sewer, if available, or an approved natural outlet.
1501.9. If the intended or designated use of any particular sewer or drain and allowable
discharge thereto is unclear, the Director will consider the pertinent facts and make a
determination. This determination shall be final and binding.
1502 Sewer Connection Permits and Fees
1502.1. No person shall uncover, repair, connect, make any opening into or use, alter or disturb
in any manner any Sewer or any part of the POTW without first executing an
"Application for Sewer Service Work" from the Public Works Department and paying all
applicable fees.
All work must be performed and completed in accordance with all applicable
regulations by persons who are: 1) certified and employed by firms that hold a valid
"Utility Pipe Installers" license, or 2) with special permission of the Public Works
Director, a residential building owner doing work for themselves, at their residence.
Utility pipe installers shall maintain minimum insurance coverage in accordance with
Selectmen's Policy 96-05.
1502.2. There shall be charges in all areas of the Town for a sewer tie-in or connection permit
for single and multi-residential living units; for commercial establishments; and for
establishments producing industrial wastes. Application for a permit must be made at
the office of the Water and Sewer Billing during its normal working hours. A permit fee
shall be paid for a single residential and commercial service and higher permit fee shall
be paid for multi-dwelling or industrial service. These fees will be charged in
accordance with a Schedule of Charges for Sewer Service which the Town may adopt
from time to time.
1502.3. A permit fee shall be paid for each sewer service connection permit in those instances
where the Town has already installed the building sewer to the street line. This charge
will be charged in accordance with a Schedule of Charges for Sewer Service which the
Town may adopt from time to time. In all other cases, the full cost of the connection
shall be borne by the applicant.
Permits will be issued only to qualified utility pipe installers licensed to lay pipes in the
Town, and homeowners qualified under section 1502.1. Permits are not transferable.
Permits will not be issued until the applicant has filed a layout plan showing the location
of existing service connection, house location and route of sewer service, and said
layout has been approved by the Town.
Permits shall be subject to revocation when any of the rules and regulations contained
herein are not being followed.
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 13 of 47
If the work under the permit is not completed within ninety (90) days, renewal of the
permit must be obtained at the then-in-effect fee for the permit, less any amount
previously paid.
1502.4. Licenses to connect building sewers to the sanitary sewer will be issued to experienced
and competent contractors. Licenses must be renewed annually on January 1. The
fee for such license will be in accordance with such schedule of charges as the
Selectmen may adopt from time to time and shall be payable to the Town. Said
licenses shall be obtained at the office of the Public Works Director.
1502.5. No person, firm or corporation shall excavate any town-maintained street, roadway,
sidewalk, parking lot, or right-of-way without a valid digging permit (Town Ordinance
504). An individual permit is required for each road cut.
1502.6. Any person proposing a new discharge into the system or a substantial change in the
volume or character of pollutants that are being discharged into the system shall notify
and obtain written approval from the Director at least sixty (60) days before the
proposed change or connection. Proposed new discharges from residential or
commercial sources involving loading exceeding 50 population equivalents (5,000
gallons per day average flow), any new industrial wastewater, or any alteration in either
flow or waste characteristics of greater than twenty percent (20%) of existing industrial
wastes that are being discharged into the POTW, and that could cause interference
with the POTW or have an adverse affect on the receiving water or otherwise endanger
life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance, shall be approved by the NHDES
Water Division. Approvals for industrial wastewater shall be obtained in accordance
with Section 1509 of these regulations.
1503 Connections to Sanitary Sewer
Except as otherwise provided in this section, each improved property shall be connected
separately and independently with the sanitary sewer through a building sewer. Grouping of
more than one building sewer shall not be permitted, except under special circumstances and for
good sanitary reasons or other good cause shown, and then only after special permission of the
Director, in writing, shall have been secured and subject to such files, regulations, and
specifications governing such grouping as may be prescribed by the Director. In addition to these
regulations, the Town of Exeter Department of Public Works is hereby authorized to develop and
implement specifications addressing the construction of public utilities within the Town.
1503.1. The owner will initially construct each building sewer, and all costs and expenses of
construction of the building sewer, including connection to the structures served, shall
be borne by the owner of the improved property to be connected; and such owner shall
indemnify and save harmless the Town, its officers and agents, from all loss or damage
that may be occasioned, directly or indirectly, as a result of construction of a building
sewer on the owner’s premises or its connection to the sanitary sewer. After the initial
construction of the building sewer, the owner shall thereafter be obligated to pay all
costs and expenses of operation, repair and maintenance and of reconstruction (if
needed) of the building sewer beginning at the sanitary sewer and ending at the
building. Every building sewer shall be maintained in a sanitary and safe operating
condition by the owner.
If Town personnel are called out to work on a sewer and it is subsequently determined
that the problem was on the owner’s building sewer, the owner will reimburse the Town
for all costs associated with the service call.
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 14 of 47
1503.2. If the owner of any building located within the Town and benefited, improved, served or
accommodated by any public sewer, or to which any public sewer is available, after
ninety (90) days notice from the Town, in accordance with Section 1501, shall fail to
connect such building as required, the owner shall be in violation of these regulations
and the Town may make such connection and may collect from such owner the costs
and expenses thereof by such legal proceeding as may be permitted by law. The Town
shall have full authority to enter on owner's property to do whatever is necessary to
properly drain the improved property into the public sewer.
1503.3. If the owner of any building located within the Town shall fail or refuse, upon receipt of
a notice of the Town, in writing, to remedy any unsatisfactory condition with respect to a
building sewer within forty-five (45) days of receipt of such notice (except this time
period may be reduced as necessary to protect the health and safety of the residents of
the Town), the Town may remedy any unsatisfactory condition with respect to a
building sewer and may collect from the owner the costs and expenses thereof by such
legal proceedings as may be provided by law. The Town shall have full authority to
enter on the owner's property to do whatever is necessary to remedy the unsatisfactory
condition.
1503.4. A building sewer shall be connected to the sanitary sewer at the place designated by
the Town.
1503.5. The connection of the building sewer into the sanitary sewer shall conform to the
requirements of the current building and plumbing code, NHDES Env-Wq 704.13, and
the Town’s Standard Specifications for Construction of Public Utilities in Exeter, New
Hampshire.
Pipe and fittings to be used in the work shall be only SDR 35 poly-vinyl chloride (PVC)
ring tight joints, , (4 inches or more in diameter for single family residence and small
commercial uses; 6 inches minimum for multifamily use and larger commercial uses;
size shall be approved by the Director.)
In general, sewer services will not be allowed to have more than two (2) angle points,
or a total angular deviation of 180 degrees, unless a variance is granted by the Town.
A cleanout shall be installed at each angle point and/or every one hundred (100) ft.
length where the sewer service extends more than 300 feet. The Town may require the
installation of manholes subject to its approval.
All building sewers shall be laid in an envelope of washed screened gravel with not less
than 6 inches of said materials all around the barrel of the pipe. Maximum stone size
shall be 3/4 inch. The Town strongly recommends the installation depth to be minimum
of 4.0 feet from finished grade. All pipe and fittings shall be laid to a minimum slope of
1/4 inch per foot unless otherwise approved by the Town. The Town requires the use of
a backwater/one-way valve in the building sewer.
Line and grade of the pipe and fittings shall be controlled by the use of a transit or by
the use of batter boards and string lines set for this purpose. Batter boards shall not
exceed a distance of 30 feet apart unless otherwise allowed by the Town. Line and
grade are to be established by the contractor subject to the approval of the Town.
Whenever possible, the building sewer should be brought to the building at an elevation
above the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to
permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain
may be lifted by a Town-approved means at the owner's expense and discharged to
the building sewer.
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 15 of 47
No person shall connect a building sewer to a manhole unless permission is granted, in
writing, from the Director.
The centerline of a building sewer at the point of connection shall enter the top half of
the sanitary sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall be made and the connection of a building
sewer to the sanitary sewer shall be made secure, watertight, and gas tight by the use
of a “saddle”, appropriate in size to the receiving sewer line, and shall be acceptable to
the Town. A KOR-N-SEAL boot shall be provided where sewers are to be connected
to manhole structures. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials
shall be approved by the Director before installation.
1503.6. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings when they are
found, on examination by the Town, to meet all requirements of these ordinances.
1503.7. No structure shall be connected to the sanitary sewer system unless there is a vent
pipe extending to a point above the roof and properly vented or otherwise vented as
per applicable codes and code enforcement offices in a manner approved by the
Director. Vents shall be installed by the owner in all buildings as approved by the
Building Inspector/Code Enforcement Officer. No person shall obstruct the free flow of
air through any drain or soil pipe.
1503.8. A backwater valve shall be installed on all new sewer services entering the Town’s
sanitary sewer to prevent backflow from the public sewer from entering the facility or
building. Backwater valves shall be sized and installed in accordance with the most
current adopted State of New Hampshire plumbing code, and with the approval of the
Town Building Inspector/Code Enforcement Officer. Backwater valves shall be located
and installed so their working parts are readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection and shall be maintained by the Owner(s) at the Owners expense, in a
continuous, efficient, operating condition at all times.
1503.9. An interior clean-out fitting shall be provided at the discretion of the Director for each
building sewer at a readily accessible location, preferably just inside the basement wall.
The fitting shall contain a forty-five degree (45o) branch with a removable watertight
plug, and positioned so that sewer cleaning equipment can be inserted to clean the
building sewer. Buildings and mobile homes without foundations shall have a clean-out
installed on the outside.
1503.10. The Director shall maintain a record of all connections made to public sewers and
drains and all repairs and alterations made to building connections or drains connected
to or discharging into public sewers and drains of the Town or intended to so discharge.
All persons concerned shall assist the Director in securing data needed for such
records.
1503.11. When any sanitary sewer is to serve a school, hospital, or similar institutional or public
housing, or is to serve a complex of industrial or commercial buildings, or which in the
opinion of the Director, will receive sanitary sewage or industrial wastewater of such
volume or character that frequent maintenance of or access to said building sewer and
sanitary sewer is anticipated, then such building sewer shall be connected to the
sanitary sewer through a manhole. The Director shall determine if and where this type
of connection to the sanitary sewer is required. Connections to existing manholes shall
be made as directed by the Director. If required, a new manhole shall be installed in
the public sewer.
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 16 of 47
1503.12. When a building is demolished and not immediately replaced, the owner shall
adequately seal off the building sewer where it connects to the public sewer and shall
schedule an inspection by the Director.
1503.13. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with warning
signs, traffic controls, barricades, and lights so as to protect the public from hazard, and
in accordance the Standard Specifications for Construction of Public Utilities in Exeter,
New Hampshire. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in
the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Director, at the
expense of the owner(s). The contractor is responsible for all other notification
requirements, including DIGSAFE. It is the responsibility of the owner to coordinate
work with the Town by providing written notification of any proposed work prior to
initiation of excavation
1503.14. When ledge is encountered in the excavations, a permit must be obtained for the use of
explosives from the Town of Exeter Fire Department.
All blasting shall be done in accordance with the requirements of the appropriate
authorities; and by a person licensed in accordance with state laws.
1503.15. Trenches shall be backfilled and compacted and the street surface repaired in
accordance with requirements specified by the Town's "Procedures and Specifications
for Excavations on Town Streets or within Rights-of-Way."
Power shovels, bulldozers, loaders, trucks and other equipment shall not be operated
on or across sidewalks, beams, curbing, etc., until they have been properly protected
from damage by planking or other approved means. All damage resulting from the
utility pipe layer's operations shall be repaired by him.
In or adjacent to State Highways the owner shall obtain necessary permits from the
appropriate State Authority before the issuance, by the Town, of a sewer connection
permit. All work shall then be done in accordance with the requirements set forth in the
permit from the appropriate State Authority. Any costs in connection with obtaining
permits shall be borne by the applicant.
1503.16. The owner or their agent shall notify the Town when the building sewer is ready for
inspection and connection to the sanitary sewer (see Section 1503.17). The
connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the Director or
authorized representative. Requests for inspections of sewer service connections shall
be made to the Town forty-eight (48) hours in advance of the time any connection is to
be made, and only during normal working hours.
Inspections will ordinarily be made only during the normal working hours of the Town.
An additional charge may be made for inspections required after normal working hours.
Services in excess of 100 feet in length are subject to review and such other
requirements as may be found necessary to assure a functional connection.
In new construction, and where practicable in existing buildings when the common
sewer is sufficiently deep, service shall be laid directly, without deflections, from the
house plumbing vent stack to the connection provided at the common sewer.
Tunneling will not be allowed unless special permission for same is given.
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 17 of 47
Connection made to the building plumbing system shall be upstream of any septic
tanks or cesspools.
Upon connection of the building plumbing system to the sanitary sewer, existing septic
tanks and cesspools shall be completely filled with suitable material to the satisfaction
of the Town.
1503.17. No building sewer shall be covered until it has been inspected and approved by the
Town. If any part of the building sewer is covered before so being inspected and
approved, it shall be uncovered for inspection if deemed necessary at the cost and
expense of the owner of the improved property to be connected to the sanitary sewer.
This requirement shall also apply to repairs or alterations to building connections,
drains or pipes thereto.
In the event that such work is not ready for inspection or for any other reason may not
be approved by the Director, the property owner, builder, or developer shall be notified
that no further inspection of such work will be made until the property owner, builder, or
developer has paid a service charge in the amount as established by the Town to cover
the extra expense and cost to the Town. In the event of further disapproval of the
same work, a further surcharge shall be paid by the property owner, builder, or
developer in accordance with the Town’s charge schedule, before a further inspection
shall be made.
1504 New Sewers or Sewer Extensions
1504.1. When a property owner, builder, or developer proposes to construct sanitary sewers or
extensions to sanitary sewers in an area proposed for subdivision, the plans,
specifications, and method of installation shall be subject to the approval of the Director
in accordance with Section 1502.1. Said property owner, builder or developer shall pay
for the entire installation, including appropriate share of the cost of the wastewater
treatment facility, sewers, pumping stations, force mains and all other Town expenses
incidental thereto based on volume and plant capacity, as determined by the Town.
Each building sewer shall be installed and inspected pursuant to Section 1503 and all
application and inspection fees shall be paid by the applicant.
1504.2. Should the Town install a main line or extend a main line, by petition of the abutters,
the total cost shall be determined and the proportionate cost for each abutter shall be
assessed at the time of connection. If a property owner beyond the terminus of an
existing sewer main desires to connect to the line, the property owner shall extend the
main along the entire lot frontage owned by the potential customer (or to the limits of
gravity flow with the proper cover). Unless the extension is installed via a petition as
described above, all cost for this extension shall be borne by the property owner.
1504.3. Design and installation of sewers shall be in accordance with the NHDES
Administrative Rules Env-Wq 700 - Standards of Design and Construction for
Sewerage and Wastewater Treatment Facilities. Plans and specifications shall be
submitted to, and approval obtained from, the Director and the NHDES before
construction may proceed. The design of sewers shall anticipate and allow for flows
from all possible future extensions or developments within the immediate drainage
area, being compatible with the master sewerage plan adopted by the Town.
Plugged service wye fittings shall be provided along sewer extensions in locations
approved by the Director to accommodate future connections from existing unimproved
lots.
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 18 of 47
1504.4. Other components and materials of POTW installations such as pumping stations, lift
stations, or force mains shall be designed and approved in accordance with Section
1504.2 and shall be clearly shown and detailed on the plans and specifications
submitted for approval. When requested, the owner, builder, or developer of the
proposed installation shall submit to the Town all design calculations and other
pertinent data to supplement a review of the plans and specifications. Costs
associated with the engineer’s review of the plans and specifications, and any NHDES
design review fees shall be paid by the property owner, builder or developer.
1504.5. The installation of the sewer shall be subject to periodic inspection by the Director, and
the expense for this inspection shall be paid for by the owner, builder, or developer.
The Director's decisions shall be final in matters of quality and methods of construction.
The sewer, as constructed, must pass an exfiltration test approved by the Town before
any building sewer is connected thereto.
1504.6. As-built plans, specifications, and other required information shall be submitted to the
Town prior to acceptance of the sewer. The Town shall be notified at least thirty (30)
days in advance of the start of construction operations so that such inspection
procedures as may be necessary or required may be established. No sanitary sewers
will be accepted by the Town until such inspection of construction has been made as
will assure the Town of compliance with these regulations and any amendments or
additions thereto.
1505 Variances
1505.1. The Director, with the approval of the Town Manager, may allow reasonable variances
from the provisions of Sections 1501 through 1504 of these regulations, which will not
result in a violation of State or federal law, provided:
1. The owner shall be responsible for any variance fee as determined by the Board of
Selectmen;
2. The variance allowed is the least variance reasonable;
3. The variance will not cause undue harm or inconvenience to the Town, the POTW,
or the owner's neighbors;
4. The variance is justified by substantial reason; and
5. The variance is at the discretion of the Director.
1505.2. The owner shall apply for the variance in writing to the Director. The application shall
identify the name and address of the owner, the property in question, the specific
variance sought by the owner and a substantial reason justifying the variance. The
variance fee shall be paid with the application or the variance shall be deemed to have
been denied. The variance as issued shall identify any changes, limitations or
restrictions on the variance as applied for.
1506 Powers of Assessment and Collection
1506.1. The assessment and collection of the expense of operating and maintaining the POTW
shall be governed by the provisions of RSA 149-I:7-8, inclusive, and any other
applicable general laws. The Selectmen of the Town shall have all the powers granted
to Mayors and Boards of Aldermen thereunder with reference to establishing and
assessing sewer charges and/or rentals. These charges will be in accordance with
such Schedule of Charges for Sewer Service as the Selectmen may adopt from time to
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 19 of 47
time. This schedule may include special charges for wastewater flows from private
property where such flows do not originate from the Water System or are subject to a
surcharge. If wastewater discharged to the sewer is significantly greater than the water
consumed, the owner shall be required to install a recording flow meter. If wastewater
discharged to the sewer is significantly less than the water consumed, the owner may
be required to install a recording flow meter. The water consumption rate will be
computed by using the Town water meters quantity readings. If the owner has a
special circumstance where excessive amounts of water will not be disposed of to the
POTW, the owner may request, in writing to the Director, permission to install a second
meter as approved by the Director to accurately measure the amount of discharge into
the sewer. If a sewer utilizes a source of water other than the Town's system, the
owner may either 1) pay the rate designated for such use in the Schedule of Charges
for Sewer Service adopted by the Selectmen, or 2) request, in writing, permission to
install a meter on that source of water to measure the amount of discharge. Such
installation shall have the prior approval of the Director, and any retrofitting of plumbing
to prepare a place for a meter to be installed shall be at the sewer user's expense.
1507 Restrictions on Discharge to Sewers
1507.1. General Prohibitions. No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the
POTW any pollutant or wastewater that causes pass through or interference. These
general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to
categorical pretreatment standards or any other federal, State, or local pretreatment
standards or requirements.
1507.2. Specific Prohibitions. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
A. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid,
solid, gas, or any substance that can generate or form any flammable combustible
or explosive substance, fluid, gas, vapor or liquid when combined with air, water
or other substances present in sewers, including, but not limited to, wastestreams
with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods
specified in 40 CFR 261.21;
B. Any waters or wastes that contain toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in
sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or
interfere with any wastewater treatment process, that constitute a hazard to
humans or animals, that create a public nuisance, or that create any hazard at the
wastewater treatment facility, including but not limited to heavy metals, strong
acids, basic wastes and cyanides in the waste discharged to the public sewer;
C. Any waters or wastes having a pH less than 5.5 standard units, or greater than
11.5 standard units, as measured at the point of connection to the sanitary sewer
or other available monitoring location, or otherwise having any other corrosive
property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, or
personnel of the POTW or that contribute to or cause the wastewater treatment
facility influent pH to exceed 8.0;
D. Solid or viscous substances including water or wastes containing fats, wax,
grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, or containing substances that can
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°F and 150°F (0-65°C) in
quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or
other interference with the proper operation of the POTW, such as, but not limited
to, ashes, cinders, sand, mod, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 20 of 47
plastics, wood, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, and
paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage
grinders;
E. Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (e.g., BOD, COD), or chlorine
demand requirements released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration that, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause
interference with the POTW, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a
public nuisance, or cause pass through;
F. Wastewater containing such concentrations or quantities of pollutants that its
introduction to the POTW could cause a treatment process upset and subsequent
loss of treatment ability;
G. Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150°F (65°C), or that will inhibit
biological activity in the wastewater treatment facility resulting in interference, but
in no case wastewater that causes the temperature at the introduction into the
wastewater treatment facility to exceed 104°F (40°C);
H. Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in
amounts that will cause interference or pass through;
I. Any pollutants that result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within
the POTW in a quantity that may cause worker health and safety problems;
J. Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the
Director;
K. Any medical/infectious waste, pharmaceutical waste, or radiological waste except
as specifically authorized in an IDP;
L. Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the wastewater
treatment facility's effluent or biosolids to fail a toxicity test; and
M. Any hazardous waste listed or designated by the NHDES under Env-Hw 400.
1507.3. Additional Prohibitions. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the
following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes unless specifically
authorized by the Director in an IDP:
A. Wastewater that imparts color that cannot be removed by the treatment process,
such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which
consequently imparts color to the treatment facility’s effluent, thereby violating the
Town’s NPDES permit;
B. Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater that, either
singly or by interaction with other wastes, could be sufficient to create a public
nuisance, objectionable odors, or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the
public sewers for maintenance or repair;
C. Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff,
subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water,
noncontact cooling water, or otherwise unpolluted wastewater;
D. Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes;
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 21 of 47
E. Detergents, surface active agents, or other substances that might cause
excessive foaming in the POTW and/or cause a violation of the Town’s NPDES
permit;
F. Wastewater that could cause a reading on an explosion hazard meter at the point
of discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the POTW, of more than ten
percent (10%) of the Lower Explosive Limit;
G. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded (see definition of Properly
Shredded Garbage in Section 1500). The installation and operation of any
garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4) horsepower (0.76 hp
metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the Town;
H. Any quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a “slug” as defined
herein;
I. Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or wastes in the public
sewer system, release dangerous or noxious gases or objectionable odors, form
suspended solids that interfere with the collection system, or create a condition
deleterious to structures and treatment processes;
J. Household hazardous wastes including but not limited to paints, stains, thinners,
pesticides, herbicides, anti-freeze, transmission and brake fluids, motor oil and
battery acid;
K. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or concentrated
plating solutions whether neutralized or not;
L. Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar
objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine
requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite
wastewater at the wastewater treatment plant exceeds the limits established by
the Town for such materials;
M. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing
substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by
the Town as necessary, after treatment of the composite wastewater, to meet the
requirements of the State, federal, or other public agencies having jurisdiction
over such discharge to the receiving waters;
N. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or
reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or are amenable to
treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment facility effluent
cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge
to the receiving waters;
O. Any wastes which violate federal, State or local pre-treatment standards; and
P. Any wastes which cause the wastewater treatment facility to violate its NPDES
permit.
Q. Any water or waste that prevents beneficial use of sludge as defined in Env-Wq
802.05.
1507.4. Spills. Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be
processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW.
1507.5. Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards. The federal categorical pretreatment
standards are found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471. EPA shall be
the control authority for industrial users subject to federal categorical pretreatment
standards. As the control authority, industrial users are responsible to the EPA for
compliance with categorical pretreatment standards and the requirements of 40 CFR
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 22 of 47
Part 403. Categorical industrial users shall provide the Town with copies of any reports
to, or correspondence with EPA relative to compliance with the categorical
pretreatment standards.
The industrial user is responsible to determine the applicability of categorical
pretreatment standards. The user may request that EPA provide written certification on
whether the user is subject to the requirements of a particular category.
1507.6. Local Discharge Restrictions. All persons discharging industrial wastes into public or
private sewers connected to the Town's POTW shall comply with applicable federal
requirements and State standards for pretreatment of wastes (as amended) in addition
to the requirements of these regulations.
Local regulatory controls established by the Town for the discharge of pollutants of
concern as set forth herein (referred to as "local limits"), federal, and all State
pretreatment standards shall apply, whichever is most stringent. Pollutants of concern
include any pollutants that might reasonably be expected to be discharged to the
POTW in quantities that could pass through or interfere with the POTW, contaminate
the biosolids, or adversely impact human health or safety.
A. Maximum allowable industrial limitations:
For all users connected to sewer lines that are tributary to the Town’s POTW, the
Director will not issue permits that in combination with other industrial loads exceed the
values in the following table:
POLLUTANT MAXIMUM
ALLOWABLE
INDUSTRIAL
LOADING (lb/day)
POLLUTANT MAXIMUM
ALLOWABLE
INDUSTRIAL
LOADING (lb/day)
Arsenic 0.048 Mercury 0.021
Cadmium 0.02 Molybdenum BMPs (1)
Chromium (III and VI) 1.0 Nickel 0.55
Copper 1.8 Selenium 0.06
Cyanide 0.10 Silver 0.07
Lead 0.39 Zinc 0.59
(1) The capacity associated with the molybdenum allowable loading is almost completely utilized by
backgrounds levels present in the wastewater collection system. Best Management Practices will be
required limiting the addition of molybdenum to wastewater discharges as an alternative to enforcement of
a numerical value.
All mass loading limitations for metals represent total metals, regardless of the valance
state, or the physical or chemical form of the metal. To administer these allowable
loadings through IDPs, the Director may impose concentration-based limitations, or
mass limitations in accordance with Section 1507.10. For industrial users, the values
written into IDPs for the above pollutants shall apply at the end of the industrial
wastestream and prior to dilution with non-industrial wastewaters.
Unless specifically identified in an IDP, an industrial user is not allowed to discharge
the locally limited pollutants at concentrations significantly greater than background
concentrations.
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 23 of 47
Daily concentration (or mass loading) is the concentration (or mass) of a pollutant
discharged, determined from the analysis of a flow-composited sample (or other
sampling procedure approved by the Director) representative of the discharge over the
duration of a 24-hour day or industrial operating schedule of less than 24 hours.
B. Screening Levels: Screening levels are numerical values above which actions
are initiated to evaluate, prevent or reduce adverse impacts on the POTW, the
environment, and/or human health and safety. The Town monitors industrial sources of
conservative pollutant-bearing discharges in comparison to established screening
levels, and authorization to discharge at greater concentrations may be granted subject
to the administrative procedures for managing mass loading limitations.
Screening levels for non-conservative pollutants are concentration-based values that, if
exceeded, represent a potential to compromise worker safety, create flammability or
chemical reactivity conditions in the collection system, or result in operational issues
such as excessive organic/solids loadings. Screening levels for non-conservative
pollutants are developed as needed using the methodology of the Town.
The pollutants in the following table (list is not all inclusive) are representative of
concentrations above which pollutants shall not be discharged to the POTW without the
approval of the Director.
POLLUTANT mg/L POLLUTANT mg/L
Ammonia (as Nitrogen) 20 Oil & Grease – EPA
Method 1664 HEM 350
Biochemical Oxygen
Demand (BOD) 276
Total Petroleum
Hydrocarbons - EPA
Method 1664 SGTHEM
100
Total Suspended Solids
(TSS) 306 Sulfate (Type I concrete
/ Type II concrete) 150 / 1,500
Sulfide 1.0 Chloride 1,500
VOLATILE ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Acetone 372 Fluorotrichloromethane 1.25
Acrylonitrile 0.482 Formaldehyde 1.47
Benzene 0.001 Hexachloroethane (PCA) 0.06
2-Butoxyethanol 367 Methyl ethyl ketone (MEK) 200 (1)
Carbon disulfide 0.007
Methyl isobutyl ketone
(MIBK) 36
Chlorobenzene 0.304 Methyl tert-butyl ether
(MTBE) 5.5
Chloroform 0.065 Methylene chloride 1.0
1,4-Dichlorobenzene 0.103 Tetrachloroethylene (PCE) 0.23
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 24 of 47
POLLUTANT mg/L POLLUTANT mg/L
1,1-Dichloroethane 1.74 Toluene 0.69
1,2-Dichloroethane 0.08 1,2,4-Trichlorobenzene 0.64
Trans 1,2-Dichloroethylene 2.06
1,1,1-Trichloroethane
(TCA) 2.7
1,2-Dichloropropane 3.0 Trichloroethene 0.32
1,3-Dichloropropene 0.01 Vinyl chloride
(chloroethene)
0.002
Di-isobutlyketone (DIBK) 8.0 Xylenes 1.4
Ethylbenzene 1.35 _ _
NOTE 1. The MEK limit is a hazardous waste criterion and may not be equal to or exceeded under any
circumstances.
If any of the screening levels are exceeded, repeat analysis may be required by the
Town to verify compliance or noncompliance with that screening level. If
noncompliance is indicated, then the industrial user may be required, at the discretion
of the Director, to conduct an appropriate engineering evaluation at the industrial user’s
expense to determine the potential impact of the discharge of this pollutant to the
Town's POTW or alternatively, to develop a pollution prevention plan specifically
addressing the pollutant that exceeds the screening level. This study or plan shall be
approved by and conducted under the supervision of the Town. Should the evaluation
indicate the impact to be unsatisfactory, the industrial user shall reduce the pollutant
concentration to a satisfactory level. If the evaluation supports development of an
alternate site-specific limitation, then the screening level may, at the discretion of the
Director, be adjusted as a special agreement for the industrial user and administered
as a permit limitation for the specific discharge.
If an industrial user proposes to discharge at concentrations greater than the
concentration-based screening level maintained by the Town, then the industrial user
may be required to conduct the evaluations described in the previous paragraph.
Should the evaluations support an alternate site-specific limitation, then the screening
level may, at the discretion of the Director, be adjusted as a special agreement for the
industrial user and administered as a permit limitation for the specific discharge.
1507.7. Best Management Practices. The Town may develop Best Management Practices
(BMPs) to implement Sections 1507.3 and 1507.6. Such BMPs shall be considered
local limits and pretreatment standards for the purposes of these regulations.
1507.8. Special Agreements. No statement contained in Section 1507 except for Sections
1507.1, 1507.2, and Section 1507.5 shall be construed as preventing any special
agreement or arrangement between the Town and any industrial user whereby an
industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the Town for
treatment provided that said agreements do not contravene any requirements of
existing federal or State laws, and/or regulations promulgated thereunder, are
compatible with any user charge system in effect, and do not waive applicable federal
categorical pretreatment standards. Special agreement requests may require submittal
of a best management practices plan that specifically addresses the discharge for
which a special agreement is requested.
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 25 of 47
1507.9. Dilution. No wastewaters, which otherwise will not meet the requirements of these
regulations, shall be diluted with river water or other unpolluted waters in order to
render the wastewater acceptable as meeting the requirements of these ordinances.
The Director may impose mass limitations on users to discourage the use of dilution to
meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the
imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
1507.10. Mass Based Limitations. Users implementing process changes may request that
compliance be determined based on mass limitations in lieu of concentration
limitations. Such mass-based limitations will be calculated from the permitted
concentration-based limitations and flows, and shall be equivalent to or less than the
mass discharge in effect at the time of the request. The intent of a mass-based limit is
to encourage and allow pollution prevention and/or water conservation measures that
might cause a facility to increase pollutant concentrations in their discharge even
though the total mass of the pollutant discharged does not increase, and may in fact
decrease. Decisions on granting requests for mass-based compliance limitations will
be based on user-specific information and current operating conditions of the POTW,
and will be at the discretion of the Director. Implementation of mass-based limitations
may not contravene any requirements of federal or State laws and/or regulations
implemented thereunder, and may not waive applicable federal categorical
pretreatment standards.
1507.11. Town’s Right of Revision. The discharge standards and requirements set forth in
Section 1507 are established for the purpose of preventing discharges to the POTW
that would harm either the public sewers, wastewater treatment process, or equipment;
would have an adverse effect on the receiving stream; or would otherwise endanger
lives, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance.
To meet these objectives, the Director may, from time to time, review and set more
stringent standards or requirements than those established if, in the Director’s opinion,
such more stringent standards or requirements are necessary to meet the above
objectives. In forming this opinion, the Director may give consideration to such factors
as the quantity of waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sewers, the wastewater treatment process employed, capacity of
the wastewater treatment facility, degree of treatability at the wastewater treatment
facility, pollution prevention activities, and other pertinent factors. The limitations or
restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or wastewaters discharged to the
sanitary sewer shall not be exceeded without the approval of the Director.
The Director shall allow affected industrial users reasonable time to comply with any
changes to the local limits. The conditions and schedule for compliance shall
accompany the written notification of amended local limits.
Users implementing process changes may request that compliance be determined
based on mass limitations in lieu of concentration limitations. Such mass-based
limitations will be calculated from the permitted concentration-based limitations and
flows, and shall be equivalent to or less than the mass discharge in effect at the time of
the request. The intent of a mass-based limit is to encourage and allow pollution
prevention and/or water conservation measures that might cause a facility to increase
pollutant concentrations in their discharge even though the total mass of the pollutant
discharged does not increase, and may in fact decrease. Decisions on granting
requests for mass-based compliance limitations will be based on user-specific
information and current operating conditions of the POTW, and will be at the discretion
of the Director. Implementation of mass-based limitations may not contravene any
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 26 of 47
requirements of federal or State laws and/or regulations implemented thereunder, and
may not waive applicable federal categorical pretreatment standards.
1508 Pretreatment of Wastewater
The Town shall determine the quantity and quality of all industrial wastes which can be properly
received by the POTW and treated at the wastewater treatment facility, in addition to the sanitary
wastewater from the Town.
1508.1. Pretreatment Facilities. If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in Section 1507 of this Ordinance, and which in the
judgment of the Town, may have a deleterious effect upon the POTW, processes,
equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute
a public nuisance, the Town may:
N. Reject the waters or wastes;
O. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public
sewers. If applicable or required, such pretreatment requirements will conform to
the requirements of the EPA;
P. Require control (e.g., equalization) over the quantities and rates of discharge;
and/or
Q. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes.
If the Director allows the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design
and installation of the systems and equipment shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Director and the State.
1508.2. Town Review and Approval. Where pretreatment or equalization of wastewater flows
prior to discharge into any part of the wastewater treatment system is required, plans,
specifications and other pertinent data or information relating to such pretreatment of
flow-control facilities shall first be submitted to the Town for review and approval. Such
approval shall not exempt the discharge or such facilities from compliance with any
applicable code, ordinance, rule, regulation or order of any governmental authority.
Any subsequent alterations or additions to such pretreatment or flow-control facilities
shall not be made without due notice to and prior approval of the Town.
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or
wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by
the owner at the owner’s expense.
1508.3. Fats, Oils, and Grease (FOG), and Grit Interceptors. Interceptors for oil, grease, grit or
other substances harmful or hazardous to the building drainage system, the public
sewer or POTW shall be provided at the owner’s expense when, in the opinion of the
Town, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in
excessive amounts, as described in 1507.2, or any flammable wastes, sand or other
harmful constituents as described in 1507.2 except that such interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type
and capacity approved by the Town, shall be located so as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning by the owner and inspection by the Town, and shall be
maintained by the owner(s) at the owner’s expense in a continuous, efficient operating
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 27 of 47
condition at all times. In the maintaining of these interceptors, the owner(s) shall be
responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured
material and shall maintain records of the dates, and means of disposal which are
subject to review by the Director. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials
not performed by owner(s) personnel must be performed by currently licensed waste
disposal firms.
Concentrated greases and oils from fryers, grill and stove grease accumulation traps,
and vent hoods shall be properly disposed or recycled and shall not be discharged to
the sewer.
All new food service establishments (including but not limited to restaurants, hotel
kitchens, hospital kitchens, school kitchens, bars, factory cafeterias and clubs) and any
other facility discharging fats, oil and grease above the effluent limits described in 1507
shall be served by:
A. An external FOG interceptor, subject to the Director’s approval, installed on a
separate building sewer line servicing kitchen flows and connected only to the
following fixtures or drains:
(i) pot sinks;
(ii) pre-rinse sinks;
(iii) any sink into which fats, oils, or grease are likely to be introduced;
(iv) soup kettles or similar devices;
(v) wok stations, rotisseries;
(vi) floor drains or sinks into which kettles may be drained;
(vii) automatic hood wash units;
(viii) dishwashers without pre-rinse sinks; and
(ix) any other fixtures or drains that are likely to allow fats, oils and grease to
be discharged.
The FOG interceptor serving the above shall be sized at 1,000 gallons or
greater and providing a minimum detention time of 24 hours.
B. If an external interceptor is not practical, FOG-bearing wastewaters shall be
served by an indoor automated grease recovery unit(s) (AGRUs) that separates
grease from the wastewater by active mechanical or electrical means, and are
subject to the Director’s approval and the following requirements,:
(i) An AGRU(s) shall be installed immediately downstream of each fixture or
multiple fixtures listed in subsection (A) of this section.
(ii) The AGRU shall be sized to properly pre-treat the measured or
calculated flows for all connected fixtures or drains.
(iii) The AGRU shall be constructed of corrosion-resistant material such as
stainless steel or plastic.
(iv) Solids shall be intercepted and separated from the effluent flow using an
internal or external strainer mechanism. This mechanism shall be an
integral part of the unit.
(v) The unit shall operate using a skimming device, automatic draw-off, or
other mechanical means to automatically remove separated fats and oils.
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 28 of 47
This automatic skimming device shall be either hard wired or cord & plug
connected electrically and controlled using a timer or level control. The
operation of the automatic skimming device shall be field adjustable.
The AGRU shall operate no less than once per day.
(vi) The AGRU shall be fitted with an internal or external flow control device
to prevent the exceedence of the manufacturer’s recommended design
flow.
(vii) The AGRU shall be located so as to permit easy access for
maintenance.
(viii) No fixture or drain other than those listed in subsection (A) of this section
shall be connected to the AGRU unless approved by the authorized
agent.
(ix) All AGRUs shall be designed and installed in accordance with the
manufacturer’s specifications.
Existing food service establishments undergoing significant renovation, or those
designated in sewer service areas experiencing problems, such as grease blockages,
may be required by the Director to install or upgrade existing FOG removal systems to
satisfy the requirements of these regulations.
1508.4. Additional Pretreatment Measures. Whenever deemed necessary, the Director may
require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain
wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points
of discharge, separate sanitary sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams,
and impose such other conditions as are deemed necessary to protect the POTW and
determine the user's compliance with the requirements of these regulations.
The Director may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and
maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control
facility to ensure equalization of flow. An IDP may be issued solely for flow
equalization.
1508.5. Monitoring Facilities. When required by the Town, the Owner of any property serviced
by a Building Sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control structure
together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the Building Sewer to
facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such structure, when
required, shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed in
accordance with plans approved by the Director. The structure shall be installed by the
owner(s) at the owner’s expense, and shall be maintained by the owner’s so as to be
safe and accessible at all times. All industries discharging into a public sewer shall
perform such monitoring of their discharges as the Town may reasonably require
including installation, use and maintenance of monitoring equipment, keeping records
and reporting the results of such monitoring to the Town. The failure of an industrial
user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the
user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. Such records
shall be made available upon request by the Town to other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharges to the receiving waters.
Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances shall, at the discretion of
the Director, install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter and
alarm.
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 29 of 47
1508.6. Accidental Discharge/Slug Control Plans. The Director may evaluate whether an
industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan or other action to control
Slug Discharges.
Each industrial user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited
materials or other wastes regulated by these regulations. Facilities to prevent
accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the
Owner or Operator's own cost and expense. When required by the Director, detailed
plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection and
conforming to the spill prevention control regulations of the EPA shall be submitted to
the Town for review. Review and acceptance of such plans and operating procedures
shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify its facility as
necessary to meet the requirements of these regulations. An accidental discharge/slug
control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:
A. Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges;
B. Description of stored chemicals;
C. Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of any accidental or slug
discharge as required by Section 1511.3 of these regulations; and
D. Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge.
Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage
areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of
plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment,
measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures
and equipment necessary for emergency response.
1508.7. Best Management Practices Plans. The Director may develop or require any person
discharging wastes into the POTW to develop and implement, at their own expense, a
Best Management Practices Plan (BMP Plan), also referenced as a pollution
prevention plan (i.e, BMPs for commercial kitchen clean-up to reduce FOG load to
grease interceptors). The Director may require users to submit as part of the BMP Plan
information that demonstrates adherence to the following elements:
Management Support. For changes to be effective, the visible support of top
management is required. Management's support should be explicitly stated and
include designation of a pollution prevention coordinator, goals, and time frames for
reductions in volume and toxicity of wastestreams, and procedures for employee
training and involvement.
Process Characterization. A detailed process waste diagram shall be developed that
identifies and characterizes the input of raw materials, the outflow of products, and the
generation of wastes.
Waste Assessment. Estimates shall be developed for the amount of wastes generated
by each process. This may include establishing and maintaining waste accounting
systems to track sources, the rates and dates of generation, and the presence of
hazardous constituents.
Analysis of Waste Management Economics. Waste management economic returns
shall be determined based on the consideration of:
A. Reduced raw material purchases;
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 30 of 47
B. Avoidance of waste treatment, monitoring and disposal costs;
C. Reductions in operations and maintenance expenses;
D. Elimination of permitting fees and compliance costs;
E. Reduced liabilities for employee/public exposure to hazardous chemicals and
cleanup of waste disposal sites.
Development of Best Management Practices Alternatives. Current and past best
management practices activities shall be assessed, including estimates of the reduction
in the amount and toxicity of waste achieved by the identified actions. Opportunities for
pollution prevention shall then be assessed for identified processes where raw
materials become or generate wastes. Technical information on pollution prevention
shall be solicited and exchanged, both from inside the organization and out.
Evaluation and Implementation. Technically and economically feasible pollution
prevention opportunities shall be identified and an implementation timetable with
interim and final milestones shall be developed. The recommendations that are
implemented shall be periodically reviewed for effectiveness.
Recordkeeping. Documentation demonstrating implementation or compliance with best
management practices shall be created, retained, and made available as required.
The review and approval of such pollution prevention plans by the Town shall in no way
relieve the user from the responsibilities of modifying their facilities as necessary to
produce a discharge acceptable to the Town in accordance with the provisions of these
regulations.
1509 Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit (IDP) Application
1509.1. Wastewater Characterization. When requested by the Director, a user must submit
information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within sixty (60) days of
the request. The Director is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may
periodically require users to update this information.
1509.2. Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit Requirement.
A. No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without
first obtaining an IDP from the Director, except that a significant industrial user
that has filed a timely and complete application pursuant to Section 1509.4 of
these regulations may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein.
B. The Director may require other users to obtain IDPs, or submit an application for
an IDP, as necessary to execute the purposes of these regulations.
C. Any violation of the terms and conditions of an IDP shall be deemed a violation of
these regulations and subjects the industrial discharge permittee to the
enforcement actions set out in Section 1514 of these regulations. Obtaining an
IDP does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and
State pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of
federal, State, and local law.
D. A permit fee will be assessed in accordance with the Selectmen’s tables of fees
and charges. All permittees will pay all Town costs to test, monitor, and report to
the EPA and NHDES as required by law for said permit conditions and
requirements.
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 31 of 47
1509.3. State Indirect Discharge Request. Any new industrial waste, or any alteration in either
flow or waste characteristics of greater than 20 percent of existing industrial wastewater
that is being discharged into the POTW, or that the Director believes could cause
interference with the POTW or have an adverse effect on the receiving water or
otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance, shall be
approved by the NHDES Water Division. Such approvals shall be obtained in
accordance with Section 1511.2 of these regulations.
1509.4. Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permitting – Existing Connections. Any user required
to obtain an IDP who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective
date of these regulations, and is not currently covered by a valid IDP, and who wishes
to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within sixty (60) days after said date,
apply to the Director for an IDP in accordance with Section 1509 of these regulations,
and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after one hundred
twenty (120) days of the effective date of these regulations except in accordance with
an IDP issued by the Director.
1509.5. Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permitting – New Connections. Any user required to
obtain an IDP who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must
obtain an IDP prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An
application for this IDP, in accordance with Section 1509.6 of these regulations, must
be filed at least ninety (90) days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin
or recommence.
1509.6. Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit Application Contents. When required by the
Town, persons subject to these rules shall submit an application for an IDP. Such
information may include some or all of the following:
A. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operators and
owners.
B. A list of all environmental permits held by or for the facility.
C. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and Standard
Industrial Classification of the operations carried out at such facility.
D. A listing of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility that are or
could accidentally or intentionally be discharged to the POTW, including usage
information and quantities released to the sewer.
E. An identification of the categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process.
F. An analysis identifying the nature and concentration of pollutants in the
discharge.
G. Site plans, floor plans, and details to show all major sources of industrial
wastewater and points of discharge.
H. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in
gallons per day, to the public sewer from regulated process streams and from
other streams.
I. A schedule of actions to be taken to comply with discharge limitations.
J. Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities.
K. Copies of Best Management Practices Plans, Slug Control Plans or other similar
plans that describe pollution prevention activities that may exist at the facility.
L. Additional information as determined by the Director may also be required.
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 32 of 47
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the
user for revision.
1509.7. Signatories and Certification. All IDP applications and user reports must be signed by
an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification
statement:
“I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared
under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that
qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on
my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly
responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my
knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are
significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations.”
1509.8. Hauled Wastewater. No septic tank wastes shall be disposed of in the wastewater
treatment facility or related structures.
1510 Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit Issuance
1510.1. IDP Decisions. The Director will evaluate the data provided by the industrial user and
may require additional information. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete IDP
application [or ninety (90) days in the case of an application for a new or increased
discharge requiring review and approval by the NHDES Water Division], the Director
will determine whether or not to issue an IDP. The Director may deny any application
for an IDP.
1510.2. IDP Duration. An IDP shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed three
(3) years for significant industrial users [five (5) years for other users] from the effective
date of the permit. An IDP may be issued for a period less than these intervals at the
discretion of the Director. Each IDP will indicate a specific date upon which it will
expire. IDPs shall be terminated upon cessation of operations or transfer of business
ownership, unless notification of such transfer is provided in accordance with Section
1510.6 of these regulations. All IDPs issued to a particular user are void upon the
issuance of a new IDP to that user.
1510.3. IDP Contents. An IDP shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably
necessary by the Director to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of
the water body receiving the wastewater treatment facility's effluent, protect human
health and safety, facilitate biosolids management and disposal, and protect against
damage to the POTW.
IDPs may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions:
A. Dates of IDP issuance and expiration, with a duration that in no event shall
exceed five (5) years;
B. A statement that the IDP is nontransferable without prior notification to the Town
in accordance with Section 1510.6 of these regulations, and provisions for
providing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing IDP;
C. Identification of applicable federal categorical pretreatment standards;
D. Self-monitoring, sampling, inspection, reporting, notification, and record-keeping
requirements. For pollutants to be monitored, these requirements shall include
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 33 of 47
sampling locations, sampling frequencies, and sample types based on these
regulations, and State and federal laws, rules and regulations;
E. For users with reporting requirements, such reports at a minimum shall require:
1. Periodic monitoring results indicating the nature and concentration of
pollutants in the discharge from the regulated processes governed by the
IDP and the average and maximum daily flow for these process units;
2. A statement as to whether the applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, identification
of additional operation and maintenance practices and/or pretreatment
systems that are necessary;
3. Submittal of any monitoring results performed in addition to the
requirements of the IDP using procedures prescribed in the permit; and
4. Appropriate supporting documentation for items 1 through 3 above.
F. A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment
standards and requirements;
G. Requirements to control Slug Discharges, if determined by the Director to be
necessary; and
H. Any applicable compliance schedule. This schedule may not extend the time for
compliance beyond that required by these regulations, and applicable State and
federal laws, rules and regulations.
I. Limitations on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge,
and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
J. Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or
construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or
prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW;
K. Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or
other special conditions including best management practices necessary to
adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges;
L. Development and implementation of Best Management Practices to control the
amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
M. The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the
wastewater discharged to the POTW;
N. Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling
facilities and equipment;
O. A statement that compliance with the IDP does not relieve the permittee of
responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and State pretreatment
standards, including those that become effective during the term of the IDP; and
P. Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Director to ensure compliance
with these regulations, and State and federal laws, rules, and regulations.
1510.4. IDP Appeals. Any person, including the user, may petition the Director to reconsider
the terms of an IDP within thirty (30) days of its issuance.
A. Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the
administrative appeal.
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 34 of 47
B. In its petition, the appealing person or user must indicate the IDP provisions
objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it
seeks to place in the IDP.
C. The effectiveness of the IDP shall not be stayed pending the appeal.
D. If the Director fails to act within thirty (30) days, a request for reconsideration shall
be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider an IDP, not to issue an IDP,
or not to modify an IDP shall be considered final administrative actions for
purposes of judicial review.
E. Aggrieved parties may appeal the conditions of the IDP in accordance with
Section 1517.2 of these regulations.
The filing of a request by the permittee for an IDP modification does not stay any IDP
conditions.
1510.5. IDP Modifications. The Director may modify an IDP for good cause, including, but not
limited to, the following reasons:
A. To incorporate any new or revised federal, State, or local pretreatment standards
or requirements;
B. To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes,
or wastewater volume or character since the time of IDP issuance;
C. A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or
elimination of the authorized discharge;
D. Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the Town
POTW, Town personnel, or the water quality in the receiving waters;
E. Violation of any terms or conditions of the IDP;
F. Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the IDP
application or in any required reporting;
G. Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards
pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
H. To correct typographical or other errors in the IDP; or
I. To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or
operator.
1510.6. IDP Transfer. IDPs may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee
provides at least sixty (60) days advance notice to the Director and the Director
approves the IDP transfer. The notice to the Director must include a written
certification by the new owner or operator that:
A. States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the
facility's operations and processes that generate wastewater to be discharged to
the POTW;
B. Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
C. Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing IDP.
Failure to provide the required advance notice of a transfer renders the IDP void as of
the date of facility transfer.
1510.7. IDP Termination. The Director may terminate an IDP for good cause as described in
Section 1514.6.
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 35 of 47
1510.8. IDP Reissuance. A user with an expiring IDP shall apply for reissuance of the IDP by
submitting a complete IDP application, in accordance with Section 1509.6 of these
regulations, a minimum of sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing
IDP. Under no circumstances shall the permittee continue to discharge without an
effective permit. An expired IDP will continue to be effective and enforceable until the
IDP is reissued if:
A. The industrial user has submitted a complete IDP application at least sixty (60)
days prior to the expiration date of the user's existing permit; and
B. The failure to reissue the IDP, prior to expiration of the previous IDP, is not due to
any act or failure to act on the part of the industrial user.
1510.9. Regulation of Waste Received from Other Jurisdictions.
A. If another municipality, or user located within another municipality, contributes
wastewater to the POTW, the Town shall enter into an intermunicipal agreement
with the contributing municipality.
B. Intermunicipal agreements must receive NHDES approval.
1511 Reporting Requirements
1511.1. Periodic Compliance Reports.
A. All Significant Industrial Users shall submit periodic reports as required, but not
less often than semiannually, indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants
in the discharge from the regulated processes governed by pretreatment
standards and the average and maximum daily flow for the reporting period. The
reports shall state whether the applicable categorical pretreatment standards and
effluent limitations are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional
operation and maintenance practices and/or pretreatment are necessary. In
cases where compliance with a Best Management Practice or pollution prevention
alternative is required, the industrial user shall submit documentation as required
by the Town or the applicable Standards to determine compliance status of the
user. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance
with Section 1509.7 of these regulations. Additional requirements for such reports
may be imposed by the Director.
B. All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge.
Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly
operated, kept clean and orderly, and maintained in good working order at all
times. The failure of a user to maintain its monitoring facility in satisfactory
working condition shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results
are unrepresentative of its discharge.
C. If a user subject to the reporting requirements in the previous paragraph of this
section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by these regulations,
using procedures prescribed in Sections 1511.7 and 1511.8, the results of this
monitoring shall be included in the report.
1511.2. Reports of Changed Conditions. Each user must notify the Director of any planned
significant changes to the user's operations or system that might alter the nature,
quality, or volume of its wastewater at least ninety (90) days before the change.
A. The Director may require the user to submit such information as deemed
necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submittal of an IDP
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 36 of 47
application under Section 1509.6 of these regulations and all information required
by the NHDES under the Env-Wq 303.10 Industrial Wastewater Discharge
Request rules.
B. Upon approval of the request by the Town, an Industrial Wastewater Indirect
Discharge Request Application may be submitted by the Town to the NHDES
Water Division based on information submitted by the user. All applicable NHDES
Water Division review fees shall be provided by the user.
C. Upon approval of the discharge request by the NHDES Water Division, the
Director may issue an IDP under Section 1510 of these regulations or modify an
existing IDP under Section 1510 of these regulations in response to changed
conditions or anticipated changed conditions.
D. For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited
to, flow increases of twenty percent (20%) or greater, and the discharge of any
previously unreported pollutants.
1511.3. Reports of Slugs or Potentially Adverse Discharges.
A. All industrial users shall telephone and notify the Director immediately of all
discharges that could cause problems to the POTW, including any slug loadings
as defined in Section 1500 of these regulations. This notification shall include the
location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and
corrective actions conducted by the user.
B. Within five (5) days of the unauthorized discharge, the industrial user shall, unless
waived by the Director, submit a written report fully describing the incident, the
pollutants involved, the cause of the discharge and the measures taken and to be
taken to prevent recurrence. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any
expense, loss, damage, or other liability that may be incurred as a result of
damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or
property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or
other liability that may be imposed pursuant to these regulations. This report must
be signed and certified in accordance with Section 1509.7 of these regulations.
C. A notice shall be permanently posted plainly visible to an industrial user’s
personnel responsible for managing wastewater discharges that instructs all
employees whom to call in the event of a spill, slug discharge, pretreatment upset
or bypass. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause such a
discharge to occur know of the required notification to the Director.
D. The permittee shall notify the Town immediately of any changes at its facility that
may affect the potential for a slug discharge. The Town may require the permittee
to develop or modify a Slug Control Plan or take other actions to control slug
discharges.
1511.4. Reports from Other Users. All non-significant users and users not required to obtain an
IDP shall provide reports as the Director may require.
1511.5. Notice of Violation / Repeat Sampling and Reporting. If sampling performed by an
industrial user indicates a violation (i.e., exceedance of a limit), the presence of a
previously unreported pollutant, or an exceedance of a screening level, the user shall
notify the Town within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the exceedance.
For violations (and unreported pollutants and screening level exceedances at the
discretion of the Town), the user shall also repeat the sampling and submit the results
as soon as possible but no later than thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the
violation, except that the industrial user is not required to resample if:
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 37 of 47
A. The industrial user performs sampling at least once per month, or
B. The Town performs sampling at the industrial user between the time when the
user performs its initial sampling and the time when the user receives the
noncompliant sampling results.
1511.6. Discharge of Hazardous Waste. Any discharge into the POTW of a substance that, if
otherwise disposed would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261 or are
hazardous wastes as defined in the NHDES Hazardous Waste Rules, is prohibited
unless permitted by applicable State of New Hampshire and federal permits, and that is
also approved by the Director.
1511.7. Analytical Requirements. All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics
of waters and wastes to which reference is made in these regulations shall be
determined in accordance with EPA approved methods published in the Code of
Federal Regulations, Title 40, Part 136 (40 CFR Part 136) or as may be revised.
Where 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the
pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed by using validated
analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the POTW or other parties.
A laboratory that is currently certified by the State of New Hampshire to perform the
requested tests shall perform all analyses. Complete copies of analytical laboratory
reports, including all relevant quality control data, shall be submitted as part of each
IDP application or report.
1511.8. Sample Collection.
A. Except as indicated in paragraph (B), below, the user shall collect wastewater
samples using 24-hour flow-proportional composite collection techniques. In the
event flow-proportional sampling is not feasible, the Director may authorize the
use of time-proportional sampling, or grab sampling where the user demonstrates
that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In
addition, grab samples may be required to demonstrate compliance with
instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limitations (e.g., screening levels
established to protect worker health and safety). A single grab sample may also
be used in place of multiple grabs or a composite sample with approval of the
Director when:
1. The effluent is not discharged on a continuous basis (i.e., batch
discharges of short duration), and only when the batch exhibits
homogeneous characteristics (i.e., completely mixed) and the pollutant can
be safely assumed to be uniformly dispersed;
2. Sampling is at a facility where the Director determines that a statistical
relationship can be established between previous grab samples and
composite data; and
3. The waste conditions are relatively constant (i.e., are completely mixed
and homogeneous) over the period of the discharge.
B. Samples for temperature, pH, cyanides, oil & grease, total phenols, sulfides, and
volatile organic compounds shall be obtained using grab collection techniques.
C. The industrial user is required to collect the number of grab samples necessary to
assess and assure compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements.
D. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136
and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a 24-hour
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 38 of 47
period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total
phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the
field; for volatile organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in
the laboratory.
E. Samples shall be collected by individuals who are properly qualified, through
verifiable training and experience, to perform the type of sampling required. The
integrity of all samples shall be ensured by following established chain-of-custody
practices for evidentiary samples. Sampling and chain-of-custody records shall
be maintained. Copies of chain-of-custody records shall be submitted as part of
each analytical report.
1511.9. Timing. Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked. For reports that are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility
serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall
govern.
1511.10. Recordkeeping. Users subject to the reporting requirements of these regulations shall
retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information
obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by these regulations and any
additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken
by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact
location, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) obtaining the
samples; chain of custody; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the
analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses.
These records shall remain available for a period of at least five (5) years. This period
shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or
the Town, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period
by the Director.
1512 Powers and Authority of Inspectors
1512.1. Duly authorized employees of the Town bearing proper credentials and identification
shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurements, sampling, copying of records and testing pertinent to discharge to the
POTW and the performance of any additional duties in accordance with the provisions
of these regulations.
1512.2. Duly authorized employees are authorized to obtain information concerning industrial
processes which have a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the
wastewater collection system. An industry may declare certain information confidential,
subject to the requirements in Section 1513 of these regulations.
1512.3. While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in Section
1512.1, above, duly authorized employees of the Town shall observe all safety rules
applicable to the premises, and the owner shall be held harmless for injury or death to
Town employees, and the Town shall indemnify the owner against loss or damage to
its property by Town employees and against liability claims and demands for personal
injury, or property damage asserted against the owner and growing out of the gauging
and sampling operation, except as such may be pulsed by negligence or failure of the
owner to maintain safe conditions.
1512.4. Where a user has security measures in force that require proper identification and
clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make and maintain all
necessary arrangements so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 39 of 47
Director will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific
responsibilities.
1512.5. The Director shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation
of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's
operations.
1512.6. The Director may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The
facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe
and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to
measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated in accordance with the
manufacturer’s recommendations (but at least annually) to ensure their accuracy.
Calibration records shall be maintained.
1512.7. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be
inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or
verbal request of the Director and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such
access shall be borne by the user.
1512.8. Unreasonable delays in allowing the Director access to the user's premises, sampling
or inspection sites, or pretreatment records shall be a violation of these regulations.
1512.9. The Director and/or other duly authorized employees of the Town, bearing proper
credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all private properties through
which the Town holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited
to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any
portion of the wastewater facilities lying within said easement. All entry and
subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the
terms of the duly negotiated easement, pertaining to the private property involved.
1512.10. If the Director has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part
thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a
violation of these regulations, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of
a routine inspection and sampling program of the Town designed to verify compliance
with these regulations or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall
public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the Director may obtain an
administrative inspection warrant under RSA 595-B.
1513 Confidential Information / Public Participation
1513.1. Information and data about a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, IDP
applications, IDPs, monitoring programs, and from Town inspection and sampling
activities, shall be available to the public without restriction unless the user specifically
requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Town, that the release of
such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production
entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable law. Any such request must be
asserted at the time of submittal of the information or data.
1513.2. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other “effluent data” as defined by 40
CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the
public without restriction.
1513.3. When requested and demonstrated by the industrial user furnishing a report that such
information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 40 of 47
trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the
public but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies
for uses related to these regulations, the NPDES program or pretreatment program,
and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report.
1514 Enforcement and Penalties
1514.1. Notice of Violation. The Town, upon being informed in writing of a possible violation of
these regulations or on its own initiative, shall make or cause to be made an
investigation of facts and an inspection of the premises where such violations may
exist. When investigation reveals evidence of any violation, or whenever the Director
finds that any person has violated or is violating these regulations, or a IDP or order
issued hereunder, the Director shall give written notice, either hand delivered or by
certified mail with receipt acknowledged, of such violation to the owner and the
occupant of such premises. The Town shall demand in such notice that such violation
be abated within some designated reasonable time. Within the time period specified in
the notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and
prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted to the
Director. Submittal of this plan in no way relieves the person of liability for any
violations occurring before or after receipt of the Notice of Violation.
If, after such notice and demand, such violation has not been abated within the time
specified, the Town shall institute appropriate action to prevent, correct, restrain or
abate any violation of the Ordinance. The Town or its agents have the authority to
enter the premises, cause the violation to be abated and recover any direct expenses.
Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the Director to take any action,
including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a
Notice of Violation.
1514.2. Compliance Schedule Development. The Director may require any user that has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of these regulations, an IDP or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to develop a
compliance schedule. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section shall comply
with the following conditions:
A. The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the
commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and
operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable
pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, retaining an
engineer, completing preliminary and final design plans, executing contracts for
major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and
conducting routine operation);
B. No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months;
C. The user shall submit a progress report to the Director no later than fourteen (14)
days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance
including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of
progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the action being taken by
the user to return to the established schedule; and
D. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress
reports to the Director.
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 41 of 47
1514.3. Best Management Practices Plan Development. The Director may develop or require
any user that has violated or continues to violate any provision of these regulations, an
IDP, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to
develop a Best Management Practices Plan acceptable to the Director in accordance
with Section 1508.7 of these regulations. The Best Management Practices Plan must
specifically address violation(s) for which this action was undertaken. The Best
Management Practices Plan shall be developed using good engineering judgment and
shall be submitted to the Director no later than sixty (60) days after the user was
notified of this requirement.
1514.4. Show Cause Orders. The Director may order any person that causes or contributes to
a violation of these regulations, IDP or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the Director and show cause
why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on
the person specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement
action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the person show cause why this
proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be
served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least
ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any person or
authorized representative of a user. Whether or not a duly notified person appears as
noticed, immediate enforcement action may be pursued. A show cause hearing shall
not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, executing any other action against the person.
1514.5. Compliance Orders. When the Director finds that a person has violated or continues to
violate the ordinance or a permit or order issued thereunder, the Director may issue an
order to the person responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified
time period, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities,
devices, or other related appurtenances have been installed and are property operated.
Orders may also contain such other requirements as might be reasonably necessary
and appropriate to address the noncompliance, including the installation of
pretreatment technology, additional self-monitoring, and management practices.
1514.6. IDP Termination. The Director may terminate a user’s IDP for good cause, including
but not limited to the following:
A. Violation of IDP conditions;
B. Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its
discharge;
C. Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater constituents and
characteristics;
D. Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the IDP
application;
E. Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection,
monitoring, or sampling;
F. Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
G. Tampering with monitoring equipment;
H. Failure to pay fines;
I. Failure to pay sewer charges or fees;
J. Failure to meet compliance schedules;
K. Failure to complete a wastewater survey;
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 42 of 47
L. Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted facility;
M. Discharging wastewater that presents an imminent hazard to the public health,
safety or welfare, or to the local environment; or
N. Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or this Ordinance or order
issued hereunder, or any applicable State or federal law.
1514.7. Termination of Discharge. Any user who violates a Section 1514.6 criteria, or fails to
cease and desist from any discharge of wastewater upon termination of their IDP for
that discharge, is subject to discharge termination. Such user will be notified of the
proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause
under Section 1514.4 of these regulations why the proposed action should not be
taken. Exercise of this option by the Director shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for,
taking any other action against the user.
1514.8. Emergency Suspensions. The Town may, after informal notice to a person discharging
wastewater to the POTW, immediately halt or prevent any such discharge reasonably
appearing to present an imminent endangerment to the health and welfare of the
public, or any discharge presenting, or which may present, and endangerment to the
environment, or which threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW.
A. Any person notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately terminate or
eliminate its wastewater discharge. In the event of a person's failure to
immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Director may
implement such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of
the sewer connection and entry on private property to halt such discharge, to
prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment
to any individuals. The Director may allow the person to recommence its
discharge when the person has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Director
that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings
in Section 1514.7 of these regulations are initiated against the person.
B. A person that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting
imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the
causes of the harmful contribution and the measures implemented to prevent any
future occurrence, to the Director prior to the date of any show cause or
termination hearing under Sections 1514.4 or 1514.7 of these regulations.
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any
emergency suspension under this section.
1514.9. Recovery of Expenses. Any person violating any of the provisions of these regulations
shall become liable to the Town for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the
Town, by reason of such violations.
1514.10. If any Person shall fail, or refuse, upon receipt of a notice of the Town, in writing, to
remedy any unsatisfactory condition with respect to a Building Sewer, within forty-five
(45) days of receipt of such notice, the Town may remedy any unsatisfactory condition
with respect to a Building Sewer and may collect from the Owner the costs and
expenses thereof by such legal proceedings as may be provided by law. The Town
shall have full authority to enter on the Owner's property to do whatever is necessary to
remedy the unsatisfactory condition. The 45-day notice period shall not apply to a
condition that threatens public health and/or safety.
1514.11. Penalties (Fines). When the Director of Public Works finds that a person has violated,
or continues to violate, any provision of this Ordinance, an IDP, or order issued
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 43 of 47
hereunder, or any other Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, the Director of Public
Works may fine such user in an amount not to exceed $1,000. (Ref. RSA 31:39 III)
Such fines shall be assessed on a per-violation, per-day basis. In the case of monthly
or other long-term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day
during the period of violation. The Director of Public Works is authorized to issue
citations seeking penalties and for initiating judicial proceedings for penalties that are
not paid.
Issuance of a penalty shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, implementing any
other action against a person.
1514.12. Civil Penalties. The Town may pursue any other or any combination of remedies for
enforcement of this ordinance available to it under applicable law. Each day in which
any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
A. Any person who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
Ordinance, an IDP, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement shall be liable to the Town for a maximum civil penalty of $10,000
per violation per day, as authorized by RSA 149-I:6, plus actual damages incurred
by the POTW. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge
limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation.
B. The Town may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other
expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and
monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the Town.
The Town shall petition the Court to impose, assess, and recover such sums.
C. In determining the amount of civil liability, the Court shall consider all relevant
circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the
violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained
through the violation, corrective actions implemented by the person, the
compliance history of the person, and any other factor as justice requires.
D. Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for,
implementing any other action against a person.
E. The Town shall give notice of the alleged violation to the NHDES within 10 days of
commencement of any action under this section. (Ref. RSA 149-I:6)
1514.13. Criminal Penalties. Any person who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this
Ordinance, an IDP, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement shall be subject to criminal action under prevailing sections of the criminal
code of the State of New Hampshire. The Director shall cooperate with all law
enforcement officials having jurisdiction over such criminal conduct in the event that a
prosecution is undertaken. Every separate provision violated shall constitute a
separate violation. Every day that a violation occurs shall be deemed a separate
violation. Additionally, any violation may be referred to the state for criminal
prosecution under its powers. (Ref. RSA 485-A:22 and RSA 485-A:5)
1514.14. Nonexclusive Remedies. The remedies provided for in these regulations are not
exclusive. The Town may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a
noncompliant person. The Town may pursue other action against any person ser
without limitation, including ex parte temporary judicial relief to prevent a violation of
these regulations. Further, the Town is empowered to pursue more than one
enforcement action against any noncompliant person
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 44 of 47
1515 Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations
1515.1. Upset.
A. For the purposes of this section, “upset” means an exceptional incident in which
there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with pretreatment standards
due to factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not
include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly
designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive
maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
B. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for
noncompliance with pretreatment standards if the requirements of paragraph (C),
below, are met.
C. A user who intends to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall
demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other
relevant evidence that:
1. An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; and
2. At the time of the upset, the facility was being operated in a prudent and
workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and
maintenance procedures;
3. The user has submitted the following information to the Director within
twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is
provided orally, a written submittal must be provided within five (5) days):
a. A description of the discharge and cause of noncompliance;
b. The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not
corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue; and
c. Action being implemented and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
D. In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an
upset shall have the burden of proof.
E. Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset
only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with pretreatment
standards.
F. A user shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to
maintain compliance with pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure
of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of
treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among
other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost,
or fails.
1515.2. Prohibited Discharge Standards. A user shall have an affirmative defense to an
enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in
Section 1507.1 of these regulations or the specific prohibitions in Section 1507.2 of
these regulations if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its
discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause
pass through or interference and that either.
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 45 of 47
A. A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance
with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference.
B. No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or
constituents from the user's prior discharge when the Town was regularly in
compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in
compliance with applicable biosolids use or disposal requirements.
1515.3. Bypass
A. For the purposes of this section,
1. “Bypass” means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any
portion of a user's treatment facility.
2. “Severe property damage” means substantial physical damage to
property, damage to the treatment facilities that causes them to become
inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources that can
reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe
property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in
production.
B. A user may allow any bypass to occur that does not cause pretreatment standards
or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to
assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of
paragraphs (C) and (D) of this section.
C. The user shall provide the following notifications for bypass events:
1. If a user is aware in advance of the need for a bypass, the user shall submit
prior notice to the Director, at least ten (10) days before the date of the
bypass, if possible;
2. A user shall submit verbal notice to the Director of an unanticipated bypass
that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within twenty-four (24) hours
from the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. A written submittal
shall also be provided within five (5) days of the time the user becomes
aware of the bypass. The written submittal shall contain a description of the
bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and
times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is
expected to continue; and steps implemented or planned to reduce,
eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The Director may waive
the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been
received within twenty-four (24) hours.
D. A bypass of the treatment system is prohibited, and the Director may initiate
enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:
1. The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe
property damage;
2. There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, including the use of
auxiliary treatment, or retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during
normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if
adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of
reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass that occurred during
normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
3. The user submitted notices as required under paragraph (C) of this section.
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 46 of 47
E. The Director may approve an anticipated bypass, subsequent to considering its
adverse effects, if the Director determines that it will satisfy the three conditions
listed in paragraph (D) of this section.
1516 Conflict of Ordinance
1516.1. If a provision of this Ordinance is found to be in conflict with any provision of zoning,
building, safety, health or other ordinance or code of the Town, the State of New
Hampshire, or the Federal Government existing on or subsequent to the effective date
of this Ordinance, that provision, which in the judgment of the Town establishes the
higher standard of safety and protection of health, shall prevail.
1516.2. The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence or provision of this Ordinance shall not
affect the validity of any other part of this Ordinance, which can be given effect without
such invalid part or parts.
1517 Interpretation of Requirements
1517.1. Interpretation. The provisions of this Ordinance with respect to the meaning of
technical terms and phrases, the classification of different types of sewers, the
regulations with respect to installing or constructing connections to sewers or drains,
and other technical matters shall be interpreted and administered by the Director acting
in and for the Town of Exeter, New Hampshire through the Board of Selectmen.
1517.2. Appeals. Any party aggrieved by any decision, regulation or provision under this
Ordinance, as amended, from time to time, shall have the right of appeal within thirty
(30) calendar days of said decision to the Director, who shall issue a decision within
thirty (30) calendar days. If said appeal is denied by the Director, then the aggrieved
party shall have the right to appeal to the Exeter District Court for equitable relief,
provided that said appeal is entered within thirty (30) calendar days from the issuance
of the decision of the Director.
1518 Modifications
The Town reserves the right to adopt, from time to time, additional rules and regulations as it shall
deem necessary and proper relating to connections with a sewer and the POTW, which additional
rules and regulations, to the extent appropriate, shall be a part of these regulations.
1519 Bell and Flynn Agreement (Agreement terminated 12/19/94)
1520 Oak Haven Sewer District (Agreement terminated 04/03/95)
Chapter 15 Sewer Regulations Town of Exeter, NH
Effective January 28, 2013 Page 47 of 47
1521 Ordinance in Force
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval, recording,
and publications as provided by law.
Duly enacted and ordained this 28th day of January 28, 2013 by the Board of Selectmen of the
Town of Exeter in Rockingham County, State of New Hampshire, at a duly noticed and duly held
session of the said Board of Selectmen.
Exeter, New Hampshire
By:











ADDITION TO CHAPTER 16 WATER SERVICE REGULATIONS TOWN OF EXETER, NH
EXETER TOWN ORDINANCES
1610 Water Use Restrictions
1610.1 The purpose of this ordinance is to ensure the use of water is regulated in a
manner the Town of Exeter Board of Selectmen (Board) deems to be in the
best interests of the Town of Exeter. The Board may use reasonable means
to protect, preserve and maintain the public health, safety and welfare when
a water supply shortage exists.
1610.2 The Town of Exeter adopts this - ordinance under its authority to regulate
public water systems under RSA 38:26 and to restrict the use of private wells
to water lawns under RSA 41:11-d.
1610.3 The requirements of this section shall apply to all water users with
connections receiving water from the Exeter Water Department and, under
state or federally declared drought conditions, all residential well users within
the Town.
1610.4 By definition, a water supply shortage is a situation when insufficient water is
available to meet the present or anticipated needs of the water system. A
water supply shortage usually occurs due to drought or a major infrastructure
failure.
1610.5 Upon declaration of a State of Water Supply Shortage or other water
emergency the Board shall be authorized to determine and implement
restrictions necessary to conserve and maintain adequate reserves of the
public water supply. Provided there is a declaration as noted above, the
following levels of progressive restriction will apply immediately after the
public notification period specified in 1610.6.
a. If the Board issues a Level 1 restriction, then
i. The public is requested to refrain voluntarily from landscape watering
and to limit the amount of water used outdoors for other purposes.
ii. Landscape watering shall not occur between the hours of 8 am and 7
pm.
b. If the Board issues a Level 2 restriction, then
i. Landscape watering by odd numbered addresses is allowed on odd
numbered days.
ii. Landscape watering by even numbered addresses is allowed on even
numbered days.
iii. Landscape watering shall not occur between the hours of 8 am and 7
pm.
CHAPTER 16 WATER SERVICE REGULATIONS TOWN OF EXETER, NH
c. If the Board issues a Level 3 restriction, then
i. Landscape watering by odd numbered addresses is allowed on
Mondays and Thursdays.
ii. Landscape watering by even numbered addresses is allowed on
Tuesdays and Fridays.
iii. Landscape watering shall not occur between the hours of 8 am and 7
pm.
If the Board issues a Level 4 restriction, then
i. Landscape watering is prohibited.
ii. The filling of swimming pools greater than 100 gallons capacity is
prohibited.
iii. Washing of streets, driveways, sidewalks or other impervious areas is
prohibited.
iv. Washing of vehicles or boats at a non-commercial facility shall be
prohibited.
1610.6 Notification of intent to implement water use restrictions by the Board due to a
water supply shortage shall be posted three days prior to effective date in two
public locations and published in a newspaper of general circulation within
the town of Exeter or by such other means reasonably determined to notify all
affected water users.
1610.7 The Board upon a determination that the water supply shortage no longer
exists may terminate a State of Water Supply Shortage. Public notification of
the termination of a State of Water Supply Shortage shall be given in
accordance with 1610.6.
1610.8 Exceptions to restrictions include the following
a. Hand irrigation of crops used for food by residents at a residential property
shall not be restricted.
b. Water to sustain animal life shall not be restricted.
c. Commercial car washes, cash crops, farms, flower shops or garden
centers shall not be restricted.
d. Despite the authority granted by 1610.2, orders imposing water use
restrictions shall not apply to uses that obtain water from sources other
than the public water supply, unless it can be clearly demonstrated that
the use of such water directly affects the public water supply. Note:
Municipalities have the authority to implement lawn watering restrictions in
accordance with RSA 41:11-d applicable to all water users (including
those using private wells) under state declared drought conditions.
1610.9 Any person failing to comply with the restrictions imposed pursuant to this
ordinance shall be subject to a fine and/or be subject to imposition of civil
penalties pursuant to RSA 38:26, II not to exceed $10,000 per day of such
CHAPTER 16 WATER SERVICE REGULATIONS TOWN OF EXETER, NH
violation. Recovered penalties shall be used as the Town of Exeter may
direct. In addition to the foregoing penalties, the Town of Exeter is authorized
to discontinue the furnishing of water where orders and restrictions have
been violated. Such discontinuance shall be made pursuant to RSA 38:31
and may be continued so long as there is evidence that the violations will
continue.
First violation: Written warning delivered to site of violation
Second violation: $100 fine
Third violation: $500 fine and discontinuance of water service.
All current fees will be applicable in addition to fines including but not limited to
fees for water shut-off and turn-on.


T
own of Exeter, N. H.
Zoning Ordinance
As amended through March 201 9
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
b
Table of Contents
Article 1. Authority and Purpose ................................................................1-1
1.1 Short Title ................................................................................................ 1-1
1.2 Purposes .................................................................................................. 1-1
Article 2. Definitions .................................................................................2-1
2.1 Interpretations .......................................................................................... 2-1
2.2 Definitions ................................................................................................ 2-1
Article 3. Establishment and Designation of Districts...................................3-1
3.1 Establishment of Districts ........................................................................... 3-1
3.2 Zoning Map .............................................................................................. 3-2
3.3 Interpretation of Boundaries ...................................................................... 3-2
Article 4. District Regulations ....................................................................4-1
4.1 Schedule of Regulations............................................................................. 4-1
4.2 Schedule I: Permitted Uses ....................................................................... 4-1
4.3 Schedule II: Density and Dimensional Regulations – Residential ................... 4-9
4.4 Schedule III: Density and Dimensional Regulations - Non-Residential…………4-10
4.5 Application of Regulations ........................................................................ 4-14
Article 5. General Regulations ...................................................................5-1
5.1 Non-Conforming Uses ................................................................................ 5-1
5.2 Special Exceptions ..................................................................................... 5-2
5.3 Existing Lot Regulations ............................................................................. 5-3
5.4 Height Regulations .................................................................................... 5-9
5.5 Yard Regulations ..................................................................................... 5-10
5.6 Off-Street Parking ................................................................................... 5-11
5.7 Sign Regulations ..................................................................................... 5-16
5.8 General Landscaping Regulations ............................................................. 5-30
5.9 Performance Standards ........................................................................... 5-30
Article 6. Supplementary use Regulations ..................................................6-1
6.1 Elderly Congregate Health Care Facilities – Standards .................................. 6-1
6.2 Junkyards ................................................................................................. 6-2
6.3 Junk Cars ................................................................................................. 6-3
6.4 Amusement Centers .................................................................................. 6-4
6.5 Sexually Oriented Business Uses ................................................................. 6-4
6.6 Essential Services ...................................................................................... 6-5
6.7 Retail Uses ............................................................................................... 6-5
6.8 Epping Road Strip Management Ordinance, C-3 District ................................ 6-6
6.9 Manufactured Housing Parks ...................................................................... 6-7
6.10 Home Occupations – Inside and Outside Residential Districts .................... 6-9
6.11 Gasoline and/or Automotive Service Stations ......................................... 6-10
6.12 Marinas, Docks and Piers ..................................................................... 6-11
6.13 Excavation of Earth Material ................................................................. 6-12
6.14 Industrial and Manufacturing Uses ........................................................ 6-12
6.15 Helicopter and Airport Ordinance .......................................................... 6-12
6.16 Healthcare District: .............................................................................. 6-15
6.17 Wind Energy Systems. ......................................................................... 6-16
6.18 Cemetery Regulations .......................................................................... 6-18
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
c
Article 7. Open Space Development ..........................................................7-1
7.1 Purpose .................................................................................................... 7-1
7.2 Objectives ................................................................................................ 7-1
7.3 Definitions ................................................................................................ 7-1
7.4 Procedure ................................................................................................. 7-2
7.5 Single Family Open Space Development ...................................................... 7-2
7.6 Multi-Family Open Space Development ....................................................... 7-3
7.7 General Regulations Governing Open Space Development ............................ 7-6
Article 8. Historic District .........................................................................8-1
8.1 General Administrative ............................................................................. 8-1
8.2 Purpose and Intent ................................................................................... 8-1
8.3 Scope of Review ....................................................................................... 8-2
8.4 Authority to Adopt Regulations ................................................................... 8-4
8.5 Appeals .................................................................................................... 8-5
8.6 Administration, Enforcement and Limitation ................................................. 8-5
8.7 Districts .................................................................................................... 8-5
8.8 Standards and Extent ................................................................................ 8-7
8.9 General Policy ........................................................................................... 8-9
Article 9. Natural Resource Protection .......................................................9-1
9.1 Wetlands Conservation District ................................................................... 9-1
9.2 Aquifer Protection District Ordinance ........................................................ 9-11
9.3 Exeter Shoreland Protection District Ordinance .......................................... 9-19
9.4 Floodplain Development Ordinance ........................................................... 9-30
Article 10. Growth Management Ordinance ................................................ 10-1
10.1 Preamble ............................................................................................ 10-1
10.2 Phasing Subdivision Development: ........................................................ 10-1
Article 11. Public Capital Facilities Impact Fee ............................................ 11-1
11.1 Authority and Applicability .................................................................... 11-1
11.2 Purpose .............................................................................................. 11-2
11.3 Findings ............................................................................................. 11-2
11.4 Definitions .......................................................................................... 11-3
11.5 Computation of Impact Fee .................................................................. 11-4
11.6 Assessment & Payment of Impact Fee .................................................. 11-4
11.7 Waivers .............................................................................................. 11-5
11.8 Appeals .............................................................................................. 11-6
11.9 Administration of Funds Collected ......................................................... 11-6
11.10 Custody and Maintenance of Fund Accounts .......................................... 11-6
11.11 Use of Funds ...................................................................................... 11-7
11.12 Refund of Fees Paid ............................................................................ 11-7
11.13 Additional Assessments ........................................................................ 11-7
11.14 Premature and Scattered Development ................................................. 11-8
11.15 Review ............................................................................................... 11-8
Article 12. Board of Adjustment ................................................................ 12-1
12.1 Board of Adjustment............................................................................ 12-1
12.2 Administrative Fees ............................................................................. 12-1
12.3 Equitable Waivers of Dimensional Requirements .................................... 12-1
12.4 Limits of Approval ............................................................................... 12-1
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
d
Article 13. Administration and Enforcement ............................................... 13-1
13.1 Administration..................................................................................... 13-1
13.2 Building Codes .................................................................................... 13-1
13.3 Enforcement ....................................................................................... 13-1
Article 14. Validity .................................................................................... 14-1
14.1 Saving Clause ..................................................................................... 14-1
14.2 Amendments ...................................................................................... 14-1
14.3 Conflicting Provisions ........................................................................... 14-1
14.4 Effective Date ..................................................................................... 14-1
Appendix A
? Record of Amendments
? Single Family Open Space Developments – Internal Setback Requirements
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
1-1
Article 1. AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE
1.1 SHORT TITLE
This ordinance may be referred to as the Exeter Zoning Ordinance.
1.2 PURPOSES
The purposes of the Exeter Zoning Ordinance are to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fires, panic and other dangers; to promote health and the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; and to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements.

Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
2-1
Article 2. DEFINITIONS
2.1 INTERPRETATIONS
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall be used in the interpretation and construction of the ordinance. Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular. The word “structure” shall include the word “building”; and the word “used” shall include “arranged”, “designed”, “constructed”, “altered”, “converted”, “rented”, “leased”, or “intended to be used”. The word “shall” is mandatory and not optional.
2.2 DEFINITIONS
2.2.1 Abandonment: To stop the use of property or activity without the intent to resume. When the use of a property has ceased for a period of 12 consecutive months, intent to abandon will be presumed unless the owner can show that a diligent effort has been made to sell, rent, or use the property for that use. Signs that are not in use for greater than one year will be deemed to be abandoned regardless of the intention of the owner
2.2.2 Abutter: As defined in NH RSA §672:3, “Abutter” means any person whose property is located in New Hampshire and adjoins or is directly across the street or stream from the land under consideration by the local land use board. For purposes of receiving testimony only, and not for purposes of notification, the term “abutter” shall include any person who is able to demonstrate that his land will be directly affected by the proposal under consideration. For purposes of receipt of notification by the municipality of a local land use board hearing, where an abutting property is under a condominium or other collective form of ownership, the term abutter means the officers of the collective or association, as defined in NH RSA §356-B:3, XXIII.
2.2.3 Accessory Dwelling Unit: A dwelling unit subordinate to a detached one-family dwelling, located either in the principal dwelling or its accessory structure and as delineated in Article 4, Section 4.2 Schedule I: Permitted Uses, Note #2.
2.2.4 Accessory Use or Structure: A use or structure subordinate to the principal use of a building on the same lot and serving a
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
2-2
purpose customarily incidental to the use of the principal building.
2.2.5 Active Adult Community: A community or living facility designed specifically for the interests of seniors age 55 and older, which may include recreational amenities and support services for maintenance-free living for older adults who are healthy, active, and capable of living independently.
2.2.6 Affordable Housing: See Articles 6.1.4 and 7.7.1.B.
2.2.7 Amateur Radio Communications Tower: A free-standing, guy supported or building-mounted structure, including appurtenances and antenna intended for two-way Amateur Radio Communications.
2.2.8 Amusement Center: A structure or structures and/or outdoor areas engaged in providing private amusements, sports and recreation activities and/or entertainment including such activities as dance halls or studios; theaters; cinemas, bowling alleys; billiard halls; video arcades, and similar types of uses for a fee or admission charge for profit. (See Article 6.4)
2.2.9 Animal Hospital: An establishment where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment and are cared for during the time of such treatment. Use as a kennel shall be limited to short-time boarding and shall be incidental only to such hospital use.
2.2.10 Animal Boarding/Kennel: Any structure, land or combination thereof used, designed or arranged for the boarding, breeding or care of dogs, cats, pets, fowl, horses, or other domestic animals for profit, but exclusive of animals used for agricultural purposes.
2.2.11 Assisted Living Facility: Housing primarily for elderly persons, who require some support services for their daily living activities including basic medical assistance. Assisted Living Facilities typically require residents to be mobile and capable of performing most routine tasks.
2.2.12 Bed and Breakfast: The primary dwelling of an owner-operator that provides exclusively for the lodging of transient guests and whose posted rates shall include breakfast. A Bed and Breakfast shall not be used for any other hospitality or business related uses. A Bed and Breakfast shall have not more than
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
2-3
four (4) rentable rooms and a dining area capable of accommodating the number of registered guests.
2.2.13 Board of Adjustment: The Zoning Board of Adjustment of the Town of Exeter.
2.2.14 Building Coverage: That percentage of the plot or land area covered by the principal and accessory building area.
2.2.15 Building Height: The vertical distance measured from the main level of the ground surrounding the building to the highest point of the building, but not including chimneys, spires, towers, silos, tanks, and similar projections.
2.2.16 Building, Principal: A structure in which is conducted the principal use of the site on which it is situated. In any residential district any dwelling shall be deemed to be a principal building on the lot on which the same is located.
2.2.17 Business Office: A building occupied by one or more offices for activities related to the sale or provision of goods and services to others, including; financial service provider, real estate agents, nonprofit or other community services and governmental agencies.
2.2.18 Child Day Care: Any person or organization, either established for profit or otherwise, which regularly receives for child day care four or more children, unrelated to the operator or staff of the agency.
2.2.19 Code Enforcement Officer: The administrative officer charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this ordinance.
2.2.20 Community Buildings: A building or structure or group of buildings or structures, owned and operated by the Town of Exeter, or by a nonprofit organization, the primary purpose of which is to provide social and recreational services to the citizens of the community, focused on promoting their health and general welfare.
2.2.21 Discontinuance: The visible or otherwise apparent intention of an owner to discontinue the use of a building or premises or the removal of a characteristic equipment or furnishings used in the performance of any non-conforming use without its replacement by similar equipment or furnishings. Any non-
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
2-4
conforming use or building replaced by a conforming use or building shall be considered to be discontinued.
2.2.22 Duplex: (See Two-Family)
2.2.23 Dwelling: Any building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively as the residence or sleeping place of one or more persons.
2.2.24 Dwelling Unit: One (1) or more rooms, including cooking facilities, and sanitary facilities in a dwelling structure, designed as a unit for living and sleeping purposes.
2.2.25 Elderly/Senior: For the purpose of this ordinance, elderly or senior shall be defined as persons fifty-five (55) years of age or older.
2.2.26 Elderly Congregate Health Care Facilities (ECHCF): A multi-dwelling residential facility providing various housing options to meet the spectrum of needs and interests from active adults through skilled nursing facilities. ECHCF’s primary feature is the provision of “lifetime” supportive services at each stage of a senior’s later life. The facility is generally intended for persons fifty-five (55) years of age or older which provides on-site nursing home facilities as licensed by the State of New Hampshire.
2.2.27 Essential Services: The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities and telecommunication providers or Town or other governmental agencies of underground or overhead gas, electrical, or water transmission or distribution systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or Town or other governmental agencies or for the public health or safety or general welfare, but not including buildings. (See Article 6.6)
2.2.28 Farm/Farm Uses: A parcel of land used principally for the raising, keeping or production of agricultural products or animals, including the necessary or usual dwellings, buildings and facilities related to such activity.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
2-5
2.2.29 Farm, Roadside Stands: Structure in connection with a farm operation, for the purpose of display and sale of farm products raised by the owner on the premises.
2.2.30 Floor Area: For the purposes of determining requirements for off-street parking and off-street loading, it shall mean the gross sum of the area of the several floors of a building or portion thereof, including the basement, if any, as measured from the interior faces of the exterior wall of such buildings.
2.2.31 Frontage: The horizontal distance measured along a lot line dividing a lot from a street. Such measurement shall refer to a continuous line except where otherwise specified.”
2.2.32 Garden Supply Establishment: An establishment where retail and wholesale garden products and produce are sold to the consumer. The establishment imports most of the items sold, but may include a nursery and/or greenhouses, and may include plants, nursery products and stock, potting soil, hardware, other garden and farm variety tools and outdoor furniture.
2.2.33 Gasoline and/or Automotive Service Station: A building or other structure or tract of land used principally for the storage and sale of gasoline or motor fuels, lubricants, automotive parts or supplies, and for the working, servicing, washing and repair of motor vehicles.
2.2.34 Hazardous Storage: Facilities intended for the storage of flammable, explosive or toxic chemicals, liquids or gases for the primary purpose of transmission or distribution off-site by pipeline, tank vessel, tank car, tank vehicle, portable tank or container, etc. (See Article 6.14)
2.2.35 Heliports: (See Article 6.15)
2.2.36 Home Occupation: An occupation conducted on the premises of a dwelling unit which is principally operated by an occupant and which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the principal structure as a dwelling unit and does not change the residential character thereof. (See Article 6.10)
2.2.37 Hotel/Motel: A building in which living/sleeping accommodations are provided for transient occupancy. A hotel may also be combined with uses related to the needs of short-term visitors such as restaurant, gift store, or conference
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
2-6
rooms. These uses may be incorporated within the same building or within the hotel complex.
2.2.38 Impervious surface: A modified surface, that cannot effectively absorb or infiltrate water including roofs, decks, patios, paved gravel or crushed stone driveways and parking areas and walkways unless designed to absorb or infiltrate water.
2.2.39 Independent Living Facilities: Similar to the Active Adult Community but provides some support services such as cleaning, laundry, food, transportation, and other services. Group facilities may be provided on premises for recreation and social interaction.
2.2.40 Junkyard: An area of land, with or without buildings, primarily used for the storage outside of a completely enclosed building, of used and discarded materials, including but not limited to waste paper, rags, metal, building materials, house furnishings, machinery, vehicles or parts thereof, with or without the dismantling, processing, salvage, sale or other use of disposition of the same. Junkyard also means any business and any place of storage or deposit, whether in connection with another business or not, which has stored or deposited two or more unregistered motor vehicles which are no longer intended or in condition for legal use on the public highways, or used parts of motor vehicle or old iron, metal, glass, paper, cordage, or other waste or discarded or secondhand material which has been a part, or intended to be a part, of any motor vehicle, the sum of which parts shall be equal in bulk to two or more motor vehicles. Junkyards shall also include any place of business or storage or deposit of motor vehicles purchased for the purpose of dismantling the vehicles for parts or for use of the metal. (See Article 6.2)
2.2.41 Laboratories: A building or group of buildings in which are located facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing or experimentation, but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of products, except as incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory.
2.2.42 Landscape Services: An establishment for the sale and service of landscape materials. The establishment stocks and delivers most of the items sold. Stock may include paving materials, fencing, plants, nursery products and stock, potting soil, mulch,
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
2-7
hardware, power equipment and machinery, garden and farm variety tools and utensils and outdoor furniture.
2.2.43 Light Industry: A use engaged in the manufacture, predominately from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging incidental storage, sales and distribution of such products; but excluding basic industrial processing such as casting and forging.
2.2.44 Lot: A piece or parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings, or utilized for a principal use and uses accessory or incidental to the operation thereof, together with such open spaces as required by the ordinance, and having frontage on a public street, private way or right-of-way.
A. Lot, Corner: A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection or upon two parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135o) degrees. The point of intersection of the street lot lines is the “corner”.
B. Lot Depth: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
C. Lot Lines: The property lines bounding the lot.
1. Lot Line, Front: The lot line separating the lot from a street, private way or right-of-way.
2. Lot Line, Rear: The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line.
3. Lot Line, Side: Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street, private way or right-of-way is called a side street lot line.
D. Lot Width: The distance between the two side lot lines measured at the minimum front yard setback line required in the district.
2.2.45 Lot Coverage: All impervious and pervious paved surfaces on a given lot including: paved, bricked or gravel areas, buildings or
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
2-8
other structures, decks and patios, and recreational facilities such as tennis courts, in-ground pools or similar amenities.
2.2.46 Lot Coverage, Shoreland Protection District: All impervious and pervious paved surfaces on a given lot including: paved, bricked or gravel areas, buildings or other structures, decks and patios, and recreational facilities such as tennis courts, in-ground pools or similar amenities, lawns or other manicured groundcovers.
2.2.47 Lot, Non-Conforming: Any lot, which does not conform with the minimum width, depth, area or required setback dimensions specified for the district(s) in which it is located.
2.2.48 Lot of Record: Any lot a deed to which has been recorded in the office of the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds.
2.2.49 Manufacturing: Manufacturing, storing, assembling, packing or treating of articles or merchandise from previously prepared materials.
2.2.50 Manufactured Housing: Any structure transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width and forty (40) body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is 320 square feet or more, and which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to required utilities, which include plumbing, heating and electrical systems contained therein.
2.2.51 Manufactured Housing Park: A parcel of land under single ownership which has been planned for the placement of manufactured housing, appurtenant structures or additions.
2.2.52 Manufactured Housing Subdivision: A subdivision designated by the applicant for the exclusive use of manufactured housing on individually deeded lots and consisting of a minimum of four (4) lots, each lot conforming to the density and dimensional regulations of the R-1 zoning district.
2.2.53 Medical Offices: A structure or group of structures occupied by one or more medical or health-care practitioners for the purpose of providing health services to people on an outpatient basis including doctors, dentists, physical therapists, massage therapist and chiropractors.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
2-9
2.2.54 Medical Rehabilitation Facility: A building or group of buildings devoted to extended medical treatment and/or physical rehabilitative care.
2.2.55 Mini-Storage Buildings: A building or group of buildings containing store rooms or containers which are leased to customers for storage of personal household goods or products outside of their home or place of business.
2.2.56 Multi-Use: A single building containing one or more uses permitted within the zoning district in which it is located. In addition to the permitted uses allowed, residential uses (one or more dwelling units) are allowed on any level except the street level.
2.2.57 Multi-Family; Multi-Family dwellings: Any building or structure containing more than two (2) dwelling units.
2.2.58 Municipality: To mean the Town of Exeter.
2.2.59 Museum: An organized and permanent nonprofit institution, essentially educational or aesthetic in purpose, with professional staff, which owns and utilizes tangible objects, cares for them and exhibits them to the public on some regular basis.
2.2.60 Non-Conforming Use: Any use of land, building or premise lawfully existing at the time of adoption of this Zoning Ordinance or any subsequent amendment thereto which does not conform to one or more provisions of this ordinance.
2.2.61 Nursing Home: A long-term care facility licensed by the state that offers 24-hour room and board and health care services, including basic and skilled nursing care, rehabilitation, and may also offer a full range of other therapies, treatments, and programs. Nursing homes may or may not cater exclusively to seniors.
2.2.62 Open Space: Is defined as land area vertically open to the sky, free of all impervious surfaces as described under 2.2.39 and 2.2.40. Open Space may include wetlands, stream systems or other bodies of water.
2.2.63 Open Space Development: A residential development consisting of either single family and /or multi-family dwelling units, located on one or more parcels, which is subject to the
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
2-10
overall density requirements for the zone in which the development is located, but which may be located, grouped or dispersed in any fashion, subject to the requirements of Article 7 - Open Space Development of this ordinance.
2.2.64 Planning Board: The Planning Board of the Town of Exeter.
2.2.65 Professional Offices: A building occupied by one or more offices in which there is no display of unrelated stock or wares in trade commodity sold, nor any commercial use conducted other than the professional offices of a lawyer, architect, engineer, insurance agent or other similar professional services.
2.2.66 Prototype Production: A use limited to the fabrication of new or experimental products produced in quantities not exceeding those necessary for research and development or testing of the product within the corporation and not intended for sale.
2.2.67 Recreation Facility: A structure or structures and/or outdoor areas engaged in providing public, non-profit amusements or entertainment, including parks, swimming pools and playgrounds.
2.2.68 Research and Development Uses: A use devoted to technological experimentation or the development of new products and processes, research and development laboratories and related facilities for research, development and testing.
2.2.69 Residential Conversion: The conversion of existing residential buildings (principal residential structure as well as accessory structures) into not more than four (4) dwelling units . See Article 4.2 Schedule I, Notes. (Remove subset A. through D. in the definition as they are included in 4.2 Schedule I Notes)
2.2.70 Residential Uses: single family, two-family or multi-family; a combination thereof or separate uses.
2.2.71 Retail Services: Establishments engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods, including retail stores, restaurants and banks. Also establishments primarily engaged in providing services involving the care of a person or his or her apparel (such as barbershops and beauty salons, spas, tailors and dry cleaners).
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
2-11
2.2.72 Rooming and Boarding Houses: A dwelling or part there-of, other than a hotel or motel, where lodging is provided for compensation without individual cooking facilities.
2.2.73 Sexually Oriented Business Use: A principal use or substantial accessory use where goods and/or services are marketed, advertised or displayed of a sexually oriented or sexually explicit nature which meets the definition of either “harmful to minors” or “sexual conduct” as set forth in NH RSA §571-B:1. Such goods include, but are not limited to, sexually explicit books, videos, movies, devices, computer software, and marital aids. Examples of sexually oriented business uses include, but are not limited to, theaters or mini-motion picture displays where sexually explicit films or videos are shown, nude modeling studios, massage parlors, escort agencies or sexual encounter centers.
2.2.74 Sign: See Article 5.7.2: Sign Regulations – Definitions.
2.2.75 Special Exception: A use permitted within a District only after a determination by the Board of Adjustment that certain conditions specified in the Zoning Ordinance have been met. (See Article 5.2)
2.2.76 Street: A thoroughfare or roadway which is either (a) formally accepted by the Town, or (b) shown on a subdivision plan approved by the Planning Board and constructed to Town specifications and for which surety has been posted to guarantee construction of all improvements required by the Planning Board.
2.2.77 Street level: The floor level of a structure most accessible to any street.
2.2.78 Structure: Anything constructed, the use of which requires permanent location on or in the ground, or attachment to something having permanent location on or in the ground, including stationary and portable carports and swimming pools.
A. Structure Setback: The mean horizontal distance from the front lot line and the structure frontage.
B. Structure Frontage: The length of the structure facing a street, private way or right-of-way.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
2-12
2.2.79 Transfer: Referring to the transportation activity of collection, temporary storage and re-shipment of material.
2.2.80 Two-Family: Two-family home (Duplex): A building designed for residential purposes and containing two principal dwelling units separated by a common interior wall (including ceiling/floor), and supported with a common foundation.
2.2.81 Variance: The zoning board of adjustment shall have the power to:
A. Hear and decide appeals if it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of any zoning ordinance adopted pursuant to RSA 674:16; and
B. Authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, a variance from the terms of the zoning ordinance if:
1. The variance will not be contrary to the public interest:
2. The spirit of the ordinance is observed;
3. Substantial justice is done;
4. The values of surrounding properties are not diminished; and
5. Literal enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance would result in an unnecessary hardship.
a. For purposes of this subparagraph, “unnecessary hardship” means that, owing to special conditions of the property that distinguish it from other properties in the area:
i. No fair and substantial relationship exists between the general public purposes of the ordinance provision and the specific application of that provision to the property; and
ii. The proposed use is a reasonable one.
b. If the criteria in subparagraph (A) are not established, an unnecessary hardship will be
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
2-13
deemed to exist if, and only if, owing to special conditions of the property that distinguish it from other properties in the area, the property cannot be reasonably used in strict conformance with the ordinance, and a variance is therefore necessary to enable a reasonable use of it.
The definition of “unnecessary hardship” set forth in subparagraph (5) shall apply whether the provision of the ordinance from which a variance is sought is a restriction on use, a dimensional or other limitation on a permitted use, or any other requirement of the ordinance.
2.2.82 Veterinarian: An establishment where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment and are cared for during the time of such treatment. Use as a kennel or overnight services are prohibited.
2.2.83 Warehousing: A use engaged in storage of manufactured products, supplies and equipment; bulk storage.
2.2.84 Wetlands: Those areas of land identified and delineated as consisting of poorly and very poorly drained soils as defined by the Soil Conservation Service/National Cooperative Soil Survey, or those poorly and very poorly drained soils as identified by a high intensity soil survey prepared by a certified soil scientist, as defined in Article 9.1.3 Wetlands Conservation District – Area of Jurisdiction.
2.2.85 Wholesale Establishment: An establishment or place of business primarily engaged in selling and/or distributing merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional business users, or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or selling merchandise to, such individuals or companies.
2.2.86 Yard: Any open space that lies between the principal buildings or group of buildings and the nearest lot line and is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward by any structure except as herein permitted.
A. Yard, Front: An open space that lies between the principal building or group of buildings and the front lot line
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
2-14
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward by any structure.
B. Yard, Rear: An open space extending the full width of the lot between the principal building or accessory structure and the rear lot line unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward by any structure.
C. Yard, Side: An open space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the principal building or accessory structure and the nearest side lot line unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward by any structure.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
3-1
Article 3. ESTABLISHMENT AND DESIGNATION OF DISTRICTS
3.1 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
For the purposes of promoting the public health, safety, and general welfare of the Town of Exeter, the Town is hereby divided into the following types of Zoning Districts:
RESIDENTIAL
RU Rural
R-1 Low Density Residential
R-2 Single-Family Residential
R-3 Single-Family Residential
R-4 Multi-Family Residential
R-5 Multi-Family
R-6 Retirement Planned Community
M Manufactured Housing
MS Manufactured Housing Subdivision
COMMERCIAL
C-1 Central Area Commercial
C-2 Highway Commercial
C-3 Epping Road Highway Commercial
NP Neighborhood Professional
WC Waterfront Commercial
CORPORATE/TECHNOLOGY
CT Corporate/Technology Park
CT-1 Corporate/Technology Park-1
INDUSTRIAL
I Industrial
HEALTHCARE
H Healthcare
OVERLAYS
HD Historic District
A Aquifer Protection
ESP Exeter Shoreland Protection
F Flood Hazard
W Wetland Conservation
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
3-2
3.2 ZONING MAP
Said districts are bounded as shown on the map entitled, “Zoning Map of the Town of Exeter,” adopted March 6, 1973, as amended, and certified by the Town Clerk which accompanies and which, with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby made a part of this ordinance. The Flood Hazard Area and Regulatory Floodway, as delineated on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Floodway Maps for Exeter, New Hampshire, dated May 17, 1982, as prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency-Federal Insurance Administration, and as amended, shall become a part of the Zoning Map as previously described. When a property is located in a Flood Hazard Area, all new construction and substantial improvements shall conform to the requirements herein and of the Subdivision Regulations, Site Plan Review Regulations, as well as those for the underlying zone. (See Record of Amendments for summary of map revisions.)
3.3 INTERPRETATION OF BOUNDARIES
3.3.1 Designation of District Boundaries: The district boundary lines are intended generally to follow the centerlines of streets, the centerlines of railroad right-of-way, existing lot lines at the time of the adoption of this ordinance, mean level of streams and other waterways, or Town boundary lines, all as shown on the Zoning Map.
3.3.2 Determination of Locations of Boundaries: In case of uncertainty as to the true location of a district boundary line in a particular instance, the Planning Board shall request the Board of Selectmen to render its determination with respect thereto.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
4-1
Article 4. DISTRICT REGULATIONS
4.1 SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS
The restrictions and controls intended to regulate development in each district are set forth in Schedules I, II, and III, which are supplemented by other articles of this ordinance.
4.2 SCHEDULE I: PERMITTED USES
DISTRICT
PERMITTED PRINCIPAL
PERMITTED ACCESSORY
SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
RU-
RURAL
One-family detached dwellings, excluding manufactured housing. Farms, farm uses, and customary farm occupations, except piggeries. Open space development.
Home occupations. Customary farm buildings for the storage of products or equipment. Roadside farm stands Private garages, parking and loading areas as associated with residential and farm uses. Any other accessory building or use customarily incidental to the principal use.
Residential conversions and accessory dwelling units (See Notes 1 and 2 at the end of this article). Bed and Breakfast. Child day care. Churches and similar places of worship. Community buildings, social halls, clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations. Essential services. Excavation of earth material (See Art. 6.13). Campgrounds, golf courses, Recreation Facilities. Libraries, museums. Private schools. Landscape Nurseries. Heliports
R-1
LOW DENSITY
RESIDENTIAL
One-family detached dwellings, manufactured housing subdivisions. Public elementary and high schools. Recreation facilities. Farms, farm uses, and customary farm occupations, except piggeries. Open space development.
Home occupations. Private garages and parking. Roadside farm stands Other accessory uses customarily incidental to the principal use.
Multi-family Open Space Development (See Article 7.6). Residential conversions and accessory dwelling units (See Notes 1 and 2 at the end of this article). Bed and Breakfast. Campgrounds, golf courses, community buildings, social halls, clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations. Child day care. Churches and similar places of worship. Elderly congregate health care facilities (See Article 6.1). Essential services. Libraries, museums. Private schools.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
4-2
DISTRICT
PERMITTED PRINCIPAL
PERMITTED ACCESSORY
SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
R-2
SINGLE FAMILY
RESIDENTIAL
One-family detached dwellings. Public elementary and high schools. Recreation facilities. Open space development.
Home occupations. Private garages and parking. Other accessory uses customarily incidental to the principal use.
Two-family homes. Residential conversions and accessory dwelling units (See Notes 1 and 2 at the end of this article). Bed and Breakfast. Child day care. Churches and similar places of worship. Elderly congregate health care facilities (See Article 6.). Essential services. Libraries, museums. Multi- family Open Space Development (See Article 7.6). Private schools. Community buildings.
R-3
SINGLE FAMILY
RESIDENTIAL
One-family detached dwellings. Public elementary and high schools. Recreation facilities. Open space development.
Home occupations. Private garages and parking. Other accessory uses customarily incidental to the principal use.
Residential conversions and accessory dwelling units (See Notes 1 and 2 at the end of this article). Child day care. Churches and similar places of worship. Essential services. Libraries, museums. Multi-family Open Space Development (See Article 7.6). Community Buildings.
R-4
MULTI-FAMILY
RESIDENTIAL
One-family detached dwellings and two-family homes. Public elementary and high schools. Recreation facilities. Open space development. Multi-family. Active Adult Community, Independent Living Facilities, Assisted Living Facility.
Home occupations. Private garages and parking. Other accessory uses customarily incidental to the principal use.
Accessory dwelling units (See Notes 1 and 2 at the end of this article). Child day care. Churches and similar places of worship. Community buildings, social halls, clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations. Elderly congregate health care facilities (See Article 6.1). Essential services. Libraries, museums. Multi-family Open Space Development (See Article 7.6). Private schools.
R-5
MULTI-FAMILY
DISTRICT
Multi-family and Community buildings. Active Adult Community, Independent Living Facilities, Assisted Living Facility.
Private garages and parking. Other accessory uses customarily incidental to the principal use.
Essential services. Recreation facilities. Home occupations.
R-6
RETIREMENT
PLANNED
COMMUNITY
Residential Uses. Municipal water and sewer and underground utilities required. Active Adult Community, Independent Living Facilities, Assisted Living Facility.
Private garages and parking. Other accessory uses customarily incidental to the principal use. Community buildings and recreation facilities, swimming pools.
Nursing home. Essential services. Home occupations.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
4-3
DISTRICT
PERMITTED PRINCIPAL
PERMITTED ACCESSORY
SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
M-
MANUFACTURED
HOUSING
PARK
Manufactured housing.
Recreation facilities Private garages and parking. Home occupations. Other accessory uses customarily incidental to the principal use.
Essential services. Community Buildings.
MS-
MANUFACTURED
HOUSING
SUBDIVISION
Manufactured housing.
Private garages and parking. Home occupations. Other accessory uses customarily incidental to the principal use.
Child day care. Essential services. Recreation facilities. Community Buildings.
C-1
CENTRAL AREA
COMMERCIAL
DISTRICT
Retail services, business offices, professional offices, medical offices. Hotels/motels. Bed and Breakfast. Child day care. Churches and similar places of worship. Community buildings, social halls, clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations. Essential services. Libraries, museums. Multi-family residential and multi- use. Amusement Centers. Veterinarians and garden supply establishments.
Off-street parking. Other accessory uses customarily incidental to the principal use. Home occupations
Residential conversions. Rooming and boarding houses by conversion only. Residential uses.
C-2
HIGHWAY
COMMERCIAL
Retail services, business offices, professional offices and medical offices. Hotels/motels. Bed and Breakfast. Child day care. Community buildings, social halls, clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations. Essential services. Automobile repair shops and washing establishments. New and used car dealers. Amusement Centers. Wholesale establishments. Landscape services and garden supply establishments. Animal hospitals and veterinarians, animal boarding/ kennels. Boat sales and services. Access to Healthcare District. Access to the R-4 multi-family district.
Off-street parking. Other accessory uses customarily incidental to the principal use. Home occupations.
Gasoline and/or services stations. Residential conversions, Rooming and boarding houses by conversion only. Heliports. Multi-use.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
4-4
DISTRICT
PERMITTED PRINCIPAL
PERMITTED ACCESSORY
SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
C-3
EPPING ROAD
HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL
Retail services, business offices, professional offices and medical offices, hotels/motels. Bed and Breakfast. Child day care. Essential services. Automobile repair shops and washing establishments. New and used car dealers. Amusement Centers. Wholesale establishments, distribution plants and warehouses. Landscape services and garden supply establishments. Animal hospitals and veterinarians, animal boarding/kennels. Boat sales and services.
Off-street parking. Other accessory uses customarily incidental to the principal use. Home occupations
Gasoline and/or services stations. Sexually oriented business use. Light industry. Medical Rehabilitation Facilities and elderly congregate healthcare facilities. Churches and similar places of worship. Community buildings, social halls, clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations. Heliports.
NP-
NEIGHBORHOOD
PROFESSIONAL
Professional and medical offices. Child day care. Multi-Use. Garden supply establishments. Assisted Living Facility.
Off-street parking. Accessory uses customarily incidental to a permitted principal use. 10% of the gross floor area may be used for retail services. (See Article 6.7.3)
Business offices, nursing homes, healthcare facilities, elderly congregate healthcare facilities. Essential services. Residential uses. Medical Rehabilitation Facility. Residential conversions. Community Buildings and recreation facilities.
WC-
WATERFRONT
COMMERCIAL
Retail services, business offices, professional and medical offices. Hotels/motels. Bed and Breakfast. Churches and similar places of worship. Community buildings, social halls, clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations. Essential services. Libraries, museums. Multi-use.
Off-street parking. Other accessory uses customarily incidental to the principal use. Home occupations
Marinas, docks, piers, (See Article 6.12 Marinas, Docks and Piers). Amusement Centers.
CT-
CORPORATE/
TECHNOLOGY
PARK
Business, professional, and medical offices. Child day care. Light industry, laboratory, research and development uses. Hotels/motels
Accessory uses customarily incidental to a permitted principal use. 20% of the gross floor area may be used for retail services. (See Article 6.7.3)
Essential services. Heliports. Amusement Centers. Medical Rehabilitation Facilities
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
4-5
DISTRICT
PERMITTED PRINCIPAL
PERMITTED ACCESSORY
SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
CT-1
CORPORATE/
TECHNOLOGY
PARK-1
Amusement Centers. Business, professional, and medical offices. Manufacturing, light industry, laboratories, research and development uses. Hotels/motels. Warehouse, distribution plants, wholesale establishments. Landscape services, garden supply establishments. Animal hospitals and veterinarians, animal boarding/ kennels.
Child day care. Off-street parking. Accessory uses customarily incidental to a permitted principal use. 20% of the gross floor area may be used for retail services. (See Article 6.7.3)
Retail services. Social halls, clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations. Essential services. Boat sales and services. Medical Rehabilitation Facilities. Heliports
I-INDUSTRIAL
Manufacturing, light industry. Laboratory, research and development uses. Warehousing, distribution plants, truck terminals, wholesale establishments. Mini-storage buildings. Business, medical and professional offices. Hotels/motels. Medical Rehabilitation Facilities
Child day care. Accessory uses customarily incidental to a permitted principal use.
Hazardous storage. Essential services. Retail Services., Automobile repair shops and washing establishments. New and used car dealers. Amusement Centers. Landscape services and garden supply establishment. Animal hospitals and veterinarians, animal boarding/kennels,. Boat sales and services. Heliports. Junkyards.
H- HEALTHCARE
Hospitals, nursing homes, elderly housing with available healthcare facilities or services, medical rehabilitation facilities, other healthcare facilities, medical offices, and healthcare administration offices. Child day care.
Off-street parking and other accessory uses customarily incidental to the principal use.
Essential services. Heliports.
HD-
HISTORIC
DISTRICT
See Article 8 Historic District Ordinance
A-
AQUIFER
PROTECTION
See Article 9.2 Aquifer Protection District Ordinance
ESP- EXETER
SHORELAND
PROTECTION
See Article 9.3 Exeter Shoreland Protection District Ordinance
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
4-6
DISTRICT
PERMITTED PRINCIPAL
PERMITTED ACCESSORY
SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
F-
FLOOD
HAZARD
Such uses as the underlying zone may permit, excepting that within the designated “floodway”, manufactured housing is prohibited, except in existing manufactured housing parks. Encroachments in the “floodway” including fill, new construction, and substantial improvements to existing development are prohibited unless certification by a structural and other registered professional engineer is provided by the applicant demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the 100-year flood (See Article 9.4 Floodplain Development Ordinance for additional restrictions).
W-
WETLANDS
CONSERVATION
See Article 9.1 Wetlands Conservation District Ordinance.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
4-7
Schedule I Notes:
1. In addition to the criteria set forth in Article 5, Section 5.2 Special Exception, the following criteria must also be met:
Conversions – The conversion of existing residential buildings (principal residential structure as well as accessory structures) into not more than four (4) dwelling units provided that;
(a) The number of spaces for off-street parking shall comply with Article 5.6 Off-Street Parking;
(b) The minimum lot size required shall be such that each dwelling unit is provided with thirty percent (30%) of the minimum lot size (per unit) required for the district;
(c) The structure has been a residence for a minimum of ten (10) years;
(d) The lot must meet a minimum of twenty percent (20%) open space unless otherwise stated in Articles 4.3 and 4.4 Schedules II and III.
(e) For conversions intended to become rental units, one of the dwelling units shall remain owner-occupied.
(f) The Board of Adjustment may require the Planning Board to review the proposed site plan. All conversions consisting of three or more units must be reviewed by the Planning Board.
(g) The Board of Adjustment may allow expansion to an existing structure for the purpose of providing additional area for the units, provided all other requirements are met. Any expansion greater than 400 sq. ft. (foot print) shall require Planning Board review of the proposed site plan.
(h) Prior to any renovations or building, the owner shall provide evidence to the Town Building Inspector that septic facilities are adequate for both units according to the standards of the Town and the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services (Water Division). If deemed necessary by the Building Inspector, such evidence shall be in the form of certification by a State of New Hampshire licensed septic systems designer. Also the owner shall provide evidence that there is adequate potable water according to the standards of the State of New Hampshire.
2. Accessory Dwelling Units – Accessory Dwelling Units must meet the following conditions, in addition to the terms of Article 5.2 Special Exceptions.
(a) The property and proposed use must conform to the dimensional requirements of a one-family lot.
(b) No more than one accessory dwelling unit will be allowed in a detached one-family dwelling or its accessory structure.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
4-8
(c) The accessory dwelling unit shall be designed so that the appearance of the building remains essentially that of a one-family dwelling. The Board of Adjustment may require that new entrances be located on the side or in the rear of the building.
(d) Accessory dwelling units shall not be allowed in manufactured housing.
(e) For accessory dwelling units within the principal structure, the accessory dwelling unit shall be limited to a maximum of 900 square feet or one-third of the finished floor area of the principal structure, whichever is less but in no case shall the accessory dwelling unit be restricted to less than 750 square feet in accordance with NHRSA 674:71 to :73, or as the same may be subsequently amended. For accessory dwelling units located in a detached accessory structure, the dwelling unit shall be limited to a maximum of 750 square feet.
(f) One of the dwelling units shall remain owner-occupied.
(g) Off-street paved or gravel parking shall be provided for at least four (4) vehicles. Garage and “piggy-back” parking is encouraged.
(h) The structure and lot shall not be converted to a condominium or any other form of legal ownership distinct from the ownership of the existing one-family dwelling. An accessory dwelling unit use shall be recorded by deed addendum at the Registry of Deeds, indicating all the terms of the approval granted.
(i) Prior to any renovations or building, the owner shall provide evidence to the Town Building Inspector that septic facilities are adequate for both units according to the standards of the Town and the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services (Water Division). If deemed necessary by the Building Inspector, such evidence shall be in the form of certification by a State of New Hampshire licensed septic systems designer. Also the owner shall provide evidence that there is adequate potable water according to the standards of the State of New Hampshire.
(j) Once any renovation or construction is completed, or the owner is ready to have a unit occupied, a request must be made to the Building Inspector for an occupancy permit. There will be no occupancy of the accessory unit until the Building Inspector has issued a certificate of occupancy.
(k) A purchaser of a home that had a special exception granted for an accessory dwelling unit who wants to continue renting any one of the accessory units must comply with all conditions of the permit previously granted. Any change to the prior conditions will require a new application.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
4-9
4.3 SCHEDULE II: DENSITY AND DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS – RESIDENTIAL
See Notes(#)
Minimum Lot Area
Minimum Lot
Maximum Height
(5)
Minimum Yard
Set Backs
(8)
Maximum
Minimum
DISTRICT
RESIDENTIAL
No Municipal Water &
Sewer
(8)
Municipal Water & Sewer
(8)
Dwelling Unit
(Sq. Ft.)
(3) (10)
Width
(Feet)
(1)
(8)
Depth
(Feet)
(8)
Frontage
(Feet)
Feet
Stories
Front (Feet)
Side
(Feet)
Rear (Feet)
Building Coverage (%)
(4)
Open Space (%)
(16)
(1)
(8)
one
both
RU- Rural
2 acres
(19)
2 acres
(19)
2 acres
(19)
200
200
200
35
(18)
3
50
30
60
50
10
85/75
(17)
R-1 Low
Density
2 acres
(15, 19)
40,000
(19)
40,000
(19)
150
150
150
35
3
25
15
30
25
15
80/70
(17)
R-2 Single
Family
1 acres
(15)
15,000
15,000
100
100
100
35
3
25
15
30
25
25
60/40
(17)
R-2 Two
Family
24,000
12,000
100
100
100
35
3
25
15
30
25
25
60/40
(17)
R-3 Single
Family
12,000
12,000
100
100
100
25
2
25
15
30
25
25
40
R-4 Multi-Family
(20)
Detached Single Family
12,000
12,000
100
100
100
35
3
25
15
30
25
25
30
Two Family
15,000
7,500
100
100
100
35
3
25
15
30
25
25
30
Three or more
21,000
(2)
7,000
100
200
100
40
3
25
(6)
40
30
30
R-5 Multi-Family
12,000
(20)
3,630
100
100
100
40
(9)
4
25
25
25
30_60
(7)
20
R-6 Retirement
Planned
Community
Not
Permitted
8,000
(11, 20)
80
80
80
35
(12)
20
(13)
10
(14)
20
(14)
30
40
M- Manufactured Housing
10,000
(2)
10,000
100
100
100
15
1
25
15
30
25
25
50
MS- Manufactured Housing Subdivision
10,000
(2)
10,000
100
100
100
15
1
25
15
30
25
25
50
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
4-10
SCHEDULE II NOTES:
1. Lots with no municipal water and sewer – minimum lot width 200 feet; minimum lot frontage 200 feet. Lots with municipal water only – minimum lot width 175 feet; minimum lot frontage 175 feet.
2. Must have municipal water and sewer.
3. Includes parking area per dwelling unit; but excludes public or private rights-of way (ROW) and all roads designed to access proposed units.
4. See definition 2.2.14 Building Coverage.
5. See Article 5.4.2 Height Regulations – Special Exception to Height Regulations – Board of Adjustment.
6. 10 feet + 1 foot per dwelling unit for each side.
7. 30% if three (3) or more stories; 60% if two (2) stories or less.
8. For yard dimensions for Open Space Development, See Article 7.
9. Except that existing non-historic buildings, south of Chestnut Street may be replaced by new construction to a height of 50 feet within the footprint of the existing building.
10. Elderly Congregate Health Care facilities, permitted in the R-1, R-2, and R-4 districts, shall be subject to the following density:
R-1: 3 dwelling units/acre
R-2 8 dwelling units/acre
R-4 12 dwelling units/acre
11. Municipal water and sewer and underground utilities are required. Maximum density of 8 units per acre with multi-family buildings limited to a maximum of 32 units.
12. Multi-unit buildings may have a maximum height of 50 feet.
13. Structures 35 feet or less in height shall require a 100 foot setback from an existing public way. Structures exceeding 35 feet in height shall require a 200 foot setback from an existing public way.
14. Structures 35 feet or less in height shall require a 50 foot setback from external abutting property lines. Structures exceeding 35 feet in height shall require a 200 foot setback from external abutting properties zoned/residential and a 100 foot setback from properties zone non-residential.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
4-11
15. Minimum Lot Area for those properties located within the Aquifer Protection Overlay District shall be three (3) acres.
16. Overlay districts in which more stringent requirements apply supersede those as required under Schedule II and III.
17. For lots using septic systems, the open space requirement would be the greater percentage required in that district.
18. Buildings may have a maximum height of 50 feet if a special exception is granted by the Board of Adjustment.
19. For proposed subdivisions of an existing lot of record having a total combined area of 20 or greater acres, open space development pursuant to Article 7 is required unless waived by the Exeter Planning Board.
20. None of the area within the 100 year flood plain and 50% of the areas defined as jurisdictional wetlands may be used to satisfy minimum lot area requirements for multi-family uses. Regulations regarding perimeter buffers (See Site Plan Review and Subdivision Regulation 9.6.1.2) shall apply.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
4-12
4.4 SCHEDULE III: DENSITY AND DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS – NON-RESIDENTIAL
See Notes(#)
Minimum Lot Area
Minimum Lot
Maximum
Minimum Yard
Set Backs
Maximum
Minimum
DISTRICT
No
Municipal
Water &
Sewer
Municipal
Water &
Sewer
Square Feet
Dwelling
Unit
(Sq. Ft.)
(19)
Width
(Ft.)
(1)
Depth
(Feet)
Height
(Feet)
(5)
Front (Feet)
Side (Feet)
Rear (Feet)
Building
Coverage (%)
(4)
Open
Space
(%)
(17)
one
both
C-1
Central Area
5,000
3,500
50
100
35
10
(2)
(3)
20
75
5
(18)
C-2
Highway
20,000
(20)
150
100
35
(12)
50
20
40
50
(13)
30
15
C-3
Epping Rd.
Highway
40,000
Not
Permitted
175
225
50
50
30
60
25
40
20
NP
Neighborhood
Professional
20,000
(20)
150
100
35
50
20
50
30
25
WC
Waterfront
5,000
750
50
100
35
(6)
10
(2)
(3)
25
(7)
75
5
(18)
CT
Corp./Tech.
Park
Not Permitted
4 Acres
400
400
50
(15)
75
50
50
20
(8)
35
CT-1
Corp./Tech.
Park – 1
2 Acres
Not Permitted
250
250
50
(15)
75
30
50
40
30
I
Industrial
40,000
Not Permitted
150
200
50
50
20
40
50
40
25
H
Healthcare
2 Acres
(16)
2 Acres
(16)
1750/
2550
(10)
200
(16)
200
(16)
86
75
(9)(16)
30
(16)
60
(16)
50
(16)
40
(8)
35
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
4-13
SCHEDULE III NOTES:
1. Lots with no municipal water and no sewers – minimum lot width 200 feet. Lots with municipal water only – minimum lot width 175 feet.
2. Or the average of the block, whichever is less.
3. Equal to the side yard of the abutting property or 10 feet, whichever is less. Each side yard setback shall be determined separately.
4. See definition 2.2.11 Building Coverage.
5. See Article 5.4.2 Height Regulations – Special Exception to Height Regulations – Board of Adjustment.
6. On Water Street side: 50 feet on river side.
7. Any development on existing rear yard must be in conformity with the Master Plan.
8. A minimum of 35% of the lot shall be maintained for open space and landscaped areas. In the Healthcare District, these requirements shall apply to all lots owned by a single entity and its affiliates collectively and not to each such lot individually. (For the purpose of this provision “Affiliate” shall mean an entity owned by, or under common ownership with another entity.).
9. With not less than 25 feet landscaped or wooded area where the zone abuts an “R” zone.
10. 1,750 if three (3) or more stories; 2,550 if two (2) stories or less.
11. (Previous note deleted in March 2008)
12. Maximum height of fifty 50 feet permitted by special exception.
13. Minimum rear yard setback of 20 feet permitted by special exception.
14. (previous note deleted 3/16/17 in conjunction with amendment to Article 6.8-Epping Road Strip Management, C-3 Ordinance)
15. Except that a building height of 60 feet is allowed if a minimum 200 foot setback is maintained from a residential zoning district or existing residential use.
16. See Article 6.16 Healthcare District
17. Overlay districts in which more stringent requirements apply supersede those as required under Schedule II and III.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
4-14
18. For lots using septic systems, the open space requirement would be the greater percentage required in that district.
19. Includes parking area per dwelling unit; but excludes public or private rights-of way (ROW) and all roads designed to access proposed units.
20. Residential density for ‘multi-use’ buildings is 5,000 sq. ft. of lot area per unit.
4.5 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS
Except as hereinafter otherwise provided:
A. No building shall be erected and no existing building shall be moved, altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall any land or building be designed, used or intended to be used for any purpose or in any manner other than as permitted in the district in which such building or land is located.
B. No building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed in height the limit designated for the district in which such building is located.
C. No building shall be erected, no existing building enlarged, nor shall any open space surrounding any building be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except in conformity to the yard, lot area and building location regulations hereinafter designated for the district in which such building or open space is located.
D. No yard or other open space provided around any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this ordinance shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building, and no yard or other open space on one lot shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for a building on any other lot.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
5-1
Article 5. GENERAL REGULATIONS
5.1 NON-CONFORMING USES
5.1.1 Reconstruction of: In the event of the damage, destruction or demolition of any building not conforming to the regulations of this ordinance, said building may be rebuilt or refurbished for its former non-conforming use in the same manner and extent, provided such construction is started within one year of its damage or destruction and is completed within two years. The provisions of the Town of Exeter Building Code, as amended, shall apply to any reconstruction.
5.1.2 Expansion of: Expansion of a non-conforming use is prohibited except by variance.
A. The non-conforming use may not be physically extended, reconstructed, enlarged or structurally altered so as to create changes in said use except in conformity with this Ordinance.
B. Any change in the purpose, manner, or extent of a non-conforming use is permitted only by variance.
5.1.3 Discontinuance of: In the event, a non-conforming use is discontinued for a period of more than one year, it shall not be permitted to recommence: thereafter the property shall only be used in conformity with this ordinance. The marketing of a building or premises for the continuation of an existing non-conforming use shall be deemed as evidence of intent to continue the use.
5.1.4 Continuance of:
A. A non-conforming use shall be allowed to continue as long as its purpose, manner or extent does not change.
5.1.5 Temporary Manufactured Housing: In the event of damage or destruction of a single family dwelling unit such that it cannot be safely occupied the Building Inspector, if requested in writing by the lot owner, is authorized to grant a temporary occupancy permit for a manufactured housing unit to be placed on the lot for a six (6) month period. The Building Inspector may authorize the renewal of the temporary occupancy permit for one additional six (6) month period. Once a certificate of occupancy has been issued for the rebuilt single-family dwelling unit, the
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
5-2
temporary manufactured housing unit must be removed within fifteen (15) days.
5.2 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
Special exceptions, as enumerated in Article 4.2, Schedule I, shall be permitted only upon authorization by the Board of Adjustment. Such exceptions shall be found by the Board of Adjustment to comply with the following requirements and other applicable requirements as set forth in this ordinance:
A. That the use is a permitted special exception as set forth in Article 4.2, Schedule I hereof.
B. That the use is so designed, located and proposed to be operated that the public health, safety, welfare and convenience will be protected.
C. That the proposed use will be compatible with the zone district and adjoining post 1972 development where it is to be located. Adjoining principal uses in existence prior to 1972 (generally referred to as grand-fathered uses), that are not permitted uses as listed in 4.2 Schedule 1: Permitted Use, shall not be considered in determining the compatibility of an applicant's proposed use.
D. That adequate landscaping and screening are provided as required herein.
E. That adequate off-street parking and loading are provided and ingress and egress are so designed as to cause minimum interference with traffic on abutting streets.
F. That the use conforms with all applicable regulations governing the district where located, except as may otherwise be determined for large-scale developments.
G. As a condition of special exception approval, the Applicant may be required to obtain Town Planner review and /or Planning Board approval of the site plan. Additionally, the Board of Adjustment may require the applicant to obtain Planning Board approval of the site plan prior to rendering a decision on an application for Special Exception.
H. That the use shall not adversely affect abutting or nearby property values.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
5-3
I. That if the application is for a Special Exception for the hazardous storage of a material which is, in the opinion of the Planning Board, potentially explosive, then as per Article 5.2.D, landscaping shall be required to include blast containment, blast dampening or blast channeling features.
J. That if the application is for a use on any of the following Tax Map Parcels: #70-101, #70-102, #70-103, #70-104, #69-2, #69-3 and/or #69-4 (previously zoned as PP- Professional/Tech Park – zoning district deleted; and rezoned to CT-Corporate Technology), such exception will not:
1. Affect the water quality of Water Works Pond or other water supplies;
2. Constitute a health and safety hazard to the community;
3. Permit temporary structures;
4. Permit the recycling, disposal or transfer of materials defined as hazardous waste and set forth in Article 5.10.5 of this ordinance.
The applicant shall demonstrate that handling, storage and containment of any chemicals or substances defined as “hazardous” will be handled in strict accordance with the regulations and recommendations of the EPA and/or any other governmental body charged with enforcing compliance with any laws or statutes regulating hazardous substances.
5.3 EXISTING LOT REGULATIONS
5.3.1 Existing Non-Conforming Lots of Record:
A. A single-family structure may be constructed on any lot in any R-District if said lot is less than the minimum area required or does not meet one or more of the minimum dimensional requirements of Article 4.3, Schedule II, providing the following conditions exist or are met:
1. Availability of Adjacent Vacant Land: No structure shall be erected on any non-conforming lot if the owner of said lot owns any adjacent vacant land which would create a conforming lot if said vacant land were
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
5-4
combined with the lot deficient in area. Said combination of lots shall not result in a new non-conforming lot.
2. Side Yards: No structure shall be constructed on a non-conforming lot unless it shall have a minimum side yard of ten feet (10') on either side.
3. Front and Rear Yards: No structure shall be constructed on a non-conforming lot unless it shall have front and rear yards conforming to the minimum required for the R-District in which said lot is located or at such front yard setback distance as shall conform to the line of existing buildings on adjacent property.
4. Access: Access to an existing non-conforming lot shall comply with the provisions of NH RSA §674:41, Erection of Buildings on Streets; Appeals.
B. Owner: For the purposes of this provision, “Owner” is defined as any person, corporation, partnership, trust, association or other entity holding, as of December 1, 1980, record title to, or pursuant to contract or other agreement having an expectancy of same in, or in any other manner directly or indirectly holding any right, title, or in interest in, either the “non-conforming lot” or “adjoining vacant land” as terms are herein used.
5.3.2 Corner Lot Visual Clearance: At all street intersections, no obstructions to vision (other than an existing building post, column, or tree) exceeding thirty inches (30") in height above the established grade of the street at the property line shall be erected or maintained on any lot within the triangle formed by the street lot lines of such lot and a line drawn between the points along such lot lines thirty feet (30') distance from their point of intersection.
5.3.3 Lots Not Served By Municipal Sewer System:
A. No subdivision of land will be approved where it creates a lot that will not meet the minimum standards imposed by the State of New Hampshire Water Supply & Pollution Control Commission and requirements of “Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land in Exeter, New Hampshire” for lots not served by municipal sewer system.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
5-5
B. No building permit will be issued for a lot of record not served by municipal sewer systems unless meeting the requirements of “Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land in Exeter, New Hampshire” for lots not served by municipal sewer system.
5.3.4 Removal of Damaged Structures: No owner or occupant of land within the Town of Exeter shall permit fire ruins or other ruins to be left on their property, but shall within three (3) months remove and refill the same to clear ground level. The Building Inspectors/Code Enforcement Officer upon request for reasonable cause that he/she may deem adequate may authorize an extension of up to sixty (60) days.
5.3.5 Demolition Review
A. Definitions
As used in this section, the following words or phrases shall have the meanings set forth below, except when the context in which they are used requires a different meaning.
1. Building: Building is defined as in the International Building Code and the International Residential Code, "any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy."
2. Demolition Review Committee: A subcommittee of the Exeter Heritage Commission comprised of three (3) members of the commission and two (2) alternates appointed by the chair of the commission.
3. Demolition: The act of pulling down, destroying, removing, or razing a building or commencing the work of total or substantial destruction with the intent of completing the same. It is not the intent of this article to include interior demolition which does not alter the exterior appearance of the building or structure.
4. Code Administrator: For the purposes on this article, means the code enforcement officer who is authorized to interpret and administer the building and/or zoning codes.
5. Appurtenances: Any element or feature of local historical or cultural significance.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
5-6
B. Criteria
Any building or part of a building in the Town of Exeter will fall under the terms of this article where:
1. The building or appurtenances was constructed more than fifty (50) years before the date of application for the building permit; or is listed or is eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places, or is located in an established historic district.
2. Manufactured homes are exempt from the provisions of this article.
C. Procedure
When an application for a demolition permit, or a building permit involving demolition, or a site plan review involving demolition is made, or a formal written application is submitted to the Code Administrator for a determination under this article, the Code Administrator will determine if the building, or section of the building, meets the above criteria. If it does, the Code Administrator shall:
1. Forward a copy of the application to the demolition review committee chair.
2. Within seven business days of its receipt of a copy of the application, the committee shall issue a preliminary recommendation regarding the granting of a demolition permit. If the committee issues a recommendation in favor of granting of such a permit, a demolition permit shall be issued. If the committee issues a recommendation in opposition to the granting of a permit for demolition, no permit shall be issued until a more thorough investigation is undertaken and a final written recommendation is provided by the committee to the code administrator. Investigation and recommendation shall be completed within 30 business days of the committee’s determination of significance.
3. During the maximum 30 business day-period, the committee shall meet with the property owner and conduct such public hearings and investigations as it may determine to be necessary in the formulation of its
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
5-7
written recommendation regarding the granting of such permit.
4. The committee shall consider the following criteria in its deliberation:
a. The building or structure is of such interest or quality that it would meet national, state or local criteria for designation as a historic, cultural, or architectural landmark.
b. The building or structure is of such unusual or uncommon design, texture, or materials that it could not be reproduced or could be reproduced only with great difficulty and expense.
c. The building or structure is of such architectural or historic interest that its removal would be to the detriment of the public interest.
d. Retention of the building or structure would help preserve and protect a historic place or area of historic interest in the town.
D. Demolition Review Committee Responsibilities
It is the responsibility of the Demolition Review Committee to:
1. Make a decision within seven (7) business days of receipt of the demolition application as to whether the building might be of historical or architectural significance.
2. Notify the Code Administrator in writing by the end of the seven (7) day decision period that if the building is not considered significant, demolition may proceed.
3. Establish a date and location for a public hearing to occur within twelve (12) days of determination of potential significance. A notice of public hearing shall be submitted to local newspaper within two (2) days of decision.
4. Hold the public hearing to hear all public testimony regarding demolition of the building. The applicant or representative of the applicant proposing the demolition shall be invited to attend the public hearing to hear the
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
5-8
concerns or alternatives that are proposed by members of the public.
5. Notify the applicant and Code Administrator within two (2) business days following the public hearing that demolition can proceed if the building is found to be not significant.
6. Hold a meeting between the Demolition Review Committee and the applicant (or applicant's representative) within the remaining thirty (30) business days to discuss alternatives to demolition if the committee determines the building is significant and its loss potentially detrimental to the community.
E. Demolition
1. If no alternatives to demolition have been identified and agreed to by the applicant, after the meeting provided for in the preceding section,, the applicant is free to proceed with demolition provided a permit is issued. Prior to demolition, and if the applicant is in agreement, the Demolition Review Committee shall photographically document the building. The committee shall also encourage the applicant to salvage significant architectural features.
2. Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent immediate demolition where public safety is at stake and the building has been determined by the Code Administrator to be a public hazard and demolition is the only viable recourse.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
5-9
5.4 HEIGHT REGULATIONS
5.4.1 General Application: No building or structure shall have a greater number of stories, nor have an aggregate height of a greater number of feet than is permitted in the District in which such building is located, except as noted elsewhere in this ordinance.
5.4.2 Special Exception to Height Regulations – Board of Adjustment:
A. Chimneys, cooling towers, elevators, bulkheads, fire towers, ornamental towers or spires, or necessary mechanical appurtenances may be erected as to their structural design in accordance with existing, or hereafter adopted ordinances, of the Town of Exeter, providing they do not exceed height regulations by more than forty percent (40%) and structural specifications comply with BOCA National Building Codes.
B. Church spires or towers of public buildings may exceed the height regulations by more than forty percent (40%) providing structural specifications comply with BOCA National Building Codes.
C. No tower shall be used as a place of habitation or for tenant purposes.
D. No sign, nameplate, display or advertising device of any kind whatsoever shall be inscribed upon or attached to any chimney, tower, tank or other structure that extends above the height limitations.
E. Clocks and/or bells shall be permitted.
F. Communication towers may exceed the height regulations by more than forty percent (40%) providing the Zoning Board of Adjustment grants special exception approval and finds that:
1. The proposed site and tower promote co-location opportunities.
2. The applicant has exhausted all other reasonable alternatives to a new tower that would minimize the adverse visual impacts.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
5-10
3. The applicant has made every reasonable effort to locate the tower in a non-residential zoning district.
5.4.3 Amateur Radio Communication Tower Exception to Height Regulation: Amateur radio communications tower may be erected as to their structural design in accordance with existing, or hereafter adopted ordinances, of the Town of Exeter providing they do not exceed a height of eighty feet (80').
5.5 YARD REGULATIONS
Every part of a required yard must be open to the sky unobstructed except for the ordinary projection of open porches, balconies, steps, sills, belt courses and cornices. Fences, wells, flagpoles, signs, lighting structures, covered or enclosed walkways, and pumps shall be exempt from the requirements of Article 4.3, Schedule II – Density and Dimensional Regulations – Residential, ‘Yard Dimensions’ and Article 5.5.5, ‘Accessory Structures in Other Than R-Districts.
5.5.1 Side Yards: Side Yard of Corner Lot: The side street setback of any corner lot of record at the time of the adoption of this ordinance shall have a width equal to not less than one-half the required minimum front yard setback of any adjoining lot fronting on the side street. Any corner lot delineated by subdivision after the adoption of this ordinance shall have a side street setback equal in width to the minimum front yard setback of any adjoining lot fronting on the side street.
5.5.2 Transition Yard Requirements:
A. Where a residence district abuts a non-residence district on a street line, there shall be provided in the non-residence district for a distance of fifty feet (50') from the district boundary line, a front yard, not to be used for parking, at least equal in depth to that required in the residence district.
B. Where the side or rear yard in a residence district abuts a side or rear yard in a non-residence district, there shall be provided in the non-residence district along such abutting line or lines, a side or rear yard, not to be used for parking for a distance of twenty feet (20') from the district boundary line(s).
5.5.3 Permissible Structures: Only one principal building shall be allowed on a lot in a residential or manufactured housing district unless otherwise herein provided, except for “Residential
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
5-11
Conversions” and in R-5 Multi-family, in which more than one principal building shall be allowed on a lot subject to Article 4.3, Schedule II: Density and Dimensional Regulations – Residential.
5.5.4 Accessory Structures in R-Districts: Accessory structures, which are not attached to a principal structure, may be erected in accordance with the following requirements:
A. An accessory building not greater than the height permitted for principal buildings in the district.
B. Accessory structures shall comply with front, side and rear yard requirements: except one (1) accessory structure of 120 square feet or less is permitted within the yard setback areas with exception to the front yard setback and is limited to a height of twelve feet (12 ft.).
5.5.5 Accessory Structures in Other Than R-Districts:
A. Accessory structures shall comply with front, side and rear yard requirements for the principal structure to which they are accessory.
B. One (1) accessory structure of 120 square feet or less is permitted within yard setback areas for parcels that have received Planning Board site plan approval.
C. Any storage container used on a lot shall be considered an accessory structure regardless of its foundation or lack thereof. It shall adhere to front, side and rear yard requirements in accordance with the district it is in. Additionally, storage containers shall be screened from abutting properties.
5.6 OFF-STREET PARKING
5.6.1 In all districts, in connection with every manufacturing business, institutional, recreational, residential or any other use, there shall be provided, at the time any new building or structure is erected, off-street parking spaces for automobiles in accordance with the requirements set forth herein.
5.6.2 Any change of use of the premises, or expansion of building size, to non-residential use and/or multi-family use, or to another substantially different non-residential use, or any expansion of
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
5-12
the number of such multi-family or non-residential uses, shall provide off-street parking as required herein.
5.6.3 Off-Street Parking:
A. Size and Access: Each off-street parking space shall be rectangular, nine feet by nineteen feet exclusive of access drives or aisles, and shall be of usable shape and condition. The Planning Board may grant a reduction in the size of the space if circumstances on the site, such a perimeter parking which allows overhang, can be provided.
B. Number of Parking Spaces Required: The number of off-street parking spaces, to the extent of floor area devoted to each specific use, shall be as set forth in the Off-Street Parking Schedule 5.6.6. For sites with multi-uses, the parking requirements must be calculated proportionately for each use.
1) Alternative Parking Calculation: If the proposed use is not represented or if the applicant believes the required number of spaces are not necessary for the specific proposed use as shown in Table 5.6.6 (Off-Street Parking Schedule), the applicant may utilize the most recent data available from the Institute of Transportation Engineers’ (ITE) Parking Generation Guide, and/or actual field data collected from a comparable trip/parking generator (i.e., comparable in size, location and setting) to determine the number of required parking spaces. This data will be presented in a summary table such that assumptions on trip generation and parking calculations arrived at by the engineer are fully understandable and approved by the Planning Board.
2) Phased Parking Option: If approved by the Planning Board, the Applicant may utilize a phasing option in which the parking is indicated on the plan but not all initially constructed. The applicant must provide statistics on trip generation and parking rates to prove the reduction is reasonable. The plan must show how parking space construction is to be phased, depicting the parking to be built at the onset of the project and what may be built if needed at a later date.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
5-13
C. Off-Street Parking: Off-street parking areas shall be screened from adjoining residential uses or districts. See Article 5.8.1 General Landscaping Regulations – Unenclosed Uses.
5.6.4 Shared Parking: Shared Parking: Shared parking is parking on a single site utilized by two or more uses in a 24 hour period. It is an allowance to fulfill their individual parking requirements as their prime operational hours may not overlap and their parking demands may vary from specified standards due to the scale of the project. Shared parking recognizes complimentary parking characteristics that may be unique for each case and for the specific users of the site.
5.6.5 The Planning Board may grant reductions in the number and size of required off-street parking spaces in conjunction with its site plan review. The applicant must first submit with the proposal, a parking plan that adheres to 5.6.3 A and B, also with it a proposal for shared parking. The intent of this provision is to grant discretional review authority to the Planning Board in order to promote:
1. Better utilization of parking areas, including shared parking, or
2. A reduction in impervious surface, and
3. Conservation of open space lands and buffers.
In its discretion, the planning board shall require specific information detailing user parking needs and schedules. The Board may also require parking lot buffers and /or landscaping.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
5-14
5.6.6 Off-Street Parking Schedule:
USE
REQUIRED PARKING SPACES
Accessory Use
Additional spaces required based on accessory use
Active Adult Community
1 space for each 1 bedroom unit, 2 for each 2+ bedroom unit, plus 1 for every 4 units for guest parking
Amusement Center
1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 space per 200 square feet of ground area devoted to such use. Bike racks should also be provided.
Animal Hospital
1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area
Animal Kennel
1 space per employee plus one per 1000 sq. ft. of gross floor area
Assisted Living Facility
1 space for every 5 units, 1 space for every 6 units for guest parking, plus one per employee on maximum shift
Bed and Breakfast
2 spaces for dwelling unit plus 1 space for each rented room
Boarding and Rooming Houses
1 for each sleeping room
Business Office
1 space per 250 square feet of gross floor area
Child Day Care
1 space per employee at the maximum shift plus 1 space for every 3 students based upon the facility’s capacity
Churches
1 for each 3.5 permanent seats
Community Buildings
Social Halls
1 for each 200 square feet of floor area
Conference Center
1 space per 3 seats based on the facility’s capacity
Dwelling Units
2 for each single family dwelling unit.
2 for each multi-family unit of 2+ bedrooms.
1 for each multi-family unit of 1 bedroom/studio.
Guest parking for multi-family based on total number of units. One (1) additional space for guest parking for each four (4) multi-family dwelling units.
Elderly Congregate Healthcare
1 space for each 1 bedroom dwelling unit, 2 for each 2+ bedroom dwelling unit, 1 per 4 beds, 1 per 6 units for guest parking, plus 1 per employee on the maximum shift
Garden Supply
Landscaping Services
1 space per 200 square feet of indoor retail area plus 1 space per 2000 square feet of exterior nursery sales and greenhouse production area.
Gasoline or Automotive
1 space per 300 square feet of gross retail area
Healthcare District
2.8 spaces per bed for hospital. 4 spaces for each 1,000 square feet of out- patient facilities (excluding storage, utility and maintenance areas). 5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area for medical offices (excluding storage, maintenance and utility areas) 0.8 spaces for each nursing home bed. 3 spaces for each 2 living units for elderly housing with available healthcare facilities or services.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
5-15
Home Occupations
1 for each 200 square feet, or part of floor area used for home occupation
Independent Living Facilities
1 space for unit, plus one space per employee on maximum shift, plus 1 for every 5 units for guest parking
Manufacturing, Research and
Development Laboratories, Light Industry, Prototype Production
1 for each employee on the maximum working shift
Medical Offices
1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area
Medical Rehabilitation
Nursing Home
1 space per employee at the maximum shift plus 1 space per 10 beds.
Mini Storage
1 space per 1000 square feet of gross floor area including all storage areas
Motels/ Hotels
1 space for each unit plus 1 space for each employee on the maximum shift, for hotels or motels with restaurants or conference centers, add the required parking for the additional uses.
Museum
1 space per employee on the maximum shift plus 1 space per 1000 square feet of gross floor area
Professional Offices
1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area
Recreation Facility
1 space for each 300 square feet. of gross floor area (excluding storage, maintenance, and mechanical utility areas)
Restaurants, Bars , Night Clubs
1 for each three seats
Retail Stores, Store Groups Shops
other than offices, etc
1 space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area for buildings less than 30,000 square feet, 1 space for each 500 sq. ft. of gross floor area for buildings over 30,000 square feet
Schools - Elementary and Junior High
1 for each 15 classroom seats
Schools - Senior High
1 for each 5 classroom seats
Schools - Private Dormitories
1 for each 4 beds
Sexually Oriented Business
1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area
Theater
1 for each 3.5 seats
Wholesale Establishments Warehouses
1 for each employee in the maximum shift; the total parking area shall not be less than 25 percent of the building floor area
5.6.7 Off-Street Loading: In any district, in connection with every building, or building group or part thereof thereafter erected and having a gross floor area of over 4,000 square feet or more, which is to be occupied by manufacturing, or commercial uses or other uses similarly requiring the receipt or distribution by vehicles of material or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained, on the same lot with such building, off-street loading berths or unloading berths. The required number of
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
5-16
loading/unloading berths shall be determined in accordance with the applicable terms of the ‘Site Plan Review Regulations’.
5.7 SIGN REGULATIONS
5.7.1 Purpose: The sign regulation article is designed to provide standards for the installation of signs so as to promote the general welfare of the community. This is accomplished by encouraging the creation of an aesthetic appearance along street frontages through the use of attractive signing. The sign regulations, as set forth in this article, are designed to be logical and equitable for the various uses and identification needs. These sign standards and regulations help to effectuate an aesthetic and safe street environment. Restrictions on type, location, and size of signs protect the public from hazardous and distracting devices.
5.7.2 Definitions:
A. Sign/Sign Copy: Any device providing identification, advertising or directional information for a specific business, service, product, person, organization, place or building. Included in this definition are graphic devices such as logos, attention-attracting media such as banners, pennants, flags or logo sculpture, and obtrusive colored fascia or architectural elements. The individual letters and/or graphics that make up the sign are known as the sign copy.
B. Advertising Sign: A sign which includes any copy and/or graphics relating to any service, product, person, business, place, activity or organization in addition to simple identification, excluding directional information.
C. Awning: A covering supported by a framework attached to the building and used for the purpose of providing shelter or screening.
D. Banner Sign: A temporary sign made of flexible material for the purposes of advertising a single event.
E. Directional Sign: A sign that does not contain either identification or advertising copy, but includes pertinent information including assisting in the flow of traffic.
F. Directory Sign: A sign listing the names and/or uses, and/or locations of various businesses or activities within a
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
5-17
building, or a multi-tenant development, not for the purpose of advertising products, goods or services to the attention of vehicular traffic.
G. Fascia Sign: A sign that is permanently affixed to the horizontal piece covering the joint between the top of a wall and the projecting eaves of the roof.
H. Free-standing Sign: An identification sign which is erected or mounted on its own self-supporting permanent structure, detached from the supporting elements of the main building which it identifies.
I. Identification Sign/ or Nameplate: A sign that includes, as copy, only the name of the business, place, organization, building or person it identifies.
J. Illuminated Sign: A sign whose surface is lighted internally or externally and which identifies, advertises, or attracts attention to a use or activity on the premises.
1. Internally illuminated sign - illuminated by a light source contained within the sign.
2. Externally illuminated sign - illuminated by a steady, stationary, shielded external light source directed solely at the sign.
K. Mansard and Parapet Signs: A sign permanently affixed to a wall or surface designed to protect the edge of a roof, constructed no more than twenty degrees from vertical.
L. Marquee: A large signboard depicting the name of a business projecting over the entrance to a building, most commonly a theater and typically containing an area for advertising changing information.
M. Menu Board: A permanently mounted sign displaying the bill of fare of a drive-in or drive-through restaurant.
N. Price Sign: A permanently mounted sign displaying the retailing cost of fuel on the premises of a service station.
O. Projecting Sign: A permanent sign mounted perpendicular to the building facade to advertise the business or service.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
5-18
P. Portable Billboard Signs: A sign ordinarily with replaceable letters used to convey a special message advertising products or services available on the premises. A sign not permanently attached to the ground or designed for permanent installation.
Q. Primary Sign: The main identification sign of a business.
R. Secondary Sign: A supplementary identification sign, smaller or less prominent that the Primary Sign.
S. Temporary Signs: A sign, made of flexible materials and held in place along one or more sides or two or more corners by staples, tape, wires, ropes, or straps, that are not fixed or rigid, whose purpose is to support or oppose political candidates; local, national, or international issues; advertise coming events; or other circumstances of a temporary nature.
T. Wall-mounted Signs: An identification or advertising sign that is fastened to any vertical portion of the main building which it identifies, or advertises.
U. Window Signs: A sign using internal or external window space for advertisement or business identification.
5.7.3 General Regulations
A. Sign Area Measurements:
1. Sign copy mounted or painted on a background panel or area distinctively painted, textured or constructed as a background for the sign copy:
a. Sign area is measured as that area contained within the outside dimensions of the background panel or surface.
2. Sign copy mounted as individual letters and/or graphics against a wall or fascia of a building or other structure that has not been painted, textured or otherwise altered to provide a distinctive background for the sign copy:
a. Sign area is measured as the area enclosed by the smallest single rectangle that will enclose all sign copy.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
5-19
3. Sign copy mounted or painted on an illuminated sign or illuminated architectural element of a building:
a. The entire illuminated surface or illuminated architectural element which contains sign copy, will be counted as sign area.
4. Number of Sign Faces:
a. One – area of the single face only;
b. Two – if the interior angle between the two sign faces is 45 degrees or less, the area will be the area of one face only; if the angle between the two signs is greater than 45 degrees the sign area will be the sum of the areas of the two faces.
c. Three or more – the sign area will be the sum of the areas of the three or more faces.
d. Spherical, Free Form, Sculptural, Other Non-Planar Signs – sign area will be the sum of the areas of the four vertical sides of the smallest polyhedron that will encompass the sign structure.
5. For a sign having more than one component (e.g., a service station identification/price sign combination mounted on the same surface) the sign area will be the area of the smallest rectangle that will encompass the several components of the sign.
B. Sign Height Measurements:
1. Free-standing Sign: Height shall be the distance from the top of the sign structure to the top of the curb or crown of roadway where no curb exists. The height of any monument base or other structure erected to support or ornament the sign shall be measured as part of the sign height.
2. Wall or Fascia Mounted Signs: Height shall be the distance from the top of the sign structure to the top of the curb or crown of road where no curb exists.
C. Prohibited Sign Types:
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
5-20
1. Signs not specifically authorized are prohibited.
2. Portable billboard sign except as allowed for temporary use (See Sign Tables under Article 5.7.4 and 5.7.5);
3. Signs mounted, attached or painted on trailers, boats, or motor vehicles when used as additional advertising signs on or near the premises;
4. Roof-mounted signs, or signs that project above the highest point of the roofline, parapet, or fascia of the building;
5. Any sign emitting sound;
6. Any sign with intermittent or flashing illumination, animated, moving, or electronic reader board signs;
7. Any off-site identification sign or advertising sign unless otherwise herein provided.
D. Right-of-Way Limitations:
1. No sign shall be erected or placed within a public street, sidewalk, bicycle path or any Town right-of-way except as provided in Section 502.2 of the Town Ordinance.
2. No sign, which by reason of location, size, color, or designs, shall interfere with public traffic or be confused with or obstruct the view or effectiveness of any official traffic signal or traffic marking.
E. Non-Conforming Signs: Non-conforming free-standing signs, sign structures, poles and other related equipment that have been abandoned for more than one year shall be removed.
F. Maintenance: All signs and sign structures shall be properly maintained, so as not to become a public hazard or to become a detriment to the street environment. The Code Enforcement Officer has the right to request reasonable maintenance to be carried out within the calendar year of the request. Light sources shall be maintained to minimize glare for motorists, pedestrians and neighboring premises.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
5-21
G. Illumination: The source of a sign’s illumination shall not be visible from any adjacent residential areas or streets.
H. Window Sign (Outside Designated Historic Districts): When a window sign or signs are placed so as to attract the attention of persons outside the building where such signs are displayed, the total area of all such window signs shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the total area of the window in which such sign is placed. Window signs do not require a sign permit. For window signs within a historic district, see Article 5.7.7.
I. Directional Signs: Directional signs not exceeding two (2) square feet per sign shall be allowed in all zoning districts without requiring a sign permit. Such signs would include street addresses, safety signs (e.g. “No Smoking”), and signs assisting in the flow of traffic.
J. Projecting Signs: Where wall-mounted signs are allowed, projecting signs are permitted up to ten square feet (10 sq. ft.) in area and must have a minimum height of eight feet (8') to the bottom of the sign and a maximum height of fifteen feet (15') to the top of the sign. Signs may not project more than five feet (5 feet) from a wall surface.
K. Permitting:
1. A building permit shall be required in addition to a sign permit, if the cost of the sign and installation together exceeds Fifteen Hundred Dollars ($1,500). The Board of Selectmen may, from time to time establish a new dollar figure by resolution.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, install, and/or replace any sign that requires a sign permit within the Town without first applying for and obtaining a sign permit from the Planning Department.
3. Failure to conform to the conditions of a sign permit, including any conditions and/or stipulations attached thereto by the Planning Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment, and/or Board of Selectmen shall render such permit void.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
5-22
4. Fees for sign permits shall be required and payable in such sums as the Board of Selectmen may from time to time establish by resolution. Fees shall not be required to replace an existing sign.
5. A sign permit does not include electrical work; however, this exemption shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in violation of the provisions of any other laws or ordinances.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
5-23
5.7.4 Dimensional Sign Regulations for Residential Districts:
Permitted signs in the following zoning districts;
RU, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, M, MS.
Type of Use
Maximum
Aggregate
Area
(Sq. Ft.)
(Note A)
Wall-Mounted
Signs
Maximum
Area
(Sq. Ft.)
One, Free-Standing
Identification
Sign
Maximum Area/Height
Illuminated
Sign
Sign
Permit
Required
Off-Site
Signs
(Sq. Ft.)
Temp | Perm.
One and Two Family Dwelling Identification
4
4
4/5
No
No
No
No
Multi-Family Dwellings Apartment & Condominium Identification
24
24
24/10
External
Yes
No
No
Subdivision Identification (each entrance)
24
N/A
24/10
External
Yes
No
No
Mobile Home Parks (each entrance)
24
N/A
24/10
External
Yes
No
No
Civic Organization Group Displays
(Note E)
40
N/A
40/10
No
Yes
24
4
Churches, Museums & Schools (per building) (Note E)
24
24
24/10
Yes
Yes
24
4
Health Care Facilities & Libraries (per building) (Note E)
24
24
24/10
Yes
Yes
No
No
Home
Occupation
4
4
4/5
No
Yes
No
No
Farm Uses&
Garden Supply
(Note E)
24
24
4/5
No
Yes
No
No
Legal Non-Conforming Use
(Note E)
24
24
24/10
External
Yes
No
No
Permanent Reader board (Note E)
12
12
12/10
Yes
Yes
No
No
Temporary Contractor
12
12
12/5
No
No
No
No
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
5-24
5.7.4 Dimensional Sign Regulations for Residential Districts Continued:
Temporary Real Estate Signs
Permitted signs in the following zoning districts;
RU, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, M, MS.
Type of Use
Maximum
Aggregate
Area
(Sq. Ft.)
(Note A)
Wall-Mounted
Signs
Maximum
Area
(Sq. Ft.)
One
Free-Standing
Identification
Sign
Maximum Area/Height
Illuminated
Sign
Sign
Permit
Required
Off-Site
Signs
(Sq. Ft.)
Temp | Perm.
Temporary Real Estate Signs
Sale, Lease or Rent
6
6
6/5
No
No
No
No
Open House/ Model Home Directional sign (Note B)
24
N/A
6/5
No
No
Yes (B)
No
Parcels greater than 5 acres
(Note C)
24
24
24/10
No
Yes
No
No
Subdivision
Advertising
(Notes C, D)
48
N/A
24/10
No
Yes
No
No
Future Development
24
24
24/10
No
Yes
No
No
Explanatory Notes:
A. Maximum aggregate sign area is the sum of all identification and advertising signs that require a sign permit.
B. Four off-site signs may be used only when a sales person is on duty at the home for sale and in no event may be left overnight even if the homeowner is selling the house himself. The off-site signs must be placed in such a manner as to not create a public hazard.
C. Oversized Sale, Lease, or Rent signs shall be located at least 100' from adjacent residential structures.
D. One off-site sign allowed for subdivisions of six (6) or more lots.
E. A permanent reader-board or non-electronic changeable letter advertising is permitted. The maximum aggregate area is 12 sq. ft. and the maximum mounted height is 10 ft. The sign may be attached to a permanent freestanding identification sign structure. A permit is required and it may be illuminated.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
5-25
5.7.5 Dimensional Sign Regulations for Non-Residential Districts:
For signs located along Epping Road, see Article 6.8 in addition to the following regulations.
Type of Use
Maximum Aggregate
Area (Sq. Ft.) (A)
Wall-Mounted Signs Maximum Area (Sq. Ft.)
One Freestanding Identification Sign Maximum Area/Height (F)
Illuminated
Sign
Sign
Permit
Required
Single Business
50 (B)
50 (B)
24/10
24/25(C-2, C-3)
Yes
Yes
Multi-Business (E)
40(C)
40(C)
(D)/10
(D)/25(C-2, C-3)
Yes
Yes
Temporary Real Estate Sign
24
24
24/10
No
Yes
Future Development
24
24
24/10
No
Yes
Service Station Price Sign
12
12
12/10
Yes
Yes
Menu Board
12
12
12/10
Yes
Yes
Permanent Reader board (G)
12
12
12/10
Yes
Yes
Explanatory Notes:
A. Maximum aggregate sign area is the sum of all identification and advertising signs that require a sign permit.
B. One (1) additional square foot of sign area is allowed for each additional linear foot of principal building frontage in excess of fifty linear feet (50') to a maximum of one hundred (100) square feet.
C. One (1) additional square foot of sign area is allowed for each additional linear foot of principal building frontage occupied by each business in excess of forty linear feet (40') to a maximum of eighty (80) square feet of sign area per business.
D. One (1) freestanding identification sign per street frontage is allowed for the multi-business building or center. The maximum sign area allowed shall be twenty-four (24) square feet plus an additional four (4) square feet for each business to a maximum of forty-eight (48) square feet, except thirty-two (32) square feet in a C-1 and WC zones. The free-standing sign may either be a directory sign or identify the building or center only.
E. All wall fascia-mounted signs for individual businesses shall be uniform in terms of colors, shapes, and maximum vertical dimension with all other such signs in the center. A proposal for signing for the entire center shall be submitted and approved prior to issuance of any sign permit.
F. The location, size, and height of free-standing identification signs must not obstruct views for safety reasons or obscure other adjacent signs. The precise locations of the proposed sign shall be noted on the sign permit application.
G. A non-electronic changeable letter advertising sign may be attached to a permanent free-standing identification sign structure.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
5-26
5.7.6 Regulations for Signs in the Historic District: In addition to the preceding regulations, signs on properties within the boundaries of the Historic Districts, as defined on the official zoning map for the Town of Exeter, must comply with the following instructions and receive approval from the Historic District Commission.
A. Goals and Standards: The goals and standards of the Exeter Historic District Commission in reviewing and approving applications, as well as considering requests for exceptions in special cases shall be:
1. To ensure that the visual impact of all signs shall be consistent with the historical and architectural qualities of the Historic District.
2. To ensure all signs are consistent with the goals and standards of the Historic District in design, size, color, material and visual impact.
3. To preserve, to the extent practicable, the period architectural details of facades of the buildings in the Historic District.
4. To promote the general visual attractiveness of the Historic District.
5. To be consistent with the goals of NH RSA 674:45.
B. General Guidelines:
1. Application: A sign erected within the Historic District shall require an approved application from the Historic District Commission. Applications must be presented by the building owner or his/her agent. Applicants are urged to consult the Preservation Guidelines for the Exeter Historic District for definitions of terms and helpful suggestions.
2. Sign Area: Only one face of a two-sided sign shall be used in computing sign area.
3. Exempt Signs: Signs required by Federal and/or State law and Historical Markers will not be considered as part of total signage area.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
5-27
4. Material: Materials appropriate to the Historic District, such as wood, brass, glass, or wrought iron, will be permitted. Other materials may be permitted on a case by case basis.
5. Special Cases: Request for exceptions to any of the requirements listed in the following articles for the Commercial and Residential Historic Districts will be reviewed by the Historic District Commission.
6. Size and Scale: Signs in the Historic Districts should be appropriate in size and scale and, therefore, not dominate the structure with which they are associated. (See Historic District – Table A- Allowable Sign Area-Commercial)
7. Placement: Signs should be placed in locations on or near the structure traditionally used for signage and should not obscure significant architectural features.
8. Trademarks and Product Names: Such signs shall be discouraged in favor of names of proprietors, business owners or business names. If trademarks and product names are desired, the Historic District Commission shall review them carefully to insure that said signs in design, size, colors, materials and visual impact are consistent with the goals and standards of the Historic District.
9. Illumination: Signs shall be illuminated only by steady, stationary, shielded light sources directed solely on the sign without causing glare for motorists, pedestrians, or neighboring premises. Only externally illuminated signs will be permitted in the historic districts.
10. Lettering: Lettering should be appropriate to the type of business and historic nature of the property to which it is associated.
11. Maintenance: The Historic District Commission has the right to request reasonable maintenance in the Historic District, to be carried out within the calendar year of the request. Light sources shall be
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
5-28
maintained to minimize glare for motorists, pedestrians and neighboring premises.
5.7.7 Sign Ordinance for the Historic District – Non-Residential Zoning Districts:
A. Size and Sign Type: Total signage shall be limited to 40 square feet and as specified below by sign type.
Historic District – Table A- Allowable Sign Area (Commercial)
Type of Sign
Size
Notes
Awning
Text is only permitted on front hanging edge of canopy. The awning may not extend over two-thirds of the sidewalk or 6 feet from the building face, whichever is the lesser.
Front edge must be flexible or free hanging. Color and style must be appropriate to the building and lettering will be considered part of the total allowable sign area.
Directory Sign
10 square feet.
Directional Sign
2 square feet.
Excluded from total allowable sign area.
Free Standing Sign
Maximum height is 10 feet.
Single Business - Maximum size allowed is 12 square feet.
Multiple Business - Maximum size allowed is 24 square feet.
Permitted where property layout allows sign to be at least 5 feet from the sidewalk.
Marquee
80 square feet.
Only permitted on a case by case basis with documented historical precedence.
Nameplate or Plaque
2 square feet.
Used to distinguish primary entrance where multiple businesses are present.
Projecting or Hanging Sign
10 square feet.
Signs with an “open” design in excess of 10 square feet will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis.
Wall-Mounted Flat Sign
25 square feet maximum in size and projecting no more than 6” from the surface of the wall.
Window Sign
Permanent - Text may cover 10 % of the total window area in which they appear.
Temporary - Text may cover 25% of the total window area in which they appear.
Temporary signs may be displayed for a period of 30 days or less.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
5-29
B. Number of Signs/Business:
1. Each business shall be permitted one primary and one secondary sign per street façade.
2. In case of multiple occupancies, the owner of the building is responsible for an overall signage plan. Directory signs shall be designed and constructed with provision to allow for changes of occupancy without reconstruction of the entire sign.
a. If occupants have separate entrances, each occupant will be allowed one nameplate or plaque to mark their primary entrance. This counts as the business secondary sign.
b. Where a building façade is limited to a single door leading to multiple occupancies, only one of the following is permitted: wall-mounted directory sign; projecting/hanging sign; or window sign. If a wall- mounted or projecting sign is used, the door shall have the building name and/or street number only.
C. Location:
1. A parallel sign can project no more than six inches (6") from the building surface.
5.7.8 Sign Ordinance for the Historic District – Residential Zoning Districts:
A. Location:
1. A parallel sign can project no more than six inches (6") from the building surface.
2. No sign may project from the building face for more than three feet (3') or be more than four square feet in size.
3. One free-standing or one wall mounted sign is allowed with a maximum sign area 6 sq. ft. Historic markers are excluded from this provision. Lettering and illumination shall comply with table 5.7.4.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
5-30
5.8 GENERAL LANDSCAPING REGULATIONS
5.8.1 Unenclosed Uses: Any unenclosed special exception which may be authorized by the Board of Adjustment shall be landscaped according to this article and shall be required to provide a fence, screen, planted berm or landscaping sufficient to obscure such uses from view from abutting residential uses, properties lying in R-District or from a public right-of-way.
5.8.2 Maintenance: Any fencing or landscaping installed in accordance with this article shall be maintained in good order to achieve the objectives of this article. Failure to maintain fencing or to replace dead or diseased landscaping shall be considered a violation of this ordinance.
5.9 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
All uses shall comply with the following:
5.9.1 Sound: The volume of sound inherently and recurrently generated shall be controlled so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent uses.
5.9.2 Vibration: An operation that creates intense earthshaking vibration, e.g., heavy drop forges, heavy hydraulic surges, shall not be discernible beyond the property lines of the industry.
5.9.3 Radioactivity: No operation shall be permitted which causes radioactivity in violation of Title 10, Chapter 1, Part 20, Code of Federal Regulations, “Standards for Protection Against Radiation,” dated June 16, 1957, or any subsequent revision or amendments.
5.9.4 Odor: No emission of odorous gas or other odorous matter in such quantity as to be readily detectable at any point along lot lines without use of instruments shall be permitted.
5.9.5 Hazardous Waste:
A. Hazardous waste shall be those substances as defined by the Environmental Protection Agency in its proposed Regulations under Section 3001, 3002 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act of 1976, and as said proposed Regulations (including definitions) are more fully set forth in the Federal Register, Monday, December 18, 1978, Part IV, and as said proposed regulations (including definitions) may from time to time be amended and finally adopted. Hazardous Waste shall also
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
5-31
be further defined as provided for in “An Act Establishing a Hazardous Waste Management Program,” NH RSA §147-A:2, effective July 1, 1979, hereinafter referred to as the “Act”, and as same may be amended or enlarged upon by the Rules and Regulations of the Bureau of Solid Waste Management, as is more specifically provided for in the Act.
B. The disposal, treatment, bulking or handling (hereinafter collectively called treatment) of hazardous waste within the corporate limits of the Town of Exeter shall be permitted only when such waste is generated within the Town of Exeter and such treatment shall be prohibited except by an operation of facility owned or operated and controlled by the Town of Exeter, its agents or its designees, in which event such treatment shall not be conducted by the Town or delegated to any third party until two prerequisites have been satisfied, namely:
1. The Town shall have adopted by vote at an annual town meeting or a special town meeting called for such purpose, a comprehensive plan for the treatment of hazardous waste, such plan to be consistent with and in conformity with all State and Federal statutes and regulations governing the same.
2. Approval of the operation or facility proposed shall be in each instance, by vote of the Town at an annual town meeting or special town meeting, called for such purposes by the Town.
C. The temporary storage of hazardous waste other than for treatment is permitted only when it is used, manufactured or generated as a waste as part of an industrial, manufacturing or laboratory process that takes place within the Town of Exeter, and in such event, the same shall be inventoried and stored inside a building with an impermeable floor and otherwise handled in strict conformance with all applicable Federal and State regulations governing same. The records pertaining to such inventory and storage shall be open to the Board of Selectmen and/or the Exeter Fire Department upon reasonable request.
5.9.6 Glare: No direct or reflected glare shall be detectable from any R-District boundaries.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
5-32
5.9.7 Heat: No direct or reflected heat shall be detectable from any R or C-District boundaries.
5.9.8 Dust and Fly Ash: No solid or liquid particles shall be emitted in such quantity as to be readily detectable at any point along lot lines or as to produce a public nuisance or hazard beyond lot lines.
5.9.9 Smoke: No smoke shall be emitted in such quantity as to become a nuisance.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
6-1
Article 6. SUPPLEMENTARY USE REGULATIONS
6.1 ELDERLY CONGREGATE HEALTH CARE FACILITIES – STANDARDS
6.1.1 Purpose: The regulations in this article have been established for the purpose of encouraging the construction of dwelling units suitable for occupancy by elderly persons, while ensuring compliance with local planning standards, land use policies, good building design and other requirements consistent with promoting the public health, safety and general welfare of the inhabitants of Exeter.
6.1.2 General Standards: All Elderly Congregate Health Care Facilities shall conform to the following standards:
A. Dwelling units shall be on municipal sewer and water.
B. The occupancy of dwelling units within the development shall be limited generally to persons fifty-five (55) years of age or older.
C. The minimum tract area shall be three (3) acres.
D. A landscaped buffer area having a minimum depth of one hundred feet (100') shall be provided between any proposed structure and the perimeter of the property in order to provide an adequate division or transition from abutting land uses. Whenever possible, the natural vegetation shall be retained, or if required, vegetation shall be planted of sufficient size to shield the development from abutting properties. Buffer areas may include fences or berms, as well as shrubs or trees.
No dwelling, accessory structure, collector or service roads or parking areas shall be permitted within the designated buffer area. However, access roads are permitted to cross this buffer area.
6.1.3 Procedure and Criteria: The procedure and criteria for reviewing applications for elderly congregate health care facilities shall be as set forth in the “Site Plan Review/Subdivision Regulations”.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
6-2
6.1.4 Density Bonus: A density bonus of 15% above the number of units permitted in the appropriate zoning district will be granted for developments that will guarantee:
A. 20% of the total number of units proposed within the development shall be affordable, see sections (B) and (C). Affordability shall be defined as housing that can be purchased under a conventional mortgage whereby the combined annual expenses for principal, interest and property taxes will not exceed 30% of household income.
B. 15% or more of the units constructed will be sold at initial sale for a price that can be afforded by a household with an income not more than 120% of the median family income for the New Hampshire portion of the Portsmouth-Rochester NH-ME PMSA, as published by US Department of Housing and Urban Development;
C. 5% or more of the units constructed will be sold at initial sale for a price that can be afforded by a household with an income not more than 80% of the median family income for the New Hampshire portion of the Portsmouth-Rochester NH-ME PMSA, as published by US Department of Housing and Urban Development;
D. Units will be sold with deed restrictions and a recorded housing agreement that limit, for a period of 30 years renewable upon sale or transfer, the resale value of the unit to not more than the purchase price plus two times the accumulated consumer price index.
E. The units shall be on-site.
6.2 JUNKYARDS
6.2.1 New junkyards may be permitted only within an I District, subject to the granting of a special exception found to comply with the requirements herein set forth.
6.2.2 Without the granting of a special exception, no junkyard existing as a non-conforming use shall be allowed to:
A. Expand in area;
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
6-3
B. Install salvage-processing equipment or facilities that would create noise or vibration detectable beyond the property lines;
C. Extend the hours of operation;
D. Increase the height of materials stored.
6.2.3 The Board of Adjustment, in considering an application for special exception, shall find that the proposal complies with the following criteria:
A. The terms of Article 5.2 Special Exceptions herein are complied with.
B. To the greatest extent practical the objectives and purposes of NH RSA §236:111 shall be promoted.
C. All materials and equipment shall be stored within the enclosed area, unless an accessory use is specifically authorized.
D. A landscaped buffer (per Section 9.7 of the Site Plan Review/Subdivision Regulations) exterior to minimum eight foot (8') high fence shall be provided to effectively screen from view, year-round, all materials and equipment from adjacent rights-of-way and property lines.
6.3 JUNK CARS
Even if an unregistered motor vehicle or a registered motor vehicle which does not have a valid state motor vehicle inspection sticker is intended to be repaired or is in condition for legal use on the public highways, no more than one (1) such motor vehicle may be stored outside of a building on a lot for a period not to exceed one year, except for a state licensed new or used motor vehicle dealer or a state licensed junk motor vehicle dealer (See NH RSA §236:124).
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
6-4
6.4 AMUSEMENT CENTERS
6.4.1 General Regulations:
A. Such uses, when not conducted entirely within an enclosed structure, may be required to be enclosed by appropriate fencing or landscaping.
B. Off-street parking areas shall be screened from adjoining residential properties in accordance with Article 5.9 General Landscaping Regulations and Section 9.7 of the Site Plan Review/Subdivision Regulations.
C. No amusement center shall be maintained or operated within 300 feet of an entrance or exit of a public or private school..
D. Illuminated signs and other lights shall be directed away, or shielded from adjoining residential properties and streets in such a way as not to disturb the occupants thereof.
E. No public address system shall be permitted except where such system is inaudible at any property line.
6.5 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS USES
6.5.1 Purpose and Intent: The purpose of this article is to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to limit the location and prevent the concentration of sexually oriented business uses within the Town of Exeter. The intent of this article is to promote health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the Town of Exeter by preventing problems of blight and deterioration which accompany and are brought about by the concentration of sexually oriented business uses.
6.5.2 Permitted Locations: Sexually oriented business uses shall only be permitted in the C-3, Epping Road Highway Commercial Zoning District by special exception provided all regulations, requirements and restrictions pertaining to that zoning district are met and the sexually oriented business use shall not be permitted within 1,000 feet of a church or place of worship, funeral home, a public or private school, an approved day care center, another sexually oriented business use, or 500
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
6-5
feet from a residence or residential district, a recreation park or Town of Exeter building.
6.5.3 Measure of Distance: The measure of distance between any sexually oriented business use and other named point of reference shall be measured in a straight line from the structure containing the sexually oriented business use to the nearest property line of the named point of reference.
6.5.4 Limiting Clause: Nothing in this article or in the zoning ordinance as a whole authorizes any use that violates any Town of Exeter ordinance or State of New Hampshire statute regarding public nuisances, sexual conduct, lewdness, or obscene or harmful material or the exhibition or public display thereof.
6.6 ESSENTIAL SERVICES
6.6.1 Enclosed or Permanent Structures: Such uses when in R-District shall be subject to the following regulations:
A. Such facility shall not be located on or under a residential street (unless no other site is available) and shall be so located as to draw a minimum of vehicular traffic to and through such streets.
B. The location, design and operation of such facility shall not adversely affect the character of the surrounding residential area.
6.6.2 Open: Where applicable, the landscaping regulations of Article 5.9 General Landscaping Regulations shall apply.
6.7 RETAIL USES
6.7.1 Drive-In Commercial Uses: Such businesses, where persons are served in automobiles, shall be not closer than 300 feet to an R-District and shall provide ingress and egress so as to minimize traffic congestion. The number and location of curb cuts shall be subject to the review and approval of the Planning Board.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
6-6
6.7.2 Retail Trade Size Limitations: For all districts except the C-3 District: Any single or grouped retail business use (i.e. a contiguous strip center, mall) shall not exceed a total of 85,000 square feet of building footprint area.
6.7.3 Retail services allowed as accessory uses in the NP, CT, CT-1 and PP districts are limited to the following floor areas shown below to a maximum of 1000 sq. ft. per lot:
A. NP: 10% of the gross floor area of the principal building,
B. CT and CT-1: 20% of the gross floor area of the principal building,
C. PP: 15% of the gross floor area of the principal building.
Proposed retail areas shall be physically linked to the principle use. Specifically, in cases where there are existing structures, the retail area shall be located in an existing building. For new proposals, the retail area shall be located in the same structure as the principal use.
Drive-thru facilities are not allowed as part of this provision.
6.8 EPPING ROAD STRIP MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE, C-3 DISTRICT
6.8.1 Purpose: To lessen congestion upon arterial streets and provide for the safe and orderly flow of traffic within a developing commercial area. These regulations intend to prescribe design standards for traffic access, curb cuts, landscaping, lighting, signing and internal traffic circulation within the C-3 Districts.
A. Insofar as possible, access points shall be located directly opposite each other across Epping Road.
B. Each parcel shall have but one point of access to Epping Road unless it has more than 1,200 feet of frontage, in which case one point of access is permitted for each 600 feet of frontage.
C. Abutters shall consolidate access points at common property lines or, as may be agreed, elsewhere so as to reduce the number of such points.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
6-7
6.8.2 Minimum Front Yard, Use Thereof: The first twenty-five feet (25') of front yard shall be kept clear of obstructions to sight and shall not be used for display of goods or signs; the next twenty-five feet (25') of front yard shall be planted and landscaped and shall permit signage with a minimum setback requirement of thirty-five feet (35').
6.9 MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARKS
6.9.1 Area Requirements: Individual manufactured housing lots located in a manufactured housing park shall contain at least 10,000 square feet of lot area and shall not be less than seventy-five feet (75') wide exclusive of easements.
6.9.2 Setback Requirements: No structure located on any lot in any manufactured housing park shall be closer to any front lot line than twenty-five feet (25'); to any side lot line than fifteen feet (15'); nor to any rear lot line than twenty-five feet (25').
6.9.3 Lot Requirements: All lots in any manufactured housing home park shall be well drained and graded to a point where manufactured housing may be parked so that the parking of the same shall result in safety to all concerned. In all instances as much natural growth as is reasonably possible shall be preserved by any manufactured housing park developer. A paved parking apron shall extend at least one foot beyond the outside dimensions of any manufactured house parked thereon.
6.9.4 Utility Improvements: All manufactured housing parks shall provide to each manufactured housing lot line both a continuing supply of safe and potable water as approved by the New Hampshire Department of Health, and a connection to public sanitary sewerage disposal facilities of the municipality or to facilities provided by the developer which shall be in accordance with, and as approved by, the New Hampshire State Department of Health.
6.9.5 Other Site Improvements: There shall be provided in each manufactured housing park such other improvements as shall be required whereby such requirements shall at all times be in the best interests of the public’s health, safety and general welfare and shall include garbage and trash collection and disposal facilities as approved by the New Hampshire Department of Health, and an adequate park lighting system.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
6-8
6.9.6 Individual tenants at the manufactured housing park may construct attached enclosures to individual manufactured housing, provided that such enclosures do not exceed 100 percent (100%) of the floor area of the manufactured housing.
6.9.7 All manufactured housing parks shall have paved access roads to and from all sites and in no instance shall such sites and roads be in conflict with any other ordinance of the municipality.
6.9.8 Minimum improvements for all manufactured housing parks shall include the following:
A. Streets: All streets within any manufactured housing parks shall conform to the design standards set forth in the “Subdivision Regulations”.
B. Open Space: All manufactured housing parks shall provide not less than ten percent (10%) of the total land area for public open space purposes and such lands shall be improved whereby the same will be accessible to all families residing within said tract and whereby such open space may be used for recreational purposes.
6.9.9 Roadway or area lighting shall be reflected away from adjoining properties.
6.9.10 All manufactured housing parks shall be located on well-drained lands and shall have not less than a total land area of ten (10) acres.
6.9.11 The commercial sale of manufactured housing from a manufactured housing park shall be prohibited.
6.9.12 All proposed manufactured housing developments shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Board and must conform to subdivision rules and regulations.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
6-9
6.10 HOME OCCUPATIONS – INSIDE AND OUTSIDE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Permitted home occupations may be operated in any dwelling unit only if they comply with all of the following conditions:
6.10.1 Where Permitted: Within a dwelling unit, or in a building or other structure accessory to a dwelling unit and only by the person or persons maintaining a dwelling therein. No more than two additional non-residents shall be employed in the home occupation.
6.10.2 Evidence of Use: Does not display outside the building or create beyond the lot lines of the premises, any evidence of the home occupation, except a permitted sign and off-street parking, in addition to not more than one commercial vehicle parked at the dwelling overnight and with no detrimental impact on existing traffic safety on abutting streets.
6.10.3 Extent of Use: Does not utilize more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the combined gross floor area of the dwelling unit and accessory structures located on the premise, except foster family care. Where an existing residential building, in existence prior to April 1, 1972, is converted, no more than three (3) dwelling units shall be permitted if a home occupation exists within the principal building or other structure accessory to the principal building (including basement and accessory structures).
6.10.4 Permitted Uses: Includes the following uses provided that such uses are clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes and that provisions are made for off-street parking as required herein (See Article 5.6.4 Off-Street Parking Schedule):
A. Medical offices;
B. Other professional offices, including lawyer, engineer, architect, etc;
C. Custom dressing making, seamstress, milliner;
D. Artist or Musician
E. Foster family care (for not more than four children simultaneously);
F. Real estate and insurance offices;
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
6-10
G. Farm stands and garden supply stands for produce grown or raised on the premises;
H. Beauticians and barbers;
I. Art, craft, hobby and antique shops;
J. Consultants;
K. Contractors;
L. Child Day Care (not more than 3)**;
M. Catering;
N. Similar occupations as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer.
** Four (4) children or more see Article 4.2, Schedule I: Permitted Uses.
6.10.5 Permitted Procedure: A home occupation use permit shall be issued by the Code Enforcement Officer if the requirements of Article 6.10.1-6.10.4 are met.
6.10.6 Special Exception: Foster family care for more than four children, child day care for more than three children, and otherwise permitted uses which exceed the standards of Article 6.10.2 Home Occupations – Evidence of Use, as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer, may be permitted by special exception issued under Article 5.2 Special Exceptions of this ordinance.
6.10.7 Also, any home occupation that may have an impact on abutting properties, as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer shall be required to obtain a special exception.
6.11 GASOLINE AND/OR AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE STATIONS
6.11.1 Location: No gasoline and/or service station shall be erected or extended except in the Highway Commercial District. The service station location must be abutted on both sides by property zoned Highway Commercial.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
6-11
6.11.2 Authorization: No lot or plot shall be used for the sale or storage of gasoline, oil or other fuels until the owner has made application for and received a Special Exception permit therefore from the Board of Adjustment, after a public hearing held for that purpose.
6.11.3 Quantity: No more than one gasoline and/or service station facility shall be allowed per each 500 vehicle registrations existing in the Town at the time of application. The number of registrations shall be determined from the Town Clerk’s office.
6.11.4 Additional Requirements: All gasoline and/or automotive services stations that abut residential properties shall be screened as regulated in Article 5.9 General Landscaping Regulations of this ordinance.
6.11.5 Location of Pumps: All pump islands shall be set back at least twenty-five feet (25’) from the front property line.
6.11.6 Service Work: All service work with the exception of the pumping of gasoline shall be performed within the building.
6.11.7 Unregistered Vehicles: No unregistered vehicles are to remain on the site for more than one week unless enclosed in a building or screened from view of adjacent property. Vehicles shall not be sold upon the premises.
6.12 MARINAS, DOCKS AND PIERS
6.12.1 Marinas, boatyards, yacht clubs, docks, wharves, floats, waterfront walkways and related development projects may be permitted by Special Exceptions which shall be granted only upon authorization by the Board of Adjustment upon compliance with the following requirements:
A. Marinas shall be designed so as to result in the least amount of alteration of water area.
B. Supporting marinas facilities, such as outside winter storage yards, shall be located inland, not in the Waterfront Commercial District.
C. Pilings or cribbing are to be used to elevate marina structures rather than solid fill.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
6-12
D. Pump-out facilities for boat sewage must be provided and connected to the municipal sewer, should any services be offered other than tie-ups.
E. Marinas, supporting facilities and structures shall be designed and located to enhance and promote the Waterfront Master Plan.
6.12.2 No dock, wharf, float, pier, waterfront walkway or any related waterborne structure shall be permitted within 400 feet of the String Bridge downstream abutments.
6.13 EXCAVATION OF EARTH MATERIAL
6.13.1 Excavation operations may be permitted only upon authorization by the Board of Adjustment by Special Exception provided the following requirements are met in addition to Article 5.2 Special Exceptions:
A. Excavation operations shall not take place closer than 300 feet to adjacent property.
B. Planning Board approval of the excavation and reclamation plans.
C. Planning Board approval of the performance bond.
6.14 INDUSTRIAL AND MANUFACTURING USES
6.14.1 Hazardous Storage: facilities must be a minimum of 1,000 feet from any place of public assembly having a capacity of ten persons or more, or any habitable dwelling. All storage facilities must be meet all state and federal regulations.
6.15 HELICOPTER AND AIRPORT ORDINANCE
6.15.1 Purpose: In order to promote the orderly and safe development of helicopter and airport services within the Town of Exeter, it has been deemed appropriate to adopt a special ordinance in order to insure public safety as well as commercial or recreational convenience.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
6-13
6.15.2 Definitions:
A. Heliport: An area used, or to be used, for landing or take-off of helicopters and includes any and all of the area and buildings which are appropriate to accomplish these functions.
B. Helicopter: An aircraft propelled and sustained by horizontal propellers, rotary wings, or other aircraft capable of hovering.
C. Airport: An area used, or to be used, for the landing or take-off of fixed wing aircraft.
6.15.3 Regulation of Heliport and Airports:
A. Heliports and airports shall only be permitted in the RU, C-2, C-3, H, PP, CT, CT-1 and I zones provided landing area site approval and registration is completed by the State Division of Aeronautics in accordance with NH RSA §424.
B. Heliports and airports may be permitted only upon authorization by the Board of Adjustment by Special Exception provided the following requirements are met:
1. The heliport and/or airport must clearly be shown to be incidental to the principal use of the property;
2. The proposed use will not adversely affect the adjoining land uses and the growth and development of the area in which it is proposed to be located;
3. The traffic generated by the proposed use will not impose an undue burden upon the streets and highways designed to carry the traffic in the area;
4. The use will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, welfare and convenience of the citizens of Exeter;
5. Due consideration has been given to the selection of the site and flight paths which are near or adjacent to large open areas or bodies of water so as to minimize public safety concerns;
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
6-14
6. That the applicant agrees as a condition of the Special Exception to obtain Planning Board approval of the site plan in addition to State Division of Aeronautics site approval and registration prior to applying for a building permit. The Board of Adjustment may require the applicant to obtain Planning Board approval of the site prior to scheduling a hearing on an application for a Special Exception.
C. Permits for establishing and maintaining heliports and/or airports shall be issued to the owner or lessee of the heliport and/or airport by the Code Enforcement Officer after being granted a Special Exception by the Board of Adjustment. All requests shall be considered as non-residential and as such will be subject to the normal application and site plan review process.
6.15.4 General Regulations:
A. It shall be unlawful to take-off or land a helicopter anywhere within the Town of Exeter except at a heliport and/or airport for which a permit has been issued by the Town of Exeter unless such take-off or landing is performed in conjunction with one of the following:
1. Special events such as an athletic contest, holiday celebration, parade or similar activity after reasonable advance notice has been given to the Exeter Police and Fire Departments and approval has been issued by the Board of Selectmen of their designated agent;
2. When necessary for law enforcement or other public safety purposes;
3. When necessary for aircraft or medical emergencies;
4. When required by the officer in charge of the Exeter Fire Department in conjunction with Fire Department operations;
5. Occasional landing to pick up or discharge passengers at a location where regular use is
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
6-15
neither permitted nor anticipated. Such occasional landing shall not exceed more than one per year.
6.16 HEALTHCARE DISTRICT:
6.16.1 Dimensional Regulations: Except for setbacks (i.e. minimum yards) from lot lines which are also lines separating the Healthcare District from any adjacent District, the dimensional requirements under “Municipal Water & Sewer”, “Min. Lot Area”, “Min. Lot Depth”, “Min. Lot Width”, “Min. Frontage”, “Min. Front Yard”, “Min. Side Yard”, and “Min. Rear Yard” shall not apply to any lot now existing or hereafter created in the Healthcare District so long as the lot at issue and all adjoining lots in the Healthcare District are owned by the same entity or its affiliates. “Affiliate” shall mean an entity owned by, or under common ownership with another entity.
The Planning Board, in connection with site plan review, may require reasonable separations between buildings.
6.16.2 Perimeter Setback: Wherever the Healthcare District adjoins a residential district, the building set back shall be not less than fifty feet from the residential district line, and wherever the Healthcare District adjoins a non-residential district, the building set back shall be not less than thirty feet from the non-residential district line.
6.16.3 Parking Setbacks: No additional, or enlarged, parking areas shall be installed in the Healthcare District within fifty feet (50) of where the Healthcare District adjoins any residential district or residential uses.
6.16.4 Landscape Buffer: In addition to the building and parking setbacks in 6.16.2 and .3, the Planning Board, in its consideration of site plan review applications for site development or redevelopment within the Healthcare District, shall require landscaping and screening within the fifty (50) foot perimeter setback from any adjacent residential district or residential uses.
6.16.5 Height: The portion of any building constructed within seventy five (75) feet of the boundary of the Healthcare District with any residential zone shall not exceed the height allowed in the
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
6-16
adjoining residential zone. The Planning Board, when considering site plan review applications for construction of a portion of any building located more than seventy give (75) feet from said boundary which will have a height greater than that allowed in the adjoining residential zone, shall require the applicant to submit shadow studies evaluating the impact of the proposed construction on adjoining residentially zoned property.
6.17 WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS.
6.17.1 Purpose
This wind energy systems ordinance is enacted in accordance with RSA 674:62-66, and the purposes outlined in RSA672:1-III-a. The purpose of this ordinance is to accommodate wind energy systems in appropriate locations, while protecting the public’s health, safety and welfare. In addition, this ordinance provides a permitting process for wind energy systems to ensure compliance with the provisions of the requirements and standards established herein.
6.17.2 Location Allowances:
A. Small wind energy systems shall be allowed by special exception in all districts in accordance with the following requirements and restrictions.
B. Large wind energy systems shall be allowed by special exception in Industrial (I) and Corporate Technology –1Park (CT-1) districts in accordance with the following requirements and restrictions.
6.17.3 Definitions:
A. Small wind energy system consists of a wind turbine, a free-standing tower, and associated control or conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity of 60 kilowatts or less and the generated energy will be used for onsite consumption.
B. Large wind energy system consists of a wind turbine, a free-standing tower, and associated control or
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
6-17
conversion electronics and will allow for a rated capacity of over 60 kilowatts and the generated energy would not be restricted to onsite consumption. (Note: the intent is not to allow for a wind farm).
6.17.4 General Regulations:
A. The small or large wind energy system footprint is considered as the tower’s base pole or poles including any other supporting cables or appurtenances used in mounting the tower and its blade. The system is considered a permanent structure and therefore would require a building permit.
B. The small or large wind energy system height will be measured at the tower height and not include the blades.
C. Height restrictions:
1. A small or large wind energy system that is equal or less than the allowed height restriction for structures within the district shall meet the building setbacks as specified within that district.
2. A small or large wind energy system that has a tower height that exceeds the allowable height in the zoning district in which it is proposed shall be set back a distance equal to 115% of the total height from any public road, sidewalk or trail, overhead utility lines and property lines, as measured from the center of the tower base.
3. The tower height shall not exceed 150 feet.
4. The applicant shall provide evidence that the proposed tower height does not exceed the height recommended by the manufacturer of the wind turbine.
D. Noise restriction: The small wind or large energy system shall not exceed 60 decibel (dbA) sound level as measured at the property line, except during short-term events such as severe wind storms and utility outages.
E. Approved Wind Turbines: The manufacturer and model of the wind turbine to be used in the proposed small wind energy system must have been approved by the California
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
6-18
Energy Commission or the New York State Energy Research and Development Authority or a similar list approved by the State of New Hampshire, if available.
F. Clearing: It is recommended that clearing of natural vegetation be limited to a minimum which is necessary for the construction, operation and maintenance of the small wind energy system.
G. Safety/Access: The tower shall be designed and installed so that any step bolts or a ladders readily accessible to the public are at a minimum height of 8 ft. above the ground.
H. Code Compliance: The small wind energy system shall comply with all applicable sections of the New Hampshire State Building Code.
I. Wind turbine energy systems may be combined with other uses such as cell tower use, radio or other antenna radio devices provided they meet all applicable manufacturing and building codes.
J. Regional Notification shall be adhered to as outlined in applicable NH State RSA (36:57).
6.18 CEMETERY REGULATIONS
6.18.1 Purpose: Under RSA 289:3 (III) the State of New Hampshire has established certain statutory setbacks from burial sites, burial grounds and cemeteries in the absence of local zoning regulations. This section is intended to serve as said local regulations.
6.18.2 Definitions: The terms “cemetery”, “burial site”, and “burial ground” shall all have the definitions, which are provided in RSA 289:1.
6.18.3 Structure Setback: No building or structure shall be constructed within 25 feet of a known burial site or within 25 feet of the boundaries of an established burial ground or cemetery. Underlying zoning may require a greater setback for structures, in which case the greater setback will apply.
6.18.4 Access Way and Utilities: No driveways and utility services (either above ground or underground) may be placed within 25 feet of
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
6-19
a known burial site or 25 feet of the boundaries of an established burial ground or cemetery.
6.18.5 Special Exception: Where the foregoing restrictions present practical difficulties to the use and enjoyment of adjoining properties, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may grant special exceptions from these provisions provided that all requirements for a special exception under 5.2 are met as well as the following:
A. The proposed use must have approval of both the Board of Selectmen and Cemetery Trustees.
B. Such proposal does not impair the integrity of the cemetery walls, facilities, drainage, or other physical attributes.
C. The proposed use does not diminish the general solemnity and solitude of the cemetery setting. In this regard, the Board may require appropriate buffering or screening from such proposed use.
D. The proposed use does not pose a public safety hazard to the cemetery or patrons thereof.
E. There are no practical alternatives to the proposed use.

Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
7-1
Article 7. OPEN SPACE DEVELOPMENT
7.1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Open Space Development article is to encourage flexibility in design and development of land in order to promote the conservation of open space and the efficient use of land in harmony with its natural features.
7.2 OBJECTIVES
7.2.1 To stimulate imaginative and economical approaches to land use and community development.
7.2.2 To facilitate the adequate and economical provision of streets, utilities and public spaces.
7.2.3 To preserve the natural and scenic qualities of open areas.
7.2.4 To establish living areas that provide a diversity of housing opportunities while ensuring adequate standards for public health, safety, welfare and convenience.
7.2.5 To encourage the conveyance of land and easements for use by the general public for recreational and or conservation purposes, in accordance with the terms of Article 7.7.1.A General Regulations Governing Open Space Development – Density – Bonus.
7.2.6 To preserve those areas of the site that have the highest ecological value, for example, wildlife habitat including rare and exemplary species and habitats, water resources, wetlands, streams and rivers.
7.2.7 To create a contiguous network of open spaces or “greenways” by linking the common open spaces within the subdivision and to open space on adjoining lands wherever possible.
7.3 DEFINITIONS
7.3.1 Vegetated Buffer Strip: A natural vegetated strip of land required to lessen the impact of development on neighboring communities, wetlands or other features. This land can be considered as part of the common area owned by the homeowners association or donated to the Town for access to conservation land.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
7-2
7.3.2 Common Area/Common Open Space: Any parcel or area of land and/or water set aside as a result of an Open Space Development Plan. The common area is designed for the benefit and enjoyment of the residences within the development. These areas may contain utility services to be used by the owners of the common area and may where appropriate contain accessory structures and improvements necessary for educational, recreational, cultural, societal or other non-commercial, non-industrial and non-residential uses.
7.3.3 Net Tract Area: The area of a parcel defined as ninety percent (90%) of the total area of the parcel less all non-buildable land, including all very poorly drained soils, and seventy-five percent (75%) of any poorly drained soils as identified and regulated in the Wetland Conservation District Ordinance.
7.3.4 Greenways: A contiguous network of open space providing connectivity and movement between larger tracts of protected land.
7.4 PROCEDURE
An application under this article shall follow the procedures and standards of the Site Plan Review/Subdivision Regulations and applicable terms of the Zoning Ordinance.
7.5 SINGLE FAMILY OPEN SPACE DEVELOPMENT
7.5.1 The minimum area for a Single-family Open Space Development shall not be less than five (5) acres of contiguous land where single family open space is permitted.
7.5.2 Single-family Open Space Development permits the planned grouping of single-family dwelling units, subject to the requirements set forth in this article.
7.5.3 A Single-family Open Space Development is permissible in the RU, R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 Districts.
7.5.4 Single-family Open Space Development on individual lots shall be processed under the applicable terms of the “Site Plan Review/Subdivision Regulations”. Single-family Open Space Development on a single lot shall be processed under the
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
7-3
applicable terms of the “Site Plan Review/Subdivision Regulations”.
7.5.5 External Boundaries:
A. Front: No building or parking area shall be within one hundred feet (100') of an existing public way.
B. Side & Rear yard: Setbacks and vegetated buffer strips shall be in accordance with the Town of Exeter’s Subdivision and Site Plan Review Regulations.
7.5.6 Internal Dimensional Requirements:
A. Minimum internal right-of-way lot width/frontage shall be fifty feet (50').
B. Front Yard Setback: No structure shall be closer than twenty-five feet (25') from the right-of-way of a proposed street or parking area.
C. Detached single family units on one parcel shall be set apart from each other a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet.
D. Structures shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from side yard property lines and twenty (20) feet from rear yard property lines.
E. Minimum Lot Size: No lot shall be less than 25,000 square feet in the RU District, 15,000 square feet in the R-1 Districts, and 10,000 square feet in all other residential districts.
F. Existing Open Space Development: Internal setbacks effective as of the date of the approval of any existing open space development shall be applied to future construction within the same existing open space development. (See Appendix A. for table regarding internal setbacks.)
7.6 MULTI-FAMILY OPEN SPACE DEVELOPMENT
7.6.1 Small Scale Multi-Family Open Space Development:
A. The minimum area for a small scale Multi-family Open Space Development shall not be less than five (5) acres of
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
7-4
contiguous land and not more than 24.9 acres of contiguous land.
B. Density calculations for small-scale multi-family open space development shall be in accordance with Article 7.7.1 Density and Section 7.13 Yield Plan of the Site Plan Review and Subdivision Regulations. Small scale Multi-family Open Space Development permits the planned grouping of up to five (5) attached* dwelling units per structure. On parcels proposed for development that are less than ten (10) acres in size, no more than three (3) attached dwelling units per structure are allowed. The planning board may allow additional dwelling units per structure for the purpose of conserving additional open space. Regulations regarding perimeter buffers (See Site Plan Review and Subdivision Regulation 9.6.1.2) shall apply.
C. A small scale Multi-family Open Space Development is permissible in the RU, R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 Districts.
D. Small scale Multi-Family Open Space Development shall be processed under the applicable terms of the “Site Plan Review/Subdivision Regulations”.
E. External Boundaries:
1. Front: No building, lot line or parking area shall be within one hundred feet (100') of an existing public way.
2. Side & Rear: No building, lot line or parking area shall be within fifty feet (50') of abutting property line.
F. Internal Setback Requirements:
1. Front Yard Setback: No structure shall be closer than twenty-five feet (25') from the right-of-way of a proposed street or parking area.
2. Side & Rear Yard Setback: No structure shall be closer than forty feet (40') from an abutting structure.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
7-5
7.6.2 Large Scale Multi-Family Open Space Development:
A. The minimum area for a large scale Multi-family Open Space Development shall not be less than twenty-five (25) acres of contiguous land.
B. A large scale Multi-family Open Space Development shall be subject to the granting of a special exception by the Zoning Board of Adjustment, per Article 5.2 Special Exceptions of this Zoning Ordinance.
C. Density calculations for large-scale multi-family open space development shall be in accordance with Article 7.7.1. Density and Section 7.13 Yield Plan of the Site Plan Review and Subdivision Regulations. A large scale Multi-family Open Space Development permits the planned grouping of a minimum of six (6) multi-family dwelling units per structure and a maximum of twelve (12) multi-family dwelling units per structure. The planning board may allow additional dwelling units per structure for the purpose of conserving additional open space. Regulations regarding perimeter buffers (See Site Plan Review and Subdivision Regulation 9.6.1.2) shall apply.
D. A large scale Multi-family Open Space Development is permissible in the R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 Districts.
E. A large scale Multi-family Open Space Development shall be served by municipal water and sewer service.
F. Large scale Multi-family Open Space Development shall be processed under the applicable terms of the “Site Plan Review/Subdivision Regulations”.
G. External Boundaries:
1. Front Yard Setback: No building, lot line or parking area shall be within one hundred feet (100') of an existing public way.
2. Side & Rear Yard Setback: No building, lot line or parking area shall be within two hundred feet (200') of an abutting property line.
H. Internal Setback Requirements:
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
7-6
1. Front Yard Setback: No structure shall be closer than forty feet (40') from the right-of-way of a proposed street or parking area.
2. Side & Rear Yard Setback: No structure shall be closer than fifty feet (50') from an abutting structure.
* For the purposes of this ordinance, attached “dwelling units” are defined as units separated by party walls in which no portion of a dwelling unit extends over a portion of another.
7.7 GENERAL REGULATIONS GOVERNING OPEN SPACE DEVELOPMENT
7.7.1 Density: Each lot shall be of a size and shape to provide a building site that shall be in harmony with the natural terrain and other features of the land. The dwelling unit density shall be determined using a “Yield Plan” which shall be provided by the applicant and reviewed and accepted by the Planning Board prior to proposing an Open Space Development Plan. The Yield Plan is used to determine the density that is reasonably achievable under a conventional subdivision following the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision and Site Plan Review regulations of the Town. The dwelling unit density shall be no greater than that allowed by the Yield Plan unless the density bonus can be applied. The Planning Board shall adopt regulations that provide for the generation of a yield plan in accordance with this article.
A. Bonus: A density bonus of ten-percent (10%) of the total allowable number of dwelling units may be granted by the Planning Board to an applicant if fifty-percent (50%) or more of the non-buildable, undeveloped, or common open space land is permanently conveyed to the Town or Conservation Commission for the benefit of the general public for recreational and/or conservation purposes. The density bonus will only be granted upon written notice by the Town or Conservation Commission of their intent to accept a deed or easement conveying an interest in fifty-percent (50%) or more of said non-buildable, undeveloped, or common open space land to the Town of Exeter or Conservation Commission.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
7-7
B. Density-Bonus (Affordable Housing Sales): Density bonus of 15% above that indicated by the yield plan will be allowed for developments that will guarantee:
1. 20% of the total number of units proposed within the development (including all units allowed by density bonuses) shall be affordable as defined below*, see sections (2) and (3);
2. 15% or more of the units constructed will be sold at initial sale for a price that can be afforded by a household with an income not more than 120% of the median family income for the New Hampshire portion of the Portsmouth-Rochester NH-ME PMSA, as published by US Department of Housing and Urban Development;
3. 5% or more of the units constructed will be sold at initial sale for a price that can be afforded by a household with an income not more than 80% of the median family income for the New Hampshire portion of the Portsmouth-Rochester NH-ME PMSA, as published by US Department of Housing and Urban Development;
4. Units will be sold with deed restrictions and a recorded housing agreement that limit, for a period of 30 years renewable upon sale or transfer, the resale value of the unit to not more than the purchase price plus two times the accumulated consumer price index.
5. The unit shall be on-site.
*Affordability shall be defined as housing that can be purchased under a conventional mortgage whereby the combined annual expenses for principal, interest, property taxes, homeowner’s insurance and condominium fees (if applicable) will not exceed 30% of household income.
C. Density-Bonus (Affordable Housing Rentals): Density bonus of 15% above that indicated by the yield plan will be allowed for developments that will guarantee:
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
7-8
1. Private Sector Funding – Rent to Buy Program:
a. 20% of the total number of units proposed within the development (including all units allowed by density bonuses) shall be affordable as defined below*, see sections (2) and (3);
b. 15% or more of the units constructed will be rented for a price that can be afforded by a household with an income not more than 120% of the median family income for the New Hampshire portion of the Portsmouth-Rochester NH-ME PMSA, as published by US Department of Housing and Urban Development;
c. 5% or more of the units constructed will be rented for a price that can be afforded by a household with an income not more than 80% of the median family income for the New Hampshire portion of the Portsmouth-Rochester NH-ME PMSA, as published by US Department of Housing and Urban Development;
d. Units will be rented with deed restrictions and a recorded housing agreement that limit, for a period of 30 years renewable upon each rental and in the event of sale, (Paragraph B. Density-Bonus (Affordable Housing Sales) shall govern.
e. The unit shall be on-site.
2. Private Sector Funding – Rental Program
a. 20% of the total number of units proposed within the development (including all units allowed by density bonuses) shall be affordable as defined below*, see sections (2) and (3);
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
7-9
b. 15% or more of the units constructed will be rented for a price that can be afforded by a household with an income not more than 100% of the median family income for the New Hampshire portion of the Portsmouth-Rochester NH-ME PMSA, as published by US Department of Housing and Urban Development;
c. 5% or more of the units constructed will be rented for a price that can be afforded by a household with an income not more than 60% of the median family income for the New Hampshire portion of the Portsmouth-Rochester NH-ME PMSA, as published by US Department of Housing and Urban Development;
d. Units will be rented with deed restrictions and a recorded housing agreement that limit, for a period of 30 years renewable upon each rental.
e. The unit shall be on-site.
3. Public Sector Funding
a. Terms and conditions of the project to be dictated by The Low Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) program (HFA:109.02) selected by the developer/builder, or
b. Term and conditions of the project to be dictated by Community Development Finance Authority (RSA 162.L) programs selected by the developer.
D. *Affordability shall be defined as housing that can be rented whereby the combined annual rental and utility expenses will not exceed 30% of household income.
E. Administration of Worker Housing Units (Sales or Rentals)
1. In the event of a unit sale or transfer the Buyer will be certified for eligibility by an agency with expertise
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
7-10
acceptable to the Town prior to sale or transfer. A copy of said certification will be provided to the seller.
2. In the event of a unit rental or renewal, the Renter will be certified by an agency with expertise acceptable to the Town prior to the rental or renewal. A copy of said certification will be provided to the landlord. Rental units cannot be sub-let by the current renter of record to a third party.
3. In the event rental units are sold Article 7.7.1. B.1.-5. Density, Bonus & Density-Bonus (Affordable Housing Sales) will govern.
4. A certification fee will be charged for each sale, transfer or rental term for a unit. The fee to be paid by the purchaser or renter of the unit as designated by the Town of Exeter.
5. The foregoing bonuses are not cumulative and no project shall receive more than a 15% overall density bonus for affordability.
The Planning Board may adopt regulations to effectuate and aid the administration of this section.
7.7.2 Non-Residential Uses:
A. Non-residential uses may be permitted in projects of fifty (50) acres or greater, provided the Board of Adjustment grants a Special Exception finding such non-residential use complies with Article 5.2 Special Exceptions of this Zoning Ordinance as well as the following:
1. The total space allocated to commercial establishments shall not exceed five percent (5%) of the net tract area of the open space development.
2. No building intended to be used in part or in whole for commercial purposes shall be constructed prior to the completion of sixty percent (60%) of the dwelling units proposed.
3. Convenience commercial uses designed to serve the development and nearby neighborhoods shall be limited to the following shops and stores: Bakery (outlet only), bank, barber/beauty shop,
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
7-11
food and convenience store, ice cream/sandwich shop, flower shop, laundromat, dry cleaning (pick-up only), professional office or similar uses by Special Exception. None of the above non-residential uses shall contain more than 2,000 square feet of floor area.
4. Non-residential uses shall have access from an interior road with adequate screening and landscaping.
5. Setback Requirements:
a. Front: No structure or parking area shall be closer than thirty feet (30') from the internal roadway.
b. Side & Rear: No structure or parking area shall be closer than one hundred feet (100') from residential structures.
c. External: Boundaries the setback requirements of Article 7.6.1 A-F shall apply to the separation of non-residential uses from external uses.
6. Once a certificate of completion has been issued for the commercial area, any change in use shall require approval as a Special Exception by the Zoning Board of Adjustment and a Site Plan Review/Subdivision Regulations by the Planning Board; any physical expansion of the facilities shall require approval by Special Exception from the Zoning Board of Adjustment and Site Plan Review/Subdivision Regulations by the Planning Board.
7. All non-residential uses shall be architecturally compatible with adjacent residential structures within the development.
8. Non-residential uses shall have only one indirectly lighted sign, not to exceed four (4) square feet in area. No sign shall be illuminated after 9:00 p.m.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
7-12
9. Non-residential uses shall not constitute or contribute to strip development.
7.7.3 Open Space and Common Areas:
A. A minimum of thirty percent (30%) of the land identified as “Net Tract Area” shall be set aside as common open space intended for the use and enjoyment of the residents of the development. Reasonable efforts must be made to locate common open space adjacent to protected open space in adjoining property or properties to the satisfaction of the Planning Board. This common open space shall be permanently restricted for recreation, open space and conservation uses and protected by a homeowners or condominium association. Except that upon mutual agreement of the Town, the development and/or the homeowners or condominium association, a portion of the common open space may be permanently protected by a public body which shall maintain the land for the benefit of the general public.
B. Any non-buildable or undeveloped land not identified as part of the common open space may be protected in any of the following manners or combinations prescribed by the Planning Board:
1. A private non-profit corporation, association or other legal entity established by the applicant for the benefit and enjoyment of the residents such as a homeowners or condominium association.
2. A public body that shall maintain the land as open space for the benefit of the general public – for example, the Town.
3. A private non-profit organization which has as its purpose the preservation* of open space through ownership and control, provided, however, that the residents of the development shall have access to the common open space for appropriate recreational uses – for example, the Society for the Protection of New Hampshire Forests.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
7-13
C. The Town and the property owners within the development shall be assured of enforceable rights with respect to such preservation.
D. Such common open space shall not be re-subdivided further but may contain accessory structures and improvements appropriate for educational, recreational or social uses.
E. In the event an open space development proposes, wholly or partially, the development of prime agricultural land, the Planning Board may waiver the requirements of this article to provide for the protection of these lands, whereby the common open space area for the use of the residents of the development may be reduced in favor of setting aside and permanently restricting the development of these prime agricultural areas. This land may be sold, leased or protected in a fashion described in Article 7.7.3B 1-3 and permanently restricted for agricultural uses, subject to the approval of the Planning Board.
F. The developer shall submit, prior to final approval, such legal instruments as the Planning Board may require to prescribe the manner of ownership, maintenance and obligations of the developer and future residents, including the articles of incorporation and charter in a form and manner approved by the Board necessary to insure the intent and purpose of this article.
G. In the event the party entrusted with ownership of the open space within the development shall fail to maintain such open space in a reasonable order and condition, the Town may, through court action, be authorized to assess the costs incurred by the municipality to maintain this open space against the owners as a lien on their properties.
H. Should the organization managing said open space dissolve, all assets shall be turned over to the public or a non-profit organization dedicated to the preservation of open space. Any such transfer shall be approved by the Planning Board.
* Preservation defined in the general sense, which includes the word, “conservation”.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
7-14
7.7.4 Diversity and Mix: A diversity of housing types (i.e. single family and multi-family) is permitted and encouraged. For developments involving both single family and multi-family dwelling units, the standards of Articles 7.5 Single Family Open Space Development and 7.6 Multi-Family Open Space Development must be adhered to for each type of development.
7.7.5 Utilities: All electrical, telephone and other utilities shall be located underground.
7.7.6 Allowance for Lots Separated by a Municipal Trail: Parcels separated by a municipal trail right-of-way may be considered contiguous land. All applicable setbacks from public rights-of-way (ROW) shall still apply.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
8-1
Article 8. HISTORIC DISTRICT
8.1 GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE
The Town, by the authority granted under NH RSA §674:46, established a Historic District Commission on June 8, 1970.
8.1.1 Membership: The Commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the Selectmen. One of the seven members shall be a Selectman and one shall be a member or an alternate member of the Planning Board, each appointed for a one-year term. Remaining members will be appointed for three year terms: the initial terms of such members shall be staggered so that no more than three appointments occur annually, except when required to fill vacancies. Selectmen shall appoint four alternate members to serve terms of three years: the initial terms of alternate members shall be staggered so that no more than two appointments occur annually, except when required to fill vacancies.
8.2 PURPOSE AND INTENT
8.2.1 The purposes of the Historic District Commission of Exeter are:
A. To safeguard the heritage of the Town as it is represented in structures of historical and architectural value located, or which may be located, in an historic district;
B. To preserve and reflect elements of the community’s architectural, cultural, social, economic and political history;
C. To conserve property values;
D. To foster civic pride; and
E. To promote use of an historic district for the education, pleasure and welfare of the citizens of Exeter.
8.2.2 The intent of the Downtown Historic District is to preserve the scale and unique character of Exeter’s downtown, while permitted new construction of a size, scale and design that will be in harmony with the old. It is intended that the Water Street commercial area retain and enhance its commercial character, and that residential portions of the districts retain their residential qualities.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
8-2
8.3 SCOPE OF REVIEW
8.3.1 Activities Requiring Review: It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter, modify, repair, move or demolish any building, structure or improvement which lies within a Historic District without first obtaining a Certificate of Approval from the Historic District Commission, or in the case of a project of minimal impact, the Code Enforcement Officer and the Deputy Code Enforcement Officer, in the manner prescribed in this section.
8.3.2 Exempt Activities: The following activities are not subject to review under this section:
A. Ordinary maintenance, repair and/or replacement of any architectural feature which does not involve a change in design, materials or outer appearance.
8.3.3 Projects of Minimal Impact: For the purpose of this section, the following activities shall be considered to be projects of minimal impact and shall be reviewed and approved, conditionally approved or disapproved by the Code Enforcement Officer and the Deputy Code Enforcement Officer prior to the issuance of any building or demolition permit:
A. Erection, construction or repair of a fence or shed provided the following criteria are met:
1. The exterior design, arrangement, texture and materials are compatible with the existing building or structure or if new construction, the surrounding area;
2. The scale and general size of the building or structure is compatible with the existing surroundings; and,
3. All proposed chain link fencing (except in-kind replacement) shall be considered a Major Impact and require Historic District Commission approval;
4. Sheds shall be placed fully behind the principal structure and be 200 square feet or less to be considered as a minimal impact;
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
8-3
5. Alteration, including landscaping, grading, excavating, and/or paving of a site, provided that the following criteria are met:
Parking areas, wherever possible, should be placed to the rear of buildings. Parking areas, wherever visible from the street, shall be screened by planting beds or hedges. Fences and low stone walls are also acceptable as long as they have plantings in front of them. All hardscape features shall be considered a major impact and be reviewed by the Historic District Commission. Hardscape includes landscaping details such as stone or concrete walkways, decks, retaining walls, patios, and other landscaping designs that use stone, wood, pebbles, brick, metal, and other similar materials.
Where appropriate and at the discretion of the Code Enforcement Officer, alterations of a site may be reviewed by the Chair of the Historic District Commission or his/her designee.
B. Erection, alteration, or replacement of a sign(s), provided the proposed signage adheres to the following criteria:
1. Signs shall fit within existing features of the facade. On most buildings, lintels or bands of decorative moldings create natural frames for signs.
2. Projecting signs shall align with some horizontal element on the facade (i.e., top of sign aligns with top of window; bottom of sign aligns with bottom of window; bottom of sign aligns with top of lintel). Where possible, signs shall be aligned with other signs on adjacent buildings.
Projecting signs shall be supported by black iron attachments to the building unless already existing and not being altered.
3. Guy wires shall not be permitted as a principle sign support member. No support for the projecting sign shall extend above the cornice to which it is attached.
4. Internally lighted signs shall be prohibited. Only shielded, indirectly lighted signs shall be permitted.
5. Materials, such as wood, glass, bronze, MDO plywood, high density urethane or iron shall be used. Plastic (visible), aluminum, and vinyl (except lettering) shall be considered a Major Impact and are prohibited unless it can be
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
8-4
demonstrated the Historic District Commission that their use is historically consistent with the architecture of the building.
Signs within the historic district shall comply with the provisions of Articles 5.7.7 and 5.7.8 of this ordinance, its successors or amendment ordinance.
C. Essential outdoor mechanical equipment (ducts, fans, solar panels, etc.) provided they are installed in locations which create the least disturbance to the historical appearance of the building and which involve the minimum alteration to its structural integrity. Any outdoor mechanical equipment that will be visible from a public right-of-way shall be considered a Major Impact and be reviewed by the Historic District Commission.
At the discretion of the Code Enforcement Officer, any application for a project of minimal impact that is not in clear conformance with the above-outlined guidelines shall be referred to the Historic District Commission for review and action.
The Code Enforcement Officer and the Deputy Code Enforcement Officer shall have the final authority to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove applications for projects of minimal impact. However, if the Code Enforcement Officer and the Deputy Code Enforcement Officer are not in full agreement about the disposition of the application, the application shall be forwarded to the Historic District Commission for full review and action. Furthermore, the decision of the Code Enforcement Officer and the Deputy Code Enforcement Officer may be appealed to the Historic District Commission provided that notice of the appeal is filed within thirty (30) work days of the staff's decision.
8.3.4 Projects of Major Impact. Development activity not specifically listed as an exempt activity or as a project of minimal impact shall be considered a project of major impact and shall go through the review process of the Historic District Commission as outlined in the subsections below.
8.4 AUTHORITY TO ADOPT REGULATIONS
The Historic District Commission, after notice and public hearing, may adopt such regulations regarding its procedures in hearing and processing applications and
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
8-5
statements of policy as required by NH RSA §31:89-e as it shall deem fit and shall compile such regulations in printed form to be available to applicants and citizens of the Town.
8.5 APPEALS
Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by a decision of the Historic District Commission shall have the right to appeal that decision to the Zoning Board of Adjustment within thirty (30) days of the decision being rendered. Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by a decision of the Code Enforcement Officer and the Deputy Code Enforcement Officer shall have the right to appeal that decision to the Historic District Commission within thirty (30) days of the decision being rendered.
8.6 ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND LIMITATION
8.6.1 These articles shall be administered by the Commission, the Code Enforcement Officer and the Deputy Code Enforcement Officer and such other lawfully empowered officers of the Town.
8.6.2 In addition to all others lawfully entitled to enforce these articles, the Historic District Commission is empowered to enforce them in accordance with NH RSA §674:46.
8.6.3 Nothing in these articles shall be construed to prevent ordinary maintenance or repair of any structure or place within any historic district, nor to prevent the construction, alteration, repair, moving or demolition of any structure under a permit issued by the Building Inspector or other duly delegated authority prior to the establishment of any such district.
8.7 DISTRICTS
8.7.1 Front Street Historic District: On June 10, 1971, the Town voted to establish the Front Street Historic District that is bound as follows:
At a point beginning at the centerline of Spring Street at the junction of Front Street, thence running northerly along said Spring Street to a point at the centerline of Water Street at the junction of Spring and Water Streets, thence turning and running in a southeasterly direction along said Water Street to a point at the junction of Water and Front Streets, thence turning and running southerly to a point at the junction at Lincoln and Front Street. This district shall include all properties on both sides of Front Street to the property line or 200 feet from the curb line, whichever
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
8-6
comes first. Also included in this district is Gale Park and the Moses Kent House. The Historic District shall include all lands within the bounds as set forth by these boundaries.
8.7.2 Downtown Historic District: The Downtown Historic District is bounded as follows (boundaries identical to those voted by the Town on March 20, 1978):
An area beginning at the centerline of Water Street where it intersects with Main Street, then runs easterly along the centerline of Water Street and High Street to the intersection with Portsmouth Avenue, and includes all portions of all properties with frontage on these portions of Water Street and High Street not already included in the so-called “Front Street” Historic District established on June 10, 1971, to a depth of 200 feet from the curb line or the rear property line, whichever comes first; and the district includes all land between Water Street and the banks of the Exeter and Squamscott Rivers, and the Exeter and Squamscott Rivers from a line connecting Jady Hill Avenue to a point on the Swasey Parkway 200 feet from its intersection with Water Street, to a line 200 feet southeasterly of the High Street bridge, including Kimball’s Island; the district includes an area beginning at the intersection of Pleasant Street with High Street and running northerly along Pleasant Street and Chestnut Street to its intersection with Chestnut Hill Avenue, then proceeding southwesterly along Chestnut Hill Avenue to its intersection with Water Street and including all properties with frontage on the above portions of Pleasant Street and Chestnut Street to a depth of 200 feet from the curb line or the rear property line, whichever comes first, and all property that fronts on Chestnut Hill Avenue between Chestnut Street and the easterly bank of the river to a depth of 50 feet and all properties lying between said portion of Pleasant and Chestnut Streets and the Exeter/Squamscott Rivers. The District is intended to specifically include the properties from 1 – 35 High Street, and 2 – 30 High Street, and the properties fronting on Gilman Lane within 200 feet of High Street, and properties at No. 1 and No. 2 – 24 Franklin Street, and the properties at 11 – 13 Chestnut Street. The District is also described on an excerpt from the Exeter Tax Map entitled “Downtown Historic District,” dated January 30, 1978.
8.7.3 High Street Historic District: The High Street Historic District is bounded as follows (boundaries identical to those voted by the Town on March 14th, 2006):
An area beginning at the centerline of High Street where it intersects with Portsmouth Avenue, thence running easterly along the centerline of High Street to the intersection of Ridgewood Terrace, and includes all portions
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
8-7
of all properties with frontage on these portions of High Street to a depth of 200 feet from the curb line or the rear property line, whichever comes first; and the district includes an area beginning at the intersection of High Street and Rocky Hill Road and running northerly along Rocky Hill Road to the end of Rocky Hill Road, and includes all portions of all properties with frontage on these portions of Rocky Hill Road to a depth of 200 feet from the curb line or the rear property line, whichever comes first. The District is intended to specifically include the properties from 46 – 176 High Street and 39 – 175 High Street, and the properties from 3 – 5 Rocky Hill Road and 2 Rocky Hill Road.
8.7.4 Additional Historic Districts: This article shall be applicable to such additional historic districts as may be established by vote of the Town.
8.8 STANDARDS AND EXTENT
8.8.1 Jurisdiction of these articles extends to all structures not owned by the Town of Exeter, the State of New Hampshire, or the United States government and located in whole or in part within the boundaries of the District. Other subjects covered by the ordinance include, but are not limited to: signs, landscape features, fences, street furniture, and other factors affecting the character of the streetscape.
8.8.2 Changes or additions to structures and appurtenances, including those described in this paragraph, in the historic districts shall be permitted by written approval of the Historic District Commission after review of the following criteria.
A. New Building and Structures: New construction shall be evaluated on the basis of its compatibility with existing structures and overall effect on the historic character of the district.
B. Existing Buildings: The exterior of existing buildings (front, sides and rear visible within the Historic District) may be maintained as is. If there are to be changes, it shall be to maintain or reestablish their basic appearance as of the time of construction, or to another period when the façade attained architectural significance. No significant architectural details may be removed or changed without a Certificate of Approval from the Historic District Commission. Synthetic siding materials shall not be used to cover or replace existing architectural features, unless approved by the Historic District Commission. Contemporary design treatment may be deemed appropriate where
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
8-8
previous modifications have removed significant architectural features and on the rear of structures along the Squamscott River. Exterior maintenance and repairs (including but not limited to, painting and staining) are not within the jurisdiction of the Historic District Commission providing surface preparation and repairs do not alter, damage or deface existing architectural elements. Parties interested in promoting the spirit and intent of the District are encourage to come before the Commission for informal guidance in the selection of historically appropriate colors or details.
C. Specific Design Considerations:
All applications shall be judged on the following criteria:
1. Proportions of facades (scale, massing of elements).
2. Proportions of openings within the façade.
3. Rhythm of solids to voids within the façade.
4. Rhythm of spacing of buildings on street or along roads or pathways.
5. Percent of lot coverage and setback relative to adjacent structures.
6. Size and rhythm of projections.
7. Relationship of materials to existing adjacent structures.
8. Relationship of texture.
9. Relationship of color of pre-finished or natural materials.
10. Relationship of architectural details.
11. Relationship of roof configurations and slopes.
12. Relationship of landscaping.
13. Such other criteria as the Commission may promulgate by regulation proximal to the authority granted in Article 8.3 Scope.
D. Scale: Story heights of new construction or additions to existing buildings shall not be ten percent (10%) over, or under, the average height of adjacent buildings (within a 250 foot radius of the center of the parcel).
E. Marina Facilities: Those marina facilities constructed on or over the water shall be of predominantly wooden construction; however, modern engineering methods and treated materials may be used.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
8-9
F. Demolition, Removal or Relocation: No structure or portion of any structure shall be demolished, removed, or relocated within the district without the approval of the Commission.
G. Signs: Signs within the historic district shall comply with the provisions of Articles 5.7.7 and 5.7.8 of this ordinance, its successors or amendment ordinance.
8.9 GENERAL POLICY
The Historic District Commission in making decisions shall apply the above paragraphs and consider the Downtown Master Plan, and the Secretary of the Interior’s Guidelines for Rehabilitation of Historic Structures.

Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
9-1
Article 9. NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION
9.1 WETLANDS CONSERVATION DISTRICT
9.1.1 Purpose and Intent: The purpose of the Wetlands Conservation District is to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the community by promoting the most appropriate use of land and the protection of wetland ecosystems and water quality in accordance with the goals and objectives of the most recent Exeter Master Plan. It is intended that this article shall:
A. Prevent the development of structures and land uses on wetlands and wetland areas of very poorly drained soils and poorly drained soils and /or their buffers which will contribute to pollution of surface and groundwater by sewage or toxic substances or sedimentation;
B. Prevent the destruction of, or significant changes to, those wetland areas, related water bodies, and adjoining land which provide flood protection;
C. Protect wetland systems that provide filtration of water flowing into ponds and streams, augment stream flow during dry periods and which connect to the ground or surface water supply;
D. Protect wildlife habitats, maintain ecological function and support other public purposes such as those cited in NH RSA §482-A:1;
E. Protect potential water supplies and existing aquifers (water bearing stratum) and aquifer recharge areas;
F. Prevent unnecessary or excessive expense to the Town for the purpose of providing and/or maintaining essential services and utilities which might be required as a result of development in wetlands.
G. Prevent damage to structures and properties caused by inappropriate development in wetlands.
9.1.2 Applicability: All proposed development, removal of vegetation, and alteration/disturbance of the land including but not limited to drainage, wastewater disposal system, wells and other
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
9-2
utilities within the wetlands conservation overlay district is subject to this ordinance.
9.1.3 Boundaries: The Wetlands Conservation Overlay District includes:
A. Surface waters of the State.
B. Wetlands of any size including but not limited to swamps, bogs, marshes, ponds, lakes, and vernal pools.
C. Inland streams shown on USGS 7.5x15 minute quadrangle maps, including intermittent streams.
D. Man-made drainage structures including but not limited to detention ponds, retention ponds, and drainage swales shall not be considered part of the Wetlands Protection Overlay District.
E. A wetland buffer area comprised of all land parallel to and measured from the edge of the wetland boundary on a horizontal plane to a width defined below:
1. Prime Wetland Buffers: Includes all areas extending 100’ from the boundary of areas identified in the 2005 Prime Wetland Report and registered with the NH Wetlands Bureau. This 100 foot buffer is a “No Cut- No Disturbance” buffer.
2. Exemplary Wetland Buffers: Includes all areas extending 50 feet from the boundary of wetlands designated as an exemplary natural community by the NH Natural Heritage Bureau. This 50 foot buffer is a “No Cut – No Disturbance” buffer.
3. Very Poorly Drained Soils (Hydric A) Buffer: Includes all areas extending 50 feet from the boundary of such wetlands. This 50 foot buffer is a No Cut- No Disturbance buffer. No subsurface wastewater disposal system shall be constructed within seventy-five feet (75') of the edge of any Type A Hydric Soil.
4. Poorly Drained Soils (Hydric B) Buffer: Includes all areas extending 40 feet from the boundary of such wetlands. This 40 foot buffer is a No Cut- No Disturbance buffer. No subsurface wastewater disposal
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
9-3
system shall be constructed within fifty feet (50') of any Type B Hydric Soil.
5. Inland streams Buffer (including intermittent streams): Includes all areas extending 25 feet from the top of the bank. This 25 foot buffer is a No Cut- No Disturbance buffer.
6. Vernal Pool Buffer (200 square feet or greater): This includes all areas extending 75 feet from the boundary of vernal pools. This 75 foot buffer is a “No Cut- No Disturbance” buffer.
F. Boundary Appeals: In the event that the Building Inspector, the Planning Board, or the Conservation Commission questions the validity of the boundaries of a wetland area on a specific parcel of land, or upon written petition of the owner or any abutter of the said property to the Planning Board, the Board may call upon the services of a scientist qualified to delineate wetlands in accordance with the standards and criteria specified in 9.1.4.J Wetlands Delineation in order to examine said area and report the findings to the Planning Board for their determination of the boundary. Expenses incurred in retaining these services shall be paid by the landowner.
9.1.4 Definitions:
A. Buffer: The protected upland areas adjacent to all systems described within the Wetlands Conservation Overlay District. This area acts as essential maintenance and protection of wetland value and function.
B. Certified Wetlands Scientist: A person qualified to delineate wetland boundaries and prepare wetland maps who is certified by the State of New Hampshire Board of Natural Scientists, as defined by RSA 310-A:76, II-A.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
9-4
C. Development: Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading excavation or drilling activities.
D. Exemplary Wetlands: The NH Natural Heritage Bureau tracks "exemplary" natural communities including wetlands. To qualify as exemplary, the wetland in a given place must be of a rare type, or must be a very old occurrence of a common community in good condition.
E. No cut / No disturb: Prohibit activities which involve the cutting or clearing of native vegetation, compaction, re-contouring or grading the natural surface of the land or alteration of water flow.
F. Prime Wetlands: Those areas designated Prime Wetlands in accordance with RSA 482-A:15, and the NH Code of Administrative Rules Env-Wt 700.
G. Vernal Pool: A body of water, typically seasonal, that provides essential breeding habitat for certain amphibians and invertebrates, does not support viable fish population, and meets the criteria established by the New Hampshire Fish and Game Department, Nongame and Endangered Wildlife Program, Identification and Documentation of Vernal Pools in New Hampshire, rev 2004. In accordance with the NH Code of Administrative Rules Env Wt-101.99, this does not include areas that contain these characteristics but are the result of on-going anthropogenic activities that are not intended to provide compensatory mitigation, including but not limited to: (1) Gravel pit operations in a pit that has been mined at least every other year; and (2) Logging and agricultural operations conducted in accordance with all applicable New Hampshire statutes and rules.
H. Surface Waters of the State: Pursuant to RSA 485-A:2.XIV, perennial and seasonal streams, lakes, ponds, and tidal waters within the jurisdiction of the state, including all streams, lakes, or ponds bordering on state, marshes, water courses, and other bodies of water, natural or artificial.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
9-5
I. Wetland: Pursuant to RSA 482-A:2.X, an area that is inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal conditions does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. They include, but are not limited to, swamps, bogs, marshes, ponds, lakes, and all such areas as included in the jurisdictional definition of the New Hampshire Wetlands Board Administrative Rules, Chapter Wt 100 as subsequently amended.
J. Wetland Delineation: Wetlands shall be delineated on the basis of hydrophytic vegetation, hydric soils, and wetlands hydrology, in accordance with the techniques outlined in the Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands (January 10, 1989).
9.1.5 Permitted Uses: The following uses, to the extent permitted in the underlying zoning district, shall be permitted in the Wetlands Conservation Overlay District as specified, provided that the proposed use will not cause a degradation of the wetland.
A. Agriculture, including grazing, hay production, truck gardening and silage production provided that such use is shown not to cause significant increases in surface or groundwater contamination by pesticides or other toxic or hazardous substance and that such use will not cause or contribute to soil erosion provided that the activity does not impact the prime wetlands 100’ buffer.
B. Forestry and tree farming to include the construction of access roads for said purpose provided that the activity does not impact the prime wetlands’ 100-foot buffer.
C. Wildlife habitat development and management.
D. Recreational uses consistent with the purpose and intent of this article.
E. Conservation area and nature trails.
F. Water impoundment and the construction of well water supplies.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
9-6
G. Elevated, uncovered decks attached to an existing structure, free-standing gazebo or garden-type structures, and storage sheds (not exceeding 120 s.f. in size) may be placed within the buffer. All structures must be elevated on blocks, sonatubes or similar footing. All structures must maintain a minimum ten foot (10’) setback from the edge of wetland. The intent of these allowances is to permit a homeowner with some flexibility for reasonable use of their property, while ensuring that the buffer will maintain its ability to absorb storm water runoff.
H. Native, non-invasive plantings such as trees and shrubs.
I. Projects that reduce impervious surfaces while ensuring the protection of the wetland buffer through erosion and sediment control best management practices as reviewed and approved by the Planning Department.
J. Projects that re-vegetate or re-vitalize in some way an already disturbed buffer zone as reviewed and approved by the Planning Department
9.1.6 Conditional Uses:
A. Conditional Use Permit: Under the enabling authority granted by NH RSA §674:21 II, the following uses are only permitted in the Wetlands Conservation Overlay District pursuant to the issuance of a conditional use permit by the Planning Board provided that all of the conditions listed in article 9.1.6.B below are met.
1. Construction of roads and other access ways, parking areas, utilities, structures, drainage systems, wells and other site improvements that impact the Wetlands Conservation Overlay District, provided that the proposed construction is essential to the productive use of land not within the Wetlands Conservation Overlay District.
2. If prime wetlands are involved then the following: Agriculture activities including grazing, hay production, truck gardening and silage production provided that such use is shown not to cause increases in surface or groundwater contamination by
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
9-7
pesticides or other toxic or hazardous substance and that such use will not cause or contribute to soil erosion.
3. Within the 100 ft. buffer around prime wetlands, forestry and tree farming consistent with the best management practices as published by the NH Department of Resources and Economic Development and NH Cooperative Extension. As specified, in Logging Operations (Env-Wt 304.05), all skid trails, truck roads and log landings shall be located 50 feet from streams or ponds and designed using appropriate erosion control devices. Stream and wetlands crossings shall be kept to a minimum in size and number.
B. Conditions:
1. That the proposed use is permitted in the underlying zoning district;
2. That the use for which the permit is sought cannot feasibly be carried out on a portion or portions of the lot which are outside the Wetlands Conservation Overlay District;
3. The proposed impact has been evaluated in the context of the relative “value” of the wetland, including its ecological sensitivity, as well as its function within the greater hydrologic system. To the extent feasible, the proposed impact is not detrimental to the value and function of the wetland(s).
4. That the design, construction and maintenance of the proposed use will, to the extent feasible, minimize detrimental impact on the wetland or wetland buffer and that no alternative design which does not impact a wetland or wetland buffer or which has less detrimental impact on the wetland or wetland buffer is feasible;
5. In cases where the proposed use is temporary or where construction activity disturbs areas adjacent to the immediate use, that the landowner agrees
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
9-8
to restore the site as nearly as possible to its original grade and condition following construction;
6. That the proposed use will not create a hazard to individual or public health, safety and welfare due to the loss of wetland, the contamination of groundwater, or other reasons;
7. That all required permits shall be obtained from the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services Water Supply and Pollution Control Division under NH RSA §485-A: 17, the New Hampshire Wetlands Board under NH RSA §483-A, and the United States Army Corps of Engineers under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act.
C. Alternate Procedure for Subdivision and Site Plan Applications
In those cases where the proposed disturbance, activity, or development is associated with a project requiring Planning Board Subdivision or Site Plan approval, the CUP process as outlined in Zoning Ordinance Article 9.1.6.A and the waiver process as outlined in Section 9.9 of Exeter’s Site Plan Review and Subdivision Regulations are duplicative. To ensure an efficient and effective review, the Applicant shall follow Section 9.9 of the Site Plan Review and Subdivision Regulations and request a waiver(s) from wetland regulations and may obtain a waiver from Article 9.1.6.A CUP process.
9.1.7 Environmental Impact Assessment: The Planning Board may require the applicant to submit an environmental impact assessment when necessary to evaluate the effects of proposed development on existing wetland natural resources. The cost of this assessment shall be borne by the applicant. The Planning Board may retain its own consultant to review the impact assessment and other materials submitted by the applicant, such expenses to be paid by the applicant.
9.1.8 Prohibited Uses: In reviewing an application for a variance from the provisions of this subsection, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may request that the Conservation Commission and/or the Planning Board review the application and provide
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
9-9
written comment as to the potential impacts the proposed use may have on wetlands and wetland buffers. The following uses are not permitted in the Wetlands Conservation Overlay District, notwithstanding that they may be permitted in the underlying zoning district:
A. Salt storage
B. Wastewater Disposal Systems (including a 4,000 square foot reserve area)
C. Automobile junkyards
D. Solid or hazardous waste facilities
E. Use of fertilizer on lawns, except lime or wood ash
F. Bulk storage or handling of chemicals, petroleum products, underground tanks, hazardous materials, or toxic substances as defined under NH RSA 147-A2, VII.
G. Snow storage, unless in accordance with NH Department of Environmental Services Snow Disposal Guidelines (Document WMB-3, 2007)
H. Sand and gravel excavations
I. Processing of excavated material
9.1.9 Lot Size Determination:
A. Areas defined as jurisdictional wetlands in this article may be used to satisfy up to twenty-five percent (25%) of the minimum lot size required by the zoning ordinance, provided that the remaining lot area is sufficient in size and configuration to accommodate adequately all required utilities such as sewage disposal and water supply, and will accommodate permitted structures and lot access.
B. No open bodies of water may be used to satisfy minimum lot sizes.
C. The twenty-five percent (25 %) limitation of this article may be increased up to fifty percent (50%) for minimum sized lots in the RU or R-1 districts that are served by
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
9-10
municipal water and sewer, provided all setbacks are adhered to.
9.1.10 Non-Local Permits: Notwithstanding the provisions of this article or local approval of proposed uses, any permits required by the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services Water Supply and Pollution Control Division under NH RSA §485-A:17, the New Hampshire Wetlands Board under NH RSA §482-A, or the United States Army Corps of Engineers under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act shall be obtained prior to the use or alteration of wetlands. Separate local approval of regulated uses in wetlands shall be required irrespective of obtaining non-local permits.
A. No subsurface wastewater disposal system shall be constructed within seventy-five feet (75') of the edge of any Type A Hydric Soil (very poorly drained) or fifty feet (50') of any Type B Hydric Soil (poorly drained).
B. The Planning Board shall require the designation of buffer areas adjacent to wetlands to protect such wetlands from adverse impacts due to proposed site development in accordance with Site Plan Review and Subdivision Regulations, Section 9.9.2 Wetland Setbacks. All construction, forestry and agricultural activities within one hundred feet (100') feet of any wetlands shall be undertaken with special care to avoid soil erosion and siltation of wetlands.
C. The area extending one hundred feet (100') from the boundary lines of Exeter’s prime wetlands as registered with the NH Wetlands Bureau shall be a no-cut, no- disturbance buffer. (See Nov. 2005 Exeter Prime Wetland Mapping Report) If the prime wetlands is also a wetland contiguous to a protected river, stream, or brook, the required setback shall be that which yields the greatest protection. The permitted use as described in Article 9.3.4.I.2 is allowed within the wetland "no-cut, no-disturbance" buffer area.
9.1.11 Remedy for Violations: Any wetlands altered in violation of this article shall be restored at the expense of the violator(s) as provided by NH RSA §482-A.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
9-11
9.2 AQUIFER PROTECTION DISTRICT ORDINANCE
9.2.1 Administration: The provisions of the Aquifer Protection District shall be administered by the Planning Board. All development proposals, other than single-family residential construction not involving the subdivision of land, shall be subject to subdivision and/or site plan review and approval in accordance with Planning Board rules and regulations. Such review and approval shall precede the issuance of any building permit by the Town.
9.2.2 Purpose: The Aquifer Protection Overlay District (A) is designed to protect, preserve and maintain potential ground water supplies and related ground water recharge areas within a known aquifer identified by the Town. The objectives of the district are:
A. To protect the public health and general welfare;
B. To promote future growth and development, in accordance with the Master Plan, by ensuring the future availability of public and private water supplies;
C. To encourage uses that can appropriately and safely be located in the aquifer recharge areas;
D. To control development and land-use practices that may detrimentally affect the quality of the groundwater contained in the aquifer by directly contributing to pollution or by increasing the long-term susceptibility of the aquifer to potential pollutants;
E. To ensure that any proposed use will not cause a significant reduction in the long-term volume of water contained in the aquifer or in the storage capacity of the aquifer;
F. To ensure against discharge of wastewater on site other than that typically discharged by domestic wastewater disposal systems, and against on-site storage or disposal of toxic or hazardous wastes as herein defined.
9.2.3 General Regulations:
A. District Boundaries:
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
9-12
1. The Aquifer Protection overlay district is defined as the area(s) delineated and labeled “Aquifer Protection Overlay District” (A) on the official zoning map of the Town of Exeter. Source document: Geologic and Groundwater Quality Data for Stratified Drift Aquifers in the Exeter, Lamprey and Oyster River Basins, Southeastern New Hampshire, published by the U.S. Geological Survey.
2. For the purposes of this ordinance, the primary recharge area for an identified aquifer is considered to occupy the same area as the aquifer.
3. Appeals: Where the bounds of the identified aquifer or recharge area, as delineated, are in doubt or in dispute, any landowner aggrieved by such delineation may appeal the boundary location to the Planning Board. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Planning Board shall suspend further action on development plans related to the area under appeal and shall engage, at said landowner’s expense, a qualified hydrogeologist to prepare a report determining the proper location and extent of the aquifer and recharge area relative to the property in question. The aquifer delineation shall be modified by such determination subject to review and approval by the Planning Board.
B. Design and Operation Guidelines: Where applicable, the following design and operation guidelines shall be observed within the Aquifer Protection District:
1. Safeguards: Provision shall be made to protect against toxic or hazardous materials discharge or loss resulting from corrosion, accidental damage, spillage, or vandalism through measures such as, but not limited to: spill control provisions in the vicinity of chemicals or fuel delivery points; secured storage areas for toxic or hazardous materials; and indoor storage provisions for corrodible or dissolvable materials. All fuel storage shall comply with NH Administrative Rule W.S. 411, notwithstanding exemptions provided therein. For operations that allow the evaporation of toxic or
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
9-13
hazardous materials into the interiors of any structure, a closed vapor recover system shall be provided for each such structure to prevent discharge of condensate into the groundwater.
2. Location: Where the premises are partially outside of the Aquifer Protection Overlay Zone, potential pollution sources such as on-site waste disposal systems shall be located outside the Zone to the extent feasible.
3. Drainage: All runoff from impervious surfaces shall be recharged on the site, and diverted toward areas covered with vegetation for surface infiltration to the extent possible. Dry wells shall be used only where other methods are not feasible, and shall be preceded by oil, grease, and sediment traps to facilitate removal of contaminants.
C. Use Regulations:
1. Minimum Lot Size: The minimum lot size within the Aquifer Protection District for each dwelling unit if a residential use, or each principal building if a non-residential use, shall be three (3) acres or 130,680 square feet. This shall not apply for lots served by municipal sewer system.
2. Hydrogeologic Study:
a. Site Plan: For multi-family, commercial, or industrial development proposals within, or partially within, the Aquifer Protection District (A), a hydrogeologic study shall be performed be a registered hydrogeologist. This study shall evaluate the development’s impacts on groundwater within both the parcel to be developed and the surrounding land. The groundwater quality beyond the property lines of said site shall not be degraded by polluting substances such as nitrates, phosphates, bacteria, etc. Larger lots may be required based on findings of said study.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
9-14
b. Subdivision: For single-family subdivision proposals of four (4) lots or greater, within the Aquifer Protection District (A), a hydrogeologic study shall be performed by a registered hydrogeologist.
c. For subdivisions of three (3) lots or less, the Planning Board will determine, on a case-to-case basis, the need for a hydrogeologic study. Particularly sensitive sites may include areas that have septic systems in close proximity to wells, or may contain excessively drained soils or steep slopes.
3. Maximum Lot Coverage: Within the Aquifer Protection District (A), no more than ten percent (10%) of a single lot, may be rendered impervious to groundwater infiltration.
4. Septic System Design and Installation: In addition to meeting all local and state septic systems siting requirements, all new on-lot wastewater disposal systems installed in the (A) district shall be designed by a Sanitary Engineer Licensed in New Hampshire. These systems shall be installed under the supervision of said engineer who shall perform a basal area inspection, in person, as part of said supervision.
D. A designated agent of the Town shall inspect the installation of each new system prior to covering, and shall certify that the system has been installed as designed.
E. Septic systems are to be constructed in accordance with the most recent edition of the “Guide for the Design, Operation and Maintenance of Small Sewage Disposal Systems” as published by the New Hampshire Water Supply and Pollution Control Division.
F. However, the following more stringent requirements shall apply to all septic systems construction:
1. At least twenty-four inches (24") (rather than six inches) of natural permeable soil above the seasonal high water table.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
9-15
2. Four feet (4') (rather than three feet) of natural soil above bedrock.
3. Standards for fill material: Fill materials consisting of organic soils or other organic materials such as tree stumps, sawdust, wood chips and bark, even with a soil matrix, should not be used.
G. The in-place fill should have less than fifteen percent (15%) organic soil by volume.
H. The in-place fill should not contain more than twenty-five percent (25%) by volume of cobbles (six inch diameter).
I. The in-place fill should not have more than fifteen percent (15%) by weight of clay size particles (0.002m and smaller).
J. The fill should be essentially homogeneous. If bedding planes and other discontinuities are present, detailed analysis is necessary.
K. Prohibited Uses: The following uses are prohibited in the Aquifer Protection Zone:
1. Disposal of solid waste.
2. Storage and disposal of hazardous waste.
3. Disposal of liquid or leachable wastes except that from one or two-family residential subsurface disposal systems, or as otherwise permitted as a conditional use.
4. Industrial uses that discharge contact type process waters on-site. Non-contact cooling water is permitted.
5. Outdoor unenclosed storage or use of road salt or other de-icing chemicals, except by duly authorized municipal employees on municipally maintained roads in the performance of their duties.
6. Dumping of snow containing de-icing chemicals brought from outside the district.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
9-16
7. Animal feedlots
8. Automotive services and repair shops, junk and salvage yards.
9. All on-site handling, disposal, storage, processing or recycling of hazardous or toxic materials.
10. Sand and gravel excavation and other mining within eight (8) vertical feet of the seasonal high water table.
11. Any use or activity that, in the opinion of the Zoning Board of Adjustment or its agent, is detrimental or more so than the above uses.
12. The use of fertilizer is restricted to the following conditions:
a. Application follows best management practices, limiting the potential for nutrient runoff or groundwater infiltration.
b. Fertilizer use is restricted to a minimum of 50% slow release nitrogen.
c. Fertilizer must be phosphorus-free unless a recent (within 12 months) soil test indicates a deficiency. In those situations, fertilizer is limited to =2% phosphorus.
d. Application rates may not exceed 0.5 lb. total nitrogen/1,000 ft², with an annual maximum application of 1.5 lb. of nitrogen/1,000 ft².
e. Fertilizer restrictions may be waived by the Planning Board or their designee for circumstances indicated, provided the following conditions are met:
i. Heavy-Use Turf (i.e. athletic fields or high priority areas of golf courses such as greens): Upon submission of a turf management plan adhering to all other criteria above, the Board
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
9-17
or their designee may increase application rate limits established in 12.b.iv to a maximum rate of 1 lb. total nitrogen/1,000 ft², with an annual maximum application of 3.0 lb. of nitrogen/1,000 ft². Waivers granted shall provide for temporary allowance, not to exceed 3 years.
ii. Restoration or Establishment of New Landscaping: With the exception of 12.b.i., above restrictions 12.a. and 12.b. above may be waived by the Board or their designee upon submission of written justification addressing the need and the specific location(s) within the property where the request applies and their relationship to the district boundary. Waivers granted will provide for temporary allowance, not to exceed one year.
9.2.4 Definitions:
A. Animal Feedlot: Any animal feedlot shall be considered one on which more than five (5) animals, other than house pets, are raised simultaneously.
B. Aquifer: For the purpose of this Ordinance, aquifer means a geologic formation, group of formations, or part of a formation that is capable of yielding quantities of groundwater useable for municipal or private water supplies.
C. Fertilizer: Any substance containing one or more recognized plant nutrients which are designed for use in promoting plant growth such as nitrogen, phosphorus or potassium. Fertilizer as defined shall not include nitrogen-free soil-building products such as molasses, humic acid, kelp, soil biological stimulants, secondary macronutrients, micronutrients, and biological inoculums.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
9-18
D. Groundwater: All the water below the land surface in the zone of saturation or in rock fractures capable of yielding water to a well.
E. Groundwater Recharge: The infiltration of precipitation through surface soil materials into groundwater. Recharge may also occur from surface waters, including lakes, streams and wetlands.
F. Leachable Waste: Waste materials, including solid wastes, sludge, and agricultural wastes that are capable of releasing contaminants to the surrounding environment.
G. Mining of Land: The removal of geologic materials such as topsoil, sand, and gravel, metallic ores, or bedrock to be brushed or used as building stone.
H. Recharge Area: The land surface area from which groundwater recharge occurs.
I. Solid Waste: Any discarded or abandoned materials including refuse, putrescible materials, septage, or sludge, as defined by New Hampshire Solid Waste Rules He-P 1901.03. Solid waste includes solid, liquid, semi-solid, or contain gaseous waste materials resulting from residential industrial commercial, mining, and agricultural operations and from community activities.
J. Toxic or Hazardous Materials: Any substance or mixture of such physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics as to pose a significant, actual or potential hazard to water supplies, or other hazard to human health, if such substance or mixture were discharged to land or waters of this Town. Toxic or hazardous materials include, without limitation, volatile organic chemicals, petroleum products, heavy metals, radioactive or infectious wastes, acids and alkalies, and include products such as pesticides, herbicides, solvents and thinners, and such other substances as defined in New Hampshire Water Supply and Pollution Control Rules, Section Ws 410.04 (1), in the New Hampshire Solid Rules He-P 1901.03 (v) and in the Code of Federal Regulations 40 CFR 261, as examples. Waste generated by commercial activities such as, but not limited to, the following, are presumed to be toxic or hazardous, unless and except to the extent that anyone engaging in
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
9-19
such an activity can demonstrate the contrary to the satisfaction of the Planning Board:
? Airplane, boat and motor vehicle service and repair;
? Chemical and bacteriological laboratory operation;
? Dry cleaning;
? Electronic circuit manufacturing;
? Metal plating, finishing and polishing;
? Motor and machinery service and assembly;
? Painting, wood preserving and furniture stripping;
? Pesticide and herbicide application;
? Photographic processing;
? Printing
9.2.5 Additional Information and Site Plan Review/Subdivision Regulations:
A. Landscaping, walls & screening (Article 5.9 and Section 9.7 of the Site Plan Review/Subdivision Regulations).
B. Off-Street Parking (Article 5.6 and Sections 9.12 & 9.13 of the Site Plan Review/Subdivision Regulations).
C. Signs (Article 5.7).
D. All underlying zoning district classifications (Article 3).
9.3 EXETER SHORELAND PROTECTION DISTRICT ORDINANCE
9.3.1 Authority and Purpose: Pursuant to NH RSA §674:16-21 the Town of Exeter hereby adopts the Exeter Shoreland Protection District and accompanying regulations in order to protect and promote public health, resource conservation and the general welfare and to:
A. Protect, maintain and enhance the water quality of the Exeter River, its tributaries and the Water Works Pond in the Town of Exeter, and to ensure the continued availability of a safe public water supply;
B. Protect, maintain and enhance the water quality of the Squamscott River and its tributaries in the Town of Exeter.
C. Protect, maintain and enhance the water quality of the Fresh River and its tributaries in the Town of Exeter.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
9-20
D. Conserve and protect aquatic and terrestrial habitat associated with river areas as well as intertidal and riparian areas;
E. Preserve and enhance those recreational and aesthetic values associated with the natural shoreline and river environment, both fresh and salt;
F. Encourage those uses that can be appropriately located adjacent to shorelines.
9.3.2 Definitions:
A. Bulk Storage: Storage of materials intended for wholesale distribution or used in a manufacturing facility.
B. Contiguous Wetland: A wetland which extends landward from its adjacent waterbody to a point where a natural or manmade discontinuity exists. Contiguous wetlands include bordering wetlands as well as wetlands that are situated immediately above the ordinary highwater mark and above the normal hydrologic influence of their adjacent waterbody. The lateral extent of a contiguous wetland depends upon the existence of a discontinuity. Man-made discontinuities include dikes and barriers such as roads, etc. Natural discontinuities may be river berms, beach dunes, abrupt slope changes or abrupt changes in the soil material.
C. Fertilizer: Any substance containing one or more recognized plant nutrients which are designed for use in promoting plant growth such as nitrogen, phosphorus or potassium. Fertilizer as defined shall not include nitrogen-free soil-building products such as molasses, humic acid, kelp, soil biological stimulants, secondary macronutrients, micronutrients, and biological inoculums.
D. Hazardous and Toxic Materials: Includes but is not limited to volatile organic chemicals, petroleum products, heavy metals, radioactive or infectious wastes, acids and alkalies, pesticides, herbicides, solvents, and thinners, and such other substances as defined in NH Ware Supply and Pollution Control Rules, Section Ws 410.04 (1), in NH Solid Waste Rules He-P 1901.03 (v), and in code of Federal Regulations 40 CFR 261.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
9-21
E. Mean High Water (salt): As determined according to the published tables and standards of the National Ocean Survey, adjusted to the locality from such tables.
F. Perennial Brooks, Streams, and Creeks: Brooks, streams and creeks that appear on U.S. Geological Survey quadrangle maps revised (7.5", scale 1": 24,000") covering the Town of Exeter.
G. Residential Accessory Structure: A subordinate structure located on the same lot as the principal building, the use of which is incidental to the principal building, and discharges no sewage or other wastes.
H. Seasonal High Water Level (fresh): The average annual high water elevation of a stream, brook, or river, including contiguous wetlands and floodplains.
I. Shoreline (fresh): The water’s edge at seasonal high water level.
J. Shoreline (salt): The water’s edge at mean high water.
9.3.3 District Boundaries: The Exeter Shoreland Protection District is defined to include the following:
A. Exeter River (fresh):
1. The area of land within 300 feet horizontal distance of the seasonal high water level of the Exeter River and its major tributaries. Major tributaries of the Exeter River within the Town of Exeter are defined to be the following: water flowing north from Great Meadows, water flowing westerly from the Cove and from wetlands between Hampton and Hampton Falls Roads, Little River, Dudley Brook and Bloody Brook.
2. In addition, the area of land within 150 feet horizontal distance of the seasonal high water level of all perennial brooks and streams within the Exeter River Watershed and all other perennial brooks and streams.
B. Fresh River (fresh):
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
9-22
1. The area of land within 300 feet horizontal distance of the seasonal high water level of the Fresh River and its major tributaries.
2. In addition, the area of land within 150 feet horizontal distance of the season high water level of all perennial brooks and streams within the Fresh River Watershed.
C. Squamscott River (salt):
1. The area of land within 300 feet horizontal distance of the shoreline of the salt water Squamscott River, and the seasonal high water level of its fresh water major tributaries. Major tributaries of the Squamscott River within the Town of Exeter are defined to be the following: Norris Brook to its confluence with Watson Brook, Wheelwright Creek, Parkman Brook, and Rocky Hill Brook, and Dearborn Brook and Water Works Pond, due to their importance to the public water supply.
2. In addition, the area of land within 150 feet horizontal distance of the mean high water level of all perennial brooks, streams and creeks within the Squamscott River watershed.
3. The area of land within 150 feet horizontal distance of the upland extent of any tidal marsh adjacent to the Squamscott River
9.3.4 Use Regulations:
A. Minimum Lot Size: The minimum lot size within the Shoreland Protection District shall be the same as required in the underlying Zoning District and by applicable subdivision regulations for the Town.
B. Maximum Lot Coverage: Impervious surfaces, shall not cover more than ten percent (10%) of any lot or portion thereof within the Shoreland Protection District as defined in 9.3.3. unless a Conditional Use Permit is granted by the Planning Board under the terms of Article 9.3.4.G.2 Exeter Shoreland Protection District Ordinance – Conditional Use.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
9-23
C. Building Setbacks: No building (except a structure permitted as a Conditional Use, under Article 9.3.4.G. Exeter Shoreland Protection District Ordinance – Conditional Use or a permitted use under Article9.3.4.I Permitted Uses) septic system or septic system leaching field, (except a repair or reconstruction) shall be constructed on or moved to a site within 300 feet from the shoreline of the Squamscott River, Dearborn Brook, Waterworks Pond, and Fresh River; within 150 feet from the shoreline of the Exeter River or the major tributaries of the Squamscott River and Exeter River as herein defined, or within 100 feet of the shoreline of perennial brooks and streams located within the Exeter Shoreland Protection District. A building setback of 150 feet upland from tidal marshes adjacent to the Squamscott River shall also be maintained.
1. Exemptions: Prior to the date on which this amendment was posted, the following uses are exempt from the provisions of Article 9.3.4-C.
a. Septic Systems: septic systems or septic systems leaching field designs applied for with the State Water Supply and Pollution Control Boards as well as principal buildings associated with such uses.
b. Applications Submitted: applications submitted for consideration by the Planning Board.
D. Surface Alterations: Alteration of the surface configuration of land by the addition of fill or by dredging shall be permitted within 150 feet of the shoreline of the Exeter River, Squamscott River or their major tributaries only to the extent necessitated by a permitted or conditionally permitted use.
E. Vegetative Buffer: Alteration of natural vegetation or managed woodland within 75 feet of the shoreline of the Exeter River, Squamscott River or their major tributaries shall be permitted only to the extent necessitated by a permitted or conditionally permitted use.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
9-24
F. Prohibited Uses: The following uses shall not be permitted within the Exeter Shoreland Protection District:
1. Disposal of solid waste (as defined by the NH RSA §149-M) other than brush.
2. On site handling, disposal, bulk storage, processing or recycling of hazardous or toxic materials.
3. Disposal of liquid or leachable wastes, except from residential subsurface disposal systems, and approved commercial or industrial systems that are otherwise permitted by this article.
4. Buried storage of petroleum fuel and other refined petroleum products except as regulated by the NH Water Supply and Pollution Control Commission (Ws 411 Control of Non-residential Underground Storage and Handling of Oil and Petroleum Liquids). Storage tanks for petroleum products, if contained within basements, are permitted.
5. Outdoor unenclosed or uncovered storage of road salt and other de-icing chemicals.
6. Dumping of snow containing road salt or other de-icing chemicals.
7. Commercial animal feedlots.
8. Automotive service and repair shops; junk and salvage yards.
9. Dry cleaning establishments.
10. Laundry and car wash establishments not served by a central municipal sewer systems.
11. Earth excavation as defined by NH RSA §155:E, within 150 feet of the Exeter River, Squamscott River or their major tributaries. It is prohibited to conduct said excavation within four feet of the Seasonal High Water Table.
12. The use of fertilizer is restricted to the following conditions:
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
9-25
a. Fertilizer may not be applied within 100 feet of the shoreline of all regulated waterbodies in the Shoreland Protection District.
b. Between 100 feet from the shoreline of all regulated waterbodies to the extent of the District, fertilizer application must meet the following criteria:
i. Application follows best management practices limiting the potential fir nutrient runoff or groundwater infiltration.
ii. Fertilizer must contain a minimum of 50% slow release nitrogen.
iii. Fertilizer must be phosphorus-free unless a recent (within 12 months) soil test indicates a deficiency. In those situations, fertilizer is limited to = 2% phosphorus.
iv. Application rates may not exceed 0.5 lb. total nitrogen/1,000 ft², with an annual maximum application of 1.5 lb. of nitrogen/1,000 ft².
c. Fertilizer restrictions may be waived by the Planning Board of their designee for circumstances indicated, provided the following conditions are met:
i. Heavy-Use Turf (i.e. athletic fields or high priority areas of golf courses such as greens): Upon submission of a turf management plan adhering to all other criteria above, the Board or their designee may increase application rate limits established in 12.b.iv to a maximum rate of 1 lb. total nitrogen/1,000 ft², with an annual maximum application of 3.0 lb. of nitrogen/1,000 ft². Waivers granted
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
9-26
shall provide for temporary allowance, not to exceed 3 years.
ii. Restoration or Establishment of New Landscaping: With the exception of 12.b.i., above restrictions 12.a. and 12.b. above may be waived by the Board or their designee upon submission of written justification addressing the need and the specific location(s) within the property where the request applies and their relationship to the district boundary. Waivers granted will provide for temporary allowance, not to exceed one year.
G. Conditional Uses:
1. The following uses, if allowed in the underlying zoning district, are permitted only after a Conditional Use Permit is granted by the Planning Board.
a. Industrial and commercial uses not otherwise prohibited in Article 9.3.4.F Exeter Shoreland Protection District Ordinance – Use Regulations of these regulations.
b. Multi-family residential development.
c. Transmission lines, access ways, including driveways and parking lots or roadways, paved or unpaved, within 150 feet of the Exeter River, Squamscott River or their major tributaries, or within 100 feet of perennial brooks, streams and creeks located within the Exeter Shoreland Protection District.
d. Detention ponds, treatment swales, and other drainage structures as required by State or local regulations.
2. The Planning Board may grant a Conditional Use Permit for those uses listed above only after written findings of fact are made which have been reviewed by technical experts from the
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
9-27
Rockingham Conservation District, if required by the Planning Board, at the cost of the developer, provided that all of the following are true:
a. The proposed use will not detrimentally affect the surface water quality of the adjacent river or tributary, or otherwise result in unhealthful conditions.
b. The proposed use will discharge no waste water on site other than that normally discharged by domestic waste water disposal systems and will not involve on-site storage or disposal of hazardous or toxic wastes as herein defined.
c. The proposed use will nor result in undue damage to spawning grounds and other wildlife habitat.
d. The proposed use complies with the use regulations identified in Article 9.3.4 Exeter Shoreland Protection District Ordinance – Use Regulations and all other applicable sections of this article.
e. The design and construction of the proposed use will be consistent with the intent of the purposes set forth in Article 9.3.1 Exeter Shoreland Protection District Ordinance – Authority and Purpose.
H. Lots of Record: (See I.5 within this article.)
I. Permitted Uses: The following uses are permitted within the Exeter Shoreland Protection District provided they are conducted in accordance with the purpose and intent of this Ordinance.
1. Agriculture, including grazing, hay production, Christmas tree growing and harvesting, aquiculture, truck gardening and silage production, provided that such use will not cause increases in surface or groundwater contamination by pesticides, fertilizers, or other hazardous or toxic substances and that such use will not cause or
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
9-28
contribute to substantial soil erosion and stream sedimentation. However, no clearing of natural vegetation within the vegetated buffer (as defined in this Article under 9.3.4.E) shall be permitted for the purpose of establishing new tilled and cultivated farmland without a conditional use permit. All pesticide applications shall be conducted in strict accordance with the requirements set forth in NH RSA §430:28 et seq.
2. Forest Management, including the construction of access ways for said purpose and all harvests of woody vegetation for conversion of land to non-forest management or agricultural purposes. Partial cutting of trees is limited to thirty percent (30%) of the pre-harvest basal area for all live trees measuring six inches (6") diameter, breast height (4 ½ feet above ground level), or greater. Partial cutting shall be done in such a way that a well distributed stand of healthy growing trees remains. Clear cuts to develop improved wildlife habitat and promote forest regeneration are restricted to one-quarter (¼) acre openings dispersed throughout the Shoreland Protection District. Harvesting of trees in the Shoreland Protection District is limited to one cut per ten years. Salvage necessitated by acts of God shall exempt property owners from the conditions set forth in this paragraph.
3. Residential accessory structures, of less than 400 square feet in first floor area, within 150 feet of the Exeter River, Squamscott River or their major tributaries, or within 100 feet of perennial brooks, streams and creeks located within the Exeter Shoreland Protection District, providing that the Building Inspector has determined that the conditions set forth above have been met.
4. The clearing of natural vegetation for the creation of new agricultural land not closer than twenty feet from a shoreline, provided that any agricultural activities are carried out according to best management practices as prescribed by the
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
9-29
Rockingham County Conservation District as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer.
5. The erection of a single family residence or permitted duplex on an official lot of record, as recorded at the Rockingham county Registry of Deeds, prior to the date on which this amendment was posted and published in the Town, provided the Building Inspector determines the following to be true.
a. The use for which the exception is sought cannot feasibly be carried out on a portion or portions of the lot that are outside the Exeter Shoreland Protection District.
b. The design and construction of the proposed use will, to the extent practical, be consistent with the purpose and intent of this article.
6. Uses permitted in the underlying district of the Zoning Ordinance, except for those listed as conditional uses in this Article under G, Conditional Uses and those prohibited in F, Use Regulations.
J. Non applicability to the C-1 (downtown) and WC District: The following provisions within this Article shall not apply to the C-1 (downtown portion only) and WC Districts: 9.3.4: B, C, D, E, and F (8-11).
K. Validity: The invalidity of any provisions of this ordinance shall not affect the validity of any other provisions.
9.3.5 Administration:
A. General: The provisions of the Exeter Shoreland Protection District Ordinance shall be administered by the following:
1. Building Inspector for building permits;
2. Planning Board for subdivision, site plan review, and conditional use approval; and
3. Zoning Board of Adjustment for special exception approval of existing lots.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
9-30
B. Enforcement: The Code Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for the enforcement of the provisions and conditions of the Exeter Shoreland Protection District Ordinance.
9.3.6 Effective Date: This Article shall become effective upon the date of passage. (Adopted March 1989)
9.4 FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
9.4.1 This ordinance, adopted pursuant to the authority of NH RSA §674:16, shall be known as the Town of Exeter Floodplain Development Ordinance. The regulations in this ordinance shall overlay and supplement the regulations in the Town of Exeter Zoning Ordinance, and shall be considered part of the Zoning Ordinance for purposes of administration and appeals under state law. If any provision of the Zoning Ordinance differs or appears to conflict with any provision of the Zoning Ordinance or other ordinance or regulation, the provision imposing the greater restriction or more stringent standard shall be controlling.
9.4.2 The following regulations in this ordinance shall apply to all lands designated as special flood hazard areas by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its “Flood Insurance Study for the county of Rockingham, NH” dated May 17, 2005, together with the associated Flood Insurance Rate Maps, dated May 17, 2005 which are declared to be a part of this ordinance and are hereby incorporated by reference.
9.4.3 Definition of Terms: The following definitions shall apply only to this Floodplain Development Ordinance, and shall not be affected by, the provisions of any other ordinance of the Town of Exeter.
A. Area of Special Flood Hazard: Land in the floodplain within the Town of Exeter subject to a one-percent or greater possibility of flooding in any given year. The area is designated on the FIRM as zone A and AE.
B. Base Flood: The flood having a one-percent possibility of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
9-31
C. Base Flood Elevation: The water surface elevation having a one percent possibility of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
D. Basement: Any area of a building having its floor sub-grade on all sides.
E. Building: see “Structure”
F. Development: Any man-made change to improve or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operation, or storage of equipment or materials..
G. FEMA: Federal Emergency Management Agency
H. Flood or Flooding: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
1. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
2. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
I. Flood Insurance Rate Map: (FIRM) An official map incorporated with this ordinance, on which FEMA has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the Town of Exeter.
J. Flood Insurance Study: An examination, evaluation, and determination of flood hazards and if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevation, or an examination and determination of mud slide or flood-related erosion hazards.
K. Floodplain or Flood-prone area: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (See definition of “Flooding”).
L. Flood Proofing: Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation facilities, structures and their contents.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
9-32
M. Floodway: see “Regulatory Floodway”
N. Functionally Dependent Use: A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking and port facilities that are necessary for the loading/unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building/repair facilities but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
O. Highest Adjacent Grade: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
P. Historic Structure: Any structure that is:
1. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
2. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
3. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
4. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
a. By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or
b. Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Q. Lowest Floor: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
9-33
enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided, that such an enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this ordinance.
R. Manufactured Home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes the term “manufactured home” includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on site for greater than 180 days. This includes manufactured homes located in a manufactured home park or subdivision.
S. Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
T. Mean Sea Level: The National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
U. New Construction: For the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, new construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a flood plain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
V. Recreational Vehicle: A vehicle which is:
1. Built on single chassis;
2. 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
9-34
3. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
4. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
W. Regulatory Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.
X. Special Flood Hazard Area: See “Area of Special Flood Hazard”.
Y. Start of Construction: Includes substantial improvements, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footing, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure.
Z. Structure: For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tanks, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
AA. Substantial Damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
9-35
BB. Substantial Improvement: The combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a structure in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure. The market value of the structure should equal:
1. The appraised value prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or
2. In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring.
For the purposes of this definition, “substantial improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions or any alteration of a “historic structure”, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure”.
CC. Violation: The failure of a structure or other development to by fully compliant with the community’s flood plain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required under this ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
DD. Water Surface Elevation: The height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum of 1988, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains.
9.4.4 Permits: The Building Inspector shall not grant a building permit until the applicant certifies that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including Section
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
9-36
404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C.1334.
A. Building Permit Requirement: All proposed development in any special flood hazard areas shall require a building permit.
B. Building Permit Review: The Building Inspector shall review all building permit applications for new construction or substantial improvements to determine whether the proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is located in a special flood hazard area, all new construction or substantial improvements shall:
1. Be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
2. Be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
3. Be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages;
4. Be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
9.4.5 New or Replacement Water and Sewer Systems: Where new or replacement water and sewer systems (including on-site systems) are proposed in a special flood hazard area the applicant shall provide the Building Inspector with assurance that these systems will be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters, and on-site waste disposal systems will be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during periods of flooding.
9.4.6 New Structure Requirements: For all new or substantially improved structures located in Zones A and AE, the applicant
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
9-37
shall furnish the following information to the Building Inspector:
A. The as-built elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) and include whether or not such structures contain a basement.
B. If the structure has been flood-proofed, the as-built elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure was flood-proofed.
C. Any certification of flood-proofing.
The Building Inspector shall maintain for public inspection, and shall furnish such information upon request.
9.4.7 Development Along Watercourses:
A. In riverine situations, prior to the alteration or relocation of a watercourse the applicant for such authorization shall notify the Wetlands Bureau of the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services and submit copies of such notification to the Building Inspector, in addition to the copies required by NH RSA §482-A:3. Further, the applicant shall be required to submit copies of said notification to those adjacent communities as determined by the Building Inspector, including notice of all scheduled hearings before the Wetlands Bureau.
B. The applicant shall submit to the Building Inspector, certification provided by a registered professional engineer, assuring that the flood carrying capacity of an altered or relocated watercourse can and will be maintained.
C. Along watercourses with a designated Regulatory Floodway no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development are allowed within the floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practices that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the base flood discharge.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
9-38
D. Along watercourses that have not had a Regulatory Floodway designated, no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zone AE on the FIRM, unless it is demonstrated by the applicant that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community.
E. In zone A, the building Inspector shall obtain review, and reasonably utilize any floodway data available from Federal, State, or other sources as criteria for requiring that development meet the following floodway requirement:
“No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development are allowed within the floodway that would result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the base flood discharge.”
9.4.8 Base Flood Elevation:
A. In special flood hazard areas the Building Inspector shall determine the base flood elevation in the following order of precedence according to the data available:
1. In zone AE refer to the base flood elevation data provided in the community’s Flood Insurance Study and accompanying FIRM.
2. In Zone A the Building Inspector shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data available from any federal, state or other source including data submitted for development proposals submitted to the community (i.e. subdivisions, site approvals).
3. In Zone A where the base flood elevation is not available, the base flood elevation shall be at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
9-39
B. The Building Inspector’s base flood elevation, determination will be used as criteria for requiring in zones A and AE that:
1. All new construction or substantial improvement of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation;
2. That all new construction or substantial improvement of non-residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation; or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall
a. Be flood-proofed so that below the base flood elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
b. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy; and
c. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this article;
3. Recreational vehicles placed on site within Zones A and AE shall either:
a. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
b. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or;
c. Meet all standards of Section 9.4.8.(B)(4) of this ordinance.
4. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within special flood hazard areas shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
9-40
home is at or above the base flood elevation; and be securely anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces;
5. For all new construction and substantial improvements, fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding are permitted provided they meet the following requirements:
a. The enclosed area is unfinished or flood resistant, useable solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage;
b. The area is not a basement;
c. Shall be designated to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry or exit of floodwater.
9.4.9 Variances and Appeals:
A. Any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the Building Inspector made under this ordinance may be appealed to the Zoning Board of Adjustment as set forth in NH RSA §676:5.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
9-41
B. If the applicant, upon appeal, requests a variance as authorized by NH RSA §674:33, I (b), the applicant shall have the burden of showing in addition to the usual variance standards under state law:
1. That the variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense.
2. That if the requested variance is for activity within a designated regulatory floodway, no increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge will result.
3. That the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
C. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall notify the applicant in writing that:
1. The issuance of a variance to construct below the base level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25) for one hundred dollars ($100) of insurance coverage, and
2. Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property.
Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions.
D. The community shall:
1. Maintain a record of all variance actions, including their justification for their issuance, and
2. Report such variances issued in its annual or biennial report submitted to FEMA’s Federal Insurance Administrator.

Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
10-1
Article 10. GROWTH MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE
10.1 PREAMBLE
10.1.1 The Town of Exeter deems it desirable to control its growth, size and nature to achieve the following objectives:
A. To promote the development of an economically sound and environmentally stable “small town” residential community;
B. To preserve the scenic beauty and present aesthetic values of the Town;
C. To prevent scattered or premature development of the land;
D. To protect the health, safety, convenience, property and general welfare of its inhabitants;
E. To insure that the rate of growth of the Town does not unreasonably interfere with the Town’s capacity for planned, orderly and sensible expansion of its services to accommodate such growth;
F. To promote development harmonious with land capabilities within the Town;
G. To prevent too rapid a pace of growth that tends to thwart the planning process and escalate too rapidly the growth and costs of municipal services, especially of schools;
H. To allow the shared goals, plans and objectives of the Town, its planning officials and its citizens to be realized in a comprehensive fashion as set forth in the Exeter Master Plan.
10.2 PHASING SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT:
10.2.1 Authority: Pursuant to the provisions of the New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated R.S.A. 674:21, the Town of Exeter adopts the following regulation to be administered by the Planning Board in conjunction with the Subdivision Regulation of the Town of Exeter.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
10-2
10.2.2 Purpose:
A. To guide the implementation of major subdivisions in the Town of Exeter so that residents of the Town can be adequately served by community facilities, as those services are expanded.
B. To provide for the current and future housing needs of existing residents.
C. To insure fairness in the allocation of building permits.
D. To insure that construction costs to builders are not unduly increased by preventing them from erecting or creating several dwelling units as part of one project.
E. To phase in or control the implementation and development of tracts of land and future subdivisions thereon, at a rate which will be compatible with the orderly and gradual expansion of community services, including but not limited to education, fire protection, road maintenance, waste disposal, police protection and recreation.
10.2.3 Applicability: This article shall apply to all subdivision applications filed with the Planning Department that request approval of ten (10) or more building lots.
10.2.4 Procedure: The Planning Board may, in its discretion, establish a phasing schedule of any subdivision subject to the provision of this article specifying the number of dwelling units per year that can be constructed and the total numbers of years involved.
In establishing the phasing schedule pursuant to this article, the Planning Board shall take the following factors into consideration:
A. The area of the tracts usable and suitable for residential construction.
B. The general character of the neighborhood in which the tract lies, the effect of the plan on the area and the effect of the plan on the rural character of the Town.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
10-3
C. The relation of the plan to the long-range plans of the Town as contained in the Town of Exeter Master Plan, as amended.
D. The natural terrain of the tract.
E. The impact of the proposed subdivision upon the ability of the Town to provide or expand municipal or community services if it is not phased.
10.2.5 Limitations: In establishing the phasing schedule, the Planning Board shall not restrict the number of dwelling units permitted annually to less than ten percent (10%) of the total number of dwelling units permitted in the approved subdivision plan.

Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
11-1
Article 11. PUBLIC CAPITAL FACILITIES IMPACT FEE
11.1 AUTHORITY AND APPLICABILITY
11.1.1 This Article is authorized by New Hampshire RSA 674:21 as an innovative land use control. The administration of this article shall be the responsibility of the Planning Board. This Article, as well as regulations and studies adopted by the Planning Board consistent with and in furtherance of this Article, shall govern the assessment of impact fees imposed upon new development in order to meet the needs occasioned by that development for the construction or improvement of capital facilities owned or operated by the Town of Exeter, the Exeter School District, or the Exeter Region Cooperative School District.
11.1.2 The public facilities for which impact fees may be assessed in Exeter may include water treatment and distribution facilities; waste water treatment and disposal facilities; sanitary sewer; storm-water, drainage and flood control facilities; public road systems and right-of way; municipal office facilities; public school facilities including a proportional share of capital facilities of the Exeter Region Cooperative School District ; public safety facilities; public library facilities; and public recreation facilities not including public open space.
11.1.3 Prior to assessing an impact fee with exception of off-site improvements required by the Planning Board for one or more of the public capital facilities enumerated above, the Planning Board shall adopt such studies or methodologies and related fee schedules that provide for a process or method of calculating the proportionate share of capital improvement costs that are attributable to new development. Such calculations shall reasonably reflect the capital cost associated with the increased demand placed on capital facility capacity by new development.
11.1.4 The following regulations shall govern the assessment of impact fees for public capital facilities in order to accommodate increased demand on the capacity of these facilities due to new development.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
11-2
11.2 PURPOSE
11.2.1 Assist in the implementation of the Town of Exeter Master Plan;
11.2.2 Provide for the planning and provision of public capital facilities necessitated by the growth of the Town of Exeter;
11.2.3 Provide adequate school system capacity to accommodate growth in public school enrollment generated by new development.
11.2.4 Assess an equitable proportion of growth-related costs of new and expanded public capital facilities to new development, in proportion to the facility demands created by that development.
11.3 FINDINGS
The Town of Exeter hereby finds that:
11.3.1 The Town of Exeter is responsible for and committed to the provision of public capital facilities and services at standards determined by the Town to be necessary to support development in a manner which protects and promotes the public health, safety and welfare;
11.3.2 An impact fee ordinance for public capital facilities is consistent with the goals and objectives of the Master Plan and the Capital Improvements Program of the Town of Exeter;
11.3.3 New development in Exeter will create the need for the construction, equipment, or expansion of public facilities in order to provide adequate public capital facilities for its residents and businesses.
11.3.4 Impact fees may be used to assess an equitable share of the growth-related cost of the capacity of public capital facilities resulting from the new development in proportion to the facility demands created by that development;
11.3.5 Impact fees assessed pursuant to this Ordinance will not exceed the cost of:
A. Providing additional expanded public capital facilities necessitated by new development in Exeter; and/or
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
11-3
B. Compensating the Town of Exeter, the Exeter School District, or the Exeter Region Cooperative School District for public capital facility capacity that it provided in anticipation of new development in Exeter.
11.4 DEFINITIONS
The following terms are defined for purposes of this article.
11.4.1 Fee Payer: The applicant for a permit that would create new development as defined in this ordinance.
11.4.2 Public Capital Facilities: Facilities and equipment owned, maintained or operated by the Town of Exeter, the Exeter School District, or the Exeter Region Cooperative School District. Facilities which are eligible for impact fee assessment under this Ordinance may include any or all of the facilities which are specifically delineated under NHRSA § 674:21 (V).
11.4.3 Gross Floor Area: The sum of the areas of all floors of main and accessory buildings on the lot as measured to the outside surface of the exterior walls. The gross floor area shall include basement, lobbies, and stair openings, elevator shafts and storage. The gross floor area shall exclude open wells, (atriums), mechanical rooms, crawl spaces and attics without floors, attics used only for mechanical services, porches, balconies and open-sided roofed-over areas.
11.4.4 New Development: An activity, which results in:
A. The creation of a new dwelling or dwelling units (as defined by Article 2.2 "Definition" contained in this Zoning Ordinance); or
B. The conversion of a legally existing use, or additions thereto, which would result in a net increase in the number of residential units; or
C. Construction of a new non-residential building or, a net increase in the gross floor area of any non-residential building; or
D. The conversion of an existing use to another use if such change creates a net increase in the demand on public capital facilities that are the subject of impact fee
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
11-4
assessment methodologies adopted by the Planning Board; or
E. A new or modified service connection to the public water system or the public wastewater disposal system of the Town of Exeter that would result in a net increase in demand on the capacity of these facilities.
New Development shall not include the replacement of an existing mobile home, or the reconstruction of a structure that has been destroyed by fire or natural disaster where there is no change in its size, intensification of, or type of use, and where there is no net increase in demand on public capital facilities.
11.5 COMPUTATION OF IMPACT FEE
11.5.1 The amount of each impact fee shall be assessed in accordance with subdivision and site plan regulations adopted by the Planning Board, or with written procedures or methodologies adopted and amended by the Planning Board and accepted by the Board of Selectmen for the purpose of public capital facility impact fee assessment in Exeter. The computation of an impact fee shall be based on formulas or methods that include documentation of the procedures used to establish the amount of the impact fee. The amount of any impact fee shall be computed based on the municipal public capital improvement cost of providing adequate public capital facility capacity to serve new development. Such documentation shall be available for public inspection in the Planning Department of the Exeter Town Office.
11.5.2 In the case of new development created by the conversion or modification of an existing use, the impact fee assessed shall be computed based upon the net increase in the impact fee assessment for the new use as compared to the highest impact that was, or would have been, assessed for the previous use in existence on or after the effective date of this Ordinance.
11.6 ASSESSMENT & PAYMENT OF IMPACT FEE
11.6.1 Impact fees may be assessed by the Code Enforcement Officer, prior to or as a condition to issuance of a building permit on new development to compensate the Town of Exeter for the
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
11-5
proportional share of the public capital facility costs generated by the development. The Code Enforcement Officer may accept impact fee payment at the time the building permit is being issued.
11.6.2 Impact fees shall normally be collected as a condition for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. In the case of impact fees for off-site capital improvements that are to be constructed simultaneously with new development, and where sufficient non-impact fee funds have been appropriated to create the capital improvements, the fee may be collected at the time a building permit is issued. The Town of Exeter and the fee payer may establish an alternate, mutually acceptable schedule of payment.
11.6.3 Any person who seeks a permit for new development, may be required to pay the public capital facility impact fees established by the Town of Exeter authorized under this Ordinance, except where all or part of the fees are waived in accordance with the criteria for waivers established in this Ordinance.
11.7 WAIVERS
The Planning Board may grant a full or partial waiver of impact fees where the Board finds that one or more of the following criteria are met with respect to the particular capital facilities for which impact fees are normally assessed.
11.7.1 A person may request a full or partial waiver of school facility impact fees for those residential units that are lawfully restricted to occupancy by senior citizens age 62 or over. The Planning Board may waive school impact fee assessments on age-restricted units where it finds that the property will be bound by lawful deeded restrictions on occupancy for a period of at least 20-years.
11.7.2 The Planning Board may agree to waive all or part of an impact fee assessment and accept in lieu of a cash payment, a proposed contribution of real property or facility improvements of equivalent value and utility to the public. The value of contributions or improvements shall be credited only toward facilities of like kind, and may not be credited to other categories of impact fee assessment. Full or partial waivers may not be based on the value of exactions for on-site or off-
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
11-6
site improvements required by the Planning Board as a result of subdivision or site plan review, and which would be required of the developer regardless of the impact fee assessment authorized by this Article.
11.7.3 The Planning Board may waive an impact fee assessment for a particular capital facility where it finds that the subject property has previously been assessed for its proportionate share of public capital facility impacts, or has contributed payments or constructed capital facility improvements equivalent in value to the dollar amount of the fee(s) waived.
11.7.4 A person may request a full or partial waiver of impact fees, other than those that expressly protect public health standards, for construction within a plat or site plan approved by the Planning Board prior to the effective date of this Article (November 20th, 2001). Prior to granting such a waiver, the Board must find that the proposed construction is entitled to the four year exemption provided by RSA 674:39, pursuant to that statute.
11.8 APPEALS
11.8.1 A party aggrieved by a decision under this Article may appeal such decision to the Superior Court as provided by RSA 676:5, III and RSA 677:15 as amended.
11.9 ADMINISTRATION OF FUNDS COLLECTED
Any impact fee collected shall be properly identified by and promptly transferred for deposit in an appropriate Public Capital Facilities Impact Fee Account and used solely for the purposes for which it was collected. Impact fee accounts shall be special revenue fund accounts and under no circumstance will impact fee revenue accrue to the general fund.
11.10 CUSTODY AND MAINTENANCE OF FUND ACCOUNTS
11.10.1 A separate Public Capital Facilities Impact Fee account shall be established for each type of capital facility for which an impact fee is assessed
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
11-7
11.10.2 At the end of each fiscal year, the Finance Director shall make a report giving a particular account of all impact fee transactions during the year.
11.11 USE OF FUNDS
11.11.1 Funds withdrawn from any public facilities impact fee account shall be used solely for the purpose of acquiring, constructing, facility equipment, or making improvements to the particular public capital facilities for which the account is designated.
11.11.2 In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments have been issued for public capital facilities which were constructed in anticipation of current growth, or are issued for advance provision of capital facilities for which public capital facilities impact fees may be expended, impact fees may be used to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt instruments.
11.12 REFUND OF FEES PAID
The owner of record of property for which an impact fee has been paid shall be entitled to a refund of that fee, plus accrued interest where:
11.12.1 The impact fee has not been encumbered or legally bound to be spent for the purpose for which it was collected within a period of six (6) years from that date of the final payment of the fee; or
11.12.2 The Town has failed, within the period of six (6) years from the date of the final payment of such fee, to appropriate the non-impact fee (town) share to related capital improvements costs.
11.13 ADDITIONAL ASSESSMENTS
Payment of a public capital facilities impact fee does not restrict the Town or the Planning Board in requiring other payments from the fee payer, including, but not limited to, water and sewer hook-up fees and other fees related to the cost for extensions of water and sewer mains, including road improvements or other infrastructure and facility needs specifically benefiting the development not otherwise included in the public capital facilities impact fee.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
11-8
11.14 PREMATURE AND SCATTERED DEVELOPMENT
Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed so as to limit the existing authority of the Exeter Planning Board to provide against development, which is scattered or premature, requires an excessive expenditure of public funds, or is otherwise contrary to the Town of Exeter Zoning Ordinance or Site Plan Review and Subdivision Regulations.
11.15 REVIEW
Procedures and methodologies that are adopted for the purpose of calculating the amount of an impact fee shall be reviewed by the Board of Selectmen and Planning Board at a minimum of five-year intervals, and may be amended periodically after public hearing.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
12-1
Article 12. BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
12.1 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
12.1.1 Within thirty days after the adoption of this ordinance and thereafter as terms expire, or vacancies occur, the Board of Selectmen shall make appointments to a Board of Adjustments of five members conforming in duties to the provisions of NH RSA §673:3, or as amended. Thereafter, as terms expire, or vacancies occur, the appointing authority shall be responsible for filling vacancies and maintaining full membership on the Board of Adjustment.
12.1.2 The Board of Adjustment shall conform in membership and terms of office to the provisions of NH RSA §673:3, §673:5, and §673:6, or as amended.
12.2 ADMINISTRATIVE FEES
There shall be a fee for applications to the Board of Adjustment for special exceptions, variances and appeals. This fee shall be set by the Planning Board and shall cover the administrative costs associated with processing such applications.
12.3 EQUITABLE WAIVERS OF DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS
The Board of Adjustment is authorized to grant Equitable Waivers of Dimensional Requirements in accordance with the provisions of NH RSA §674:33-a, or as amended.
12.4 LIMITS OF APPROVAL
All approvals granted by the Board of Adjustment shall be valid for a period of three years from the date such approval was granted. The ZBA may grant one year extensions provided there have been no changes in the zoning ordinance or other applicable laws or regulations that would affect the approval. Once substantial completion of the improvements, modifications, alterations or changes in the property or use contemplated by the applicant’s petition have occurred in compliance with the terms of the approval, the rights of the owner or of the owner’s successor in interest shall vest and the three year limitation of validity of the approval shall not apply.

Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
13-1
Article 13. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
13.1 ADMINISTRATION
Administration of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be the responsibility of the Board of Selectmen, who may appoint a Zoning Officer to advise and assist them in such manner as they may direct.
13.2 BUILDING CODES
The following regulations are hereby made part of this ordinance. In the event of contradictions between regulations, the regulation imposing the higher standard shall apply. The following codes may be revised according to the provisions of NH RSA §674:52, Part VI.
13.2.1 State:
A. NH Barrier Free Design Code
B. NH Energy Code
13.2.2 National:
A. International Building Code 2000, as amended
B. International Residential Code 2000, as amended
C. International Plumbing Code 2000
D. International Mechanical Code 2000
E. New Hampshire State Fire Code, as amended.
F. National Electrical Code 2002, as amended
G. Life Safety Code N.F.P.A. 101 2000, as amended
*Note: Per Section R105.5, Expiration; any permit issued shall become invalid if the authorized work is not commenced within one (1) year after issuance of the permit, or if the authorized work is suspended or abandoned for a period of one (1) year after the time of commencing the work.
*The Exeter Building Inspector is authorized to deny building permits for proposed fences that he/she determines to be a threat to public safety.
13.3 ENFORCEMENT
Enforcement procedures shall be in accordance with NH RSA §676:17.

Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
14-1
Article 14. VALIDITY
14.1 SAVING CLAUSE
The invalidity of any provisions of this ordinance shall not affect the validity of any other provisions.
14.2 AMENDMENTS
This ordinance may be amended by a majority vote of any legal Town Meeting after such amendments have been proposed in accordance with NH RSA §675.
14.3 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS
Where any article of this ordinance conflicts with another, or with any other local regulation or ordinance, the requirement imposing the greater restriction or higher standard shall apply. In addition, the fact that a requirement under this ordinance is less restrictive than federal or state regulation or statute does not relieve an applicant from compliance with the terms of such regulation or statute, unless specifically authorized by said regulation or statute.
14.4 EFFECTIVE DATE
This ordinance shall take effect upon its passage.

Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
1
Record of Amendments
March, 1987
3.10 H’ – Healthcare District
4.20 ‘H’ – Healthcare District
4.20 R-5 Multi-family
4.20 Land Conservation Zone
4.30 Healthcare District
4.41.2 Junkyards
4.50.5 Performance Standards
5.33 Permissible Structures
6.10.1 Multiple Dwellings
6.10.2.b Supplemental Controls
6.51 Off-Street Parking
6.71 Historic Districts: General Administrative
6.71-6.2 Historic Districts: Administrative, Enforcement and Limitation
6.83.c.4 Exeter Historic District Sign Ordinance
6.85.e Open Space Development
6.87.b Wetland Conservation District
6.88 Growth Management Ordinance
6.88.c Growth Management Ordinance
Zoning Map – C-3 District
March, 1988
3.20 Zoning Map district lines redraw to property lines
4.20 Conservation Overlay District
6.83 Signs
6.91 Aquifer Protection District
7.20 Building Codes
Zoning Map – I District
C-2 District
I-3 District
R-1 District
R-2 District
R-5 District
March, 1989
2.20 Definitions: Add: abutter, business, floor area, home occupation and museum.
3.20 Zoning Map, C-2 District
4.20 Child Day Care
4.20 Mini-storage buildings
4.20 Residential Uses, C-1 District
4.42 Junk Cars
6.51 Off-Street Parking
6.82 Home Occupations
6.83 Signs
6.87.b Deleted
6.89 Helicopter Ordinance
6.90 Exeter Shoreland Protection District
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
2
March, 1990
Articles 1 –12 Reorganization and Recodification (See text for record of changes)
2.20 Definitions
Added for bulk storage, and elderly.
Definitions amended for abandonment, conversion, coverage, farm, gasoline and/or service station, junk yard, lot, non-conforming, multiple family, non-conforming use sign, sign, advertising, sign portable billboard, wetlands.
4.20 Child Day Care
4.20 Schedule I: Permitted Uses – Elderly Congregate Health Care Facilities
4.30 Schedule II: Density and Dimensional Regulations – Residential (Note 16)
4.30 Schedule II: Density and Dimensional Regulations – Residential – Maximum Height, R-4 District (three or more)
5.10 Non-conforming Uses
5.14 Required Area of Space (deleted)
5.40 Maximum Coverage (deleted)
5.61 Off-Street Parking
5.62 Off-Street Loading
6.15 Elderly Congregate Health Care Facilities - Standards
6.80 Excavation Of Earth Material
8.10 Historic District Commission - Membership
8.30 Historic District Commission - Scope
8.50 Historic District Commission - Appeals
9.40 Floodplain Development Ordinance
11.20 Administrative Fees
12.20 B.O.C.A. Code – Section 112.2, Suspension of Permits
September, 1990
2.20 Definition for Accessory Dwelling Unit added
4.20 Note2, Accessory Dwelling Units criteria added
4.20 Accessory professional office deleted
4.20 Schedule I, Conservation Overlay District (title) deleted
4.30 Schedule II and III, RU, C-2, and I District side yard requirements changed to 30/60, 20/40, and 20/40, from 25/60, 15/40 and 15/40.
4.30 Schedule III, Minimum lot area/dwelling unit changed from 7,000 Square feet to 3,500 square feet for C-1 District.
5.31 Existing Lots of Record, language added to clarify grandfathered rights.
5.54 (2) Accessory structures, under 120 square feet permitted within yard setbacks.
6.01 Multiple Dwellings – Site Plan Specification deleted.
6.02 Industrial District – Site Plan Specification deleted.
10.20(1)Growth Management Ordinance – Regulations. Health Care facilities exempted from the provisions of this ordinance.
March, 1991
4.30 Schedule III, Density and Dimensional Regulations – Non – Residential, amend reference note #3.
4.30 Schedule III, Density and Dimensional Regulations – Non – Residential, increase maximum lot coverage for the C-3, Epping Road Highway Commercial District from 20% to 40%.
5.31 Amended Existing Lots of Record by adding subsection ‘d. Access.’
5.50 Amended Yard Regulations
5.62 Amended text for Off-Street Loading, ‘Wholesale and Manufacturing’
5.73 Amended General Regulations by adding (f) to subsection 1.
5.74 Added regulations for Off-Site Signs (permanent and temporary)
6.60 Amended subsection d. – Additional Requirements
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
3
Delete subsection h. - Intersection
7.20 Amended to include text referencing conveyance of land in accordance with Section 7.60.1.a Bonus
7.60 Amended Section 7.60.1 by adding subsection ‘a. Bonus’
9.12 Amended (*) footnote for interpretation of ‘certified soils scientist’.
9.34 amended text of subsection 9.34.9.e
9.47 Amended NH RSA reference in Section 9.47.1.
12.20 Revision of Building Codes according to provisions of NH RSA §674:52
13.20 Added ‘Conflicting Provision’ Text
Zoning Map Rezone property along the east side of Epping Road from Industrial Drive to Route 101/51 to C-3, Epping Road Highway Commercial; increase the depth of this district from 400' to 500'; and amend all applicable sections of the Zoning Ordinance.
Zoning Map Delete I-3, Epping Road District and replace with I, Industrial District, and amend all applicable sections of the Zoning Ordinance.
August, 1991
In accordance with the provisions of NH RSA §674:52, the Planning Board, at its August 22, 1991 meeting, voted unanimously to adopt the updated versions of the codes referenced in Article 12, Section 12.20, Building Codes.
March, 1992
2.20 Definition of ‘Mobile Home’ deleted and replaced by State definition for ‘Manufactured Housing’.
2.20 Definition for ‘Manufactured Housing Subdivision’ added.
2.20 Definition of ‘Wetlands’ was amended to add reference to ‘high intensity soil survey’.
4.20 Schedule I: Permitted Uses amended by adding ‘manufactured housing subdivisions’ as a permitted principal use in the R-1 zoning district.
4.20 Schedule I: Permitted Uses amended by adding ‘expansion of non-conforming uses’ as a use permitted by special exception in the Waterfront Commercial (WC) District.
4.20 Schedule I: Permitted Uses amended by adding ‘expansion of non-conforming uses’ as a use permitted by special exception in the Exeter Shoreland Protection (ESP) District.
4.30 Schedule II: Density and Dimensional Regulations – Residential amended by deleting the ‘Minimum Lot Area’ column and heading; first two column headings amended.
5.51a Side Yard of Corner Lot text amended.
5.62 Off-Street Loading text amended.
9.11 Wetland Conservation District, District Boundaries, text amended.
9.15 Buffer Areas – text replaced.
9.34.2 Shoreland Protection District Use Regulations, Maximum Lot Coverage amended.
9.34.7(b) – (4) and (5) amended references to ‘Section D’ and ‘Section A’ to ‘Section 9.34’ and ‘Section 9.31’, respectively.
March 9, 1993
2.20 Definition for ‘Light Industry’ added.
2.20 Definitions for ‘Open Space Development’ added.
4.20 Schedule I: Permitted Uses amended to add ‘Corporate/Technology Park (CT)1’ as a new district.
4.21 4.20 Schedule I: Permitted Uses amended to add Corporate Technology Park-1 (CT-1)’ as a new district.
4.20 Schedule I: Permitted Uses amended to add ‘Neighborhood Professional (NP) as a new district.
4.20 Schedule I: Permitted Uses amended to add ‘Campgrounds, golf courses, private recreation uses, community buildings, social halls, clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations’ as a permitted use by special exception in the R-1 District.
4.30 Schedule III amended by adding new density and dimensional regulations for the CT – Corporate/Technology Park District.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
4
4.30 Schedule III amended by adding new density and dimensional regulations for the CT-1 Corporate/Technology Park-1 District.
4.30 Schedule III amended by adding new density and dimensional regulations for the NP – Neighborhood Professional District.
5.10 Amended to add a new section ‘5.15 Temporary Manufactured Housing’.
5.74 & 5.75 Amended to add ‘Permanent Readerboard’ as a permitted type of sign for a legal non-conforming use in residential districts and as a permitted use in non-residential districts.
7.40 Text of section addressing ‘Single Family Open Space Development amended for the purpose of clarity.
7.50 Text of section addressing ‘Multi-Family Open Space Development’ amended to differentiate between small and large scale developments and for clarity purpose
7.60 “General Regulations Governing Open Space Development” amended for the purpose of clarity.
Zoning Map By rezoning the area between Portsmouth Avenue and Spur Road from I (Industrial) to a new zoning district called “Corporate/Technology Park” (CT).
Zoning Map Rezone Tax Map Parcels 008-001-018, 008-001-001 and 005-003-008 (off Epping Road) to ‘Corporate/Technology Park-1’ (CT-1).
Zoning Map Rezone area from the County Courthouse along Hampton Road to Guinea Road from R-1 to ‘Neighborhood Professional’ (NP).
Zoning Map Rezone the area from Wayside Drive to the Town line between Route 101 and Hampton Road and from Hampton Road to Hampton Falls Road along Ashbrook Road from R-1, Low Density Residential to R-2, Single Family Residential.
June, 1993
In accordance with the provisions of NH RSA §674:52, the Planning Board, at its June 22, 1993 meeting, voted unanimously to adopt the update 1993 versions of the following codes referenced in Article 12, Section 12.20, Building Codes:
A. BOCA National Building Code (Section 421.0, Swimming Pools - adopted at the July 8, 1993 meeting)
B. BOCA National Plumbing Code
C. BOCA National Mechanical Code
D. BOCA National Fire Prevention Code
E. National Electrical Code
March 8, 1994
2.20 Definitions for ‘Amateur Radio Communications Tower’ added.
4.10 ‘Multi-Family uses’ added as a permitted principal use in the R-4, Multi-Family Residential zoning district. (Schedule I)
4.20 Schedule I: Permitted Uses amended by adding ‘Other accessory uses customarily incidental to the permitted principal use.’ Under the Permitted Accessory use column for ‘Neighborhood Professional” (NP) and ‘Corporate/Technology Park’ (CT) district.
4.30 Schedule III amended by adding Note 11 to the References section as follows: ‘Hotel related dwelling units (i.e. suites or condominiums) are permitted in addition to standard hotel rooms.’
4.30 Schedule III amended by deleting the limitation on the maximum number of stories allowed; the overall maximum height limit was retained.
5.14 Text of ‘Continuance of Non-conforming Uses’ amended
5.40 Amended to add a new section ‘5.43 Amateur Radio Communication Tower Exception to Height Regulation’.
5.80 Amended to delete Section 5.82, Review by the Planning Board.
9.23 Amended to add a new section 3. (a)(1) Special Exception.
9.41 Amended to add definition for “Recreational Vehicle”.
9.42 Amended to add a new section 2.c. describing criteria for placement of recreational vehicle.
Zoning Map Rezone area along Kingston Road (Route 111) from ‘Industrial’ (I) to ‘Neighborhood Professional’ (NP).
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
5
March 14, 1995
2.20 Definitions
By adding a new definition as follows: “Sexually Oriented Business Use” A principal use or substantial accessory use where goods and/or services are marketed, advertised or displayed of a sexually oriented or sexually explicit nature which meets the definition of either “harmful to minors” or “sexual conduct” as set forth in NH RSA §571 – B:1. Such goods include, but are not limited to, sexually explicit books, videos, movies, devices, computer software, and marital aids. Examples of sexually oriented business uses include, but are not limited to, theaters or mini-motion picture displays where sexually explicit films or videos are shown, nude modeling studios, massage parlors, escort agencies or sexual encounter centers.
2.20 Definitions
By adding a new definition for “Bed and Breakfast” as follows: The primary dwelling of an owner-operator which provides exclusively for the lodging of transient guests and whose posted rates shall include breakfast. A Bed and Breakfast shall not be used for any other hospitality or business related uses. A Bed and Breakfast shall have not more than four (4) rentable rooms and an area of dining capable of accommodating the number of registered guests.
4.20 Schedule I: Permitted Uses
By adding “Expansion of non-conforming uses” as a permitted special exception for the CT, Corporate Technology District.”
4.20 Schedule I: Permitted Uses
By adding the following to the “Permitted Accessory” use column for the “M, Manufactured Housing” (aka “mobile homes”) District: Private garages. Home Occupations. Other accessory uses customarily incidental to the principal use.”
4.20 Schedule I: Permitted Uses
By adding “Home Occupations (in dwelling units only)” to the “Permitted Accessory” use column for the “C-1, Central Area Commercial District.”
4.20 Schedule I: Permitted Uses
By adding “Sexually Oriented Business Use” to the list of uses permitted by Special Exception in the C-3, Epping Road Highway Commercial Zoning District.”
4.20 Schedule I: Permitted Uses
By deleting “Rooming and boarding houses by conversion only” form the list of uses permitted by Special Exception in the RU, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and C-3 Districts and add “except Rooming and boarding houses” to the “Special Exception” column for the C-3 district.”
4.20 Schedule I: Permitted Uses
By adding “Bed and Breakfast” as a permitted principal use in the C-1 and C-2 Zoning District; and as a use permitted by Special Exception in the RU, R-1, R-2 Zoning Districts.”
5.61 Off-Street Parking Schedule
By increasing the number of guest spaces for multi-family dwelling units from one (1) space for every five (5) multi-family units to one (1) space for every two (2) multi-family units.”
6 Supplementary Use Regulations
By adding a section 6.15 entitled “Sexually Oriented Business Uses” as posted in the Town Warrant. This section will limit the location of “Sexually Oriented Business Uses” to the C-3 Epping Road District (along Epping Road from Industrial Drive to Route 101), by Special Exception only, to be granted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment. Within the C-3 District, “Sexually Oriented Business Uses” will not be permitted within 1,000 feet of a church or place of worship, funeral home, a public or private school, an approved day care center, another sexually oriented business use, or 500 feet from a residence or residential district, a recreation park or Town of Exeter building. Under the terms of this section no use will be permitted which violates any Town of Exeter ordinance or State of New Hampshire statute regarding public nuisances, sexual conduct, lewdness, or obscene or harmful material or the exhibition or public display thereof.
6.40 Manufactured Housing Parks
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
6
Subsection h. (1) by revising the first sentence to read as follows: “All streets within any manufactured housing park shall conform to the design standards set forth in the “Subdivision Regulations”.”
9.10 Wetland Conservation District
By deleting the existing text in its entirety and replacing with new text as set forth in the posted Town Warrant.’
March 12, 1996
4.20 Schedule I: Permitted Uses
By adding the words “residential” to modify the health care facilities permitted by special exception in the R-1, R-2, and R-4 Zoning District.
4.30 Schedule II: Density and Dimensional Regulations – Residential
By replacing references to 2 ½ stories in the maximum height column for the RU, R-1, R-3, and R-4 Zoning District with 3 stories and replace the 3 ½ story reference for the R-5 Zoning District with 4 stories.
4.30 And all other relevant sections.
By replacing references to “public” water and sewer systems with the term “municipal” water and sewer.
5.54(2) Accessory Structures in R-District
By replacing the existing text with the following: “Accessory structures shall comply with side, front and rear yard requirements; except one (1) accessory structure of 120 square feet of less is permitted within yard setback areas.
9.23(1)(a) Aquifer Protection District General Regulations- District Boundaries
By adding a reference to the source document published by the US Geologic and Groundwater Quality Data for Stratified Drift Aquifers in the Exeter, Lamprey and Oyster River Basins, Southeastern New Hampshire.
9.34(3) Exeter Shoreland Protection District – Building Setbacks
By adding the additional building setback of 150 feet upland from tidal marshes adjacent to the Squamscott River.
April 8, 1997
2.20 Definitions:
By inserting the words “and telecommunication provider” after the words “public utilities” in the definition of the term “Essential Services.”
2.20 Definitions:
By inserting the words “and unobstructed from the ground upward” after the word “unoccupied” for the definition of the word “Yard.”
4.20 Schedule I: Permitted Uses
By adding ‘Light Industry.’ to the list of uses allowed by special exception in the C-3 Zoning District.
4.20 Schedule I: Permitted Uses
By adding the permitted principal, permitted accessory and special exception uses allowed in the C-3 Zoning District, excluding ‘sexually oriented business use’, to the list of those uses allowed by special exception in the CT-1 Zoning District.
4.20 Schedule I: Permitted Uses
By deleting “Churches and similar places of worship.” and “Libraries and museums.” as permitted principal uses in the R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 zoning districts.
By adding “Churches and similar places of worship.” and “Libraries and museums.” as uses permitted by special exception in the R-1, R-2, R-3 R-4 and R-5 Zoning Districts.
4.20 Schedule I: Permitted Uses
By adding “Churches and similar places of worship.” and “Libraries and museums.” as permitted principal uses in the C-1 Zoning District.
4.30 Schedule III: Density and Dimensional Regulations Non-Residential
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
7
By reducing the permitted maximum height in the C-2 Zoning District from fifty (50) feet to thirty-five (35) feet with a reference footnote “12. Maximum height of fifty (50) feet permitted by special exception.”
4.30 Schedule III: Density and Dimensional Regulations Non-Residential
By allowing the reduction of the minimum required rear yard setback in the C-2 zoning district by special exception. Amend References by adding the following footnote: “13. Minimum rear yard setback of twenty (20) feet permitted by special exception.
5.41 Special Exception to Height Regulations – Board of Adjustment
By deleting the words “communications, radio or television towers” from sub-section a. and adding a new sub-section f. as follows: Communication towers may exceed the height regulations by more than forty (40%) percent providing the Zoning Board of Adjustment grants special exception approval and finds that: (1) The proposed site and tower promote co-location opportunities. (2)The applicant has exhausted all other reasonable alternatives to a new tower that would minimize the adverse visual impacts. (3) The applicant has made every reasonable effort to locate in a non-residential zoning district.”
5.55 Accessory Structures in Other Than R-District
By deleting the existing text and replacing with the following: “Accessory structures shall comply with side, front and rear yard requirements except one (1) accessory structure of 120 square feet or less is permitted within yard setback areas that have received Planning Board site plan review approval.”
11 Board of Adjustment
By adding a new section entitled, “11.30 Equitable Waivers of Dimensional Requirements” with the following text: “The Board of Adjustment is authorized to grant Equitable Waivers of Dimensional Requirements in accordance with the provisions of NH RSA §674:33-a, as amended.”
March 10, 1998
2.20 Definitions
By adding a definition for “Retirement Planned Community”, as follows: “Any development of three (3) or more detached buildings or multi-unit building(s) which is planned generally as a retirement community for elderly persons and which include legal covenants and restrictions which are designed to promote the use and occupancy of such building(s) principally by persons fifty-five (55) years of age or older.
3.10 Establishment of Districts
By adding a new zoning district, R-6; Retirement Planned Community, to the list if districts classified as “RESIDENTIAL”
3.20 Zoning Map
By rezoning Tax Map Parcel numbers 68-6 (LaBonte property) and 88-2 (Maher property) located to the north of 101/51 to a new zoning district called “Retirement Planned Community” (R-6).
4.20 Schedule 1: Permitted Uses
To add “Hotels” to the list of permitted principal uses in the CT-1, Corporate Technology Park –1 zone.
4.20 Schedule 1: Permitted Uses
To add “Nursing homes, healthcare facilities and elderly congregate healthcare facilities.” as a use permitted by Special Exception in the CT-1, Corporate Technology Park –1 zone.
4.20 Schedule 1: Permitted Uses
By adding the R-6, Retirement Planned Community district with the following uses: Permitted Principal Uses – Single unit building(s) and multi-unit building(s). Town water and sewer and underground utilities required. Permitted Accessory Uses – Any accessory use permitted in the R-1 zone. Community building and recreational facilities. Special Exception Uses – Nursing home or healthcare facility.
4.30 Schedule II: Density and Dimensional Regulations – Residential
By adding new density and dimensional regulations for the R-6 District.
5.74 Sign Regulations – Dimensional Regulations for Residential Districts
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
8
By adding the R-6 zoning district.
5.81 General Landscaping Regulations – Unenclosed Uses
By replacing the phase “may be required” with “shall be required to provide a fence, screen or landscaping.”
6.32 B Minimum Front Yard, Use Thereof
By deleting the reference to a “frontage road”, and merging the first two sentences of this section to read as follows: “The first twenty-five (25) feet of front yard shall be kept clear of obstructions to sight and shall not be used for display of goods or signs; the next twenty-five (25) feet of front yard shall be planted and landscaped and shall permit signage with a minimum setback requirement of thirty-five (35) feet.
7.40 F. Single Family Open Space Development – Internal Setback
By deleting the existing language which defines Side & Rear and replace with the following: “No structure shall be closer than ten (10) feet to a side and/or rear property line.”
11.40 Board of Adjustment
By adding a new section entitled 11.40 Limits of Approval to read as follows: “All approvals granted by the Board of Adjustment shall only be valid for a period of six years from the date such approval was granted; provided, however, that once substantial completion of the improvements, modifications, alterations or changes in the property or use contemplated by the applicant’s petition have occurred in compliance with the terms of the approval, the rights of the owner or of the owner’s successor in interest shall vest and the year limitation of the validity of the approval shall not apply.
March 9, 1999
3.20 Zoning Map
By rezoning Tax Map Parcel #51-12 (adjacent to McFarland Ford and the Stratham Town line) to be included in the C-2 Zoning District rather than the CT Zoning District.
4.20 Schedule I – Permitted Uses
By adding ‘Any permitted principal use in the C-3 District.’ to list of uses permitted by special exception in the Industrial Zoning District.
4.20 Schedule I – Permitted Uses
By adding ‘Essential Services’ to the list of uses permitted by special exception in all non-residential zoning districts and the MS, R-4, R-5, and R-6 Zoning Districts.
4.20 Schedule I – Permitted Uses
By adding ‘assisted living healthcare facilities and elderly congregate healthcare facilities’ to the list of uses allowed by special exception in the C-3 Zoning District.
4.30 Schedule III: Density and Dimensional Regulations – Non-Residential
By reducing the front yard setback from ‘85’ to ‘50’ in the C-3 Zoning District but still require an ‘85’ setback from Epping Road.
4.30 Schedule III: Density and Dimensional Regulations – Non-Residential
By adding ‘References: 15. Except that a building height of 60 feet is allowed if a minimum 200 foot setback is maintained from a residential zoning district or existing residential use’ for the PP, CT, and CT-1 Zoning Districts.
5.50 Yard Regulations
By adding ‘covered or enclosed walkways’ after ‘lighting structures’ to the list of structures exempt from the setback requirements of Section 4.30
5.60 Off-Street Parking
By adding the following ‘Except that the Planning Board may grant reductions in required off-street parking spaces in conjunction with its site plan review in the applicant submits proposals for shared parking spaces or increased parking lot screening. The intent of this provision is to grant discretional review authority to the Planning Board in order to promote the conservation of open space lands and increase parking lot buffers without increasing the use of on-street parking.’
5.61 Off-Street Parking Schedule
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
9
By deleting the reference to ‘Professional Office’ and inserting the reference ‘Office – 1 space for each 250 square feet of floor space.
6.32 Epping Road Strip Management Ordinance, C-3
By reducing the front yard setback from ‘85’ to ‘50’ in the C-3 Zoning District but still require an ‘85’ setback from Epping Road.
6.90 Helicopter Ordinance
By adding ‘Airport’ to all helicopter references
6.91 Helicopter Ordinance Definitions
By adding the definition for ‘Airport.’ ‘An area used, or to be used, for the landing or take-off of fixed wing aircraft.’
7.40.E Single Family Open Space Development External Boundaries
By deleting the reference to ‘lot line’
8.71 Front Street Historic District
By replacing the reference to the ‘Richard Kent House’ with the Moses Kent House’ and include the entire parcel (Tax Map Parcel #73-3 in the Front Street Historic District.
9.34 Exeter Shoreland Protection District Use Regulations
Building Setbacks by increasing the building and septic system setback to 300 feet from the shoreline of the Squamscott River, Dearborn Brook, Water Works Pond, and Fresh River from ‘150’ and ‘100’ feet. Also amend maximum lot coverage from ‘20%’ to ‘10%’ for the shoreland district land for the above surface waters subject to possible conditional use permit increases.
12.20 Building Codes
By adding the note ‘The Exeter Building Inspector is authorized to deny building permits for proposed fences that he/she determines to be a threat to public safety.’
March, 2000
3.20 Zoning Map
Amended by rezoning Tax Map 72, Parcel 207, 206, 215 to be included in the C-1 District, rather than the R-2 District.
4.20 Schedule I: Permitted Uses
Remove “Accessory dwelling units from Special Exceptions of R-4, R-5, M, and MS Districts.
5.31 Existing Lots of Records
Replace the phase ‘the effective date of this paragraph with December 1, 1980’ the remainder of paragraph remains the same.
5.32 Lot Width
By adding text to clarify lot width ‘shall be measured at either the required set back line, or along the lot line at the street, private way or right-of-way.’
5.55 Accessory Structures in Other Than R-Districts
By clarifying existing text, numbering sub-sections and adding text specifying storage containers as accessory structures.
7.25 Definitions
By adding a definition section for Open Space Development to include ‘Vegetated Buffer Strip’, ‘Common Area/Common Open Space’, and ‘Net Tract Area’ descriptions.
7.40.1 Single Family Open Space Development
By increasing minimum acreage from 5 to 20 acres of contiguous land in RU & R1 and from 5 to 10 acres in other residential districts.
7.40.5 Single Family Open Space Development
By revising External Boundaries for side and rear setbacks to include the use of a vegetated buffer strip in accordance with the Town’s Subdivision and Site Plan Review Regulations and revising Internal Setback Requirements by adding a minimum internal frontage of 50 feet, increasing the front yard structural setback from 20 feet to 25 feet, increasing the side and rear structural setback from 10 feet to 20 feet, and adding a minimum lot size of 25,000 square feet in RU districts, 15,000 square feet in R-1 district, and 10,000 square feet in other residential districts.
7.51.5 Small Scale Multi-Family Open Space Development, Internal Setback Requirements
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
10
By increasing front yard structural setbacks from 20 feet to 25 feet, increasing the side and rear structural setbacks from 30 feet to 40 feet.
7.52.7 Large Scale Multi-Family Open Space Development, Internal Setback Requirements
By increasing front yard structural setbacks from 30 feet to 40 feet, increasing the side and rear structural setbacks from 40 feet to 50 feet.
7.60.1 General Regulations Governing Open Space Development, Density
By deleting ‘net tract area’ methodology to calculate density; replacing the first two paragraphs of our density calculations with the Yield Plan methodology following in part the Rockingham Planning Commission’s Model Open Space Ordinance. Note: Adoption of this proposed amendment would also necessitate slight revision to Section 7.60.2. High Intensity Soil Mapping, due to the different calculation method used to determine lot density.
9.18.2 Buffer Areas
By revising sub-section 2, substituting ‘shall’ for ‘may’, and adding sub-section 3 to provide a 100 foot no cut-no disturbance setback for prime wetlands as recorded with the NH Wetlands Bureau.
9.31 Authority and Purpose
By adding Fresh River and its tributaries to the protected Rivers, plus renumbering set.
9.32 Definitions
By adding contiguous wetland definition.
9.33 District Boundaries
By adding ‘Fresh River’ to the protected Rivers; clarifying Squamscott River, and renumbering set.
9.34.2 Use Regulation – Maximum Lot Coverage
By substituting ‘Impervious surface’ for Structures, including pavement,’ at the beginning of the paragraph.
NOTE: September 2000 reprinting of Zoning Ordinance; format restructuring in conjunction with incorporation of all amendments from March 1996 – March 2000
March 2001
2.2 Definitions:
Delete definition for Coverage,
Add definitions for Building Coverage, Lot Coverage, and Mixed Use.
Revise definition for Rooming and Boarding Houses
Renumber Article 2.2 accordingly.
3.2 Zoning Map: Rezoning 32,930 sq. ft of Tax Map Parcel 52-112 from the CT district to the C-2 district. Also expand the Healthcare District boundary line to include Tax Map Parcel #65-132.
4.3 Schedule II
Revise column title “Lot Coverage” to read “Building Coverage”.
Amend Note 4 by deleting the existing language and replacing it with: “See definition 2.2.# “Building Coverage”.
4.4 Schedule III,
Revise column title “Lot Coverage” to read “Building Coverage”.
Amend Note 4 by deleting the existing language and replacing it with: “See definition 2.2.# “Building Coverage”.
Revise Note #8 to read as follows: “A minimum of 35% of the lot shall be maintained for open space and landscaped areas. In the Healthcare District, these requirements shall apply to all lots owned by a single entity and its affiliates collectively and not to each such lot individually. (For the purpose of this provision “Affiliate” shall mean an entity owned by, or under common ownership with another entity.)
Add Note #16 to read as follows: (within the following columns for the Healthcare District: “Municipal Water & Sewer”, “Min. Lot Area”, “Min. Lot Depth”, “Min. Lot Width”, “Min. Front Yard”, “Min. Side Yard”, and “Min. Rear Yard”) Note 16 to read: See Article 6.15 Healthcare District
4.2 Schedule I: Permitted Uses:
Delete “Churches and similar places of worship” from the list of uses permitted by Special Exception in the Industrial Zoning Districts.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
11
Add “Multi-Family Residential Use” and “Mixed Use” as a Permitted Principal Use in the C-1 District
Add “Mixed Use” as a Permitted Principal Use in the WC district.
5.5.4 Accessory Structures in R-Districts: Revise subsection B. to read as follows: “Accessory structures shall comply with front, side and rear yard requirements: except one (1) accessory structure of 120 square feet or less is permitted within the yard setback areas with exception to the front yard setback and is limited to a height of twelve feet (12 ft)
6.7 Retail Uses: Add Article 6.7.2.A Retail Trade Size Limitations: For all districts except the C-3 District: Any single or grouped retail business use (i.e. a contiguous strip center, mall) shall not exceed a total of 85,000 square feet of building footprint area.
6 Add Article 6.15 entitled Healthcare District: to include 6.15.1Dimensional Regulations: an entity under common ownership such as Exeter Healthcare would not be restricted to many of the interior yard dimensional setbacks, 6.15.2 Perimeter Setbacks: 50 ft. adjoining residential district and 30 feet adjoining any non-residential district, and 6.15.3 Parking Setback: 50 ft. abutting residential zone
7.5.6 Open Space Development – Internal Setback Requirements: add a new subsection as follows: “E. Existing Open Space Development: Internal setbacks effective as of the date of the approval of any existing open space development shall be applied to future construction within the same existing open space development.”
9.1.7. Delete and replace subsection “C” with language clarifying the meaning of limitations and limiting the allowance for standard subdivisions only.
9.3.4. Revise subsection “B” Maximum Lot Coverage by adding “Exeter River” in the list of water bodies identified in this section.
10 Growth Ordinance:
Remove Sub-Articles 10.1.10, 10.1.11, 10.1.12 of the Preamble and Articles 10.2 Regulations, 10.3 Merit System and 10.4 Special Exception to Merit System of the Growth Management Ordinance.
Remove and replace Article 10.2 with “Phasing Subdivision Development” including subsections: Authority, Purpose, Applicability, Procedure, and Limitations.
12.2 Building Codes: replace subsection “D” with “New Hampshire State Fire Code, as amended”
March 2002
4.2 Schedule 1 Notes – Delete in its entirety and replace the existing “conversion” note with the following:
1. Conversions – The conversion of existing residential buildings into not more than four (4) dwelling units or as otherwise consistent with the zone provided that:
a. The number of spaces for off-street parking shall comply with Article 5.6 Off-Street Parking;
b. The minimum lot size required shall be such that each dwelling unit is provided with thirty percent (30%) of the minimum lot size required for the district;
c. That the structure was in existence prior to 1972.
d. The lot must meet a minimum of 20% open space unless otherwise stated in Articles 4.3 and 4.4, Schedules II and III.
2.2.38 Residential Conversion by deleting the existing language and replacing with the same language as above.
2.2. (Add and renumber definitions) Open space is defined as land area vertically open to the sky, free of all impervious surfaces as described under 2.2.25 Lot Coverage. Open space may be landscaped with lawn, trees, shrubs, or other planting. Open space may include wetlands, stream systems or other bodies of water.
3.2 Zoning Map by adjusting the zone district line to include Tax Map Parcels #70-99 and #70-100 in the R-2, Single Family Residential zoning district.
4.3 Schedule II: Density and Dimensional Regulations – Residential: See attached table, last column “Minimum Open Space”. Also add notes to Schedule II Notes: 17. Overlay districts in which more stringent requirements apply supercede those as required under Schedule II and III. Note 18. For
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
12
lots using septic systems, the open space requirement would be the greater percentage required in that district. See attached chart.
4.4 Schedule III: Density and Dimensional Regulations – Non Residential: See attached table, last column “Minimum Open Space”. Notes: 17. Overlay districts in which more stringent requirements apply supercede those as required under Schedule II and III. Also add note to Schedule III Notes: 18. For lot redevelopment, minimum open space requirements may be substituted if additional landscape planting is proposed for on or off-site as deemed appropriate by the Code Enforcement Officer. See attached chart.
5.2 Special Exceptions; Revise C as follows: “That the proposed use will be compatible with the zone district and adjoining post 1972 development where it is to be located. Adjoining principal uses in existence prior to 1972 (generally referred to as grand-fathered uses), that are not permitted uses as listed in 4.2 Schedule 1: Permitted Use, shall not be considered in determining the compatibility of an applicant’s proposed use. ”
5.3 Existing Regulations by adding a new sub-section entitled “5.3.5 Removal of Damaged Structures” and to read as follows: “No owner or occupant of land within the Town of Exeter shall permit fire ruins or other ruins to be left on their property, but shall within three (3) months remove and refill the same to clear ground level. The Building Inspector/Code Enforcement Officer upon request for reasonable cause that he/she may deem adequate may authorize an extension of up to sixty (60) days.
7.7.1. General Regulations Governing Open Space Development – Density - Bonus: Add the following bonus and renumber.
B. Density bonus of 15% above that indicated by the yield plan will be provided for developments that will guarantee:
1. 20% or more of the units constructed will be sold at initial sale for a price that can be afforded by a household with an income not more than 120% of the median family income for Rockingham County, as published by US Department of Housing and Urban Development;
2. 10% or more of the units constructed will be sold at initial sale for a price that can be afforded by a household with an income not more than 80% of the median family income for Rockingham County, as published by US Department of Housing and Urban Development;
3. Units will be sold with deed restrictions and a recorded housing agreement that limit, for a period of 5 years, the resale value of the unit to not more than the purchase price plus two times the accumulated consumer price index.
4. The units shall be on-site.
Affordability shall be defined as housing that can be purchased under a conventional mortgage whereby the combined annual expenses for principal, interest and property taxes will not exceed 30% of household income.
9.1.8 Buffer Areas: C. Add the following sentence, “The permitted use as described in Article 9.3.4.I.2 is allowed within the wetland “no-cut, no-disturbance” buffer area.”
9.2 Aquifer Protection District Ordinance by removing Article 9.2.3.C.1.a: the special exception to aquifer protection district.
Create a new Article 11. Impact Fee Ordinance and renumber existing Articles 11, 12, and 13 to 12, 13, and 14. The Impact Fee Ordinance will include the following sections: Authority and Applicability, Purpose, Findings, Definitions, Imposition of Public Capital Facilities Impact Fee, Computation of the Amount of Capital Facilities Impact Fee, Payment of Fee, Waivers, Appeals, Administration of Funds Collected, Custody and Maintenance of Fund Accounts, Refund or Fees Paid, Additional Assessments, Premature and Scattered Development, Review.
March 2003
2.2.2 Accessory Dwelling Unit: Add to existing definition phrase “and as delineated in Article 4, Section 4.2 Schedule I: Permitted Uses, Note #2”.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
13
3.2 Rezone the existing industrial zoning district located west of Epping Road and south of the Conner Farm to a RU-rural zoning district. Also rezone the adjoining R-1, Single Family Residential district south of Epping Road to Brentwood road to a RU-rural zoning district.
4.2 Schedule 1 Notes under Conversion – delete the phrase “or as otherwise consistent with the zone”.
6.1 Elderly Congregate Health Care Facilities – add 6.1.4 Density Bonus for affordable housing; subsections “a” through “e” to define bonus conditions.
7.7 Regulations Governing Open Space - replace density bonus for affordable housing with language clarifying requirements.
7.7.6 Allowance for Lots Separated by a Municipal Trail – new section under Open Space Development Regulations.
11 Public Capital Facilities Impact Fee – multiple revisions throughout the entire article based on suggestions from consultant.
12.4 Board of Adjustment, Limits of Approval Section, reduce time period for the validity of approvals granted by ZBA from 6 years to 3 years.
March 2004
2.2 Add and revise definitions: Add “professional offices”, “retail service” and “business office” and delete “business”.
3.2 Zoning Map District Alteration: Portsmouth Ave district line change from CT to C-2, to reflect proposed subdivision of tax map parcel #52-112 (Osram Sylvania property).
4.2 Schedule I: Permitted Uses. Replace phrase “any retail or personal establishment” with “retail services” and “business office” as permitted uses in zones C-1, C-2, C-3 and WC; delete “banking office” from all zones; and move “business office” from a permitted use to a use permitted by special exception in the NP zone only.
4.3 Schedule II: change maximum height allowed in the R-3 district from 35’ to 25’ and maximum number of stories from 3 to 2. Also add Note #18 to RU max height limit: “Multi-unit buildings may have a maximum height of 50 feet if a special exception is granted by the ZBA.”
6.1.2 Elderly Congregate Health Care Facilities: revise General Standards subsection D. minimum buffer area from 50’ to 100’.
6.1.4 Revise Density Bonus subsections b and c, by replacing the phrase “Rockingham County” with “the New Hampshire portion of the Portsmouth-Rochester NH-ME PMSA” and in subsection d by replacing the limit of “5 years” with “30 years renewable upon sale or transfer”.
6.10.6 Home Occupations Ordinance, Special Exception: Add phrase “Also, any home occupation that may have an impact of abutting properties, as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer shall be required to obtain a special exception.”
7.5 Single Family Open Space Development, section 1: replace 20 acres with 10 acres.
7.6.1 Small-scale multi-family Open Space Development, section A: Add phrase “and be limited to a maximum of fifteen (15) dwelling units”. Also Revise Section B: add phrase “Density calculations for small-scale multi-family open space development shall be in accordance with Article 7.7.1 Density and Section 7.13 Yield Plan of the Site Plan Review and Subdivision Regulations.”
7.6.2 Large-scale Multi-Family Open Space, section C: add phrase “Density calculations for large-scale multi-family open space development shall be in accordance with Article 7.7.1 Density and Section 7.13 Yield Plan of the Site Plan Review and Subdivision Regulations.”
7.7.1B General Regulations Governing Open Space Development: Revise Density Bonus subsections b and c, by replacing the phrase “Rockingham County” with “the New Hampshire portion of the Portsmouth-Rochester NH-ME PMSA” and in subsection d by replacing the limit of “5 years” with “30 years renewable upon sale or transfer”.
9.1.8 Wetland Conservation District, subsection B. Buffer Areas: add phrase “in accordance with Site Plan Review and Subdivision Regulations, Section 9.9.2 Wetland Setbacks.”
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
14
March 2005
3.2 Zoning Map: Expand the current R-4 zoning district on Epping Road and rezone the back or rear portions of the following parcels from C-2 Highway Commercial to R-4 Multi-family: Tax Map parcels: #63 -101, 63 -100, 55 -75, 55 -76, #55 – 3, 55-6; also rezone the rear portion of Tax Map parcel #54 –2 currently zoned Industrial to R-4 Multi-family. (See map included) Amend Article 4.2 – Permitted Uses, Schedule I by adding “Access to the R-4 multi-family district” as a permitted use in the C-2 (Highway Commercial) zoning district.
4.3 Schedule II: Density & Dimensional Regulations – Residential: Add Note #20 applicable to R-4, R-5 and R-6 zoning districts to read as follows: “None of the area within the 100 year flood plain and 50% of the areas defined as jurisdictional wetlands may be used to satisfy minimum lot area requirements for multi-family uses. Regulations regarding perimeter buffers (See Site Plan Review and Subdivision Regulation 9.6.1.2) shall apply.” (Reference to this note shall be inserted under “Municipal Water & Sewer” within the “Minimum Lot Area” category.)
4.3 Schedule II: Density & Dimensional Regulations – Residential: Change the allowable height in the RU district from 50 feet to 35 feet and amend Note #18 by removing the phrase “Multi-unit” so that the note reads: “Buildings may have a maximum height of 50 feet if a special exception is granted by the ZBA.”
4.3 Schedule II: Density & Dimensional Regulations – Residential: Add Note #19 in the minimum lot area columns for both the RU and R1 zoning districts. Note 19 shall state: “For proposed subdivisions of an existing lot(s) of record having a total combined area of 20 or greater acres, open space development pursuant to Article 7 is required unless waived by the Exeter Planning Board.”
6.10.3 Home Occupations – “Extent of Use”: Revise the first sentence of the existing section to read as follows: “Does not utilize more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the combined gross floor area of the dwelling unit and accessory structures located on the premise, except foster family care.”
7.6.1 Small Scale Multi-Family Open Space Development: Revise sections A and B as follows:
A. The minimum area for a small scale multi-family open space development shall not be less than five (5) acres of contiguous land and not more than 24.9 acres of contiguous land.
B. Density calculations for small-scale multi-family open space development shall be in accordance with Article 7.7.1 Density and Section 7.13 Yield Plan of the Site Plan Review and Subdivision Regulations. Small scale multi-family open space development permits the planned grouping of up to five (5) attached* dwelling units per structure. On parcels proposed for development that are less than ten (10) acres in size, no more than three (3) attached dwelling units per structure are allowed. The planning board may allow additional dwelling units per structure for the purpose of conserving additional open space. Regulations regarding perimeter buffers (See Site Plan Review and Subdivision Regulation 9.6.1.2) shall apply.
7.6.2 Large Scale Multi-Family Open Space Development: Revise section C as follows:
C. Density calculations for large-scale multi-family open space development shall be in accordance with Article 7.7.1. Density and Section 7.13 Yield Plan of the Site Plan Review and Subdivision Regulations. A large scale multi-family open space development permits the planned grouping of a minimum of six (6) multi-family dwelling units per structure and a maximum of twelve (12) multi-family dwelling units per structure. The planning board may allow additional dwelling units per structure for the purpose of conserving additional open space. Regulations regarding perimeter buffers (See Site Plan Review and Subdivision Regulation 9.6.1.2) shall apply.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
15
7.7.3 Open Space and Common Areas: Insert the following sentence after the first sentence in this section: “Reasonable efforts must be made to locate common open space adjacent to protected open space in adjoining property or properties to the satisfaction of the Planning Board.”
9.4.2 Floodplain Development Ordinance: Update the reference to the FEMA maps and revising present language as follows: “The following regulations in this ordinance shall apply to all lands designated as special flood hazard areas by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its “Flood Insurance Study for the County of Rockingham, NH” dated May 17, 2005, together with the associated Flood Insurance Rate Maps dated May 17, 2005, which are declared to be a part of this ordinance and are hereby incorporated by reference.
March 2006
2.2 Definitions by adding the definition for “Community buildings” as follows: A building or structure, or a group of buildings or structures, owned and operated by the Town of Exeter, or by a nonprofit organization, the primary purpose of which is to provide social and recreational services to the citizens of the community, focused on promoting their health and general welfare. (Renumber section accordingly)
4.2 Schedule I: Permitted Uses by adding “Community buildings” as a use permitted by Special Exception in the R-2 district.
4.2 Schedule 1: Permitted Uses by removing “conversions” under Special Exceptions in the RU, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 and M districts. Also, amend Article 4.2, Schedule I Notes by deleting Note 1. (a) – (d) in its entirety.
5.1.4 Continuance of Non-Conforming Uses by replacing existing text of subsection C. with the following: “Any determination by the Code Enforcement Officer under this provision shall be in writing and shall include detailed findings as to the above factors. The Code Enforcement Officer shall send a copy of such determination and findings to each abutter to the property where the change to the nonconforming use has been proposed, and such determination and findings shall not be effective until thirty days after such notice is mailed to abutters. Any abutter may file an appeal from such determination and findings to the Zoning Board of Adjustment and, during the pendency of such appeal, such determination and findings shall by stayed.”
5.2 Special Exceptions subsection G. by replacing existing text with the following: “As a condition of special exception approval, the Applicant may be required to obtain Town Planner review and/or Planning Board approval of the site plan. Additionally, the Board of Adjustment may require the applicant to obtain Planning Board approval of the site plan prior to rendering a decision on an application for Special Exception.”
5.6.3 Off-Street Parking by replacing existing text with following: “Except that the Planning Board may grant reductions in the number of required off-street parking spaces in conjunction with its site plan review if the applicant submits proposals for shared parking. The intent of this provision is to grant discretional review authority to the Planning Board in order to promote:
(1) Better utilization of parking areas, including shared parking, or
(2) A reduction in impervious surface, and
(3) Conservation of open space lands and buffers
In its discretion, the Planning Board shall require specific information detailing user parking needs and schedules. The Board may also require parking lot buffers and/or landscaping.”
5.6.4 Off-Street Parking Schedule by revising the following categories:
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
16
USE
REQUIRED PARKING SPACES
Dwelling Units
2 for each single family dwelling unit.
2 for each multi-family unit of 2 +bedroom
1 for each multi-family unit of 1 bedroom/studio.
Guest parking for multi-family based on total number of units. One (1) additional space for guest parking for each four (4) multi-family dwelling units.
Elderly Housing
1 for each dwelling unit, 1 per employee on the maximum shift, 1 per 8 units for guest parking
Home Occupations
1 for each 200 square feet, or part of floor area used for home occupation
Gymnasium and Recreation Facility
1 space for each 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area (excluding storage, maintenance, and mechanical utility areas)
Motels, Hotels
1 space for each unit plus 1 space for each employee on the largest shift
Office
1 space for each 250 square feet of floor area
Retail Stores, Store Groups, Shops, other than offices, etc.
1 space for each 300 square feet of floor area for buildings less than 30,000 sq. ft., 1 space for each 500 sq. ft. of floor area for buildings over 30,000 sq. ft.
8.7 Historic Districts: to add the following new district including the described boundaries as follows:
High Street Historic District: The High Street Historic District is bounded as follows (boundaries identical to those voted by the Town on March 14th, 2006):
An area beginning at the centerline of High Street where it intersects with Portsmouth Avenue, thence running easterly along the centerline of High Street to the intersection of Ridgewood Terrace, and includes all portions of all properties with frontage on these portions of High Street to a depth of 200 feet from the curb line or the rear property line, whichever comes first; and the district includes an area beginning at the intersection of High Street and Rocky Hill Road and running northerly along Rocky Hill Road to the end of Rocky Hill Road, and includes all portions of all properties with frontage on these portions of Rocky Hill Road to a depth of 200 feet from the curb line or the rear property line, whichever comes first. The District is intended to specifically include the properties from 46 – 176 High Street and 39 – 175 High Street, and the properties from 3 – 5 Rocky Hill Road and 2 Rocky Hill Road.” (renumber section accordingly)
9.4.8 100 Year Flood by revising the section as follows:
“B.1. All new construction or substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least one foot above the 100 year flood elevation.”
March 2007
3.2 Zoning Map: Rezoning tax map parcels #55-67 (Seacoast Credit Union site at 109 Epping Road) and Tax Map Parcel #55-69 (adjacent strip of property along Industrial Drive) from I-Industrial to C-2, Highway Commercial
9.1.8.C Update the article reference for the ‘prime’ wetlands report, to read as follows: “Nov. 2005 Exeter Prime Wetland Mapping Report.”
March 2008
Comprehensive revisions of Article 2, Definitions; Article 4, District Regulations; Article 5, General Regulations; and Article 6, Supplementary Use Regulations.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
17
Article 2, Definitions add a new definition, “Residential Conversions”, (Note: the entire concept of residential conversions was deleted in its entirety in 2006. The language adopted in 2008 replaced what had been previously deleted.)
4.2 Schedule I: Permitted Uses add residential conversions to those uses allowed by “Special Exceptions” in the RU, R-1, R-2, R-3, C-1, C-2 and NP districts.
4.2 Schedule I Notes add criteria associated with such conversions, as follows:
“1. In addition to the criteria set forth in Article 5, Section 5.2 Special Exception, the following criteria must also be met:
Conversions – The conversion of existing residential buildings (principal residential structure as well as accessory structures) into not more than four (4) dwelling units provided that;
(a) The number of spaces for off-street parking shall comply with Article 5.6 Off-Street Parking;
(b) The minimum lot size required shall be such that each dwelling unit is provided with thirty percent (30%) of the minimum lot size required for the district;
(c) The structure has been a residence for a minimum of ten (10) years;
(d) The lot must meet a minimum of twenty percent (20%) open space unless otherwise stated in Articles 4.3 and 4.4 Schedules II and III.
(e) For conversions intended to become rental units, one of the dwelling units shall remain owner-occupied.
(f) The Board of Adjustment may require the Planning Board to review the proposed site plan. All conversions consisting of three or more units must be reviewed by the Planning Board.
(g) The Board of Adjustment may allow expansion to an existing structure for the purpose of providing additional area for the units provided all other requirements are met. Any expansion greater than 400 square foot (in footprint) shall require Planning Board review of the proposed site plan.”
(h) Prior to any renovations or building, the owner shall provide evidence to the Town Building Inspector that septic facilities are adequate for both units according to the standards of the Town and the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services (Water Division). If deemed necessary by the Building Inspector, such evidence shall be in the form of certification by a State of New Hampshire licensed septic systems designer. Also the owner shall provide evidence that there is adequate potable water according to the standards of the State of New Hampshire.”
3.2 Zoning Map extend the C-3, Epping Road Highway Commercial zoning district within Tax Map Parcel #47-8 and #47-9, following Watson Brook to the east as depicted on the map.
3.2 Zoning Map rezone Tax Map #32-2, #32-3, and #32-4 from R-1, Single Family Residential to NP-Neighborhood Professional zoning district, as depicted on map.
6.12 add new subsection, to read as follows: “6.12.2 No dock, wharf, float, pier, waterfront walkway or any related waterborne structure shall be permitted within 400 feet of the String Bridge downstream abutments.” (As depicted on the attached map.)
6.7 Retail Uses add new subsection limiting the floor area of retail services, as accessory uses, in the NP, CT, CT-1 and PP zoning districts. New subsection to read as follows:
“6.7.3 Retail services allowed as accessory uses in the NP, CT, CT-1 and PP districts are limited to the following floor areas shown below to a maximum of 1000 sq. ft. per lot.:
NP: 10% of the gross floor area of the principal building,
CT and CT-1: 20% of the gross floor area of the principal building,
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
18
PP: 15% of the gross floor area of the principal building.
Proposed retail areas shall be physically linked to the principle use. Specifically, in cases where there are existing structures, the retail area shall be located in an existing building. For new proposals, the retail area shall be located in the same structure as the principal use.
Drive-thru facilities are not allowed as part of this provision.”
Amend Article 4.2 Schedule I: Permitted Uses by adding “Retail Services” as a permitted Accessory Use in the NP, CT, CT-1 and PP zoning districts as described above including references.
7.7.1 General Regulations Governing Open Space Development; Density, revise subsection 7.7.1 B. Density Bonus for Affordable Housing Sales, add section C. Denisty Bonus for Affordable Housing Rentals and D. Administration for Worker Housing Units (Sales or Rentals).
March 2009
2.2.6 Revise definition of Amusement Center to include sports and recreation activities, and athletic clubs within the definition.
5.6.3 Revise Off-Street Parking Regulations, Section reorganizing and clarifying the requirements for shared parking.
5.6.4 Revise Off-Street Parking Schedule by assigning required spaces for all allowed uses as described in Article 4, Section 4.2 Permitted Uses.
5.7 Revise Sign Regulations in its entirety by reformatting, adding and revising the entire to section, including allowable signage within residential, non-residential and historic districts.
5.8.1 Revise General Landscaping Regulations, Unenclosed Uses to planted berms and to add residential uses to the list of properties protected.
6.17 Add a new section to Article 6. Supplementary Use Regulations entitled Wind Energy Systems, to accommodate the use of wind energy systems in appropriate locations, while protecting the public’s health, safety and welfare and to be consistent with new state regulations.
5.3.5 Add a new section to Article 5 General Regulations, entitled Demolition Review to provide a limited review period to identify any historic or culturally significant buildings prior to demolition.
March 2010
2.2.75 Replace existing Definition for “Variance” with the definition in accordance with revised NH RSA 674:33, I so that the town will be in compliance with state regulations.
4.2 Revise Schedule 1 Notes: #2 Accessory Dwelling Units: revise note to clarify unit size limitation.
5.1 Revise various aspects of “Non-Conforming Uses” including 5.1.2 “Expansion of” , 5.1.4 “Continuance Of:” and 5.2 H in order to regulate expansion of non-conforming uses by requiring variance approval from the Zoning Board of Adjustment for such expansions, to clarify existing language, and to correct inconsistencies.
7.2 Add two objectives to Open Space Development to further define the objectives of the ordinance.
7.3 Add a definition for “Greenways” to Open Space Development in order to clarify meaning within the Article.
7.5.1 Revise the language within Single-Family Open Space Development by changing the minimum area requirement from 10 acres to 5 acres.
7.5.6 Amend Single Family Open Space Development – Internal Setback Requirements, changing the title of the section to Internal Dimensional Requirements and creating a minimum set-back between multiple units on a single lot and creating front and rear setbacks.
9.1 Amend Wetlands Conservation District in its entirety to define the wetland conservation overlay district, clarify the purpose and intent, define buffers and applicable setbacks, outline permitted, conditional and prohibited uses, and to provide general administrative guidance within the district.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
19
3.2 Amend Zoning Map by expanding the Health Care District in order to encompass existing healthcare related uses.
6.16 Amend Healthcare District sections 6.13.3 Parking Setbacks, 6.16.4 Landscape Buffer, and 6.16.5 creating height restrictions within 75 ft of the district boundary to better define buffers, setaback and other limitations within the district.
March 2011
3.2 Amend Zoning Map by rezoning Tax Map/Lot #88-4 and 88-5 from an R-1 , Single Family Residential zoning district to an I-Industrial Zoning District to better match the zoning district with the actual use.
2.2.50 Revise existing definition for Multi-Use to clarify existing description.
4.4 Revise Schedule III by adding density requirements for multi-use within the C-2 and NP districts.
5.3.1 Delete subsection B. (Lot Merger Clause) in its entirety in accordance with state legislation which no longer allows for mandatory merging of non-conforming lots.
5.7.7 Revise Section Title by “Zoning Districts” to the end of the title.
5.7.8 SAA (Results in the following: “Sign Ordinance for the Historic District – Commercial Zoning Districts” and “Sign Ord. for the HD – Residential Zoning Districts”
6.18 Add a new section entitled: “Cemetery Regulations” to be in accordance with state cemetery regulations.
9.1.5 Revise Section Permitted Uses (of the Wetlands Conservation Overlay District) by adding to the list of allowance: elevated, uncovered decks, storage sheds, gazebo or garden-type structures, and native plantings.
9.1 Revise Wetlands Conservation District sections to make corrections and clarifications within sections 9.1.1.A, 9.1.3.F, 9.1.5.B, and 9.1.6A.
9.3.4 Amend subsection C by correcting a reference
9.4 Amend Floodplain Development Ordinance by deleting existing ordinance and replacing in its entirety language tailored to the needs of Exeter as recommended and proposed by the NH Office of Energy and Planning in conjunction with the National Flood Insurance Program.
12.4 Amend Limits of Approval by allowing the ZBA to grant one-year extensions to previously granted approvals.
March 2012
2.0 Amend Definitions by adding a definition for “Abandonment”.
5.7.3.D.A Amend Right-of-Way Limitations regarding signs in the ROW to be consistent with Section 502.2 of the Town Ordinance.
5.7.7 Amend Sign Ordinance title for the Historic District to be consistent with the previous chapter section by referring to the commercial area as “non-residential”.
March 2013
2.0 Amend Definitions by adding a definition for the following: “Two Family” home (or duplex), Veterinarian”, “Active Adult Community”, Independent Living Facilities, and Assisted Living Facility.
2.2.21 Revise definition for Elderly, by adding “Senior”, as both terms are used interchangeably.
2.2.22 Amend definition for “Elderly Congregate Health Care Facilities” to clarify the type of facility.
2.2.55 Amend definition for Nursing Home to update as per more recent standards.
2.2.67 Amend definitions by deleting the definition for “Retirement Planned Community”.
3.2 Amend zoning map by adjusting the district boundary line between the PP and CT districts to follow the common property line between tax map parcel #70-103 and #66-1 on Holland Way.
3.2 Amend zoning map by rezoning parcels fronting on Portsmouth Ave from High Street (35-41 High Street) to the intersections of Green Hill Road (48 Portsmouth Ave) and Highland Street (49 Portsmouth Ave) from their current zoning designation to C-1.
4.2 Schedule 1, Permitted Uses, by adding the following to R-4, R-5 and R-6: Active Adult Community, Independent Living Facilities, and Assisted Living Facility. Also add Assisted Living Facility to the
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
20
NP and C-3 districts as permitted uses. Also add “veterinarians and garden supply establishments” to allowed principal uses in the C-1 district.
4.3 Schedule II Density and Dimensional Regulations – Residential, by revising the chart to reflect the density required for a two-family in the R-2 district as 12,000 sq.ft./unit
4.4 Schedule III Notes:20, by adding the phrase “of lot area” before “per unit”.
5.6.6 Amend Off-Street Parking Schedule by adding the use “Active Adult Community” with a parking requirement of 1 space for each 1 bedroom unit, 2 for each 2+ bedroom unit, plus 1 for every 4 units for guest parking. Also add “Independent Living Facilities” with a parking requirement of 1 space per unit, plus one space per employee on the max. shift, plus 1 for every 5 units for guest parking. Also add “Assisted Living Facility” with parking requirements of 1 space for every 5 units, 1 space for every 6 units for guest parking and one space per employee on the max. shift. Revise the parking requirement for “Elderly Congregate Health Care” by adding additional requirements including, 2 spaces for each 2+ bedroom units, and 1 per 6 units for guest parking. Delete the reference to “Retirement Planned Community”. Delete the reference to “elderly Housing” and its associated parking requirement.
5.3.5 Amend Demolition Review by revising portions of C. Procedure and D. Demolition Review Committee Responsibilities by extending various time lines and deadlines for review to seven (7) business days or thirty (30) business days.
March 2014
4.2 Schedule I Notes(b): add “(per unit)” to clarify lot size requirement.
5.6.3 Off-Street Parking: add allowance for the Planning Board to permit a reduction in required space size if the site area allows it.
5.6.4 Shared Parking: revise the definition to include scale of the project as reason for parking reduction as well as a recognition that each case is unique.
5.6.5 Add “size” to the reductions the Planning Board may allow.
March 2015
5.6.3 Off-Street Parking: make a correction to Table reference and add allowance for alternative parking calculation as well as phasing option.
9.1.5 Revise Wetlands Conservation District section 9.1.5 Permitted Uses to add projects that reduce impervious surface as well as projects that re-vegetate a disturbed buffer.
9.1.6.A Conditional Use Permit, under #1, remove wastewater disposal system from the list as it is listed as a prohibitive use.
9.1.6.B Conditional Uses: Permit Conditions, add requirement that the impact has been evaluated in the context of the relative “value” of the wetland, including its ecological sensitivity.
9.1.6 Conditional Uses: add new section C. Alternate Procedure for Subdivision and Site Plan Applications, which removes the duplicative process of having to request a waiver and a CUP for work within the wetland buffer. If an Applicant requires a Site Plan or Subdivision review, they can request a waiver from the CUP process and request a waiver from buffer setbacks.
9.4 Floodplain Development Ordinance: Revise section as specified by recommendations from NHDES.
March 2016
2.2 Definitions, add definition 2.2.30 Fertilizer (and renumber accordingly)
9.2.3.K. Prohibited Uses, add subsection 12. addressing use of fertilizer (Aquifer)
9.3.4.F. Prohibited Uses, add subsection 12. addressing use of fertilizer (Shoreland)
March 2017
2.2 Definitions, add definition for “Frontage” (and renumber accordingly)
2.2 Definitions, add definition for “Street” (and renumber accordingly)
2.2 Definitions, delete and replace definition for “Lot Width” included under the definition for
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
21
“Lot” (and renumber accordingly)
4.2 Schedule I: Permitted Uses by adding “Accessory Dwelling Units” in the R-4, Multi-Family
Residential zoning district by Special Exception.
4.2 Schedule I Notes by deleting and replacing the language in subsection regarding the size
limitation on accessory dwelling units.
4.3 Schedule II: Density & Dimensional Regulations-Residential by adding a new column to
the dimensional table entitled “Minimum Lot Frontage”; and reference to “minimum lot
frontage” in footnotes (1) and (8).
4.4 Schedule III Notes by deleting Note #14 (specific to Epping Road setbacks) and all
references to Note #14 in the Density & Dimensional Regulations-Non-Residential table.
6.8 Epping Road Strip Management by deleting subsection 6.8.3 Setback Requirements from
Right-of-Way in its entirety.
March 2018
8 Historic District – Amended to allow a Minimal Impact application that can be administratively approved by Town staff.
March 2019
2.2 Definitions by deleting the definition for “Fertilizer” and renumber accordingly. (Definition to be added to Article 9.2 Aquifer Protection and 9.3 Shoreland Protection ordinances).
3.1 Delete “Professional/Technology Park” from list of established districts.
3.2 Zoning Map: Change “PP-Professional/Technology Park” zoning district (off Holland Way/Hampton Road) to CT-Corporate Technology Park.
4.2 Schedule I: Permitted Uses by deleting the “PP-Professional/Technology Park” zoning designation and all uses permitted within the PP zoning district)
Schedule I:Permitted Uses by deleting “Assisted Living Facility” as a Permitted Use in the C-3, Epping Road Highway Commercial zoning district.
4.4 Schedule III: Density & Dimensional Regulations by deleting all dimensional requirements for the “PP-Professional/Technology Park”
9.2 Aquifer Protection District Ordinance, Section 9.2.4 by adding definition for “Fertilizer”.
Section 9.2.3.K.12. by deleting and replacing in its entirety.
9.3 Shoreland Protection District Ordinance, Section 9.3.2. by adding definition for “Fertilizer”.
Section 9.3.4.F.12. by deleting and replacing in its entirety.
9.3 Shoreland Protection District Ordinance, Section 9.3.4.B Use Regulations by deleting “adjacent to the shoreline of …..” and adding "as defined in 9.3.3”.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
22
OPEN SPACE DEVELOPMENTS, SINGLE FAMILY INTERNAL SETBACK REQUIREMENTS .
YEAR OF APPROVAL OPEN SPACE DEVELOPMENT STREETS WITHIN SUBDIVISION INTERNAL SETBACK REQUIREMENTS PREDATED ZONING (EXTENSION OF S/D APPROVED IN MAY, 1974) PICKPOCKET WOODS INDIAN TRAIL RUNAWIT ROAD SPLIT ROCK ROAD PICKPOCKET ROAD FRONT: 20’ FROM R.O.W. OR PARKING AREA. SIDE & REAR: 30’ FROM AN ABUTTING STRUCTURE. MAY, 1984 HUNTER PLACE HUNTER PLACE FRONT: 20’ FROM R.O.W. OR PARKING AREA. SIDE & REAR: 30’ FROM AN ABUTTING STRUCTURE. NOVEMBER, 1985 CRAGMERE HEIGHTS CRAGMERE HEIGHTS FRONT: 20’ FROM R.O.W. OR PARKING AREA. SIDE & REAR: 30’ FROM AN ABUTTING STRUCTURE. SEPTEMBER, 1985 DEER RUN DEER RUN FRONT: 20’ FROM R.O.W. OR PARKING AREA. SIDE & REAR: 30’ FROM AN ABUTTING STRUCTURE. NOVEMBER, 1987 FOLSOM ACRES PRENTISS WAY FRONT: 20’ FROM R.O.W. OR PARKING AREA. SIDE & REAR: 30’ FROM AN ABUTTING STRUCTURE. NOVEMBER, 1989 EXETER HIGHLANDS OAK HILL LANE EXETER HIGHLANDS DRIVE FRONT: 20’ FROM R.O.W. OR PARKING AREA. SIDE & REAR: 30’ FROM AN ABUTTING STRUCTURE. FEBRUARY, 1987 LOUISBURG CIRCLE LOUISBURG CIRCLE FRONT: 20’ FROM R.O.W. OR PARKING AREA. SIDE & REAR: 30’ FROM AN ABUTTING STRUCTURE. NOVEMBER, 1987 CAPTAIN’S MEADOW CAPTAIN’S WAY SENYAR FARM LANE HALF PENNY LANE MOORE LANE FRONT: 20’ FROM R.O.W. OR PARKING AREA. SIDE & REAR: 30’ FROM AN ABUTTING STRUCTURE. OCTOBER, 1988 ROCK CREEK PLACE ANNA LOUISE DRIVE FRONT: 20’ FROM R.O.W. OR PARKING AREA. SIDE & REAR: 30’ FROM AN ABUTTING STRUCTURE.
Exeter Zoning Ordinance – Amended March 2019
23
YEAR OF APPROVAL OPEN SPACE DEVELOPMENT STREETS WITHIN SUBDIVISION INTERNAL SETBACK REQUIREMENTS SEPTEMBER, 1996 EXETER FARMS EXETER FARMS ROAD WYNDBROOK CIRCLE FRONT: 20’ FROM R.O.W. OR PARKING AREA. SIDE & REAR: 30’ FROM AN ABUTTING STRUCTURE. (EFFECTIVE 10/23/97 – 30’ FROM BUILDING TO BUILDING AND MAINTAIN AT LEAST 10’ FROM ABUTTING PROPERTY LINE) NOTE: PHASE II APPROVAL GRANTED 3/19/98. SEPTEMBER, 1996 JUNE, 1999 MEADOWOOD AT EXETER PHASE I (LOTS: 1-15, 39-45) PHASE II (LOTS : 16-35) MEADOWOOD DRIVE TWIN POND CIRCLE PHASE I: FRONT: 20’ FROM R.O.W. OR PARKING AREA. SIDE & REAR: 30’ FROM AN ABUTTING STRUCTURE. PHASE II: FRONT: 20’ FROM R.O.W. OR PARKING AREA. SIDE & REAR: 10’ FROM PROPERTY LINE. OCTOBER, 1998 CHAPMAN WOODS CHAPMAN WAY FRONT: 20’ FROM R.O.W. OR PARKING AREA. SIDE & REAR: 10’ FROM PROPERTY LINE. APRIL, 2000 WINDEMERE AT EXETER WINDEMERE LANE SQUAMSCOTT CIRCLE DEARBORN BROOK CIRCLE FRONT: 20’ FROM R.O.W. OR PARKING AREA. SIDE & REAR: 10’ FROM PROPERTY LINE. JULY, 2000 CHRISTINA ESTATES DEERHAVEN DRIVE FRONT: 25’ FROM R.O.W. OR PARKING AREA. SIDE & REAR: 20’ FROM PROPERTY LINE. OCTOBER, 2000 BLACKFORD ESTATES BLACKFORD DRIVE ENO DRIVE FRONT: 25’ FROM R.O.W. OR PARKING AREA. SIDE & REAR: 20’ FROM PROPERTY LINE.


Site Plan Review and
Subdivision Regulations for
The Town of Exeter
New Hampshire
As Amended October 2019
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
SITE PLAN REVIEW
AND
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
FOR THE TOWN OF
EXETER, NEW HAMPSHIRE
The following amended Site Plan Review/Subdivision Regulations were adopted by the Exeter Planning Board on April 26, 2018. These regulations were adopted in accordance with NH RSA §672 through §677 inclusive of the Revised Statutes Annotated following a public hearing on April 26, 2018.
EXETER PLANNING BOARD
Langdon Plumer, Chairman
Aaron Brown, Vice Chair
Pete Cameron, Clerk
Kelly Bergeron
Gwen English
John Grueter
Niko Papakonstanis, Select Board Rep.
Nicholas Gray, Alternate
Jennifer Martel, Alternate
Robin Tyner, Alternate
Peter Steckler, Alternate
Anne Surman, Select Board Alt. Rep.
PLANNING DEPARTMENT
Dave Sharples, Town Planner
Barbara McEvoy, Deputy Code Enforcement Officer
Kristen Murphy, Natural Resource Planner
Kathleen Croteau, Administrative Assistant
Date of Filing with the Office of the Town Clerk
Received by:
Town Clerk
II
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
(This Page Intentionally Left Blank for Notes)
III
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
i
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Record of Amendments .......................................................................................... a
SECTION 1. AUTHORITY ............................................................................ 1-1
SECTION 2. TITLE .........................................................................................2-1
2.1. Formal Title ............................................................................................2-1
2.2. Short Title .............................................................................................. 2-1
SECTION 3. PURPOSE ............................................................................... 3-1
SECTION 4. JURISDICTION ..........................................................................4-1
4.1. General ..................................................................................................4-1
4.2. Applicability ............................................................................................4-1
4.3. Activity Requiring Site Plan Review Or Minor Site Plan Review ...........4-1
4.4. Activity Not Requiring Site Plan Review (If Waived By The Town Planner)…4-2
4.5. Activity Requiring Subdivision, Minor Subdivision, Or Lot Line
Adjustment Review .............................................................................. 4-3
4.6. Building Permits/Occupancy Permits ................................................... 4-3
4.7. Activity Requiring Erosion and Sediment Control Review and
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) Review. ....................4-4
SECTION 5. DEFINITIONS .......................................................................... 5-1
5.1. Abutter .................................................................................................. 5-1
5.2. Applicant ............................................................................................... 5-1
5.3. Best Management Practices (BMPs)..................................................... 5-1
5.4. Board .................................................................................................... 5-1
5.5. Certified Soil Scientist ........................................................................... 5-1
5.6. Completed Application ............................................................................5-1
5.7. Construction Activities .............................................................................5-2
5.8. Cul-de-sac ............................................................................................ 5-2
5.9. Development ......................................................................................... 5-2
5.10. Easement ............................................................................................. 5-2
5.11. Engineer or Surveyor ............................................................................ 5-2
5.12. Enlargement ......................................................................................... 5-2
5.13. Green Space ......................................................................................... 5-3
5.14 Groundwater Recharge Volume (GRV)……………………………………5-3
5.15 Hydrologic Soil Group………………………………………………………..5-3
5.16. Improvement ......................................................................................... 5-3
5.17. Individual Water Supply System ........................................................... 5-3
5.18. Land Disturbance .................................................................................. 5-3
5.19. Lot ........................................................................................................ 5-3
5.20. Lot Line Adjustment .............................................................................. 5-4
5.21. Minor Site Plan ..................................................................................... 5-4
5.22. Minor Subdivision.................................................................................. 5-4
5.23. Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) .................................. 5-4
5.24. Municipal Sewage Disposal System...................................................... 5-4
5.25. Municipal Water System ....................................................................... 5-4
5.26. Natural Resources ................................................................................ 5-4
5.27. Notice of Intent (NOI) ............................................................................ 5-5
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
ii
5.28. NPDES ................................................................................................. 5-5
5.29. Plat ....................................................................................................... 5-5
5.30. Private Sewage Disposal System ......................................................... 5-5
5.31. Public Water Systems ........................................................................... 5-5
5.32. Seasonal High Water Table .................................................................. 5-5
5.33. Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) .................................. 5-6
5.34. Street .................................................................................................... 5-5
5.35. Subdivision ........................................................................................... 5-6
5.36 Water Quality Volume
5.37. Wetlands ............................................................................................... 6-1
SECTION 6. PROCEDURE ......................................................................... 6-1
6.1. Pre-Application Review ......................................................................... 6-1
6.2. Formal Application Submission ............................................................. 6-2
6.3. Public Hearing and Notices ................................................................... 6-3
6.4. Regional Notice .................................................................................... 6-4
6.5. Technical Review Committee (TRC) ..................................................... 6-5
6.6. Minor Site Plan Review, Minor Subdivision, and Lot Line
Adjustment Procedures ......................................................................... 6-5
6.7. Recording Procedure ............................................................................ 6-9
6.8. Revocation of Approval ....................................................................... 6-10
SECTION 7. PLAN REQUIREMENTS ........................................................... 7-1
7.1. Scope of Review ................................................................................... 7-1
7.2. Professional Standards ......................................................................... 7-1
7.3. Sheet size ............................................................................................. 7-1
7.4. Existing Site Conditions Plan ................................................................ 7-1
7.5. Proposed Site Conditions Plan (Pertains to
Site Plans Only) .................................................................................... 7-4 7.6. Subdivision Layout Plan (Pertains to Subdivisions Only) ...................... 7-5
7.7. Construction Plan.................................................................................. 7-8
7.8. Utilities Plan .......................................................................................... 7-9
7.9. Grading, Drainage, and Erosion & Sediment Control Plan .................. 7-10
7.10. Landscaping Plan ............................................................................... 7-11
7.11. Drainage Improvements and Storm Water Management
Plan .................................................................................................... 7-11
7.12. Natural Resources Plan ...................................................................... 7-11
7.13. Yield Plan (Pertains to Subdivisions Only) ......................................... 7-11
7.14. Other Required Studies and/or Exhibits .............................................. 7-12
7.15. Items Required for Final Approval ....................................................... 7-14
SECTION 8. GENERAL STANDARDS ..........................................................8-1
8.1. Overview ............................................................................................... 8-1
8.2. Conformity with Master Plan, Zoning Ordinance,
Official Zoning Map, and These Regulations .................................... 8-1
8.3. Conformity to Other Laws .................................................................... 8-1
8.4. Character of Land ................................................................................. 8-1
8.5. Self-Imposed Restrictions and/or Covenants ........................................ 8-1
8.6. Protection of Environmental Quality ...................................................... 8-2
8.7. Vehicular and Pedestrian Traffic ........................................................... 8-2
8.8. Preservation of Natural Features .......................................................... 8-3
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
iii
8.9. Landscaping and Tree Planting ..............................................................8-3
8.10. Scattered or Premature Development ....................................................8-4
SECTION 9. DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS ..................... 9-1
9.1. Overview ............................................................................................... 9-1
Architectural....................................................................................................... 9-1
9.2. Architectural Design .............................................................................. 9-1
Stormwater Management Standards for Post Construction
and Construction .............................................................................................. 9-3
9.3. Stormwater Management Standards, Stormwater Management Plan, Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan, and Erosion and Sediment Control Standards ...............................................................................................9-3
9.4. Flood Hazard Areas ............................................................................ 9-15
9.5. Construction, Inspection & Maintenance, and Approval...................... 9-16
Natural Landscapes and Resources ............................................................... 9-19
9.6. Green Space ....................................................................................... 9-19
9.7. Landscaping and Screening ............................................................... 9-21
9.8. Natural Resources ............................................................................. 9-23
9.9. Wetlands ............................................................................................. 9-24
Paving and Surfaces ..................................................................................... 9-27
9.10. Bridges .............................................................................................. 9-27
9.11. Driveways .......................................................................................... 9-27
9.12. Off-Street Loading (Pertains to Site Plans Only) ............................... 9-27
9.13. Parking Areas (Pertains to Site Plans Only) ...................................... 9-27
9.14. Roadways, Access Points, and Fire Lanes........................................ 9-29
9.15. Sidewalks ............................................................................................ 9-30
9.16. Snow and Salt Storage ....................................................................... 9-30
9.17. Streets ................................................................................................ 9-31
Services and Utilities...................................................................................... 9-34
9.18. Easements .......................................................................................... 9-34
9.19. Fire Protection .................................................................................... 9-35
9.20. Outdoor Lighting ................................................................................. 9-35
9.21. Sewage Disposal ................................................................................ 9-36
9.22. Solid Waste Disposal Facilities (Pertains to Site
Plans Only) ......................................................................................... 9-39
9.23. Utilities ................................................................................................ 9-39
9.24. Water Services ................................................................................... 9-39
Surveying ....................................................................................................... 9-40
9.25. Monuments and Benchmarks ........................................................... 9-40
9.26. Property Boundaries, Bearings and Distances
(Pertains to Subdivisions Only) .......................................................... 9-41
SECTION 10. EPPING ROAD CORRIDOR
(Overlay District - Pertains to Site Plans Only) .................................. 10-1
10.1. Additional Standards and Site Plan Requirements ............................. 10-1
10.2. Conformance to Other Regulations ..................................................... 10-1
10.3. Access ................................................................................................ 10-1
10.4. Parking ............................................................................................... 10-2
10.5. Utilities ................................................................................................ .10-2
10.6. Landscaping ....................................................................................... 10-2
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
iv
SECTION 11. OPEN SPACE AND MULTI-FAMILY
DEVELOPMENT - ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS ......................................... 11-1
11.1. Review ................................................................................................ 11-1
11.2. Development Specifications (Open Space) ........................................ 11-1
11.3. Multi-Family Development (Non-Open Space) ................................... 11-2
11.4. Conversions and Other Multi-Family Dwellings .................................. 11-3
SECTION 12. ASSURANCES FOR COMPLETION AND
MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS….………………………………………. . 12-1
12.1. General .............................................................................................. 12-1
12.2. Release of Performance Guarantees ................................................. 12-2
12.3. Maintenance Guarantees ................................................................ 12-3
12.4 Inspection …….………………………………………………………… 12-3
12.5. As-Built Plans ……………………………………………………….……12-5
SECTION 13. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT ..………….……. 13-1
13.1. Amendments ...................................................................................... 13-1
13.2. Conditions .......................................................................................... 13-1
13.3. Savings Provision .............................................................................. 13-1
13.4 Interpretation ……………………………………………………………… 13-1
13.5 Conflict with Public and Private Provisions …………………………… 13-1
13.6 Separability …………………………………………………………….…13-2
13.7 Waivers ………………...………………………………………...…… 13-2
13.8 Board Action ………………………………………………………….…... 13-3
13.9 Enforcement: Failure to Comply with Order; Violations
and Penalty; Appeals……………………………………………………. 13-5
SECTION 14. MODIFICATIONS TO AN APPROVED PLAN……………… 14-1
SECTION 15. VALIDITY ………………………………………………………....15-1
15.1. Interpretation ……………………………………………………………… 15-1
15.2. Conflicting Provisions ……………………………………………………15-1
15.3. Saving Clause ……………………………………………………………. 15-1
SECTION 16. EFFECTIVE DATE ……………………………………………… 16-1
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
TOWN OF EXETER
Record of Amendments
Site Plan Review/Subdivision Regulations:
DATE
SECTION(S)
REVISION DESCRIPTION
June 8, 2000
All
Consolidated Site Plan Review
Regulations & Subdivision Regulations
August 9, 2001
9.6, 9.7, 9.13.7,
9.17.5
Reorganization and revisions to sections.
April 10, 2003
3,4,5,6,7,8,9,
14
Recognition of NPDES requirements and multiple other revisions
Sept. 30, 2010
9.20
Revision to outdoor lighting regulations.
Oct. 25, 2007
11.2.6
Revision to Open Space Regulation
Oct. 16, 2010
4.36, 5.33, 8.9,
9.9.2 & 9.9.3,
9.17
Review required for changes in use, revised definition of subdivision, amendment to include reference to NH Dept. of Agriculture, amendment to wetland and wetland buffer setbacks incl. waiver guidelines, add section to define allowances to roadway and street widths and define driveway
April 14, 2016
6.2
Digital PDF submission required
Oct. 27, 2016
6.6, 6.7, 6.8,
6.9
Delete sections in their entirety
Oct. 27, 2016
9.3
Add 9.3.5 to add requirements for
Maintenance Log & Inspection &
Maintenance checklist
Oct. 27, 2016
12, 13, 14, 15
Delete sections in entirety & replace with new Sections 12, 13 and 14.
April 26, 2018
Delete all sections in entirety and replace
Revised to add current NH DES Stormwater Regulations.
Oct. 10, 2019
7.4.7
Revise definition of ‘significant trees’ and add requirements for identification
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
1-1
SECTION 1. AUTHORITY
Under the authority vested in the Exeter Planning Board by a public vote held at Town Meetings of March 24, 1969 and March 10, 1981, in accordance with the State law then in effect, and in accordance with current State laws including, but not limited to, Chapter 672 through 677 inclusive of the Revised Statutes Annotated of the State of New Hampshire, the Exeter Planning Board adopts the following regulations governing the review of site plans and subdivisions for land within the Town of Exeter, New Hampshire.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
2-1
SECTION 2. TITLE
2.1. Formal Title
These regulations shall be known and may be cited as the “Site Plan Review and Subdivision Regulations for the Town of Exeter, New Hampshire”, as adopted and subsequently amended.
2.2. Short Title
Site Plan Review/Subdivision Regulations
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
3-1
SECTION 3. PURPOSE
Consistent with the enabling legislation cited above, these regulations are adopted for the following purposes:
1. To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare of the municipality;
2. To guide the future growth and development of the municipality, in accordance with the Master Plan;
3. To provide for adequate light, air, and privacy; to secure safety from fire, flood, and other danger; and to prevent overcrowding of the land and undue congestion of population;
4. To protect and conserve the value of land throughout the municipality and the value of buildings and improvements upon the land; and to minimize the conflicts among the uses of land and buildings;
5. To provide adequate and efficient transportation, water, sewage disposal, schools, parks, playgrounds, recreation, and other public requirements and facilities;
6. To provide for suitably located streets, sidewalks, and access ways of sufficient width to accommodate existing and prospective traffic (both vehicular and pedestrian); to afford access for firefighting equipment to buildings; and to be coordinated so as to compose a convenient and safe circulation system;
7. To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for site plans and subdivisions in order to further the orderly layout and use of land; and to insure proper descriptions and monumentation of subdivided land;
8. To insure that public facilities are available and will have a sufficient capacity to serve proposed site plans and subdivisions;
9. To prevent the pollution of air, land, watercourses, and water bodies; to assure the adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguard the water table; and to encourage the wise use and management of natural resources throughout the municipality in order to preserve the integrity, stability, and beauty of the community and the value of the land; and
10. To provide for green spaces through the most efficient design and layout of the land, while preserving the density of land development as established in the Zoning Ordinance of the municipality.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
3-2
11. To meet requirements of the Stormwater Phase II Final Rule, as amended, which requires regulated small municipal separate storm sewer systems (MS4) to develop, implement and enforce a program to reduce pollutants in storm water runoff from construction sites.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
4-1
SECTION 4. JURISDICTION
4.1. General
All Sections and paragraphs of these Site Plan Review/Subdivision Regulations shall apply to all site plan reviews and subdivisions unless the section or paragraph specifically indicates otherwise.
4.2. Applicability
These provisions shall govern all residential, non-residential, and multifamily development within the boundaries of the Town of Exeter. No land shall be developed, subdivided, or lots conveyed or sold within the corporate limits of the municipality until:
4.2.1. The Planning Board has given final approval of the site plan or subdivision plan after a public hearing and after the Chairman of the Board (or designee) has affixed his/her signature on the approved plan;
4.2.2. The applicant has complied with all of the regulations herein, including the posting of appropriate performance guarantees; and
4.2.3. For subdivisions, the approved plan is filed with the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds.
4.2.4. For construction activities that result in a land disturbance of greater than or equal to one acre or less than one acre if part of a larger common plan of development or sale that would disturb one acre or more, site operators must obtain a National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit from the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and implement practices to minimize pollutant runoff.
4.2.5 For construction activities that result in a land disturbance of
50,000 square feet or more if in the Protected Shoreland or 100,000 square feet or more in other areas, a Site Specific permit from the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services (NHDES) must be obtained.
4.3. Activity Requiring Site Plan Review Or Minor Site Plan Review
The Planning Board shall require the submission of site plans for its review by all applicants seeking approval for any of the following, except as exempted in Section 4.4 Activity Not Requiring Site Plan Review if Waived by the Town Planner:
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
4-2
4.3.1. The construction of any non-residential use facility;
4.3.2. The enlargement of any existing non-residential use that occasions development of the site;
4.3.3. The construction of any new multi-family dwelling other than one and two-family dwellings;
4.3.4. The enlargement of any existing multi-family dwelling use resulting in other than one and two-family dwellings, that occasions development of the site;
4.3.5. The construction and conversion of any multi-family dwellings, other than one and two-family dwellings, or non-residential use in which development of the site is contemplated or required by virtue of any other Town or State ordinance, statute, or regulation, or decision of the Town’s Zoning Board of Adjustment; or
4.3.6. All development, change, expansion of use, or increase in use intensity of non-residential uses and multiple dwelling units (structure containing more than two dwellings) shall be subject to these regulations whether or not such development or change or expansion of use includes a subdivision or re-subdivision of the site.
4.3.7 Any land disturbance of greater than or equal to one acre.
4.4. Activity Not Requiring Site Plan Review If Waived By The Town Planner
4.4.1. The Board shall not require the submission of site plans for their review by an applicant seeking construction of any of the following:
1. Handicap and service ramps;
2. Stairs;
3. Fire escapes;
4. Flagpoles;
5. Signs;
6. Lights;
7. Underground structures and utilities, including, but not limited to, private sewage disposal systems, drainage pipes, water
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
4-3
lines, sewer lines, gas lines, and underground storage tanks, if land disturbance is less than one acre.
8. Above-ground storage tanks;
9. Ancillary telecommunications structures, equipment, and concrete pads within previously approved fenced tower base areas; or
10. Site development of 1,000-square-feet or less.
11. Site development of 1,000 to 3,000 square-feet may be waived if no additional impervious surface is created and the development is within compliance of all other site regulations.
(Note: A minimum inspection fee may be required.)
4.4.2. A building permit shall be issued by the Building Inspector for any of the items listed above without site plan review by the Board after a determination has been made by the Town Planner that the proposed use will not have a negative impact on internal pedestrian or vehicular traffic circulation, or on abutting properties or approved site plans. In making this determination, the Town
Planner shall consult with other members of the Technical
Review Committee (as described in Section 6.5 Technical Review Committee (TRC) of these regulations) and abutting property owners as necessary. If the Town Planner determines the proposed use will have a negative impact, the applicant shall be required to comply with all applicable requirements of these regulations.
4.5. Activity Requiring Subdivision, Minor Subdivision, Or Lot Line
Adjustment Review
The Planning Board shall require the submission of plans for its review by all applicants seeking approval for any of the following:
? Subdivision of any lot, tract, or parcel of land;
? Lot line adjustments; or
? Merging of lots.
4.6. Building Permits/Occupancy Permits
In all cases, no building permit shall be issued by the Building Inspector for the construction of any building subject to these regulations until final approval is granted by the Planning Board, and no certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the terms and conditions of the Board’s approval have been fulfilled including the completion of all required site improvements. In the case of the latter, the Building Inspector may issue a certificate of occupancy provided that there is a performance
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
4-4
guarantee in place that is adequate to insure the completion of all required site improvements.
4.7. Activity Requiring Erosion and Sediment Control Review and Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) Review.
The Planning Board shall require the submission of plans for its review by all applicants seeking approval of the following:
4.7.1. Construction activities that result in a land disturbance of greater than or equal to one acre or less than one acre if part of a larger common plan of development or sale that would disturb one acre or more. A Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) is required as part of the EPA NPDES Construction Permit.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
5-1
SECTION 5. DEFINITIONS
5.1. Abutter
Abutter shall mean any person whose property is located in New Hampshire and adjoins, or is directly across the street or stream from the land under consideration by the Board. For purposes of receiving testimony only, and not for purposes of notification, the term “abutter” shall include any person who is able to demonstrate that his/her land will be directly affected by the proposal under consideration. For purposes of receipt of notification by the Town of a Planning Board hearing, in the case of an abutting property being under condominium or other form of collective ownership, the term abutter shall mean the officers of the collective or association, as defined in RSA §356 – B:3, XXIII and any amendments thereto.
5.2. Applicant
Applicant shall mean the owner of record of the land that is proposed to be subdivided or developed in a non-residential or multi-family manner, including any subsequent owner of record who proposes such development, or the duly authorized agent of any such owner.
5.3. Best Management Practices (BMPs)
Activities or structural improvements that help reduce the quantity and improve the quality of storm water runoff. BMPs include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage.
5.4. Board
Board shall mean the Planning Board of the Town of Exeter, New Hampshire as established under the provisions of RSA §673:2 as amended.
5.5. Certified Soil Scientist
A person qualified in soil classification and mapping who is certified by the State of New Hampshire Board of Natural Scientists.
5.6. Completed Application
This term refers to the application form provided by the Planning
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
5-2
Department with all information completed as requested on the form (with the exception of requested waivers from applicable regulations), all attachments, drawings, approvals, and other paperwork as requested in the form or elsewhere in these regulations, and all fees and administrative expenses as indicated in these regulations.
5.7. Construction Activities
Disturbance of soils associated with clearing, grading, or excavating. Can include construction of residential houses, office buildings, industrial sites, roads and other utilities, or demolition.
5.8. Cul-de-sac
A cul-de-sac shall mean a minor, local street, having only one end open for vehicular traffic with the other end terminated by a turn-around for vehicles.
5.9. Development
This term shall mean the construction of improvements on a tract or tracts of land, including the enlargement of a structure or physical changes to the site in an effort to accommodate an intended use. As used within these regulations, development also includes the subdivision of land.
5.10. Easement
An easement shall mean the right or privilege that a person, corporation or other organization may have in another’s land usually for the purpose of access or installing and/or maintaining utilities and drainage ways.
5.11. Engineer or Surveyor
These terms shall denote the duly designated, legally recognized, New Hampshire licensed professional engineer or land surveyor employed by the applicant as may be pertinent to the actual services to be performed in accordance with the provisions set forth in RSA §320 - A as amended.
5.12. Enlargement
This term refers to an increase in size or an expansion of any structure or appurtenance, whether said appurtenance exists alone or in service of a structure or other appurtenance.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
5-3
5.13. Green Space
Green Space shall be those vegetated areas, reserved areas, or recreational spaces as described in Section 9.6 Green Space.
5.14. Groundwater Recharge Volume (GRV)
Groundwater recharge volume means the volume of water to be infiltrated at a site subsequent to development.
5.15. Hydrologic Soil Group (HSG)
Hydrologic soil groups are based on estimates of runoff potential. Soils are assigned to one of four groups according to the rate of water infiltration when the soils are not protected by vegetation, are thoroughly wet, and receive precipitation from long-duration storms.
5.16. Improvement
This term shall refer to site grading, landscaping, street or road construction, and utilities (including but not limited to water, sewer, electric, gas, storm drainage, and their appurtenances) to be installed or agreed to be installed by the applicant on the land to be used for public or private streets and easements or other purposes as are necessary for general development of the site.
5.17. Individual Water Supply System
This term refers to any water supply system, other than the municipal water system or a public water system, which provides potable water.
5.18. Land Disturbance
An area where the natural vegetation has been removed exposing the underlying soil. Exposed soil due to clearing, grading, or excavation activities.
5.19. Lot
This term refers to a piece or parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings, or utilized for a principal use and uses accessory or incidental to the operation thereof, together with such open spaces as required by these regulations and/or the Town’s Zoning Ordinance, and having frontage on a public street, private way, or right-of-way.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
5-4
5.20. Lot Line Adjustment
A lot line adjustment shall mean the movement of a property boundary line that involves the exchange of abutting land among two or more parcels, without increasing the number of lots. For the purpose of these regulations, the merging of lots is considered a lot line adjustment. A lot line adjustment may not create a non-conforming lot where a lot was previously conforming, and a lot line adjustment may not increase the non-conformity of an already non-conforming lot, except in accordance with the provisions of the Exeter Zoning Ordinance.
5.21. Minor Site Plan
A site plan involving less than a 10% increase in existing lot coverage, as determined by the formula found in Section 6.10 Minor Site Plan Review, Minor Subdivision, and Lot Line Adjustments Procedures of these regulations, or in-progress changes of previously approved site plans.
5.22. Minor Subdivision
A minor subdivision shall mean the division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land which would result in three or fewer building lots, and which does not require the installation of any new streets or roads (public or private) or the extension of any municipally owned utilities (sewer and water).
5.23. Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4 )
A publicly-owned conveyance or system of conveyances that discharges to waters of the U.S. and is designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water, is not a combined sewer, and is not part of a publicly-owned treatment works.
5.24. Municipal Sewage Disposal System
This term shall refer to any component of the sewage disposal system operated by the Town of Exeter.
5.25. Municipal Water System
This term shall refer to any component of the water distribution system operated by the Town of Exeter.
5.26. Natural Resources
Natural Resources refer to the natural wealth of the Town, consisting of land, air quality, soils, vegetation, mineral deposits, water, wildlife, and wildlife habitat. Natural resources consist of two main types: renewable
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
5-5
and non-renewable. Renewable resources include wildlife and natural vegetation. Non-renewable resources are those that cannot be replaced, or that can only be replaced over extremely long periods of time. See Section 9.8 Natural Resources for a description of requirements concerning Natural Resources.
5.27. Notice of Intent (NOI)
An application to notify the permitting authority of a facility’s intention to be covered by a general permit: exempts a facility from having to submit an individual or group application.
5.28. NPDES
“National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System” the name of the surface water quality program authorized by Congress as part of the 1987 Clean Water Act. This is EPA’s program to control the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States.
5.29. Plat
Plat shall mean the final map, drawing, or chart on which the applicant’s plan of subdivision is presented to the Exeter Planning Board for approval and which, if approved, shall be submitted to the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds for recording. For the purpose of these regulations, the term “plan” will be used instead of “plat”; these two terms shall be considered synonymous throughout these regulations.
5.30. Private Sewage Disposal System
As defined by RSA §485-A:2 – XI, this term shall refer to any private sewage disposal or treatment system, other than a municipally owned and operated system.
5.31. Public Water Systems
As defined by RSA §485:1 – XV, this term shall mean a system for the provision to the public of piped water for human consumption, if such system has at least 15-service connections or regularly serves an average of at least 25-individuals daily at least 60-days out of the year.
5.32. Seasonal High Water Table
This term refers to the upper limit of the groundwater in a soil that becomes seasonally saturated with water.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
5-6
5.33. Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP)
A plan to describe a process whereby a facility thoroughly evaluates potential pollutant sources at a site and selects and implements appropriate measures designed to prevent or control the discharge of pollutants in storm water runoff.
5.34. Street
As set forth in RSA §672:13, street means, relates to, and includes, street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, alley, viaduct, highway, freeway, and other ways. The term “street” shall also apply to areas on any plans designated as streets, roads, and lanes, etc. as defined in RSA §674:41. A Street is a public or private way intended to provide vehicular movement, and which may or may not be continued at a later date.
5.35. Subdivision
As set forth in RSA §672:14, subdivision means the division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two or more lots, plats, sites, or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, rent, lease, or building development. The term includes re-subdivision, and when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing, or to the land or territory subdivided. The division of a parcel of land held in common and subsequently divided into parts among several owners shall be deemed a subdivision.
5.36. Water Quality Volume (WQV)
Water Quality Volume means the volume of water equivalent to the volume of runoff attributable to the first one inch of rainfall.
5.37. Wetlands
Wetlands are areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal conditions do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. They include, but are not limited to, swamps, bogs, marshes, ponds, lakes, and all such areas as included in the jurisdictional definition of the New Hampshire Wetlands Bureau Administrative Rules, Chapter Wt 100, as subsequently amended.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
6-1
SECTION 6. PROCEDURE
6.1. Pre-Application Review
There are two levels of Pre-Application Review: the Preliminary Conceptual Consultation and the Design Review Stage.
6.1.1. Preliminary Conceptual Consultation
1. In accordance with RSA §676:4, II – (a), an individual who anticipates submitting a formal application for Site Plan/Subdivision approval has the option of informally consulting with the Board prior to formal submission.
2. Purpose: The purpose of a preliminary consultation is to familiarize the Board with the basic concept of the proposed Site Plan/Subdivision. The consultation can also help to acquaint the potential applicant with the formal application process and particular information that the Board may request.
3. Limits of the Review:
a) The Board shall conduct the preliminary conceptual consultation at a regularly scheduled meeting of the Board. The applicant will make a presentation defining the general scope and concept of the Site Plan/Subdivision and/or development/redevelopment and how the land will be divided and/or used.
b) Such consultation shall not bind either the applicant or the Board, and statements made by the Board members shall not be the basis for disqualifying said members or invalidating any action taken. The Board and the applicant may discuss proposals in conceptual form only and in general terms such as desirability of types of development and proposals under the Town’s Master Plan. Neither the applicant nor the Board shall be bound by the discussions.
4. Project Description: In order to facilitate discussion, the potential applicant is requested to prepare a base map of the site to be developed or property to be subdivided. The map shall be drawn to scale, and may be drawn in pencil. The proposed site or subdivision development shall be drawn on the base map. Dimensions may be approximate. The data may be tentative, but all information shall be sufficiently clear to illustrate all conditions on the proposed site and/or subdivision development of the property.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
6-2
5. The following information or data is requested for a preliminary conceptual consultation with the Board:
a) General description of existing conditions on the site including characteristics of the land, topography, vegetation, and similar features;
b) General description of available public and private facilities and utilities both on-site and in close proximity to the site; c) A general description of the development plan for the site and of the lots to be created, including their size and dimensions, and a general use plan for the site; and
d) A topographic map of the site showing in sketch form the proposed layout of streets, lots, and other features in relation to existing conditions and/or the location of other site development features both natural and man-made.
6.1.2. Design Review Phase
In accordance with RSA §676:4, II – (b), the Board and/or the Technical Review Committee may engage in non-binding discussions with the applicant beyond conceptual and general discussions which involve more specific site design and engineering details; provided, however, that the design review phase may proceed only after identification of and notice to abutters and the general public as required by RSA §676:4, I – (d). Statements made by the Board members shall not be the basis for disqualifying said members or invalidating any action taken.
6.2. Formal Application Submission
Applications for Site Plan/Subdivision approval or Lot Line Adjustment shall be filed with the Planning Department and shall fulfill all the requirements of these regulations. An application shall be on forms available from the Planning Department Office. A completed application shall be submitted to, and accepted by, the Board only at a public hearing for which notice has been given to the applicant, abutters, and the general public. Only completed applications will be placed on the Board’s agenda in accordance with the “Planning Board’s Schedule of Deadlines and Public Hearings”.
All application documents, plans, supporting documentation and other materials shall also be provided in digital Portable Document Format (PDF) on compact disc, DVD or flash drive. Digital files shall be complete
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
6-3
and exact copies of the corresponding paper submittals (e.g. plans shall be at the same scale and sheet size as the paper copies). Applicants may submit additional digital files to assist in presentations at public hearings, but such additional files shall not be considered part of the application unless corresponding paper documents are also provided.
6.3. Public Hearing and Notices
6.3.1. Before acting on a completed site plan review, subdivision, or lot line adjustment application, the Board shall hold a public hearing to discuss the merits of said application. A public hearing shall not be required when the Board disapproves an application based upon an applicant’s failure to supply information required by these regulations, including abutter’s identification; or failure to meet reasonable deadlines established by the Board; or failure to pay costs of notice or other fees required by the Board. In accordance with RSA §676:4, I, (e), requiring notice to the general public shall not be required when the Board is considering or acting upon:
1. Minor lot line adjustments or boundary agreements that do not create buildable lots. However, even for these application, notice to abutters and holders of conservation, preservation, or agricultural preservation restrictions shall be given prior to approval of the application. Any abutter or holders of conservation, preservation, or agricultural preservation restrictions may be heard on the application upon their request; or
2. Disapprovals of applications based upon failure of the applicant to supply information required by these regulations. This information includes identification of abutters, or holders of conservation, preservation, or agricultural preservation restrictions. Additionally, failure to meet reasonable deadlines established by the Board; or failure to pay costs of notice or other fees required by the Board, is grounds for disapproval.
6.3.2. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to supply the names and addresses of all abutters, and every engineer, architect, land surveyor, or soil scientist whose professional seal appears on any plat submitted to the Board upon filing an application with the Planning Department. Abutters and the applicant shall be notified by the Planning Department, in the form of a certified mailing, of
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
6-4
the date upon which the application will be formally submitted for acceptance by the Board. Notice shall be mailed at least 10-days prior to consideration of the application by the Board. Notice to the general public will be given at the same time by advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town of Exeter and shall be posted in at least two public places. All costs of notices, whether mailed, posted, or published, shall be paid in advance by the applicant, in accordance with RSA §674:44, V and RSA §676:4, I (d).
6.4. Regional Notice
In accordance with RSA §36:54 – 58, applications that might have a regional impact shall require additional notice, and by State law, require additional time for public notice.
6.4.1. Determination of potential regional impact shall not apply to Minor Site Plan, Minor Subdivision, or Lot Line Adjustment applications.
6.4.2. Determination of potential regional impact shall be found only for applications which meet any of the following impacts:
1. Any portion of the property is located within 1,000-feet of the Town of Exeter border;
2. The proposal involves 100,000-square-feet or more of new retail floor space;
3. High intensity traffic impact on regional transportation networks;
4. Anticipated emissions such as light, noise, smoke, odors, or particles;
5. Proximity to aquifers or surface waters which transcend municipal boundaries; or
6. Shared facilities such as schools and solid waste disposal facilities.
6.4.3. The TRC, as established in Section 6.5 Technical Review Committee (TRC), shall review each application and make a recommendation to the Board as to the requirement for Regional Notice.
6.4.4. Notice shall be sent by certified mail a minimum of 14-days in advance of the scheduled public hearing to the Rockingham Planning Commission and to each town reasonably likely to be
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
6-5
affected, with each governmental entity to be considered an abutter for purposes of computing public notice fees.
6.5. Technical Review Committee (TRC)
6.5.1. A “Technical Review Committee” (TRC) is hereby established to assist the Board in reviewing Site Plan / Subdivision applications and plans. The TRC shall consist of representatives from: the Planning Department, Department of Public Works, Fire Department, and Conservation Commission. Representatives from other Town agencies may be requested to serve on the TRC as required on a case-by-case basis. The Chairman of the TRC shall be the Town Planner or his/her designated representative. The Chairman of the TRC is authorized to determine the scope of the review and whether a formal meeting of the TRC is necessary.
6.5.2. The TRC will review all site plans/subdivision plans to determine their conformance with these regulations and any other applicable ordinances and regulations including, but not limited to, the Town’s Zoning Ordinance, the Town’s Master Plan, and the document entitled Standard Specifications for Construction of Public Utilities in Exeter, New Hampshire (hereafter referred to as the “Public Works Specifications”).
6.5.3. When deemed necessary by the chairman of the TRC, additional meetings of the TRC may be scheduled to ensure all aspects of a proposed project are properly analyzed prior to submittal of recommendations to the Board.
6.5.4. The TRC, through its Chairman, shall provide the Board with a memorandum prior to the public hearing, summarizing its review of the Site Plan/Subdivision application and plans, along with a recommendation to the Board for approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval.
6.6. Minor Site Plan Review, Minor Subdivision, and Lot Line Adjustment Procedures
Per RSA §674:43, §674:44, §676:4, the Exeter Planning Board hereby adopts the following procedures for minor site plan review, minor subdivision, and lot line adjustment applications:
6.6.1. When Permitted:
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
6-6
1. Minor site plan review shall be permitted under the following conditions:
a) Site development involving less than a 10% increase in existing lot coverage. An increase in existing lot coverage will be determined by the following formula:
Percent Increase in Lot Coverage = (Proposed Additional Ground Floor Area + Proposed Additional Paved Area) divided by (Existing Ground Floor Area + Existing Paved Area) times 100.
b) Site development (other than structural additions and paving) involving the disturbance of less than 10% of the area of existing lot coverage.
2. Minor subdivision application shall be permitted when the division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land would result in three or fewer building lots, and the application does not require the installation of any new streets or roads (public or private) or the extension of any municipally owned utilities (sewer and water).
3. Lot line adjustments shall always follow the procedures in
6.6.2.
6.6.2. Procedure: Minor site plan review, minor subdivision, or lot line adjustment applications may be submitted, reviewed and approved at one or more Board hearings subject to the following requirements:
1. Submission: An application for minor site plan review, minor subdivision, or lot line adjustment approval shall be submitted in the same manner prescribed in Section 6.2 Formal Application Submission of these regulations.
2. Public Hearing and Notices: See Section 6.3 Public Hearing and Notices of these regulations.
3. Decision of the Board: With the exception of the expedited review procedures and limited exhibits outlined in this section, the Board shall follow the same decision making procedures specified for a regular site plan review or subdivision application.
4. Required Exhibits: The following items shall be shown on the minor site review plan, minor subdivision plan, or lot line adjustment plan:
a) The name and address of the property owner, authorized agent, the person or firm preparing the plan, and the
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
6-7
person or firm preparing any other data to be included in the plan.
b) Title of the site plan, subdivision or lot line adjustment, including Planning Board Case Number.
c) Scale, north arrow, and date prepared.
d) Location of the land/site under consideration together with the names and address of all owners of record of abutting properties and their existing use.
e) Tax map reference for the land/site under consideration, together with those of abutting properties.
f) Zoning (including overlay) district references.
g) A vicinity sketch showing the location of the land/site in relation to the surrounding public street system and other pertinent location features within a distance of 1,000-feet.
h) For minor site plan review only, a description of the existing site and proposed changes thereto, including, but not limited to, buildings and accessory structures, parking and loading areas, signage, lighting, landscaping, and the amount of land to be disturbed.
i) If deemed necessary by the Town Planner, natural features including watercourses and water bodies, tree lines, and other significant vegetative cover, topographic features and any other environmental features which are significant to the site plan review or subdivision design process.
j) If deemed necessary by the Town Planner, existing contours at intervals not to exceed 2-feet with spot elevations provided when the grade is less than 5%. All datum provided shall reference the latest applicable US Coast and Geodetic Survey datum and should be noted on the plan.
k) If deemed necessary by the Town Planner for proposed lots not served by municipal water and sewer utilities, a High Intensity Soil Survey (HISS) of the entire site, or portion thereof. Such soil surveys shall be prepared and stamped by a certified soil scientist in accordance with the standards established by the Rockingham County Conservation District. Any cover letters or explanatory data provided by the certified soil scientist shall also be submitted.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
6-8
l) State and federal jurisdictional wetlands, including delineation of required setbacks.
m) A note as follows: “The landowner is responsible for complying with all applicable local, State, and Federal wetlands regulations, including any permitting and setback requirements required under these regulations.”
n) Surveyed exterior property lines including angles and bearings, distances, monument locations, and size of the entire parcel. A professional land surveyor licensed in New Hampshire must attest to said plan.
o) For minor site plans only, plans are not required to be prepared by a professional engineer or licensed surveyor unless deemed essential by the Town Planner or the TRC.
p) For minor subdivisions and lot line adjustments only, the locations, dimensions, and areas of all existing and proposed lots.
q) The lines of existing abutting streets and driveways locations within 100-feet of the site.
r) The location, elevation, and layout of existing catch basins and other surface drainage features.
s) The footprint location of all existing structures on the site and approximate location of structures within 100-feet of the site.
t) The size and location of all existing public and private utilities.
u) The location of all existing and proposed easements and other encumbrances.
v) All floodplain information, including contours of the 100year flood elevation, based upon the Flood Insurance Rate Map for Exeter, as prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, dated May 17, 1982.
w) The location of all test pits and the 4,000-square-foot septic reserve areas for each newly created lot, if applicable.
x) The location and dimensions of all property proposed to be set aside for green space, parks, playgrounds, or other public or private reservations. The plan shall describe the purpose of the dedications or reservations, and the accompanying conditions thereof (if any).
y) A notation shall be included which explains the intended purpose of the subdivision. Include the identification and
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
6-9
location of all parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to public use and the conditions of such dedications, and a copy of such private deed restriction as are intended to cover part of all of the tract.
z) Newly created lots shall be consecutively numbered or lettered in alphabetical order. Street address numbers shall be assigned in accordance with Section 9.17 Streets of these regulations. aa) The following notations shall also be shown:
Explanation of proposed drainage easements, if any
Explanation of proposed utility easement, if any
Explanation of proposed site easement, if any Explanation of proposed reservations, if any
Signature block for Board approval as follows:
Town of Exeter Planning Board
_____________________ _____
Chairman Date
6.7. Recording Procedure
6.7.1. Site Plans: The Board at its discretion may require the site plan to be filed by the Town with the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds once said plan is approved or approved with conditions. Per RSA §674:44, V, the cost of said filing is considered an administrative expense, and shall be borne by the applicant. The filing fee will be determined by the Registry at the date of filing.
6.7.2. Subdivision and Lot Line Adjustment Plans: All subdivision and lot line adjustment plans, whether approved or approved with conditions, shall be filed by the Town with the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds. Per RSA §676:4, I (g), the cost of said filing is considered an administrative expense, and shall be borne by the applicant. The filing fee will be determined by the Registry at the date of filing.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
6-10
6.8. Revocation of Approval
6.8.1. A site plan, subdivision plan, or lot line adjustment which has been filed with the appropriate recording official under RSA §674:37 may not be revoked, in whole or in part, by the Board, except pursuant to RSA §676:4-a. Reasons for revocation may include:
1. Request of an applicant, or agreement with an applicant;
2. When an applicant performs work or established a use of land which fails to comply with the approved application;
3. When an applicant fails to perform any condition of approval within a reasonable time specified in the approval;
4. When the time periods specified in RSA §674:39 have elapsed without any vesting of rights, and the plan or other approval no longer conforms to applicable ordinances or regulations; or
5. When the applicant has failed to provide for the continuation of adequate security as provided by RSA §674:36 and RSA §674:44 until such time as the work secured thereby has been completed.
6.8.2. A revocation of approval shall follow the procedures established by RSA §676:4-a.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
7-1
SECTION 7. PLAN REQUIREMENTS
7.1. Scope of Review
Any site plan or subdivision plan, whether it covers the entire site or just a building addition, must, by necessity, incorporate the entire parcel within the review. Not to do so may cause approval of a use or situation, which does not conform to the Zoning Ordinance and/or other applicable ordinances and regulations. The Board does not have the authority to, and may not, create such uses or situations.
7.2. Professional Standards
7.2.1. Site plans shall be prepared and stamped by a registered professional engineer licensed in New Hampshire. This requirement shall apply to all site plans showing roadways, utilities, bridges and culverts, plus drainage and other construction plans. In specific cases, the Board may waive this requirement when deemed appropriate. A land surveyor licensed in the State of New Hampshire shall stamp boundary surveys.
7.2.2. A land surveyor licensed in the State of New Hampshire shall stamp subdivision plans. Plans of roadway, utilities, bridges and culverts, drainage, and other construction plans shall be prepared and stamped by a registered professional engineer licensed in the State of New Hampshire.
7.3. Sheet size
Plans drawn in ink shall be presented on one of the following sheet sizes subject to approval by the TRC. Only one sheet size shall be used for preparing all plans within a single application.
? 11" x 17"
? 17" x 22"
? 22" x 34"
? 24" x 36"
7.4. Existing Site Conditions Plan
Submission of this plan will not be applicable in all cases. The applicability of such a plan will be considered by the TRC during its review process as outlined in Section 6.5 Technical Review Committee (TRC) of these regulations. The purpose of this plan is to provide general information on the site, its existing conditions, and to provide the
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
7-2
base data from which the site plan or subdivision will be designed. The plan shall show the following:
7.4.1. Names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the owner, applicant, and person(s) or firm(s) preparing the plan.
7.4.2. Location of the site under consideration, together with the current names and addresses of owners of record, of abutting properties and their existing land use.
7.4.3. Title, date, north arrow, scale, and Planning Board Case Number.
7.4.4. Tax map reference for the site under consideration, together with those of abutting properties.
7.4.5. Zoning (including overlay) district references.
7.4.6. A vicinity sketch or aerial photo showing the location of the
land/site in relation to the surrounding public street system and other pertinent location features within a distance of 2,000-feet, or larger area if deemed necessary by the Town Planner.
7.4.7. Natural features including watercourses and water bodies,
tree lines, significant trees (20-inches or greater in diameter at breast height) and other significant vegetative cover, topographic features, and any other environmental features that are important to the site design process. The identification of significant trees as defined above shall be limited to the areas proposed for disturbance. Significant trees proposed for removal shall be labeled as such on the Existing Conditions Plan and significant trees to remain shall be identified on the Site or Subdivision Plan.
7.4.8. Man-made features such as, but not limited to, existing roads,
structures, and stonewalls. The plan shall also indicate which features are to be retained and which are to be removed or altered.
7.4.9. Existing contours at intervals not to exceed 2-feet with spot elevations provided when the grade is less than 5%. All
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
7-3
datum provided shall reference the latest applicable US Coast and Geodetic Survey datum and should be noted on the plan.
7.4.10. A High Intensity Soil Survey (HISS) of the entire site, or
appropriate portion thereof. Such soil surveys shall be prepared by a certified soil scientist in accordance with the standards established by the Rockingham County Conservation District. Any cover letters or explanatory data provided by the certified soil scientist shall also be submitted.
7.4.11. State and Federally designated wetlands, setback information, total wetlands proposed to be filled, other pertinent information and the following wetlands note: “The landowner is responsible for complying with all applicable local, state, and federal wetlands regulations, including any permitting and setback requirements required under these regulations.”
7.4.12. Surveyed property lines including angles and bearings, distances, monument locations, and size of the entire parcel. A professional land surveyor licensed in New Hampshire must attest to said plan.
7.4.13. The lines of existing abutting streets and driveway locations within 200-feet of the site.
7.4.14. The location, elevation, and layout of existing catch basins and other surface drainage features.
7.4.15. The shape, size, height, location, and use of all existing structures on the site and approximate location of structures within 200-feet of the site.
7.4.16. The size and location of all existing public and private utilities, including off-site utilities to which connection is planned.
7.4.17. The location of all existing easements, rights-of-way, and other encumbrances.
7.4.18. All floodplain information, including the contours of the 100-
year flood elevation, based upon the Flood Insurance Rate Map for Exeter, as prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, dated May 17, 1982.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
7-4
7.4.19. All other features which would fully explain the existing conditions of the site.
7.4.20. Name of the site plan or subdivision.
7.5. Proposed Site Conditions Plan (Pertains to Site Plans Only)
The purpose of this plan is to illustrate and fully explain the proposed changes taking place within the site. The proposed site conditions plan shall depict the following:
7.5.1. Proposed grades and topographic contours at intervals not to exceed 2-feet with spot elevations where grade is less than 5%. All datum provided shall reference the latest applicable US Coast and Geodetic Survey datum and should be noted on the plan.
7.5.2. The location and layout of proposed drainage systems and structures including elevations for catch basins.
7.5.3. The shape, size, height, and location of all proposed structures, including expansion of existing structures on the site and first floor elevation(s). Building elevation(s) and a rendering of the proposed structure(s).
7.5.4. High Intensity Soil Survey (HISS) information for the site,
including the total area of wetlands proposed to be filled.
7.5.5. State and Federally designated wetlands, setback information, total wetlands proposed to be filled, other pertinent information and the following wetlands note: “The landowner is responsible for complying with all applicable local, state, and federal wetlands regulations, including any permitting and setback requirements required under these regulations.”
7.5.6. Location and timing patterns of proposed traffic control devices.
7.5.7. The location, width, curbing and paving of all existing and proposed streets, street rights-of-way, easements, alleys, driveways, sidewalks and other public ways. The plan shall indicate the direction of travel for one-way streets. See Section 9.14 – Roadways, Access Points, and Fire Lanes for further guidance.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
7-5
7.5.8. The location, size and layout of off-street parking, including loading zones. The plan shall indicate the calculations used to determine the number of parking spaces required and provided. See Section 9.13 – Parking Areas for further guidance.
7.5.9. The size and location of all proposed public and private utilities, including but not limited to: water lines, sewage disposal facilities, gas lines, power lines, telephone lines, cable lines, fire alarm connection, and other utilities.
7.5.10. The location, type, and size of all proposed landscaping, screening, green space, and open space areas.
7.5.11. The location and type of all site lighting, including the cone(s) of illumination to a measurement of 0.5-foot-candle.
7.5.12. The location, size, and exterior design of all proposed signs to be located on the site.
7.5.13. The type and location of all solid waste disposal facilities and accompanying screening.
7.5.14. Location of proposed on-site snow storage.
7.5.15. Location and description of all existing and proposed easement(s) and/or right-of-way.
7.5.16. A note indicating that: “All water, sewer, road (including
parking lot), and drainage work shall be constructed in accordance with Section 9.3 Stormwater Management Standards, Stormwater Management Plan, Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan, and Erosion and Sediment Control Standards and the Standard Specifications for
Construction of Public Utilities in Exeter, New Hampshire”. See Section 9.14 Roadways, Access Points, and Fire Lanes and Section 9.13 Parking Areas for exceptions.
7.5.17. Signature block for Board approval as follows:
Town of Exeter Planning Board
______________________ _____
Chairman Date
7.6. Subdivision Layout Plan (Pertains to Subdivisions Only)
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
7-6
The purpose of this plan is to illustrate the layout of the subdivision lots, rights-of-way, easements, and other uses of land within the subdivision. It shall be prepared on reproducible mylar and be suitable for filing with the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds. The plan shall depict the following:
7.6.1. Names, addresses, and telephone numbers of: the owner, applicant, and person(s) or firm(s) preparing the plan (including engineer, architect, or land surveyor).
7.6.2. Name of the subdivision.
7.6.3. Location of the land/site together with the names and address of all owners of record of abutting properties.
7.6.4. Title, date, north arrow, scale, and Planning Board Case Number.
7.6.5. Tax map reference for land/site under consideration with those of abutting properties.
7.6.6. Zoning (including overlay) district references.
7.6.7. The location and dimensions of all boundary lines of the
property to be expressed in feet and decimals of a foot.
7.6.8. The location and width of all existing and proposed streets, street rights-of-way, sidewalks, easements, alleys, and other public ways.
7.6.9. The locations, dimensions, and areas of all proposed lots.
7.6.10. The location of all test pits and the 4,000-square-foot septic reserve areas for each newly created lot, if applicable.
7.6.11. High Intensity Soil Survey (HISS) information for the site,
including the total area of wetlands proposed to be filled.
7.6.12. State and Federally designated wetlands, setback information, total wetlands proposed to be filled, other pertinent information and the following wetlands note: “The landowner is responsible for complying with all applicable local, state, and federal wetlands regulations, including any permitting and setback requirements required under these regulations.”
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
7-7
7.6.13. All floodplain information, including contours of the 100-year flood elevation, based upon the Flood Insurance Rate Map for Exeter, as prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, dated May 17, 1982.
7.6.14. Sufficient data acceptable to the Board to determine the location, bearing, and length of all lines; sufficient data to be able to reproduce such lines upon the ground; and the location of all proposed monuments.
7.6.15. The location and dimensions of all property proposed to be set aside for green space, parks, playgrounds, or other public or private reservations. The plan shall describe the purpose of the dedications or reservations, and the accompanying conditions thereof (if any).
7.6.16. A notation shall be included which explains the intended
purpose of the subdivision. Indication and location of all parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to public use and the conditions of such dedications, and a copy of such private deed restriction as are intended to cover part or all of the tract.
7.6.17. Newly created lots shall be consecutively numbered or lettered in alphabetical order. Street address numbers shall be assigned in accordance with Section 9.17 Streets of these regulations.
7.6.18. The following notations shall also be shown:
Explanation of proposed drainage easements, if any
Explanation of proposed utility easement, if any
Explanation of proposed site easement, if any
Explanation of proposed reservations, if any
Signature block for Board approval as follows:
Town of Exeter Planning Board
______________________ _____ Chairman Date
7.6.19. A note indicating that: “All water, sewer, road (including
parking lot), and drainage work shall be constructed in accordance with Section 9.3 Stormwater Management Standards, Stormwater Management Plan, Stormwater
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
7-8
Pollution Prevention Plan, and Erosion and Sediment Control Standards and the Standard Specifications for Construction of Public Utilities in Exeter, New Hampshire”. See Section 9.14 Roadways, Access Points and Fire Lanes and Section 9.13 Parking Areas for exceptions.
7.7. Construction Plan
Submission of this plan will not be applicable in all cases. The applicability of such a plan will be considered by the TRC during its review process as outlined in Section 6.5 Technical Review Committee (TRC) of these regulations. The purpose of this plan is to provide detailed information and layout of the improvements (if any are required) to be constructed as part of the site’s development. Please provide separate detail sheets as necessary to show all required information.
The plan shall contain the following items:
7.7.1. Profiles showing existing and proposed elevations along centerline of all roads. Where a proposed road intersects an existing road(s), the elevation along the centerline of the existing road(s) within 300-feet of the intersection, shall be shown on the plan. Include radii of all curves, lengths of tangents, and central angles on all streets.
7.7.2. Plans and profiles showing the locations and typical cross-sections of street pavements including curbs & gutters; sidewalks; drainage easements; rights-of-way; manholes; catch basins; locations of street trees; street lighting equipment (including cones of illumination); street signs; location, size & invert elevations of existing and proposed sanitary sewers, storm water drains, and fire hydrants; connections to any existing or proposed utility systems; and exact location and size of all water, gas, or other underground utilities or structures.
7.7.3. Location, size, elevation, and other appropriate description of any existing facilities or utilities, including, but not limited to, existing streets, septic disposal facilities, sewers, drains, water mains, wells, easements, water bodies, watercourses, and other pertinent features such as surface drainage areas, swamps, railroads, and buildings at the point of connection to proposed facilities and utilities within the subject site. The water elevations of adjoining water bodies or watercourses at the date of the survey, and the approximate high and low water elevations of
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
7-9
such water bodies and watercourses shall also be shown on the plan.
7.7.4. Topography at the same scale as the Existing Site Conditions Plan with a contour interval of 2-feet referred to sea-level datum. All datum provided shall reference the latest applicable US Coast and Geodetic Survey datum and should be noted on the plan.
7.7.5. A High Intensity Soil Survey (HISS) information for all areas of construction.
7.7.6. State and Federal wetlands information for all areas of construction.
7.7.7. A note indicating that: “All water, sewer, road (including parking lot) and drainage work shall be constructed in accordance with Section 9.3 Stormwater Management Standards, Stormwater Management Plan, Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan, and Erosion and Sediment Control Standards and the Standard Specifications for Construction of Public Utilities in Exeter, New Hampshire”. See Section 9.14 Roadways, Access Points, and Fire Lanes and Section 9.13 Parking Areas for exceptions.
7.7.8. All floodplain information, including contours of the 100-year flood elevation, based upon the Flood Insurance Rate Map for Exeter, as prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, dated May 17, 1982.
7.8. Utilities Plan
Submission of this plan will not be applicable in all cases. The applicability of such a plan will be considered by the TRC during its review process as outlined in Section 6.5 Technical Review Committee (TRC) of these regulations. The purpose of this plan is to clearly indicate the scope and layout of all proposed utilities for the site. In conjunction with submission of the Utilities Plan, the applicant shall also submit any accompanying design calculations and analysis that further explain the proposed installation of utilities. The Utilities Plan shall address the following items:
1. Road layout
2. Water
3. Sewer
4. Pump stations
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
7-10
5. Storm water drains
6. Fire hydrants and fire alarm boxes (at location(s) to be determined by the Fire Department)
7. Street lighting
8. Telephone
9. Cable television
10. Natural gas lines
11. Electric
12. Other transmission lines
7.9. Grading, Drainage, and Erosion & Sediment Control Plan
7.9.1. Submission of such a plan will not be applicable in all cases. The applicability of such a plan will be considered by the TRC during its review process as outlined in Section 6.5 Technical Review Committee (TRC) of these regulations. The applicant shall submit such plans to the Board for any tract of land being developed or subdivided where one or more of the following conditions are proposed:
1. A cumulative disturbed area exceeding 10,000-square-feet, or as directed by the TRC.
2. Construction of a street or road.
3. Disturbed areas of any size within 50-feet of a stream, bog, water body, or poorly or very poorly drained soils; disturbed areas exceeding 2,000-square-feet in highly erodible soils; or disturbed areas containing slope lengths exceeding 25-feet on slopes greater than 15%.
7.9.2. Standard agricultural and timber harvesting practices are exempt from these provisions when land disturbance is less than one acre and not part of a larger common plan of development or sale that would disturb one acre or more. Existing agricultural operations are exempt from these provisions.
7.9.3. The Board may waiver the requirement for all or part of a grading, drainage, and erosion & sediment control plan if it determines that a plan is unnecessary because of the size, character, and/or natural conditions of a site. All requests for waivers and action thereon shall be made in accordance with Section 13 Waivers of these regulations.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
7-11
7.9.4. A description of design standards, plan requirements, and other relevant criteria can be found in Section 9.3 Stormwater Management Standards, Stormwater Management Plan, Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan, and Erosion and Sediment Control Standards of these regulations. The design standards shall apply to all development projects, regardless of size and/or scope.
7.10. Landscaping Plan
Submission of such a plan will not be applicable in all cases. The applicability of such a plan will be considered by the TRC during its review process as outlined in Section 6.5 Technical Review Committee (TRC) of these regulations. All landscaping plans shall be prepared in accordance with the design standards as outlined in Section 9.7 Landscaping and Screening of these regulations.
7.11. Drainage Improvements and Storm Water Management Plan
Submission of such a plan will not be applicable in all cases. The applicability of such a plan will be considered by the TRC during its review process as outlined in Section 6.5 Technical Review Committee (TRC) of these regulations. All storm water management plans shall be prepared in accordance with the design standards as outlined in Section 9.3 Stormwater Management Standards, Stormwater Management Plan, Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan, and Erosion and Sediment Control Standards of these regulations.
7.12. Natural Resources Plan
Submission of such a plan will not be applicable in all cases. The applicability of such a plan will be considered by the TRC during its review process as outlined in Section 6.5 Technical Review Committee (TRC) of these regulations. All natural resources plans shall be prepared in accordance with the design standards as outlined in Section 9.8 Natural Resources of these regulations.
7.13. Yield Plan (Pertains to Subdivisions Only)
A Yield Plan is designed to provide the applicant and the Board with information regarding the available and viable building development that is feasible under a conventional design. The Yield Plan shall be proposed by the applicant’s engineer to ensure the information is valid and complete. The Yield Plan shall comply with conventional
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
7-12
subdivision regulations and shall not require a variance from existing zoning ordinances in order to achieve the layout supporting the proposed density. The Yield Plan shall include:
7.13.1. Topography at the required 2-foot interval; wetlands and their appropriate buffers; 100-year floodplain; all rivers, water courses including their tributaries, and contiguous wetlands and the appropriate setbacks; tree lines; and any other pertinent natural features.
7.13.2. Manmade features including roads, trails, stone walls, and existing structures.
7.13.3. Easements and right-of-ways.
7.13.4. Abutting streets, lot lines, and structures within 200-feet.
7.13.5. Public and private utilities.
7.13.6. Potential lots including their dimensions, lot sizes, and applicable setbacks; proposed sewer, water, and roadways; and any other features requested by the Board to ensure the Yield Plan produces a viable development.
7.13.7. If an applicant desires, a Yield Plan may be submitted to the
Board at a Design Review Phase meeting in accordance with
Section 6.1.2 Design Review Phase of these regulations. The Board may vote to accept the Yield Plan concept only after a public hearing as required for a Design Review Phase meeting.
7.14. Other Required Studies and/or Exhibits
In an effort to determine the completeness of a site plan or subdivision application and its conformity to all applicable ordinances and regulations, the TRC may request an applicant to submit studies and/or exhibits above and beyond those outlined in Section 7.4 Existing Site Conditions Plan through 7.13 Yield Plan. In addition, the Board may also request the submission of studies and/or exhibits above and beyond those outlined in Section 7.4 Existing Site Conditions Plan through 7.13 Yield Plan as part of their consideration of a complete site plan or subdivision application. In accordance with RSA §674:44,V and 676:4,I(g), the Board may require that the cost of preparing and reviewing such studies and/or exhibits be borne by the applicant.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
7-13
Examples of such studies and/or exhibits include, but are not limited to the following:
7.14.1. A hydrogeologic study in accordance with Section 9.21 Sewage Disposal of these regulations, if applicable.
7.14.2. A sewer and water availability study.
7.14.3. Environmental Impact Assessment: An environmental Impact Assessment may be required when necessary to evaluate the effects of the proposed development on existing wetland natural resources.
7.14.4. Traffic Impact Analysis: All proposed non-residential, multifamily, commercial, industrial, or residential development shall be reviewed by the Board to ascertain that adequate provisions have been made by the owner or his/her agent for traffic safety. To facilitate this review, the applicant may be required to provide a traffic impact analysis when deemed necessary by the Board due to the size, location, or any other traffic-generating characteristic of the development. Traffic impact studies analyses shall address each of the following items:
1. Traffic circulation, access & egress, adequacy of adjacent streets & intersections, entrances & exits, traffic flow, sight distances, accident statistics, curb cuts, turning lanes, and existing or recommended traffic signalization.
2. Pedestrian safety, circulation, access, and egress.
3. Off-street parking and loading.
a) Emergency vehicle access.
4. Off-site improvements necessitated by the development.
7.14.5. Economic Impact Analysis: An economic impact analysis may be required when necessary to evaluate the impact of the proposed development on the existing property values, existing tax revenues, existing neighborhood social and economic conditions, the attraction of new business and industry, and the encouragement of conditions which make our community a pleasant place to live and work.
7.14.6. A School enrollment impact study:
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
7-14
7.14.7. Other Studies and/or Exhibits: Any other plans or studies and/or exhibits which the Board may reasonably request as necessary in order to make an informed decision on the applicant’s proposal.
7.15. Items Required for Final Approval
The Board will not give final approval to a site plan or subdivision application until the following items, if applicable, have been submitted and reviewed by the Board or its designated agent:
7.15.1. Protective covenants where the applicant proposes to regulate land use within the development or otherwise protect the proposed development.
7.15.2. Preparation and execution of a “Site Plan Review Agreement” or “Subdivision Agreement” (using the format approved by the Board) which specifies the terms and understandings between the Board and the applicant with respect to the approval granted by the Board. A Site Plan Review Agreement or Subdivision Agreement will not be required for a minor site plan, minor subdivision, or a lot line adjustment unless deemed appropriate by the Board.
7.15.3. For site plan proposals that involve the construction of a roadway, monumentation shall be installed as set forth in Section 9.25 Monuments and Benchmarks of these regulations.
7.15.4. For subdivisions that do not involve the construction of a roadway, and for lot line adjustments, all monumentation shall be in place prior to final Board signature of the plan, in accordance with Section 9.25 Monuments and Benchmarks of these regulations. The applicant’s surveyor must complete the form entitled “Certificate of Monumentation Installation Form” and have it delivered to the Planning Department office. Copies of said form can be obtained from the Planning Department office.
7.15.5. For subdivisions which involve the construction of a roadway, monumentation shall be installed as part of the installation or other required improvements as set forth in Section 9.25 Monuments and Benchmarks of these regulations.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
7-15
7.15.6. Any required performance guarantee, and deposit of inspection fee.
7.15.7. All administrative, engineering review, recording, and public notice fees.
7.15.8. Any required federal, State, or local approvals and/or permits.
7.15.9. Copy of the Notice of Intent (NOI). Note: A complete and accurate NOI must be submitted to the EPA Regional Office two days prior to commencement of any work on site.
7.15.10. Copy of the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP). Note: (See Section 9.3.5) The Applicant shall provide the Town with three copies of the SWPPP and also ensure that one copy remains onsite.
7.15.11 Copy of an Erosion and Sediment Control Plan which shall be developed in accordance with the requirements outlined in Section 9.3.6.
7.15.12. A long-Term Inspection & Maintenance Manual shall be developed and implemented in accordance with the requirements outlined in Section 9.5.2.
7.15.13. Two copies of a maintenance manual for all stormwater control facilities developed by the applicant’s engineer and signed by the owner of the facilities.
7.15.14. Completed Town of Exeter Land Use Development Tracking Form, most recently revised version, utilizing the companion instructions and definitions OR the online Pollution Tracking and Accounting Pilot Project (PTAPP) portal.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
8-1
SECTION 8. GENERAL STANDARDS
8.1. Overview
An applicant shall adhere to the following general principles when designing a site plan for land and laying out a proposed subdivision development within the Town of Exeter. These principles and requirements shall be construed as the minimum requirements. The Board, at its discretion, may require higher standards in individual cases, or may waive certain requirements for good cause in accordance with the procedures outlined in these regulations.
8.2. Conformity with Master Plan, Zoning Ordinance, Official Zoning Map, and These Regulations
The site or subdivision plan shall be in harmony and consistent with the Town’s Master Plan goals and objectives, Zoning Ordinance and Official Zoning Map, and these Regulations.
8.3. Conformity to Other Laws
Site and subdivision plans shall conform to all regulations of the Board, and other applicable Town by-laws, ordinances, regulations, and statutes of the local, State, and federal governments.
8.4. Character of Land
Land unsuitable for development due to the presence of poorly drained soils, flood hazard, steep slopes, or other conditions constituting a danger to health, safety, or the environment shall not be approved for development unless the applicant can present satisfactory evidence or data to the Board establishing the methods which will be used to overcome such conditions and the adequacy of the method. Land with inadequate capacity for sanitary sewage disposal shall not be developed unless connected to the municipal sewage system or a publicly approved private sewage disposal system.
8.5. Self-Imposed Restrictions and/or Covenants
If the owner places restrictions and/or covenants on any portion of the site or land within the subdivision greater than those required by these regulations or the Zoning Ordinance, such restrictions and/or covenants shall be referenced on the plan. The Board reserves the right to review, or have its attorney review, the proposed restrictions and/or covenants to ensure that they are designed to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare and that such restrictions and/or covenants do not
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
8-2
violate any local regulations or ordinances. All costs of legal review shall be paid by the applicant in accordance with RSA §674.44 V and §676:4, I (g).
8.6. Protection of Environmental Quality
All development plans shall be reviewed to ensure that:
8.6.1. All walls, fences, hedges, and plantings shall be located and designed to ensure harmony with adjacent developments, screen parking and loading areas, and conceal storage areas, utility installations and other such features.
8.6.2. Dust and erosion shall be prevented through the planting of ground cover or installation of other surfaces.
8.6.3. Natural attributes and major features of the site such as wetlands, highly erodible areas, historic structures, major trees, and scenic views (both from the site and onto or over the site) shall be retained to the extent feasible.
8.6.4. Provisions shall be made for adequate storm and surface water drainage facilities in order to properly drain the site while minimizing downstream flooding. Site development shall also consider potential water quality impacts. A Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) shall be developed using a combination of structural, non-structural, and vegetative Best Management Practices (BMPs) as outlined in the New Hampshire Stormwater Manual, prepared by the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services (NHDES).
8.6.5. All site development must comply with the performance standards outlined in Article 5.10 Performance Standards of the Zoning Ordinance. These standards address issues such as sound, vibration, radioactivity, odor, hazardous waste, glare, heat, dust & fly ash, and smoke.
8.7. Vehicular and Pedestrian Traffic
Safe, adequate, and convenient vehicular and pedestrian traffic must be maintained both within and adjacent to the development. To this end, all site plans must address the following items:
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
8-3
8.7.1. The effect of the proposed development on traffic conditions on abutting streets.
8.7.2. The number, locations, and dimensions of vehicular and pedestrian entrances, exits, drives, and walkways.
8.7.3. The visibility in both directions of all exit points of the development and the visibility of a vehicle entering or exiting the development to a driver or a vehicle traveling on the street.
8.7.4. The location, arrangement, and adequacy of off-street parking.
8.7.5. Interconnection of parking areas via access drives within and between adjacent lots in order to provide maximum efficiency, minimize curb cuts, and encourage safe and convenient traffic circulation.
8.7.6. The location, arrangement, and adequacy of truck loading and unloading facilities.
8.7.7. Patterns of vehicular and pedestrian circulation both within the boundaries of the development and in relation to adjoining streets and sidewalks.
8.7.8. The location, arrangement, and adequacy of landscaping within the development and adjacent parking and loading facilities.
8.8. Preservation of Natural Features
Insofar as possible, the development plan shall preserve such natural features as wetlands, watercourses, water bodies, floodplains, steep slopes, aquifer recharge areas, large or unique trees, wildlife habitats, and scenic views. The street and lot layout shall bear a logical relationship and be adapted to the topography of the site. Extensive grading and filling is discouraged and shall be avoided to the greatest extent possible.
8.9. Landscaping and Tree Planting
Insofar as possible, the development plan shall preserve existing woodlands and suitable individual trees. If not possible to retain such, additional suitable plantings shall be included on the development plan. In accordance with the NH Department of Agriculture, Markets and Food regulation Agr-3800, plantings may not contain any prohibited species, including their cultivars and varieties. For redevelopment, salvage of
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
8-4
existing landscaping and replanting prohibited species are also prohibited. In addition, the Board may require buffer strips between developments and adjacent land uses as deemed necessary.
8.10. Scattered or Premature Development
8.10.1. As per RSA §674:36 II (a), the Board, in its discretion, will not approve such scattered or premature development as would create danger or injury to the general public health, safety, and welfare due to lack of water supply, drainage, sewage disposal, transportation, or other public services; nor will the Board approve such development which will necessitate an excessive expenditure of public funds for the supply of such services.
8.10.2. These regulations are designed to guide the Town’s future growth in a balanced and responsible manner. Towards this end, the Board shall consider the following items when determining whether a proposed development is scattered or premature:
1. Distance of proposed development from nearest elementary school.
2. Existing and projected capacity of the Town’s school system and the effect of the development on school bus transportation.
3. Adequacy of existing access streets and/or sidewalks.
4. Adequacy of water for domestic needs and firefighting purposes.
5. Potential health problems regarding the relationship between on-site sewage disposal systems and the soil conditions of the parcels, as well as the potential impact on surrounding water quality.
6. Potential problems with the delivery of municipal services (such as fire protection, ambulance and police services).
7. Potential drainage problems both on-site and downstream.
8. Adequacy of nearby recreation facilities.
9. Other issues which, in the view of the Board, may cause the proposed development to be scattered or premature.
8.10.3. The Board may determine that a proposed development is scattered or premature unless special improvements are made off-site or to the site itself. In such cases, the Board may require the applicant to make said improvements prior to, or as a
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
8-5
condition of development approval. Required improvements may consist of, but shall not be limited to, the following:
1. Improvement of access streets leading to the proposed development if, in the view of the Board, the existing access streets are deemed to be inadequate.
2. Extension of the municipal water and/or sewer system(s) if the water mains and/or sewer lines are within 3,000-feet of the proposed development, provided that a subdivision development consists of twelve or more lots.
3. Construction or improvement of sidewalks along any access streets where a potential increase in pedestrian traffic is expected.
4. Construction of static water supplies (fire ponds) with dry hydrants for fire protection.
5. Improvement of nearby intersections (including the installation of traffic signals) if, in the view of the Board, the existing intersections are deemed to be inadequate.
6. Provision and/or enhancement of recreational facilities.
7. Provision and/or extension of drainage facilities.
8.10.4. The Board will consider only the impact of the proposed development in relation to the provision of municipal services and, if necessary and appropriate, apportion the costs of any such improvements required of the applicant.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
9-1
SECTION 9. DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
9.1. Overview
An applicant shall use the following design and construction standards when developing a site or laying out a subdivision development within the Town of Exeter. These standards and requirements shall be construed as the minimum standards and requirements. The Board, at its discretion, may require higher standards in individual cases, or may waive certain requirements for good cause in accordance with the procedures outlined in these regulations.
Architectural
9.2. Architectural Design
9.2.1. The purpose of these architectural guidelines is to provide design standards with which to assist with the development or renovations of commercial properties to compliment the overall New England style ambiance of the community. The guidelines are directed towards, but are not limited to, assisting corporate franchises and commercial developments in the design of structures that reflect small town New England atmosphere unique to Exeter. Consideration must be given to human scale and pedestrian orientation for the design of or renovation of a commercial structure.
9.2.2. The objective of these regulations is not intended to restrict imagination, innovation, or variety in the new construction or renovation of commercial buildings and related property, but rather to encourage continued economic development, conserve property values, and further enhance the visual appearance of the community.
9.2.3. These architectural design guidelines may apply to industrial buildings.
9.2.4. The guidelines contained herein do not expect to foresee all possible proposed building situations. Decisions concerning such unforeseen situations will be made with these guidelines in mind.
1. Monotony of design or warehouse style structures shall be avoided. Variation in detail, form, and siting shall be used to provide visual interest.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
9-2
a) In order to prevent the construction of warehouse style buildings (buildings with long, horizontal roof lines), all new buildings and additions shall have pitched roofs of 3:12 or greater or gabled roofs, where practical.
b) In cases where pitched roofs are not practical, the use of false building fronts shall be used to imitate pitched roofs to vary the horizontal lines along portions of the façade to create the appearance of multiple attached buildings. All sides of a structure shall receive design consideration. A façade unrelated to the rest of the building is not an acceptable design.
c) In large commercial structures that are over 200-feet in length, building elevations shall be designed to give the appearance of multiple attached buildings.
d) In all cases, all roof top mechanical units shall be located so as to not be visible from street level or from public areas from ground level.
e) Alternative architectural solutions may be considered by the Board. Emphasis should be placed on compatibility, aesthetics and creativity.
2. The exterior surfaces of all buildings shall be covered with wood, stone, brick, or man-made materials that simulate natural materials (such as architectural concrete masonry units). Pitched roofs shall be constructed of shingles, metal roofing, or other materials traditionally used in this region.
3. Windows shall comprise no less than 5% of the exterior wall surface of the portions of the building facing either a public right-of-way, parking area, or an adjacent development area either on or off the site. Windows may be used for either interior illumination or for display purposes.
4. Use of historic details to enhance building elements is encouraged.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
9-3
Stormwater Management Standards for Post Construction and Construction
9.3. Stormwater Management Standards, Stormwater Management Plan, Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan, and Erosion and Sediment Control Standards
Post construction stormwater management standards provide reasonable guidance for the regulation of stormwater runoff to protect local natural resources from degradation and prevent adverse impacts to adjacent and downstream land, property, facilities and infrastructure. These standards regulate stormwater discharges and runoff from land development projects and other construction activities to control and minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, and nonpoint source pollution associated with stormwater runoff.
9.3.1. Stormwater Management for New Development: All proposed stormwater management practices and treatment systems shall meet the following design standards.
1. Low Impact Development (LID) site planning and design strategies must be used to the maximum extent practicable (MEP) to reduce stormwater runoff volume, protect water quality, and maintain predevelopment site hydrology. If LID strategies are not used to manage stormwater, an applicant must provide written documentation explaining why LID strategies are not appropriate and obtain approval from the Town.
2. All stormwater treatment areas shall be planted with native plantings appropriate for the site conditions: trees, grasses, shrubs and/or other native plants in sufficient numbers and density to prevent soil erosion and to achieve the water quality treatment requirements of this section.
3. All stormwater installations and areas that receive rainfall runoff must be designed to drain within a maximum of 72 hours for vector control.
4. Surface runoff shall be directed into appropriate stormwater control measures designed for treatment and/or filtration to the maximum extent practicable and/or captured and reused onsite.
5. All stormwater runoff generated from new development shall be treated on the development site, to the maximum extent practicable. Runoff shall not be discharged from the development site to municipal stormwater systems or privately-owned stormwater systems (whether closed conduit or open drainage) or to surface water bodies and wetlands in volumes greater than
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
9-4
discharged under existing conditions (developed condition or undeveloped condition). A development plan shall include provisions to retain stormwater on the site by using the natural flow patterns, when feasible.
6. Runoff from impervious surfaces shall be treated to achieve at least 80% removal of Total Suspended Solids (TSS) and at least 60% removal of both total nitrogen and total phosphorus using appropriate treatment measures, as specified in the NH Stormwater Manual (refer to Volume 2, page 6, Table 2.1 Summary of Design Criteria, Water Quality Volume for treatment criteria) or other equivalent means. Where practical, the use of natural, vegetated filtration and/or infiltration practices or subsurface gravel wetlands for water quality treatment is preferred given its relatively high nitrogen removal efficiency.
7. All new impervious area draining to surface waters impaired by nitrogen, phosphorus or nutrients shall be treated with stormwater BMP’s designed to optimize pollutant removal efficiencies based on design standards and performance data published by the UNH Stormwater Center and/or included in the NH Stormwater Manual.
Note: The Anti-Degradation provisions of the State Water Quality Standards require that runoff from new development shall not contribute additional pollutant loads to existing water body impairments.
8. Measures shall be taken to control the post-development peak rate runoff so that it does not exceed pre-development runoff. Drainage analyses shall include calculations comparing pre- and post-development stormwater runoff rates (cubic feet/second) and volumes (cubic feet) for the WQV and the 2-year, 10-year, 25-year, and 50-year 24-hour storm events. Similar measures shall be taken to control the post-development runoff volume to infiltrate the groundwater recharge volume (GRV) according to the following ratios of Hydrologic Soil Group (HSG) type versus infiltration rate multiplier: HSG-A: 0.4; HSG-B: 0.25; HSG-C: 0.1; HSG-D: 0.00. For sites with dual HSG types, HSG-D shall be used, unless the applicant can demonstrate that another HSG type should be used. For sites where infiltration is limited or not practicable, the applicant must demonstrate that the project will not create or contribute to water quality impairments. Infiltration structures shall be placed in locations with the highest permeability on the site.
9. The design of the stormwater systems shall provide for the management of stormwater without flooding or functional
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
9-5
impairment to streets, adjacent properties, downstream properties, soils, or vegetation.
10. The design of the stormwater management systems shall account for upstream and upgradient runoff that flows onto, over, or through the site to be developed or re-developed, and provide for this contribution of runoff.
11. Stormwater collection and conveyance systems (i.e. closed conduit stormdrain networks) shall be designed to accommodate the 10-year storm event.
12. The analysis and design of stormwater systems and treatment practices shall utilize precipitation data from the Northeast Regional Climate Center (NRCC) or the most recent precipitation atlas published by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).
13. Whenever practicable, native site vegetation shall be retained, protected, or supplemented. Any stripping of vegetation shall be done in a manner that minimizes soil erosion.
14. Implement long-term maintenance practices for stormwater treatment practices in accordance with Section 9.5.2.
9.3.2 Stormwater Management for Redevelopment
1. Redevelopment (as applicable to this stormwater regulation) means:
a) Any construction, alteration, or improvement that disturbs existing impervious area (including demolition and removal of road/parking lot materials down to the erodible subbase) or expands existing impervious cover by any amount, where the existing land use is commercial, industrial, institutional, governmental, recreational, or multifamily residential.
b) Any redevelopment activity that results in improvements with no increase in impervious area shall be considered redevelopment activity under this regulation if capital cost of improvements is greater than 30% of the appraised property value.
c) Any new impervious area over portions of a site that are currently pervious.
d) Any change in land use cover.
e) Road maintenance or improvements that increase the amount of impervious area on the redevelopment site.
f) The following activities are not considered redevelopment unless they meet the above criteria in b):
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
9-6
i. Interior and exterior building renovation.
ii. Resurfacing of an existing paved surface (e.g. parking lot, walkway or roadway) unless improvements increase the amount of impervious area.
iii. Pavement excavation and patching that is incidental to the primary project purpose, such as replacement of a collapsed storm drain.
iv. Landscaping installation and maintenance.
2. Redevelopment applications shall comply with the requirements of Sections 9.3.3 and 9.3.4.
3. For sites meeting the definition of a redevelopment project and having less than 60% existing impervious surface coverage, the stormwater management requirements will be the same as other new development projects. The applicant must satisfactorily demonstrate that impervious area is minimized, and LID practices have been implemented on-site to the maximum extent practicable.
4. For sites meeting the definition of a redevelopment project and having more than 60% existing impervious surface area, stormwater shall be managed for water quality in accordance with one or more of the following techniques, listed in order of preference:
a) Implement measures onsite that result in disconnection or treatment of 100% of the additional proposed impervious surface area and at least 30% of the existing impervious area and pavement areas, preferably using filtration and/or infiltration practices.
b) If resulting in greater overall water quality improvement on the site, implement LID practices to the maximum extent practicable to provide treatment of runoff generated from at least 60% of the entire developed site area.
5. Retain or treat the WQV calculated in accordance with NH AoT Rules Env-Wq 1504.10 and be designed to remove pollutants in accordance Section 9.3.4.1 below.
6. Runoff from impervious surfaces shall be treated to achieve at least 80% removal of Total Suspended Solids (TSS) and at least 60% removal of both total nitrogen and total phosphorus using appropriate treatment measures, as specified in the NH Stormwater Manual (refer to Volume 2, page 6, Table 2.1 Summary of Design Criteria, Water Quality Volume for treatment criteria) or other equivalent means. Where practical, the use of
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
9-7
natural, vegetated filtration and/or infiltration practices or subsurface gravel wetlands for water quality treatment is preferred given its relatively high nitrogen removal efficiency. All new impervious area draining to surface waters impaired by nitrogen, phosphorus or nutrients shall be treated with stormwater BMP’s designed to optimize pollutant removal efficiencies based on design standards and performance data published by the UNH Stormwater Center and/or included in the latest version of the NH Stormwater Manual.
Note: The Anti-Degradation provisions of the State Water Quality Standards require that runoff from development shall not contribute additional pollutant loads to existing water body impairments.
7. Stormwater runoff generated from redevelopment shall be treated on the development site to the maximum extent practicable. Runoff shall not be discharged from a redevelopment site to municipal stormwater systems or privately-owned stormwater systems (whether closed conduit or open drainage) or to surface water bodies and wetlands in volumes greater than discharged under existing conditions (developed condition or undeveloped condition).
8. Stormwater collection and conveyance systems (i.e. closed conduit stormdrain networks) shall be designed to accommodate the 10-year storm event.
9. The analysis and design of stormwater systems and treatment practices shall utilize precipitation data from the Northeast Regional Climate Center (NRCC) or the most recent precipitation atlas published by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).
10. Implement long-term maintenance practices for stormwater treatment practices in accordance with Section 9.6.2.
9.3.3 Stormwater Management Plan Requirements: The Board shall require a report and plan including each of the following for existing and proposed conditions:
1. A narrative description and an Existing Conditions Site Plan showing all predevelopment impervious surfaces, buildings and structures; surface water bodies and wetlands; drainage patterns, subcatchment and watershed boundaries; building setbacks and buffers, locations of various hydrologic group soil types, mature vegetation, land topographic contours with minimum 2-foot intervals and spot grades where necessary for sites that are flat.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
9-8
2. A narrative description and a Proposed Conditions Site Plan showing all post-development proposed impervious surfaces, buildings and structures; temporary and permanent stormwater management elements and best management practices (BMP); important hydrologic features created or preserved the site; drainage patterns, sub-catchment and watershed boundaries; building setbacks and buffers; proposed tree clearing and topographic contours with minimum 2-foot intervals. The plans shall provide calculations and identification of the total area of disturbance proposed on the site (and off site if applicable) and total area of new impervious surface created. A summary of the drainage analysis showing a comparison of the estimated peak flow and volumes for various design storms at each of the outlet locations shall be included.
3. Description of the general approach and strategies implemented, and the facts relied upon to meet the design standards of the applicable sections of these regulations, including design plans and/or graphical sketch(es) of all proposed above ground LID practices.
4. Calculations of the change in impervious area, pollution loading and removal volumes for each best management practice.
5. Plans shall include appropriate methods to extend and/or connect the proposed stormwater system to adjacent land whether or not such land is developed. Such plans shall also reasonably anticipate upstream development and preserve natural watercourses within the drainage basin. Detailed design and construction standards for the installation of drainage facilities can be found in the Standard Specifications for Construction of Public Utilities in Exeter, New Hampshire.
6. Existing and Proposed Conditions Plans shall reference Exeter’s Climate Risk in the Seacoast (C-RiSe) maps to determine if the project or any portion of the subject parcel is located within projected sea-level rise and storm surge high-risk flood areas as shown on these maps. All plans shall show the projected flood extent and flood depth from sea-level rise and storm surge. It is recommended that the projected flood conditions should be considered in the design of buildings, infrastructure and landscape features to minimize potential flood impacts from increased flooding over time.
9.3.4 General Performance Criteria for Stormwater Management Plans: Site design practices shall be incorporated to reduce the generation
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
9-9
of stormwater in the post-developed condition, reduce overall impervious surface coverage, seek opportunities to capture and reuse and minimize and discharge of stormwater to the municipal stormwater management system.
1. Methods for Protecting Water Quality:
a) Permanent methods for protecting water quality, including all stormwater management practices, shall be designed to:
i. Minimize the discharge of pollutants in accordance with Section 9.3.4.2;
ii. Recharge groundwater in accordance with Section 9.3.4.3;
iii. Protect channels in accordance with Section 9.3.4.4;
iv. Control peak runoff rates in accordance with Section 9.3.4.5; and
v. Implement long term maintenance practices in accordance with 9.5.2.
b) Stormwater runoff generated from new development shall not be discharged directly into a jurisdictional wetland or surface water body without adequate treatment.
c) Minimize pollutants to surface waters of the state using the following stormwater treatment practices: stormwater ponds, stormwater wetlands, infiltration practices, filtering practices, treatment swales and vegetated buffers.
d) All development shall provide adequate treatment and infiltration practices in accordance with the New Hampshire Stormwater Manual.
2. Pollutant Discharge Minimization Requirements:
a) The stormwater treatment practices such as: stormwater ponds, stormwater wetlands, gravel wetlands, infiltration pactices, filtering practices, treatment swales, vegetated buffers and treatment practices shall be acceptable methods for minimizing pollutant discharges to surface waters of the state, provided that the requirements of this section are met along with all method-specific criteria.
b) Stormwater treatment practices shall be accessible for proposed maintenance activities.
c) Infiltration rates for designing stormwater treatment practices shall be determined in accordance with NHDES Alteration of Terrain (AoT) Rules Env-Wq 1504.14.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
9-10
d) Stormwater treatment practices shall meet the water supply well setback criteria identified in NHDES AoT Rules Env-Wq 1508.02.
e) Stormwater treatment practices shall be designed for the water quality volume (WQV), calculated in accordance with NHDES AoT Rules Env-Wq 1504.10.
f) Treatment practices shall follow the design guidance in the New Hampshire Stormwater Manual.
g) Stormwater treatment practice designed to infiltrate stormwater on commercial or industrial sites shall provide a level of pollutant removal equal to or greater than the level of pollutant removal through the use of bioretention.
h) Stormwater management system designed on commercial or industrial land use areas within the Squamscott River watershed shall incorporate shutdown and containment to isolate the system in the event of an emergency spill or other unexpected event.
i) Stormwater management systems shall be designed to optimize for nitrogen removal in accordance with the New Hampshire Stormwater Manual and the MS4 Permit.
3. Groundwater Recharge Requirements:
a) The purpose of this section is to protect groundwater resources by requiring the amount of water diverted off-site by the proposed development to be reduced to the maximum extent practicable by using groundwater recharge practices as described in NHDES AoT Rules Env-Wq 1508.16.
b) The applicant shall capture and infiltrate the GRV calculated pursuant to Env-Wq 1504.12, based on hydrologic soil group (HSG) as described in e) below.
c) Infiltration rates for designing groundwater recharge practices shall be determined in accordance with NHDES AoT Rules Env-Wq 1504.14.
d) The groundwater recharge practices shall meet the water supply well setback criteria identified in NHDES AoT Rules Env-Wq 1508.02.
e) Capture and infiltrate the groundwater recharge volume (GRV) based on HSG types: HSG A soils = 0.40 inches; B soils = 0.25 inches; C soils = 0.10 inches and D soils no recharge is required.
f) Groundwater recharge requirements can be met through the design and implementation of infiltrating stormwater
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
9-11
treatment practices such as: infiltration trenches, infiltration basins, dry wells and drip edges.
g) All treatment practices shall follow the design guidance in the New Hampshire Stormwater Manual.
4. Channel Protection:
a) The purpose of this section is to protect channels, downstream receiving waters, and wetlands from erosion and associated sedimentation resulting from urbanization within a watershed.
b) The combined flow to a single water body from a project site shall meet one of the following criteria:
i. The 2-year, 24-hour post-development peak flow rate generated from the proposed disturbance shall be equal to or less than the 2-year, 24-hour pre-development peak flow rate and:
a. The 2 year, 24-hour post-development storm volume, directed to the nearest water body has not increased over the pre-development volume by more than 0.1 acre-feet;
b. The 2-year, 24-hour post-development peak flow rate directed to the nearest water body is less than 2 cfs; or
c. The area directly discharges into a fourth order or greater river, a pond or lake greater than 10 acres, or tidal water.
ii. The 2-year, 24-hour post-development peak flow rate shall be less than or equal to 50 percent of the 2-year, 24-hour pre-development peak flow rate; or
iii. The 2-year, 24-hour post-development peak flow rate shall be less than or equal to the 1-year, 24-hour pre-development peak flow rate.
c) When determining “equal to or less than”, allowances shall be made for scientific uncertainty and mathematical rounding.
5. Peak Runoff Control Requirements:
a) The purpose of this section is to address increases in the frequency and magnitude of flooding caused by development.
b) Subject to d), below, the 10-year, 24-hour post-development peak flow rate shall not exceed the 10-year, 24-hour pre-development peak flow rate for all flows leaving the site.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
9-12
c) Subject to d), below, the 50-year, 24-hour post-development peak flow rate shall not exceed the 50-year, 24-hour pre-development peak flow rate for all flows leaving the site.
d) A project area that directly discharges to a stream, waterbody, estuary, or tidal water shall be exempt from b) and c), above, if the applicant has provided supporting off-site drainage calculations for the 10-year and 50-year, 24-hour storm in accordance with NHDES AoT Rules Env-Wq 1504.09, showing that at a point immediately downstream from the project site the post-development peak flow rate from the site and the off-site contributing area does not exceed the pre-development peak flow rate at that point.
e) The applicant shall provide supporting information in accordance with NHDES AoT Rules Env-Wq 1503.09, showing that there is no impact to properties as a result of developing within the 100-year floodplain.
9.3.5 Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP): As part of a site or subdivision application, a SWPPP is required for all construction projects with land disturbance equal to one acre or more, or less if part of a larger common plan or development. The SWPPP must include the appropriate Best Management Practices (BMPs) to minimize the discharge of pollutants from the site. Parties responsible for developing the SWPPP should refer to the NPDES Construction General Permit for a complete outline of required elements.
The SWPPP focuses on two major requirements: (1) Providing a site description that identifies sources of pollution to storm water discharges associated with industrial activity on site; and (2) Identifying and implementing appropriate measures to reduce pollutants in storm water discharges to ensure compliance with the terms and conditions of this permit.
The applicant shall provide three hard copies or one electronic pdf of the SWPPP to the Planning Department and also ensure that one copy remains onsite.
9.3.6. Erosion and Sediment Control Standards: The following standards shall be applied in planning for erosion and sediment control:
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
9-13
1. All erosion and sediment control measures in the plan shall meet the design standards and specifications set forth in the New Hampshire Stormwater Manual, prepared by NHDES.
2. A sequence of construction of the development site, including stripping and clearing, rough grading, construction of utilities, infrastructure, and buildings; and final grading and landscaping. Sequencing shall identify the expected date on which clearing will begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas, areas of clearing, installation of temporary erosion and sediment control measures, and establishment of permanent vegetation. Stripping of vegetation, regrading, or other development shall be done in such a way that will minimize soil erosion. Whenever practical, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected, and supplemented.
3. Appropriate control measures shall be installed prior to removal of vegetation.
4. Disturbed areas shall be kept to a minimum. Disturbed areas not in active development shall be adequately stabilized.
For forested lots, lot clearance values assumed by the applicant’s engineer in the stormwater analysis calculations of any subdivision or site plan shall be noted on the plan (ie. ½ an acre for an average house lot). These assumed areas of clearance shall become the limit of clearable area for each lot for that subdivision or the total clearance area of the site for other development. If a lot has been cleared beyond the clearable area limit, the applicant shall develop a reforestation and planting plan for the area cleared beyond the limit.
In order to create a smooth and safe transition between newly graded areas and the surrounding abutters, there will be no grading within 5 feet of any exterior property line.
5. Measures shall be taken to control sediment and retain it within the projected area. Provisions must be made to accommodate increased runoff caused by changed soil conditions during and after development. Sediment in the runoff water shall be trapped by the use of sediment basins or other acceptable methods until the disturbed area is stabilized. Diversions, sediment retention basins, and other such devices shall be constructed prior to any on-site grading or disturbance of existing surface material.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
9-14
6. Off-site surface water and runoff from undisturbed areas shall be carried non-erosively through the project area, or diverted away from disturbed areas where feasible.
7. Naturally occurring streams, channels, and wetlands shall be used for conveyance of runoff leaving the project area.
8. All temporary erosion and sediment control measures shall be removed after final site stabilization. Trapped sediment and other disturbed soil areas resulting from the removal of temporary measures shall be permanently stabilized within 30-days.
9. Clearing, except that necessary to establish sediment control devices, shall not begin until all sediment control devices have been installed and have been stabilized.
10.Plan Requirements: The Board shall require a plan including each of the following for existing and proposed conditions:
a) Locus map showing property boundaries.
b) North arrow, scale, and date.
c) Property lines.
d) Structures, roads, utilities, earth stockpiles, equipment storage, and on-site stump disposal locations.
e) Topographic contours at 2-foot intervals.
f) Extent of 100-year floodplain boundaries as determined by the Town’s Flood Insurance Rate Maps. Soils information based on High Intensity Soil Maps as prepared by a Certified Soil Scientist.
g) Easements.
h) State and Federal wetlands information.
i) Total area of soil disturbance.
j) Total area of wetlands to be disturbed of filled within local, State, and Federal jurisdiction.
k) Areas of cut and fill.
l) Location of all proposed structural and vegetative erosion and sediment control measures (both during the construction phase and after).
m) Identification of all permanent erosion and sediment control measures.
n) Narrative section including:
i. A detailed description of the construction sequence including timing a schedule that indicates the starting and completion dates of the measures.
ii. An earth movement schedule.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
9-15
iii. A description of temporary and permanent vegetative measures including seeding specifications.
iv. A description of all structural erosion and sediment control measures, with detailed drawing of each.
v. A proposed schedule for the inspection and maintenance of all measures.
vi. Identification of all permanent erosion and sediment control measures and a description of plans for their continued maintenance.
vii. Calculations showing volume, peak discharge, and velocity of present and future runoff.
viii. A note indicating that all erosion and sediment control measures have been installed in accordance with the design standards and specifications set forth in the New Hampshire Stormwater Manual, prepared by NHDES.
9.4. Flood Hazard Areas
Non-residential and multi-family development proposals and subdivision proposals involving land designated as flood hazard areas shall be reviewed to determine whether such proposals will be reasonably safe from flooding and shall meet the following requirements. For a detailed description of the construction standards that apply to the Town’s delineated flood hazard areas, please review Article 9.4 Floodplain Development Ordinance of the Exeter Zoning Ordinance.
9.4.1. Permits: The Board shall review the proposal to assure that all necessary permits have been received from those government agencies from which approval is required by Federal or State law including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334.
9.4.2. Minimization of Flood Damage: Sufficient evidence (construction drawings, grading, and land treatment plans) shall be submitted so as to allow the Board to determine that:
1. All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
2. All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage;
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
9-16
3. Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and,
4. New and replacement water and sewer systems (including on-site systems) are located, designed, and constructed to minimize infiltration and avoid impairment.
9.4.3. Elevation and Flood-proofing Records: The applicant shall obtain and maintain records of elevations and flood-proofing levels for all new or substantially improved structures, whether or not such structures contain a basement.
9.4.4. Alteration of Watercourses: The State Wetlands Board shall be notified prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and copies of such notifications shall be submitted to the National Flood Insurance Program. The flood carrying capacity shall be maintained within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse.
9.4.5. Floodplain Delineation: The base flood elevation (100-year flood) shall be delineated on all plans.
9.5. Construction, Inspection & Maintenance and Approval
9.5.1. Responsibility for Installation/Construction: The applicant shall bear final responsibility for the installation, construction and disposition of all grading, drainage, stormwater management and erosion and sediment control measures required by the provisions of these regulations. The Board may require a performance guarantee to ensure the actual construction and installation of all grading, drainage, stormwater management and erosion & sedimentation control measures within a period specified by the Board. Site development shall not begin before the grading, drainage, stormwater management and erosion & sediment control plan is approved by the Board.
Construction site operators shall be responsible to ensure the erosion and sediment control measures and post-construction stormwater control measures approved for the site are installed as designed. Construction site operators must control on site waste such as discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter and sanitary waste or other materials that may cause adverse impacts to water quality. Control of waste on site must be included in the SWPPP.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
9-17
9.5.2. Long Term Inspection & Maintenance:
1. To ensure the long-term effectiveness of approved stormwater practices, the applicant shall establish a mechanism to provide for on-going inspections and maintenance (I&M) of the practices for so long as the practices are reasonably expected to be used.
2. Subject to 9.5.2.6, below, the mechanism shall include an I&M manual for the practices which includes, at a minimum:
a) The name of each responsible party who will implement the required reporting, inspection, and maintenance activities identified in the I&M manual;
b) The frequency of inspections;
c) An inspection checklist to be used during each inspection;
d) A requirement to photograph each practice that is subject to the I&M requirement at each inspection of that practice;
e) An I&M log to document each I&M activity;
f) A deicing log to track the amount and type of deicing materials applied to the site;
g) A plan showing the locations of all the stormwater practices described in the I&M manual;
h) The cost to maintain the stormwater practices;
i) Preparation and execution of a “Stormwater Management/BMP Facilities Maintenance Agreement”; and
j) Actions to be taken if any invasive species begin to grow in the stormwater practices.
3. All record keeping required by the I&M manual shall be maintained by the responsible party(ies) and be made available to the Board upon request.
4. Upon the completion of all terrain alteration activities that direct stormwater to a particular practice, the responsible party(ies) shall initiate the I&M activities.
5. The responsible party(ies) may contract with one or more third parties to conduct the I&M activities, but shall remain responsible for ensuring the long-term effectiveness of the stormwater practices.
6. All inspections shall be documented in written form. A Maintenance Log and Inspection & Maintenance Checklist is required for the proposed onsite stormwater management facilities that detail the ongoing maintenance to insure the long-term functionality of the infrastructure. The written inspection forms, Maintenance Log, and Inspection & Maintenance Checklist shall be completed annually and submitted to the Exeter Public
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
9-18
Works Department on or before January 31st of each year. The form may be proposed by the responsible party, unless or until the Town provides a specific form to be utilized. The town inspector or their agent shall enter the property of the applicant as deemed necessary to make regular inspections to ensure the validity of the inspection reports filed by the applicant.
7. If a federal or state agency or the Town agrees to assume the responsibility for some or all components of the stormwater management system, the following shall apply:
a) The transferor responsible party(ies) shall document the transfer of responsibility in writing to the Board;
b) No I&M manual shall be required for those components for which the agency or political subdivision assumes responsibility, unless required by the agency or political subdivision as a condition of accepting responsibility; and
c) The entity that agrees to assume responsibility shall document that maintenance activities are being performed as necessary to ensure the long-term effectiveness of those components of the stormwater management system for which the agency or political subdivision assumed responsibility.
8. If ownership of commercial or industrial property is transferred, the new property owner(s) shall become the responsible party(ies).
9. If the property is a residential development for which a homeowners’ association will be established, then:
a) The homeowners’ association shall become the responsible party as specified in the documentation that establishes the association; and
b) If the homeowners’ association is dissolved or otherwise discontinued, the individual homeowners shall have joint and several liability for all I&M obligations.
10. If the owner or subsequent owners fail to maintain such measures, the Town shall have the right, but not the obligation to perform the required maintenance in accordance with the terms of the approved plan. The cost of such work shall be borne by the owner.
9.5.3. Drainage Easement: Where it is determined that the additional runoff incidental to the development will overload or significantly increase an existing downstream drainage facility, the Board may require the provision of drainage easements or other improvements (i.e.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
9-19
retention/detention ponds and/or facilities) necessary to alleviate such problems.
9.5.4. Plan Approval and Review
1. The Board shall indicate its approval of the grading, drainage, and erosion & sediment control plan, as filed, if it complies with the requirements and objectives of these regulations. If disapproved, a list of plan deficiencies and the procedure for filing a revised plan will be given to the applicant.
2. Technical review of submitted plans shall be conducted by the TRC, which may utilize the services of the Rockingham County Conservation District at the expense of the applicant.
9.5.5. Other Required Permits: In addition to local approval, the applicant may be responsible for obtaining State and Federal permits. Permits may include a Federal storm water permit or other permits as required by the Federal NPDES program, NH Site Specific permit, State and Federal wetlands permits, and/or EPA’s dewatering permit. (see 4.2.4, 4.2.5)
Natural Landscapes and Resources
9.6. Green Space
9.6.1. Buffer Strips:
1. Internal Buffer Strips: The Board may require the designation of buffer strips of at least 50-feet width around surface water, wetlands, or other natural features that may be adversely affected by erosion or storm water runoff. The Board may require a vegetative buffer to provide screening where nonresidential developments abut a residential zone
2. Perimeter Buffer Strip: For all open space/cluster developments and standard subdivisions, except minor subdivisions, a required vegetated buffer strip of 100-feet width in the RU or R1 districts and 50-feet width in all other allowed districts shall be provided between any proposed lots, septic system, or service road and the perimeter lot line of the tract. The buffer strip shall be comprised of natural or planted vegetation. The first 50-feet in width for RU and R1 districts and 25-feet in width for other allowed districts measured from
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
9-20
the external abutting property line shall be left natural and not to be disturbed by construction activities with the exception of access roads into the subdivision. Primary access and secondary access roads, utilities, and services shall be allowed to cross the buffer zone. Where roads may interfere with the buffer strip, the developer shall propose additional planting in the area of the interference. The Board may approve a partial or total waiver to the buffer strip if the configuration or location of the parcel, with consideration of abutting properties, warrants flexibility to the proposed green space. (Also, see Zoning Ordinance Article 7.3.1)
3. Other Required Landscape Strips (See section 9.7.3)
9.6.2. Natural Features: The subdivision and development shall, whenever possible, preserve in their natural condition important natural features. Use Low Impact Development (LID) site planning and design strategies such as land conservation and maintaining natural flow paths to the maximum extent practicable to reduce discharge of stormwater. The Board may request an advisory opinion from the Conservation Commission in the determination of the value of natural features and the boundaries of such natural systems. Such areas include watercourses, water bodies, floodplains, wetland areas, steep slopes, aquifer recharge areas, wildlife habitats, large or unique trees, and scenic views. Natural features that provide buffers between lots, or sections, of a subdivision should be preserved to enhance privacy and aesthetic value.
9.6.3. Parks: In order to provide recreation space for residents in a new subdivision or residential site plan (multiple units), the applicant shall provide adequate uplands to allow multiple recreation uses. The following guidelines shall be followed for creating the recreation area.
1. For subdivisions creating ten or more lots/units, the Board shall require a minimum of 10 % of the total site be dedicated or reserved as active or passive recreational space for the residents of the subdivision, or general public if chosen by the developer and agreed to be the Town of Exeter.
2. Recreation areas shall be centrally located. The applicant may suggest more than one area for recreation purposes or if the number of lots/units warrants additional play area, it may be required by the Board.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
9-21
3. For open space/cluster housing developments, required open space cannot be substituted for recreation requirements. However, recreation allowance within open space areas may be proposed and considered by the Board.
4. Improvements to the reserved area are required including providing grading, drainage and appropriate recreation equipment. The Board shall consider the size and type of residential development in order to determine if the Applicant has adequately met this requirement.
5. The developer shall evaluate how the proposed recreational lands and easements within the subdivision would impact nearby existing and/or other proposed green space areas and recreational trails.
6. The Board will review the developer’s proposal to insure that the dedicated or reserved recreational space is useful for its intended purposes; is accessible to residents or the general public; or is accessible to other conservation lands.
7. Alternative proposals to provide recreational opportunities, whether on-site or off-site, may be considered by the Board. As a guideline, alternative proposals to provide off-site recreational opportunities may require that an amount equal to 5% of the development’s performance bond shall be contributed to the Town of Exeter Recreation Department.
9.7. Landscaping and Screening
9.7.1. Landscaping: The Board shall require the developer to supply and plant such trees and shrubbery as are deemed to be compatible with the environmental design of the neighborhood. Landscaping shall be provided with proper regard to adjacent properties, adjacent roadways, and, within the site, include interior landscaping of parking areas as specified in Section 9.7.4. The visual expanse of a building’s exterior shall be broken up by planting shrubs and/or shade trees around the building’s perimeter. (See General Standards Section 8.9 Landscaping and Tree Planting)
9.7.2. Visual Barrier: All outdoor storage areas, loading areas, and trash receptacles shall be located, fenced, and landscaped to prevent visibility from either the parking area or neighboring properties. The manner of waste disposal shall be specified and the site plan shall show the location of all waste disposal facilities.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
9-22
9.7.3. Landscape Strips: Where appropriate, existing trees and vegetation shall be incorporated into landscape or buffer strips. Landscape strips shall be at least 20-feet in width and 4 to 6 feet in height to effectively screen the view from adjacent residential properties. If approved by the Board, the use of fencing,
landscaped berms and/or other type screening materials can be used in lieu of providing a 20 foot wide planted landscape strip. Landscape strips shall be used for screening purposes in the following situations:
1. Where a proposed non-residential use abuts a residential zoning district.
2. Where a proposed non-residential use abuts an existing residential use.
3. Where a proposed road of any development abuts an existing property line or is within 20 feet of a property line in which the existing use is residential.
9.7.4. Tree Planting: At its discretion, the Board may require the developer to plant shade trees within the rights-of-way of a subdivision layout. The developer shall supply planting plans to the Board who will seek an advisory opinion on said plans from the Conservation Commission.
9.7.5. Landscaping for Parking Areas and New Roadways: The guidelines and design standards listed below are intended to help an applicant prepare a suitable landscaping plan for proposed parking areas and new roadways.
1. The visual expanse of a building’s exterior shall be broken up by planting shrubs and/or shade trees around the building’s perimeter.
2. Parking areas and new roadways shall be effectively landscaped with trees and shrubs to reduce the visual impact of glare, headlights, and parking lot lights from the public right-of-way and from adjacent properties. In addition, parking lots shall be adequately shaded to reduce the amount of reflected heat.
3. In case where substantial grading is necessary that results in a parking lot lower in elevation than the surrounding or adjacent right-of-way, the resulting embankment shall be planted with low shrubs and shade or ornamental trees. Where feasible, a minimum of 10-feet of landscaping is
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
9-23
required between the edge of any paved surface and the property line, except as otherwise required in these regulations.
4. A curbed traffic control island shall be provided between every four rows of parking. The traffic control island shall be a minimum of 8-feet in width to accommodate low hedges, shade trees, or drainage swales. At the ends of the traffic control islands, landscaping plans shall create 12-foot wide curbed planting islands to be located throughout the lot and planted with shade trees, low shrubs, and/or ground cover. These planting islands shall extend the full length of the parking stalls, and if the parking row is double, shall extend the total width of the row. The applicant, if desired, may shorten the main traffic control island no more than 14-feet at each end just before each planting island to better allow for the removal of snow. If the main traffic control island is proposed to be shortened, pavement markings shall be required to prohibit through traffic.
5. Landscaping plans shall provide additional curbed planting islands (a minimum of 9-feet wide) between every ten to fifteen parking spaces to avoid long rows of parked cars. Each of these planting islands should provide at least one shade tree having a clear trunk height of at least 6-feet.
6. Curbing for all traffic control and planting islands shall be granite or concrete.
7. Within the interior of the parking lot, landscaping should be used to delineate vehicular and pedestrian circulation patterns. Clear and legible signs, different color and texture paving materials, raised areas, and other techniques should be used to further direct the flow of both vehicular and pedestrian traffic within the site.
8. Landscaping plans shall use deciduous shade trees with ground cover or low shrubs as the primary landscape material within parking lots and avoid tall shrubs or low-branching trees that will restrict visibility.
9.8. Natural Resources
9.8.1. Included in the purposes of these regulations is the statement “to encourage the wise use and management of natural resources throughout the municipality in order to preserve the integrity, stability, and beauty of the community and the value of the land”.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
9-24
The Board believes that the protection of our natural resources is important, and desires applicants to have a complete understanding of the natural resources on sites being proposed for development. To this extent, applicants shall use the following guidelines when developing a natural resources plan.
1. Inventory: Applicants shall inventory all natural resources of the site proposed for development. The inventory shall include the natural resources of land, air quality, soils, vegetation, mineral deposits, water, wildlife, and wildlife habitat.
2. Impact: Applicants shall address each natural resource and describe how the resource will be maintained, protected, or impacted during the development.
3. Mitigation: Where natural resources will be significantly affected or eliminated by the development, applicants may propose a mitigation plan to restore or replace the natural resource. If the Board feels a significant impact exists, the Board may require a mitigation plan.
9.8.2. In developing the plan, the applicant shall review the following sections of these regulations:
1. Section 8.4 General Standards: Character of Land.
2. Section 8.6 General Standards: Protection of Environmental Quality.
3. Section 8.8 General Standards: Preservation of Natural Features.
4. Section 8.9 General Standards: Landscaping and Tree Planting.
5. Section 9.6.2 – Green Space: Natural Features.
9.9. Wetlands
9.9.1. Wetland Boundary Markers: The Board may require a portion or all of the wetland boundaries, as identified according to the Zoning Ordinance, to be marked with an identifiable permanent marking system.
9.9.2. Wetland Setbacks: Wetland setbacks are established to protect a naturally vegetated upland area, or ‘buffer’ around wetlands. The vegetation in this buffer area naturally reduces the amount of nutrients and sediment that flows into wetlands thereby affording
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
9-25
them greater protection. Buffer widths vary based on wetland significance and or their sensitivity to excess nutrients and sedimentation infiltration. It should be noted that the Planning Board recognizes the need to filter runoff from parking is more critical than rooftops of structures due to the pollutant loads from parking and road areas.
Wetlands categories and setbacks:
Wetland Category
No cut / No
Disturbance
Setback (1)
Parking Setback (2)
Waste Water Systems
Structural Setback
Prime Wetland
100' no cut/no disturb
125’
Exemplary Wetlands
50' no cut/no disturb buffer
75’
Vernal Pool
(V.P. >/= 200 sf)
75' no cut/ no disturb buffer
100’
Wetlands with Very Poorly
Drained (VPD) Soils
50' no cut/ no disturb buffer
75’
Wetlands with Poorly Drained
40' no cut/ no disturb buffer
75’
Inland Streams
(incl. intermittent)
25' no cut/ no disturb buffer
75’ (1)
(1) Additional setbacks apply if within the Exeter Shoreland Protection District Ordinance.
(2) For “Open Space Development” the Planning Board may allow the reduction of parking setbacks to that of the associated structural setbacks.
The “no cut-no disturbance buffer” shall be preserved as a natural buffer. Alteration of the buffer may be permitted only to the extent necessitated by a
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
9-26
permitted use within the Zoning Ordinance Chapter 9 Articles: Wetland Conservation District Permitted Uses or Conditional Uses sections or the
Exeter Shoreland Protection District Permitted Uses or Conditional Uses
9.9.3 Wetland Waiver Guidelines: In accordance with Section 13, a request for waiver(s) from the setbacks defined in 9.9.2 shall be submitted in writing by the applicant along with the application for Board review. In addition to the finding addressed under Section 13-1 General, the Board should consider the following if relief is requested:
1. The relative “value” of the wetland, including its ecological sensitivity, as well as its function within the greater hydrologic landscape shall be compared to the proposed impact.
2. A wetland scientist has conducted a “function and values” study of the wetlands and deemed that the wetlands under consideration will not be negatively impacted by the development.
3. The Applicant has demonstrated that the use cannot be reasonably carried out on a portion or portions of the lot which are outside of the buffer.
4. The applicant has made a substantial effort to minimize the impacts to the buffer.
5. Consideration of waivers requested for constructed drainage facilities within the no-disturbance buffer should be determined by all of the following:
a) Assurance that the drainage facility has the most current water quality features that would provide measured reductions in potential pollutants typical to the proposed development,
b) That a reasonable effort has been made to keep the disturbance to a minimum,
c) Not more than 50% of the drainage structures are within the required buffer.
6. Recommendations from Exeter’s Conservation Commission should be reviewed and considered.
7. The applicant has prepared a mitigation proposal, including revegetating any disturbed area within the buffer to mimic
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
9-27
preconstruction conditions or better. The applicant may also propose an increase in wetland buffers elsewhere on the site that surround a wetland of equal or greater size, and of equal or greater functional value than the impacted wetland.
Paving and Surfaces
9.10. Bridges
Bridges must be built according to State of New Hampshire Department of Transportation specifications. All bridge plans must be approved by State engineers prior to construction.
9.11. Driveways
All permits for driveways and other access points onto a State highway shall be obtained from NH Department of Transportation prior to final approval of the development. Any permits required for driveways onto Town or private streets shall be obtained from the Exeter Department of Public Works.
9.12. Off-Street Loading (Pertains to Site Plans Only)
9.12.1. Space Requirements: For the uses listed below, the following off-street loading space requirements will apply:
1. Retail and Service Establishments
a) One space for the first 4,000-square-feet
b) One space for each addition 10,000-square-feet
2. Wholesale and Manufacturing
a) One space for the first 5,000 – 15,000-square-feet
b) One space for each additional 10,000-square-feet
c) One space for each 20,000-square-feet or portion thereof over 45,000-square-feet
9.12.2. Size Requirements: The first loading berth required in each instance shall not be less than 12-feet in width, 50-feet in length and 14-feet in height and may occupy all or any part of a required yard, excepting required driveways, setbacks, and transition yards (see Article 5.5.2 Transition Yard Requirements of the Zoning Ordinance). However, up to 50% of any additionally required berths may be less than 50-feet in length provided that in no case shall any berth be less than 20-feet in length.
9.13. Parking Areas (Pertains to Site Plans Only)
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
9-28
9.13.1. The number of required parking spaces shall conform to Article 5.6.4 Off-Street Parking Schedule as outlined in the Exeter Zoning Ordinance.
9.13.2. The number and design of handicap parking spaces shall conform to the New Hampshire Architectural Barrier Free Design Code, as prepared by the Governor’s Commission for the
Handicapped, and/or Title II and Title III of the federal Americans With Disabilities Act. In the event of a conflict between the provisions or standards of the codes noted above, the more restrictive provision or standard shall apply.
9.13.3. Parking areas shall be paved if public use is intended; however, the Board may waive paving in an effort to reduce surface water runoff which cannot be conveniently disposed of, and to ensure groundwater recharge.
9.13.4. Parking areas shall be located in such a manner so as not unduly harm the owners or occupants of neighboring parcels.
9.13.5. Parking spaces shall be arranged so that cars will not back into public streets.
9.13.6. Aisle widths shall conform to the following minimum dimensions:
Parking Angle Minimum Aisle Width
? 45-degrees 16-feet
? 60 -degrees 20-feet
? 90-degrees 22-feet
9.13.7. Parking areas must be constructed to the following specifications. Regarding the construction standards outlined below for parking areas, the Board may consider waiving these standards and approving an alternative based upon the review and recommendation of the Exeter Department of Public Works.
1. Loam and/or yielding material must be removed to a depth of no less than 21-inches below final grade. Areas that are muck must be removed or stripped from the parking area to a depth of no less than 36-inches below finish grade and replaced with gravel.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
9-29
2. A bank run gravel sub-base of 12-inches must be applied and compacted, followed by 6-inch base of crushed gravel, which is then compacted and rolled true to grade lines with a roller.
3. A 3-inch binder course and a 1-inch wearing surface of bituminous concrete and pavement must be installed with a self-propelled mechanical spreader and rolled by tandem roller.
4. The minimum grade for parking areas shall be 0.5% and the maximum grade shall be 5%.
5. See Section 9.7 Landscaping and Screening of these regulations for requirements pertaining to parking areas.
9.14. Roadways, Access Points, and Fire Lanes
Traffic access to the development from Town streets shall ensure the safety of vehicles and pedestrians. The design and construction standards for roadways and points of access are as follows:
9.14.1. The Board shall approve of the design for a proposed access/egress point onto the public way. Said point shall provide an adequate sight distance, grade, width and curb.
9.14.2. All permits for driveways and other access points onto a State highway shall be obtained from the NH Department of Transportation prior to final approval of the development plan. Any permits required for driveways onto local streets shall be obtained from the Exeter Department of Public Works.
9.14.3. In all cases, the number of access points to a given street shall be held to a minimum, preferably one point of access in order to reduce traffic hazards from turning movements and to ease the installation of traffic control devices when necessary.
9.14.4. The Board may require improvement of existing access/egress point(s) in order to provide safe traffic flow onto abutting streets, should increased traffic be generated by the proposed development.
9.14.5. Off-site improvements may be required, such as increasing pavement width or adding deceleration lanes, curbing, or signaling devices.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
9-30
9.14.6. Traffic circulation, pedestrian access, parking and loading facilities, and emergency access shall be designed and located in a manner that ensures maximum safety on-site.
9.14.7. Driveways shall be located in such a manner as not to unduly harm the owners or occupants of neighboring parcels.
9.14.8. Private roads serving non-residential and multi-family developments shall remain in private ownership and the developer shall provide legal instruments to insure their continued maintenance and ownership.
9.14.9. All proposed roadways, access points, fire lanes, and ancillary improvements for non-residential and multi-family developments shall be constructed in accordance with the Standard
Specifications for Construction of Public Utilities in Exeter, New Hampshire, except that roadways and fire lanes shall be 24-feet in width. The Board may waive the above-referenced standards based upon the review and recommendation of the Exeter Department of Public Works.
9.15. Sidewalks
The Board may require the installation of sidewalks between the main entrances of business, industries, multi-family housing developments, and parking areas in order to insure safe pedestrian travel. The Board may also require sidewalks from the street line to the principal building or along street frontages if there is a reasonable expectation that pedestrian shoppers or employees will be traveling to and/or from the site. The applicant shall be required to install sidewalks, 5-feet in width, on one side of each newly created street. Sidewalks shall be at least 6inches above grade and be protected by curbing. Sidewalk designs shall include means for handicapped access. Detail design and construction standards for sidewalks can be found in the Public Works Specifications.
9.16. Snow and Salt Storage
Provisions shall be made for snow storage on all sites during the winter months. Snow storage areas shall be located in accordance with
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
9-31
NHDES guidance1 such that no direct untreated discharges to receiving waters are possible from the storage site. Consideration shall be given to locating the snow storage where melting will not create a hazard when refreezing occurs. Additionally, runoff from snow storage areas shall be directed to stormwater treatment areas to infiltrate into groundwater.
Where salt storage is proposed on commercial and industrial development sites, salt storage areas shall be covered and loading/off-loading areas shall be designed and maintained in accordance with NHDES guidance2. Runoff from salt storage areas shall be directed to stormwater treatment areas to infiltrate into groundwater.
9.17. Streets
9.17.1. Access: Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall not be permitted. The subdividing of land shall be such as to provide each lot with satisfactory access to an existing public street or highway by means of either public street or way or permanent easement.
9.17.2. Dead-End Streets and Cul-De-Sacs:
? Except where near-future connections are planned, approved, and bonded, dead-end streets shall not exceed 1,200-feet in length.
? The length of a dead-end street or cul-de-sac shall be measured from the middle of the last two-street intersection that allows for two-way through access to the furthest point of the turn-around.
? In addition, dead-end streets will not be allowed without an asphalt paved turn-around minimum radius of 59-feet from center to outside edge of the roadway.
? The perimeter of cul-de-sacs shall have sloped granite curbing.
? Cul-de-sacs shall be landscaped in the middle. For specifications, please review the Public Works Specifications.
1 NHDES. (2015). Snow Disposal Guidelines. Environmental Fact Sheet, WMB-3. https://www.des.nh.gov/organization/commissioner/pip/factsheets/wmb/documents/wmb-3.pdf
2 NHDES (2011) Storage and Management of Deicing Materials, Environmental Fact Sheet, WD-DWGB-22-30. https://www.des.nh.gov/organization/commissioner/pip/factsheets/dwgb/documents/dwgb-22-30.pdf
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
9-32
? Turn-arounds are also required at Town boundaries for snowplows and school buses.
? Unless restricted by soil conditions, topography, or other site conditions, all turn-arounds for dead-end streets shall provide enough frontage for at least one legal-size lot.
9.17.3. Future Subdivision: Where the plan submitted covers only a part of the subdivider’s entire tract or landholdings, a sketch of the prospective future street system of the unsubmitted part shall be furnished to the Board and the street system of the part submitted shall be considered in light of the adjustments and connections with the street system of the part not yet submitted.
9.17.4. Platting of Streets: Insofar as the Master Plan or the Official Zoning Map does not indicate the size, location, direction, and extent of a street, and subject to the regulations hereinafter specified regarding definite minimum widths, the arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall provide for the continuation of the principal street existing in the adjoining subdivisions, or of their proper projection when adjoining property is not subdivided, and shall be of a width at least as great as that of such existing streets, but no less than a 50-foot right-of-way. Where, in the opinion of the Board, topographical conditions make such continuance or conformity impractical, the Board may permit dean-end streets as described herein.
9.17.5. Public Ways and Private Rights-of-Way: For a description of the Town’s policy regarding the acceptance of proposed streets within a subdivision and other private roadways, please review Selectmen’s Policy 01-21.
Each newly created lot shall be provided with its own driveway access to a public street unless otherwise approved by the Board. The Board shall not approve the creation of private rights-of-way to a lot, in part or in whole, within a proposed subdivision. The Board may allow an exception to this requirement if, due to the original parcel’s natural characteristics, a hardship would be imposed and then, only one lot shall be served by said right-of-way. The portion of the lot impacted by the right-of-way or easement cannot be considered as part of the required lot size. No private right-of-way shall be less than 50-feet in width and may be required to be more if deemed appropriate by the Board.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
9-33
9.17.6. Street Names: Streets that join or are in alignment with streets of abutting or neighboring properties shall bear the same name. No proposed street name shall duplicate or have phonetic resemblance to existing street names within the Town. A letter from the Fire Chief approving the proposed street name(s) shall be submitted to the Board.
9.17.7. Street Name Signs: At all intersections, street signs shall be provided and installed by the developer in conformity with the specifications of the Exeter Department of Public Works.
9.17.8. Street Address Numbers: Street address numbers shall be assigned as part of the Technical Review Committee process for each newly created lot.
9.17.9. Other Design Standards: The document, Standard Specifications for Construction of Public Utilities in Exeter, New Hampshire, contains detailed design and construction standards and requirements for the following:
1. Curbing
2. Cul-de-sacs
3. Road Dimensions
4. Curb Radius Intersections
5. Intersection Angles
6. Sight Distance
7. Street Drainage
8. Road Construction
9. Utilities
9.17.10 Roadway Parameters
A. An access road that serves one or two lots will be considered a driveway.
B. An access road used to serve three or more units is considered a road (or street).
C. Road/Street Width Specifications
Number of lots served
Width of Road
ROW required
3-4
16-18 foot paved road*
50 ft.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
9-34
5-9 lots
20-22 foot paved road*
50 ft
10 lots or more
24 foot paved road**
50 ft
* A range is provided as each case will be determined with consideration to roadway length, slope, curvature and character of the area. Road width does not include requirements for gravel shoulders or sidewalk.
**An allowance for slight reduction from 24 ft. may be negotiated if the design, topography, road length and other considerations warrant such a reduction. This does not include gravel shoulder or sidewalk requirements.
D. All private and public roads must allow for emergency vehicle access and include a turn-around for emergency vehicles serving 3 or more units.
E. The shorter the road and the shorter the driveways, the more likely there will be parking along the roadway. Therefore, the Planning Board may require new roads to be posted as “No Parking” if road or driveway, width and/or length may result in an overcrowding within the proposed subdivision.
F. All roads built less than 24 feet in width, unless otherwise deemed appropriate by the Town of Exeter’s Public Works Department or Board of Selectmen will be considered private roads inperpetuity. Restrictions regarding the private status, maintenance and snow removal of such roads, including agreements between private parties shall be included in the deeds of the affected lots.
Services and Utilities
9.18. Easements
All easements shall be laid out on the site or subdivision plan and referenced in each affected deed, granting to the Town rights of access and maintenance. The following additional provisions shall apply:
9.18.1. Utilities: Where the topography is such as to make difficult the inclusion of any utilities or other facilities within the road rights-of-way, the development plan shall show the boundaries of the proposed permanent easements over or under private property. Such easements shall not be less than 25-feet in width and shall have satisfactory access to existing or proposed public rights-of-way.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
9-35
9.18.2. Drainage: Where a proposed development is traversed by a watercourse or drainage way, the Board may require a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way of at least 25-feet in width.
9.19. Fire Protection
Fire alarms and fire hydrants shall be provided as specified by the Exeter Fire Department. These items shall be shown on the development plan and installed by the applicant.
9.20. Outdoor Lighting
9.20.1. Purpose: The purposes of this regulation is to avoid negative impacts resulting from excessive outdoor lighting, light trespass on adjacent properties, or safety concerns resulting from glare. This regulation is further intended to preserve Exeter’s rural character and dark night sky, to minimize the impact of artificial lighting on wildlife, and to conserve energy and natural resources.
9.20.2. Applicability of Lighting Standards: The Planning Board may require lighting in any new development, or any change to or addition of new lighting fixtures to an existing site, based on the Board’s evaluation of the submitted plan. This section applies to non-residential uses and any structure with 3 or more residential units.
9.20.3. Plan Requirements: For review of lighting designs the following information must be provided on a separate sheet submitted as part of the plan:
1. A visual photometric plan that demonstrates both light coverage and light spillage resulting from the proposed lighting plan;
2. Photometric data, such as that furnished by manufacturers, showing the angle of cut off or light emissions;
3. Plans indicating a description and location on the premises, of illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, reflectors, and other devices. The description may include, but is not limited to pictures and drawings supplied by manufacturers
4. Proposed lighting schedule that includes style, housing and bulb action, when units are on and off, and what will remain on, if any after 10:00 pm.
9.20.4. General Lighting Requirements:
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
9-36
1. All new outdoor lighting for non-residential structures or residential structures with three or more units is required to have full-cutoff shielding (including wallpack fixtures), and the design of the fixture shall be approved by the Planning Board.
2. The new installation of up-lighting, by any method, is prohibited; however, the limited use of upward landscape lighting on a case-by-case basis may be approved provided the lighting does not spill onto neighboring properties or public ways
3. Lighting should be designed to provide the minimum illumination standards by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) and shall follow the recommended practices for controlling light pollution of the International Dark Sky Association.
4. Lights shall be turned off or reduced in intensity at 10 p.m. or a reasonable hour as determined by the Planning Board. A note on the plan shall specify the hours of operation for any proposed lighting.
5. Emergency and Security lighting may be permitted on a case by case basis.
9.20.5. Prohibitions: The following types of lighting are prohibited:
1. Mercury Vapor Lamps or Fixtures. The installation of any mercury vapor fixture or lamp for use as outdoor lighting is prohibited.
2. Source Light. The use of laser source light or any similar high intensity light for outdoor advertising or entertainment, when projected above the horizontal plane is prohibited.
3. Searchlights. The operation of searchlights is not permitted.
4. Neon. Neon lighting on buildings or signs is prohibited, unless the sign is located inside a building. It is permissible for a neon sign to be visible through or placed in a building’s window.
5. Security Lighting. Security lighting shall be limited in such as fashion so as to not direct light onto neighboring property. Continual lighting must be shielded so as to not produce glare or light trespass onto neighboring property.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
9-37
9.21. Sewage Disposal
9.21.1. Municipal Sewage Disposal: All development proposals shall provide municipal sewage disposal when available or required by the Board. Installation of sewer lines and facilities are subject to the approval of the Exeter Department of Public Works. Detailed design and construction standards for the installation of sewer lines can be found in the Public Works Specifications. The Board shall reserve the right to inspect, or have its designated agent inspect the installation of all sewer lines.
9.21.2. Sewage Disposal: When a private sewage disposal system is proposed, a professional engineer licensed in New Hampshire shall design the system. Each system shall be designed to handle the expected wastewater flow for present and future development within the development. The Board reserves the right to have its designated agent inspect the installation of all sewage disposal systems in accordance with the State’s installation standards (Env-Ws 1000).
9.21.3. On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems: Per RSA §485-A: 29, no site plan or subdivision will be approved where the site or the creation of a lot does not meet the minimum standards imposed by the Water Supply and Pollution Control Division of the NH Department of Environmental Services. Regarding the installation of on-site sewage disposal systems, the following design standards shall apply:
1. Per administrative rules of the Water Supply and Pollution Control Division (Env-Ws 1003.01-d), subsurface sewage disposal systems under 2,500 gallons/day shall be designed by a septic system designer, licensed in the State of New Hampshire, or a professional engineer. A professional engineer practicing in New Hampshire shall design sewage disposal systems over 2,500 gallons/day. Systems are to be constructed in accordance with the most recent edition of the Subdivision and Individual Sewage Disposal System Design
Rules as published by the NH Water Supply and Pollution
Control Division of the Department of Environmental Services.
2. The Town of Exeter, in an effort to improve water quality, makes the following more stringent requirements:
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
9-38
a) 2-feet rather than 6-inches of natural permeable soil is required above the seasonal high water table.
b) 3-feet of natural soil is required above bedrock or any impervious substratum.
c) Any land area having a natural slope of 20% or greater shall not be used for wastewater disposal.
3. In addition to the natural permeable soil requirement, fill material may be added when needed to raise the bottom of the leaching area above seasonal high groundwater table or impervious substratum. The fill material shall be a medium to coarse textured sand (0.5 to 1.0 mm) with a Uniformity Coefficient (as determined by a sieve analysis) greater than “four”.
4. Each site proposed for non-residential or multi-family development or each proposed individual lot shall have at least two test pits, separated by at least 50-feet. The test pits shall establish the existence of a contiguous area of 4,000square-feet suitable as a receiving layer for a leaching system. The area must be able to accommodate a replacement leaching field equal in area to the original. This area shall be shown on the plan. The Board requires that all test pits and percolation test data be verified by its designated agent.
5. Each site proposed for non-residential or multi-family development or individual lot shall accommodate its own sewage. For cluster developments, all sewage shall be disposed within the boundaries of the cluster development, unless connected to the municipal sewer system.
6. Septic systems shall be located outside of the well radius required by the NH Department of Environmental Services.
9.21.4. Hydrogeologic Study:
1. A hydrogeologic study may be required for all projects that:
a) Have one or more septic systems designed for a total on-site sewage loading of 2,500 gallons per day or more, and
b) Subdivisions of four or more lots that are located within the Town’s Aquifer Protection District.
2. For subdivisions of three lots or less, the Board will determine on a case-by-case basis the need for a hydrogeologic study. Particularly sensitive sites may include areas that have septic
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
9-39
systems in close proximity to wells, or may contain excessively drained soils or steep slopes.
3. A hydrogeologic study shall at a minimum provide the following:
a) A hydrogeologic mapping of local groundwater flow;
b) Existing background water quality;
c) The location of abutter water supply wells and septic systems;
d) The location and capacity of the proposed septic system(s); and
e) Estimates of the transport of contaminants from the septic system(s) and of constituent concentrations (i.e. nitrates) at the property boundary and at abutter’s water supplies.
4. The proposed septic system(s) shall not create groundwater degradation beyond the limits of the property line in excess of EPA water quality criteria for domestic supplies, as amended. Degradation that does occur shall be minimal and shall not result in significant changes in local well water quality. Systems that violate these tenets shall be rejected.
5. The hydrogeologic studies shall be performed by registered or certified hydrologists, hydrogeologists, or other qualified professionals. All water testing is to be performed at EPA approved laboratories.
9.22. Solid Waste Disposal Facilities (Pertains to Site Plans Only)
All outdoor solid waste disposal facilities shall be located on a raised 6inch concrete pad enclosed by appropriate screening to prevent the scattering of trash.
9.23. Utilities
The applicant shall install all electric, telephone and other utility distribution lines per underground specifications of the public utilities companies involved, and there shall be provided by the developer such easements as are required for underground utilities, including those required for transformer pads.
9.24. Water Services
9.24.1. Municipal Water:
1. All non-residential and multi-family developments and subdivisions shall provide municipal water service when available or required by the Board. Installation of water mains
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
9-40
and facilities are subject to the approval of the Exeter Department of Public Works. The number and location of all fire hydrants shall be determined by the Fire Department.
2. Detailed design and construction standards for the installation of water mains can be found in the Public Works
Specifications. The Board shall reserve the right to inspect, or have its designated agent inspect the installation of all water mains. The Exeter Department of Public Works’ Water Division shall install all water mains and services on existing Town roads from the existing main line to the property line. The applicant will be responsible for the installation cost.
9.24.2. Public Water: All non-residential and multi-family developments or subdivisions shall provide public water service (as defined by RSA §485:1-XV) when available or required by the Board. When a public water system is proposed, the system shall be designed by a qualified engineer. Each system shall be designed to handle the expected flows (domestic and fire) for present and future development within the development. The Board reserves the right to have its designated agent inspect the installation of all public water systems in accordance with the State’s installation standards (Env-Ws 1000).
9.24.3. On-Site Water Supply: The provision of on-site water supply shall conform to criteria of the Water Supply and Pollution Control Division of the NH Department of Environmental Services. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to provide adequate information to prove that the area of each lot is adequate to permit the installation and operation of both individual on-site water supply and sewage disposal systems.
Surveying
9.25. Monuments and Benchmarks
9.25.1. Monuments: Granite bounds shall be set on one sideline at all points of curvature and points of tangency. Such bounds shall also be set at the intersection of sidelines of existing or proposed streets. The size of said bounds shall be 4-inches by 4-inches by 30-inches (4" x 4" x 30"), with a three-eighths inch (3/8") drill hole in the center. The developer shall excavate a hole sufficiently
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
9-41
large enough to properly place the bounds securely in the ground. Iron pipes are to be furnished at all property line corners and angles, the size of said pipes shall be ½-inch by 30-inches (1/2" x 30"). Said pipes shall be driven into the ground at accurate locations, leaving 2-inches exposed. All newly installed iron pins shall include a surveyor’s “cap” in an effort to facilitate their location in the field. The locations of all bounds and pipes shall be shown on the subdivision plan. The applicant’s surveyor shall certify in writing that the bounds and pipes have been installed according to the submitted plan. The form entitled “Certificate of Monumentation Installation Form” shall serve as the surveyor’s certification. Copies of said form can be obtained from the Planning Department at the Exeter Town Offices.
9.25.2. Benchmarks: As part of the subdivision plan a permanent reinforced granite marker may be required by the Board, and if so required, it shall be placed at the edge of each road boundary at their terminus of the subdivision as reference for all locations and elevations and every 2,500-feet within the subdivision or at other locations specified by the Exeter Department of Public Works. For all subdivisions involving more than twenty acres, all benchmarks shall be tied to the “State Plane Coordinate System”.
9.26. Property Boundaries, Bearings and Distances (Pertains to Subdivisions
Only)
For subdivisions that do not involve the construction of a roadway, and for lot line adjustments, all property bounds must be set and firmly established before the Board will give final approval to the plan.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
10-1
SECTION 10. EPPING ROAD CORRIDOR (Overlay District - Pertains to Site Plans Only)
10.1. Additional Standards and Site Plan Requirements
All site development within the Epping Road Corridor shall comply with the following additional standards and site design requirements.
10.2. Conformance to Other Regulations
All non-residential development proposed within the Epping Road
Corridor shall comply with these regulations, the Town’s Zoning
Ordinance (specifically Article 6.8 Epping Road Strip Management
Ordinance, C-3 District), the Town’s Master Plan (specifically the Epping Road Corridor Section), and other applicable Town by-laws, ordinances, regulations, and statutes of the local, State, and federal governments.
10.3. Access
Regarding site access, the following additional standards and site design requirements shall apply:
10.3.1. The design and location of access and eggress points within the Epping Road Corridor shall be specified by the Board. Insofar as possible, access points shall be located directly opposite each other. Site plans shall be reviewed to ultimately limit access points to the greatest possible extent. This goal shall be achieved through the use of single access points for parcels with extensive frontage, and joint use of access points by parcels with relatively small amounts of frontage.
10.3.2. Every property will be given reasonable access to the public way. The Board may require locating drives adjacent to abutting property lines that may be used as a future access point by both properties.
10.3.3. Each parcel shall have but one point of access to Epping Road unless it has more than 1,200-feet of frontage, in which case one point of access is permitted for each 600-feet of frontage. The Board may require the provision of service roads for new commercial/industrial development.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
10-1
10.4. Parking
To the greatest extent possible, parking areas shall be located to the rear and side of buildings. Where parking is provided along Epping Road, it shall be appropriately screened by landscaping and/or berms.
10.5. Utilities
All utilities shall be provided underground, including telephone and electric.
10.6. Landscaping
Landscaping for non-residential development proposals shall conform to Section 9.7 Landscaping and Screening of these regulations. The front yard landscaping requirements, as set forth in Article 6.8.2 Epping Road
Strip Management Ordinance, C-3 Districts, Minimum Front Yard, Use Thereof of the Zoning Ordinance, shall be included as part of the landscaping requirement.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
11-1
SECTION 11. OPEN SPACE AND MULTI-FAMILY DEVELOPMENT -
ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS
An application for an open space and/or multi-family development shall conform to these regulations and the following additional requirements:
11.1. Review
The Board shall review single-family open space and multi-family development plans based upon the design standards listed below, as well as conformance with Article 7 OPEN SPACE DEVELOPMENT of the Zoning Ordinance.
11.2. Development Specifications (Open Space)
An open space development proposal shall adequately provide for the following:
11.2.1. Adequate provision must be made for light, air, access and privacy in the arrangement of the buildings to each other. Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum of one exterior exposure. Laundry facilities, including washing machines and clothes dryers, may be required on the premises for use by all occupants of the premises.
11.2.2. Proposed collector and through streets serving other than development traffic will require setbacks complying with external boundaries of the development as set forth in Article 7.5 Single Family Open Space Development of the Zoning Ordinance.
11.2.3. Protection of the residential environment from soil, water, air, noise and light pollution and other forms of pollution/nuisances.
11.2.4. Landscaping plans should include the preservation of existing landscaping features as well as additional natural screening between surrounding developments, public ways, and parking areas. Screening shall be provided in a transition area between residential and non-residential uses.
11.2.5. Utilization of topography, slope, sun, and weather orientation in overall layout and design of the development.
11.2.6. Open space and common areas shall be designed and located so as to provide for active and/or passive recreational uses. Reasonable effort must be made to locate common open
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
11-2
space adjacent to protected open space in adjoining property or properties to the satisfaction of the Planning Board. At least 75% of designated common open space shall be contiguous to other protected open space where applicable.
11.2.7. Attached dwelling units shall each be provided with a private space, for example, a patio, balcony, deck, or enclosed yard.
11.2.8. Perimeter Buffer Strip: A required vegetated buffer strip of 100-feet width in the RU or R1 districts and 50-feet width in all other allowed districts shall be provided between any proposed lots, septic system, or service road and the perimeter lot line of the tract. The buffer strip shall be comprised of natural or planted vegetation. The first 50-feet in width for RU and R1 districts and 25-feet in width for other allowed districts measured from the external abutting property line shall be left natural and not to be disturbed by construction activities with the exception of access roads into the subdivision. Primary access and secondary access roads, utilities and services shall be allowed to cross the buffer zone. The Board may approve a partial or total waiver to the buffer strip if the configuration or location of the parcel, with consideration of abutting properties, warrants flexibility to the proposed open space.
11.3. Multi-Family Development (Non-Open Space)
In reviewing a proposed site plan for one or more multi-family structures, the Planning Board and the Board of Adjustment will be guided by Article 7 OPEN SPACE DEVELOPMENT of the Zoning Ordinance, these regulations, and the following additional requirements.
11.3.1. Site Plan Specifications
1. Distance Between Buildings: Article 4.3 Schedule II: Density and Dimensional Regulations – Residential of the Zoning Ordinance shall be applied.
2. Distance Between Building and Driveway:
a) No parking lot shall be closer than 25-feet to the front of any building, or 10-feet to the side or rear of any building.
b) In the case of an enclosed garage or carport provided as an extension of the main structure, distance requirements for driveways providing access to these accommodations shall not apply.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
11-3
c) All driveway and parking areas shall be developed in accordance with these regulations and shall contain facilities for night illuminations.
3. Landscaping: The proposed site must be properly landscaped in order to further enhance the natural qualities of the land. Where adjacent land uses dictate, the Board may require proper screening and buffer zones.
4. Recreational Space: The site shall provide an area or areas devoted to the joint recreational use of the residents thereof. Such recreation space shall consist of not less than 400square-feet of space per dwelling unit. The Board may require the provision of active and/or passive recreation uses, as it deems appropriate.
11.4. Conversions and Other Multi-Family Dwellings
11.4.1. Parking: The number of parking spaces shall comply with the requirements of the Exeter Zoning Ordinance. The Board may require that parking area development avoid the necessity of cars backing into a street and not encroach upon a required front yard, side yard, and rear yard.
11.4.2. Landscaping: The proposed site must be properly landscaped in order to further enhance the natural qualities of the land. Where adjacent land uses dictate, the Board may require proper screening and buffer zones.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
12-1
SECTION 12. ASSURANCES FOR COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS
12.1. General
12.1.1. Under no circumstances shall any site work (including any disturbance of soil or tree removal) commence or any building permits be issued until all precedent conditions of the approval have been met, the plan is signed by the Chairman of the Planning Board, a preconstruction meeting has taken place with the Town of Exeter, all inspection escrows have been established, and all required performance sureties have been posted.
12.1.2. Off-site Improvements: Prior to the commencement of any site work, the property owner shall post a performance surety to guarantee the completion of the off-site improvements or any improvements intended to be offered to the Town for acceptance.
12.1.3. On-site Improvements: Prior to any site work, the property owner shall be required to submit an erosion control and site restoration bond in an amount and form determined by the Town Engineer. The property owner shall submit an erosion control and site restoration scheme and calculations to the Town Engineer for review prior to establishing the bond. If the proposal is to create a condominium form of ownership, then the property owner shall be required to post a performance surety to cover the estimated cost of constructing and installing all required site improvements including, but not limited to: as-builts, street work, drainage facilities, parking and/or loading facilities, landscaping, water mains and all associated infrastructure, sewer lines or septic system(s) and all associated infrastructure, and other utilities.
12.1.4. All performance sureties shall be in the form of an Irrevocable Letter of Credit as shown in Exhibit A or a cash bond. Individuals or companies providing these Letters of Credit shall be registered with the New Hampshire Department of State and considered members in good standing. These sureties shall be in an amount not less than 100% of the cost of construction which shall be determined by an engineer’s estimate of value submitted by the applicant and subject to the review and approval of the Town Engineer. In the event that the Town Engineer and applicant
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
12-2
cannot agree on the estimated cost of construction, the matter will return to the Planning Board for a determination.
12.1.5. In circumstances that prevent landscaping or other required improvements to be completed (due to weather conditions or other unique circumstances), The Code Enforcement Officer may issue a Certificate of Occupancy (C/O) prior to the completion of these improvements, if agreed upon by the Town Planner, and when a cash bond (in an amount agreeable to the Town but not less than 110% of the cost to complete the improvements), accompanied by a written agreement to complete the improvements, is supplied to the Town. The improvements shall be completed within nine (9) months from the issuance of the C/O, or the Town shall utilize the bond to contract out the work to complete the improvements in accordance with the approved Plan. No other improvements shall be permitted to bond for their completion for purposes of receiving a C/O and all these other improvements must be satisfactorily completed prior to the issuance of a C/O unless otherwise approved by the Planning Board (or their designee) as a plan amendment request as outlined in Section 14.
12.1.6. Wetlands and Riparian Buffer Areas and limits of cut: Any no cut/no disturbance zones of all wetland and riparian buffers and/or the limits of proposed land clearing indicated on the plans shall be clearly delineated in the field using flagging tape or similar approved methods prior to any site work with writing on them that identifies the area as a “no cut zone” or “limit of tree cut”. All these flags shall be maintained throughout construction of the project until a permanent C/O has been issued.
12.2. Release of Performance Guarantees
12.2.1. Upon inspection of a partial completion of required improvements the Board or its agent may authorize in writing a reduction in the performance guarantee up to an amount equal to the work completed. The Town shall retain sufficient funds for the current cost to complete the remaining improvements as indicated by a qualified contractor’s bid estimate approved by the Town, plus a retainage of 20% of the original performance guarantee amount
which shall be kept until all required improvements have been inspected and approved by the Town. If costs for completing the required improvements exceed the amount of the performance
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
12-3
guarantee held by the Town, additional funds shall be required in order to insure completion before the development proceeds any further. The retainage shall be held until the completion of all required improvements have been inspected and approved by the Town and a permanent C/O has been issued.
12.2.2. The performance guarantee (or balance thereof) shall not be released until the Board or its agent has certified completion of all required improvements in accordance with the approved plan, and Town Counsel has reviewed and approved all deeds governing land to be used for public purposes, and all easements and/or covenants and/or other encumbrances being proposed on the land. All costs associated with Town Counsel review of documents shall be borne by the applicant.
12.3. Maintenance Guarantees
12.3.1. For public improvements within the Town right-of-way, or for roads intended to be turned over to the Town for acceptance, the performance guarantee shall not be released until a maintenance guarantee is in place. The maintenance guarantee shall cover the maintenance of public roads and other improvements for a period of two (2) years from the date of street acceptance by the Board of Selectmen, in an amount not to exceed 15% of the improvement costs. If repair or unusual maintenance is needed or additional improvements are required then such costs as are necessary shall be drawn against said guarantee. For a description of the Town’s procedure for posting a maintenance guarantee, please review Selectmen’s Policy 92-06.
12.4. Inspections
12.4.1 Inspection Service Fee and Cost
1. All applicants shall be required to deposit an inspection fee escrow(s) with the Town prior to any site work. This fee, which shall be determined by the Town, shall cover all costs incurred by the Town and the cost of the Town’s designated agent who shall monitor and inspect improvements for
compliance with the approved plans and required engineering standards.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
12-4
2. The Town may contract with a consultant for inspection services. The applicant shall be responsible for all costs of all inspections and associated work performed by the consultant on behalf of the Town.
3. If it is determined that any of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the Town’s construction standards and specifications or approved plans, the applicant shall be responsible for reconstruction and re-inspection of the improvements.
4. Escrow accounts shall be periodically reviewed by the Town Engineer to assure that sufficient funds are available to cover all inspection costs and additional escrow shall be provided as needed.
5. Upon acceptance of the project and submission of the required as-built plan, any unused escrow shall be returned to the applicant. The project shall be considered accepted once the Town determines that all improvements have been constructed in accordance with the plans and Town specifications and standards and a permanent Certificate of Occupancy has been issued.
12.4.2 Arrangement for Inspections: At least fifteen days prior to commencing any site work, the applicant shall notify the Town Engineer in writing of the time he/she proposes to commence construction. The Town Engineer will arrange a preconstruction meeting prior to the start of construction. The escrow amount(s) needed for the project shall be supplied to the applicant in writing at the preconstruction meeting and the escrow(s) shall be established prior to any site work.
12.4.3. Proper Installation of Improvements: If the Town or the Town’s agent determines that any of the improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications or any condition of Planning Board approval, the Town Engineer shall notify the Finance Director who shall notify the applicant, and if necessary, the bonding company or escrow agent and take all necessary steps to preserve the Town’s rights under the bond or agreement. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued by the Code Enforcement Officer if the applicant is in default on a previously approved Subdivision or Site Plan regardless of whether or not the current applicant was involved in the prior approvals.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
12-5
12.4.4. Failure to Complete Improvements or Abandon Project
1. When a performance surety has been posted and required off-site improvements have not been installed or completed in accordance with the terms of said performance, the project may be declared in default and the Town shall make a determination on calling the surety to complete all outstanding improvements.
2. When an applicant fails to complete all required on-site improvements as shown on the approved plans and the Building Permit has expired, the Planning Board shall proceed with the Revocation process in accordance with NHRSA 676:4-a, as amended.
12.5 As-Built Plans
12.5.1. At the completion of a project or completion of an approved phase (whichever occurs first), the applicant shall submit a detailed as-built plan to the Town Engineer. The applicant shall deliver a paper Portable Document Format (PDF) copy and one electronic copy of the as-built plan to the Town Engineer for review and approval. Once the Town Engineer determines that the submitted plans are acceptable, the applicant shall supply two paper copies and one electronic version of the plan in accordance with the following:
1. It shall be in a .dwg or .dxf file format;
2. It shall be in NAD 1983 State Plane New Hampshire FIPS 2800 Feet coordinates;
3. Horizontal control points shall have an adjusted
accuracy of 1:10,000 (Third Order, Class I);
4. The layer naming convention shall be provided; and,
5. All lines representing property lines shall consist of continuous line work snapped to endpoints. Stonewall representations, unless created using a line type will not be accepted.
6. The coordinates of all stormwater infrastructure elements (e.g. catch basins, pipes, swales, detention/bioretention areas) shall be provided in .dwg or GIS file format; and,
7. Calculations of the change in impervious area, pollution loading and removal volumes for each stormwater best management practice (BMP) shall be provided.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
12-6
12.5.2. For subdivisions that include the construction of a new street, submission of as-built plans is required before a street is formally accepted by the Town. Please refer to Selectmen’s Policy 97-21 for the appropriate procedure to be followed for the
acceptance of subdivision roads by the Town.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
13-1
SECTION 13. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
13.1. AMENDMENTS: For the purpose of providing for the public health, safety, and general welfare, the Planning Board may, from time to time, amend, change, alter, add or rescind the provisions imposed by these regulations in accordance with NH RSA 675:6, as the same may be subsequently amended.
13.2. CONDITIONS: Regulation of development of land and the attachment of reasonable conditions to land development is an exercise of valid police power delegated by the State to this municipality. The developer has the duty of compliance with reasonable conditions laid down by the Planning Board for design, dedication, improvement, and restrictive use of land so as to conform to the physical and economical development of the municipality and to the safety and general welfare of the future owners of the development and of the community at large.
13.3. SAVINGS PROVISION: These regulations shall not be construed as abating any action now pending under, or by virtue of, prior existing regulations, or as discontinuing, abating, modifying, or altering any penalty accruing or about to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm, or corporation, or as waiving any right of the Town under any section or provision existing at the time of adoption of these regulations, or as vacating or annulling any rights obtained by any person, firm or corporation, by lawful action of the Town except as shall be expressly provided for in these regulations.
13.4 INTERPRETATION: In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare.
13.5. CONFLICT WITH PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROVISIONS:
13.5.1. Public Provisions – These regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. Where any provision of these regulations imposes restriction different from those imposed by any other provision of these regulations or any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or any
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
13-2
other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher standards shall control.
13.5.2. Private Provisions – These regulations are not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or any other private agreement or restriction, provided that where the provisions of these regulations are more restrictive, impose higher standards or regulations than such easement, covenant, or other private agreement or restriction, the requirements of these regulations shall govern. Where the provisions of the easement, covenant, or private agreement or restriction impose duties and obligations more restrictive, or higher standards than the requirements of these regulations, or the determination of the Planning Board in approving a development or in enforcing these regulations, and such private provisions are not inconsistent with these regulations or determinations thereunder, then such private provisions shall be operative and supplemental to these regulations and determinations made thereunder.
13.6. SEPARABILITY: If any part or provision of these regulations and application thereof to any person or circumstances is adjudged invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall be confined in its operation to the part, provision, or application directly involved in all controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered and shall not affect or impair the validity of the remainder of these regulations or the application thereof to other persons or circumstances. The Town hereby declares that it would have enacted the remainder of these regulations even without any such part, provision, or application.
13.7. WAIVERS: The Planning Board shall not approve any waivers from these regulations unless it shall make the following findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case:
13.7.1. The granting of the waiver will not be detrimental to the public safety, health, or welfare or injurious to other property;
13.7.2. The conditions upon which the request for a waiver is based are unique to the property for which the waiver is sought and are not applicable generally to other property;
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
13-3
13.7.3. Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of these regulations are carried out;
13.7.4. The granting of the waiver will not be contrary to the spirit and intent of the regulations; and,
13.7.5. The waiver will not, in any manner, vary the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance or Master Plan.
In approving waivers, the Planning Board may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements of these regulations.
All requests for waivers shall be submitted in writing by the applicant at the time when the application is filed for consideration. The petition shall fully state the grounds for the waiver and all the facts relied upon by the applicant.
13.8. BOARD ACTION
13.8.1. Within time frames established in NH RSA 676:4, as the same may be subsequently amended, the Planning Board shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the application. The reasons for a disapproval of a plan shall be stated in the record of the Board. Approval of the plan shall be endorsed on the plan by the Chairman of the Board. The time to act may be extended in accordance with NH RSA 676:4.f, as the same may be subsequently amended.
13.8.2. The Board may require that a Site Plan or Subdivision Plat or portion thereof be reviewed by a consulting engineer or other professional consultant and/or a legal consultant to ensure compliance with all applicable local, State, and Federal regulations, construction standards and building codes. The consultant shall provide the Board with a written report of the technical review of the proposal. The cost of such consultant shall be paid by the applicant.
13.8.3. All approvals shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of the meeting the Board votes to approve the application, unless the
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
13-4
Board, at their discretion, chooses to extend the number of days required to fulfill precedent conditions. All precedent conditions must be met within this 180-day time period (or within the extended time as specified by the Board at the time of approval) or the approval shall be null and void. In the case where extenuating circumstances prevent the fulfillment of the precedent conditions within the applicable time period, the applicant may request an extension (in writing with justification and accompanied by the appropriate fee) from the Board no later than 14 days prior to expiration. The Planning Board shall vote at their next regular scheduled meeting on whether or not to grant the extension.
13.8.4. Once active and substantial development has been achieved, approved Plans shall be protected from future changes in regulations and ordinances in accordance with NH RSA 674:39, as the same may be subsequently amended, and all provisions shall apply to approved Plans as if this these provisions were fully incorporated herein. For the purpose of these regulations, “active and substantial development” shall be defined as follows:
1. Construction of and/or installation of basic infrastructure to support the development (including all of the following: roadways, pedestrian access ways, parking lots, etc. to a minimum of gravel base; and utilities placed in underground conduit ready for connection to proposed buildings/structures) in accordance with the approved plans; and,
2. Construction and completion of drainage improvements to service the development (including all of the following: detention/retention basins, treatment swales, pipes, underdrain, catch basins, etc.) in accordance with the approved plans; completion of drainage improvements means that these facilities shall be fully operational; and,
3. All erosion control measures (as specified on the approved plans) must be in place and maintained on the site; and
4. Items 13.8.1, 13.8.2 and 13.8.3 above shall be reviewed and approved by the Town.
5. Movement of earth, excavation, or logging of a site without the completion of items 13.8.1, 13.8.2 and 13.8.3 above, shall not be considered “active and substantial development”. Plans approved in phases shall be subject to this definition for the phase currently being developed.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
13-5
13.9 ENFORCEMENT; FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ORDER; VIOLATIONS
AND PENALTY; APPEALS
13.9.1. General – These regulations shall be enforced under the authority of NH RSA 676, as the same may be subsequently amended, and such other authorities as may be available.
13.9.2. Penalties – Any person who fails to comply with or violates any section of these regulations shall be fined in accordance with NH RSA 676.
13.9.3. Civil Enforcement – Appropriate actions may be taken by law or in equity to prevent any violation of these regulations in order to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages, to restrain, correct, or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupation of a structure or premises. These remedies shall be in addition to the penalties described above.
13.9.4. Revocation of Approval – Plans approved by the Board may be revoked, in whole or in part, in accordance with NH RSA 676:4-a, as the same may be subsequently amended.
13.9.5. Appeals – In accordance with the terms of RSA §677:15, any person(s) aggrieved by any decision of the Board concerning a site plan review or subdivision application may present to the superior court a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal or unreasonable in whole or in part and specifying the grounds upon which the same is claimed to be illegal or unreasonable. Such petition shall be presented to the court within 30-days after the Board’s final decision regarding the site plan review or subdivision application in question.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
14-1
SECTION 14. MODIFICATIONS TO AN APPROVED PLAN
If at any time before or during construction of the improvements required pursuant to a Plan review approval, the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Town Planner and the Town Engineer, that unforeseen conditions make it necessary or preferable to modify the design of the requirements/improvements, the Town Planner, and the Town Engineer, may authorize such modifications provided that the modifications shall be limited to the following:
14.1 Changes in the dimensions or locations of any buildings or structure which do not require changes in parking, loading, access or public utilities, provided that the changes do not necessitate permits or approvals from any Federal, State or local entity. Relocating any structure that encroaches further into any regulated buffer shall not be considered a minor change.
14.2 Changes in the dimensions or locations of parking lots which do not result in an increase in the number of parking spaces provided and which do not result in the encroachment into any approved landscaped area.
14.3 Minor changes in the locations, dimensions, and materials of proposed water, sanitary sewage and drainage systems, provided that the changes do not necessitate permits or approvals from any Federal, State or local entity. Redesign of an approved drainage scheme shall not be considered a minor change.
14.4 Changes in the locations and types of proposed outdoor lighting and landscaping, provided that the integrity of the approved Plan is maintained.
At the discretion of the Town Planner, any request of a modification to a Plan which is not in clear conformance with the guidelines set out above shall be referred to the Planning Board for review and action, pursuant to Section 6 of this chapter.
Any request for review and approval of a modification to an approved Plan shall be accompanied by a fee of an amount to be determined in accordance with the Town of Exeter Planning Department Planning and Zoning Fee Schedule.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
15-1
SECTION 15. VALIDITY
15.1. Interpretation
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare.
15.2. Conflicting Provisions
Where any section of these regulations conflicts with another, or with any other local regulation or ordinance, the requirement imposing the greater restriction or higher standard shall apply. In addition, the fact that a requirement under these regulations is less restrictive than a federal or state regulation or statute does not relieve an applicant from compliance with the terms of such regulation or statute, unless specifically authorized by said regulation or statute. Where any section of these regulations references other manuals or documents for design guidance and standards, the latest version of such documents shall be used, unless specifically noted.
15.3. Saving Clause
If any section, clause, provision, or portion of these regulations shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect or impair any other section, clause, provision, or portion of these regulations.
Site and Subdivision Regulations amended October 10, 2019
16-1
SECTION 16. EFFECTIVE DATE
These regulations and amendments shall take effect upon their passage.








