2NFI :..... L.     T.Gi.f'N   BEACH  ORD   NANCE

WHEREAS, the Town of Enfield, owns and· maintains a town beach and adjoining parking lot adjacent to Route 4A, and,

WHEREAS, the increasing use of the beach and parking lot has created problems of overcr.owding, and,

WHEREAS, the overcrowding is placing an increased strain on the limited facilities of the Town beach, and

WHEREAS, the projected continued growth of the Town makes it desirable to insure the continued availability of the Town beach for residents of Enfield,

NOW, THEREFORE, the Selectmen of the Town of Enfield, under the authority of RSA 41:11, adopt the following ordinance for the regulation of parking at the Town beach:

1.	No motor vehicles shall be permitted to park at the Town beach parking lot without displaying a  valid permit sticker.

2..Permit stickers shall be available at the Office of the Selectmen for the following fees:

A.	Residents, per vehicle, $1.00 per season;
B.	Non-residents, per vehicle, $25 per season;
C.	Renters/Short-term visitors, $1.00	per	day;
per	vehicle;	$10	for	15-day	permit;	per
vehicle;	and
vehicle	$25	for	season	permit;	per

3.	Violations of this ordinance shall result in a fine not to exceed $100 per violation and this ordinance shall be enforced by the Town police department.

4.	Revenues from the permits/fines shall go to the Enfield Recreation Department.


and this
15 of







Evely	. Palmer
  (J	%
C.Ja
Enfiela Board of Selectmen
L
 
Adopted: 8 April 1991
Amended: 6 July 1998



TOWN OF ENFIELD BOARD OF SELECTMEN


CLASS VI ROADS POLICY




Section I.	PURPOSE

The Selectmen recognize and are concerned about  the potential for scattered or premature development in areas that are not adequately accessible to emergency vehicles and which otherwise lack satisfactory public services.  The Town of Enfield has been presented with an increasing number of requests for building permits on Class VI roads. Presently, there is a need for standards by which the Selectmen can evaluate an application  for a building permit on a Class VI road.  The standards would provide the Selectmen and the Planning Board with guidance in evaluating the merits of a request for a building permit on a Class VI road and would prevent arbitrary and inconsistent results.  The following is not to be considered an exhaustive statement on Class VI roads, and each case will be decided on a case by case basis.



Section II.	POLICY

It shall be the policy of the Selectmen, in accordance with the Master Plan, Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision Regulations, and previous Town vote expressing the intent to preserve Class VI roads as recreational/conservational public ways, to discourage construction on Class VI roads. The Board may take such actions as it deems necessary to insure against the scattered or premature development of land that could involve danger or injury to the public health, safety and welfare, due to the lack of water supply, drainage, access or other public services, or that would necessitate an excessive expenditure of public funds for the supply of such services.

Except as otherwise provided below, each request for a building permit on a Class VI road shall be reviewed by the Planning Board and evaluated according to the following criteria:

A.	Road Condition

 
1.	Length of road
2.	Width of traveled way
3.	Width of right-of-way
4.	Road surface and condition
5.	Condition of the road bed with regard to the depth and quality of gravels
6.	Steepness of the grade on the portion of the road being considered
7.	The existence of large rocks or ledge in the road bed
8.	The existence of areas which flood during seasonal rainy periods
9.	Impeded access due to mud during rainy periods
k:\executive\regulations ordinances & policies\dpw\roads\class vi road policy amended 7-6-98.doc    3/5/2013
 













Page 1
 

10.	The adequacy of drainage along the road
11.	The condition of any existing culverts and the need for new culverts
12.	The condition of curves and switch backs
13.	The existence and condition of any bridges on the road
14.	The proximity of trees to the traveled way
15.	Any other condition of the road which would affect its suitability for development

B.	Intensity of Use

1.	The ability of two cars to safely pass each other
2.	The ability of a plow truck to pass along the road
3.	The ability of a fire truck or emergency vehicle to pass along the road
4.	The distance to the closest Class V or higher quality road
5.	The number of existing homes already located on the Class VI road
6.	The distance to the closest residence
7.	The distance to municipal services, such as police, fire, water, sewer, utilities and schools
8.	The consistency of the proposed development with the Master Plan
9.	Any other factors which would affect the suitability of the road for use by the proposed development

By using these criteria, the Planning Board and Selectmen may determine which Class VI roads would be suitable for the issuance of building permits that would not cause premature and scattered development, not distort the Master Plan, cause financial or access hardships to future purchasers of the subject property, or undue financial impact on the municipality.

Upon favorable review by the Planning Board according to the above criteria, it shall be the policy of the Board of Selectmen that when a permit is approved, it shall be allowed at a density not to exceed one single family dwelling, with accessory uses,  per parcel of land.  Any further property development shall require review by the Planning Board under the standards for site plan review.

Persons desiring to build and gain access off a Class VI road after a favorable recommendation by the Planning Board, may be permitted to do so by the Selectmen, provided that they agree to bring the road up to minimum standards approved by the Planning Board and the Board of Selectmen.  These standards shall adhere as closely as possible to  the Town of Enfield road design standards  established in the Subdivision Regulations, except that the width of the traveled way shall be a minimum of 16 feet and the shoulders shall be a minimum of 2 feet.  A building permit will not be granted prior to the receipt of a performance bond covering the expense of necessary road improvements in compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations.

In a case where a year-round single family dwelling has already been established on a Class 6 road by this permit process, an additional building permit for an accessory use to that dwelling may be issued without further Planning Board or Board of Selectmen consideration.
 

A notice of the limits of municipal responsibility and liability, in a form satisfactory to the Board of Selectmen, shall be recorded in the Grafton County Registry of Deeds prior to the issuance of any building permit authorized hereunder.



Section III.	MAINTENANCE


It shall be the responsibility of landowners who have been granted permission to build on Class VI roads to maintain, at their own expense, the portion of the road needed to access their property.  Such maintenance work shall be sufficient to permit ease of access by emergency vehicles at all times.
 
TOWN OF ENFIELD
ENFIELD PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT WATER DIVISION
P.O. BOX 373
ENFIELD, NEW HAMSPHIRE 03748












CROSS CONNECTION PROGRAM FOR THE
MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM










Adopted:	March 18, 2013 Prepared By:	Enfield Public Works Dept.
for Water & Sewer Division
 


Cross Connection Program


I.	Purpose

Cross-Connections between water supplies and non-portable sources of contamination can represent one of the most significant threats to health in the water supply industry.  These program regulations are designed to maintain the safety and potability of the water in the Enfield Water System by establishing rules and procedures to control cross-connection situations and to prevent the contamination of public drinking water by the backflow of water or other fluids from a source or sources other than its intended or approved source(s) of supply.

A.	The purpose of this regulation is:

1.	To protect the public water supply of the area served by the Enfield Water Department from the possibility of contamination or pollution by isolating within its customers' internal distribution system(s) such contaminants or pollutants which could backflow or back-siphon into the public water supply system; and

2.	To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections, actual or potential, between its customers' in-plant potable water system(s) and non-potable; and

3.	To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection control which will effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of all potable water systems by cross-connection.

This document is intended to supplement the rules promulgated by the New Hampshire Department of Environmental  Service (DES) as listed in section ll below.  Changes to this document in the future must be approved by DES.

II.	Authority

A.	New Hampshire Administrative Rule Env-WS 364 (Bac/eflow Control)

B.	The Enfield Water Department rules and regulations, adopted.

III.	Requirements

The Public Works Director shall be responsible for the protection of the public potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to the backflow or back-siphonage  of
contaminants or pollution through the water service connection. If, in the judgment of the Public Works Director, an approved backflow prevention device is required at the Enfield water service connection to any customer's premises for the safety of the water system; the Public Works Director or his designated agent shall give notice, in writing, to said customer to install an approved backflow prevention device at each service connection to his premises. The customer shall, within (90) days, install approved device  or devices at his own expense; and failure, refusal, or inability on the part of the customer to install said
 


device or devices within (90) days shall constitute a ground for discontinuing water service to the premises until such device or devices have been properly installed.

IV.	Definitions

A.	Approved -Accepted by the Public Works Director as meeting an applicable specification stated or cited in this regulation, or as suitable for the proposed use.

B.	Auxiliary Water Supply-Any water supply on or available to the premises other than the purveyor's approved public potable water supply.

C. Backflow - The flow of water or other fluids, mixtures or substances into the distributing pipes of a portable water supply system form any source other than intended approved source of supply.

D.	Backflow Preventer-A device or means designed to prevent backflow or back- siphonage.

1.	Air Gap -A physical separation sufficient to prevent backflow between the free- flowing discharge end of the potable water system and any other system.  Physically defined as a vertical distance equal to twice the diameter of the supply side pipe diameter; but no less than one ( 1) inch.

2.	Atmospheric Vacuum Breaker - A device which prevents back-siphonage by creating an atmospheric vent when there is either a negative pressure or sub-atmospheric pressure in a water system.

3.	Barometric Loop -A fabricated piping arrangement rising at least thirty-five (35) feet at its topmost point above the highest fixture it supplies. It is utilized in water supply systems to protect against back-siphonage.

4.	Double  Check Valve Assembly-An  assembly  of two (2) independently operating spring loaded check valves with tightly closing shut-off valves on each side of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of each check valve.

5.	Double Check Valve with Intermediate Atmospheric Vent -A device having two
(2) independently operating spring loaded check valves separated by an atmospheric vent chamber.

6.	Hose Bibb Vacuum Breaker -A device which is connected to a hose bibb and which acts as an atmospheric vacuum breaker. Not to be used under constant pressure .

7.	Pressure Vacuum Breaker-A  device containing one or two independently operated spring loaded check valves and an independently operated spring loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve(s).  The device includes tightly
 


closing shut-off valves on each side of the check valve(s) and properly located test cocks for the testing of the check valve(s).

8.	Reduced Pressure Principal Backflow Preventer - An assembly consisting of two
(2) independently operating spring loaded check valves with an automatically operating differential relief valve located between the two (2) check valves, tightly closing shut-off valves on each side of the check valves plus properly located test cocks for the testing of the check valves and the relief valve.

9.	Residential  Dual Check-An assembly of two (2) spring loaded independently operating check valves without tightly closing shut-off valves and test cocks.  Generally employed immediately downstream of the water meter to act as a containment device.

E.	Backpressure - A condition in which the owner's system pressure is greater than the supplier's system pressure.

F.	Back-Siphonage-The  flow of water or other fluids, mixtures or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source other than its intended source caused by the sudden reduction of pressure in the potable water supply system.

G.	Containment-A method ofbackflow prevention which requires a backflow prevention device at the water service entrance.

H.	Contaminant -A substance that will impair the quality of the water to a degree that it creates a serious health hazard to the public leading to poisoning or the spread of disease.

I.	Cross-Connection-Any actual or potential connection between the public water supply and a source of contamination or pollution.

J.	Department-New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services (DES).

K.	Fixture Isolation -A method of backflow prevention in which a backflow preventer is located to correct a cross-connection at an in-plant location rather than at a water service entrance.

L.	Owner -Any person who has legal title to, or license to operate or habitat in, a property upon which a cross-connection inspection is to be made or upon which a cross-connection is present.

M.	Person -Any individual, partnership, company public or private corporation political subdivision or agency of the State, department, agency or instrumentality or the Unites States or any other legal entity.

N.	Permit-A document issued by the water supplier which allows the use of a backflow preventer.
 


0.	Pollutant- A foreign substance, that if permitted to get into the public water system, will degrade its quality so as to constitute a moderate hazard, or impair the usefulness or quality of the water to a degree which does not create an actual hazard to the public health; but which does adversely and unreasonably effect such water for domestic use.

P.	Water Service Entrance -That point in the owner's water system beyond the sanitary control of the water supplier; generally considered to be the outlet end of the water meter and always before any unprotected branch.

Q.	Public Works Director -The official or his delegated representative in charge of the Enfield Water Department is invested with the authority and responsibility for the implementation of an effective cross-connection control program and for the enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance.

R.	Water Supplier -The public water supply system.

V.	Administration

A.	The Enfield Water Department will operate a cross-connection control program, to include the keeping of necessary records, which fulfills the requirements  of the Department's Backflow Control Rules and is approved by the Department.

B.   The owner shall allow his property to be inspected for possible cross-connections and shall follow the provisions of the Enfield Water Department's program and the Department's rules, if a cross-connection is permitted.

C.	Ifthe Enfield Water Department requires that the public supply be protected by containment, the owner shall be responsible for the water quality beyond the outlet end of the containment device and should utilize fixture outlet protection for that purpose.

D.	The owner may utilize trained or experienced personnel to assist him in the selection of proper fixture outlet devices, and the proper installation of these devices.

E.	Both the Enfield Water Department and the owner shall attempt to eliminate all cross- connections.

VI.	Responsibilities

A.	Enfield Water Department

1.	On new installations, the Enfield Water Department will provide an on-site, evaluation and/or inspection of plans in order to determine the type ofbackflow preventer, if any, that will be required, will issue a permit, and perform inspection and testing.  In any case, a minimum of a dual check valve will be required in any new construction.
 


2.	For premises existing prior to the start ofthis program, the Enfield Water Department will perform evaluations and inspections of plans and/or premises and inform the owner by letter of any corrective action deemed necessary, the method of achieving the correction, and the time allowed for the correction to be made.  Ordinarily, [ninety (90)] days will be allowed.  However, this time period may be shortened depending upon the degree of hazard involved and the history of the device(s) in question.

3.	The Enfield Water Department will not allow any cross-connection to remain unless it is protected by an approved backflow preventer for which a permit has been issued and which will be regularly inspected to insure satisfactory operation.

4.	The Enfield Water Department shall inform the owner, by letter, of any failure to comply by the time of the first re-inspection.  The Enfield Water Department will allow an additional [fifteen (15)] days for the correction.  In the event the owner fails to comply with the necessary correction by the time of the second re-inspection, the Enfield Water Department will inform the owner, by letter, that the water service to the owner's premises will be terminated within a period not to exceed [five (5)]days.   In the event  that the owner informs the Enfield Water Department of extenuating circumstances as to why the correction has not been made, a time extension may be granted by the Enfield Water Department, but in no case will exceed an additional [thirty (30)] days.

5.	Ifthe Enfield Water Department determines at any time that a serious threat to the public health exists, the water service will be terminated immediately.

6.	The Enfield Water Department shall begin initial premise inspections to determine the nature of existing hazards and corrections to be made, following approval of the program by the Department.  Initial focus will be on high hazard industries and commercial premises.

7.	The Enfield Water Department shall have on its staff a person who is a certified backflow prevention device inspector.

8.	Certified backflow prevention device inspectors must be certified as determined by DES.

B.	Owner

1.	The owner shall be responsible for the elimination or protection of all cross- connections on his premises.

2.	The owner, after having been informed by a letter from the Enfield Water Department, shall at his expense, install, maintain, and inspect or have inspected, any and all backflow preventers on his premises.

3.	The owner shall correct any malfunction of the backflow preventer which is revealed by periodic inspecting.  This shall include the replacement of parts or the
 


replacement of the backflow preventer, if deemed necessary by the Enfield Water Department.

4.	The owner shall inform the Enfield Water Department of any proposed or modified cross-connections and also existing cross-connections of which the owner is aware, but has not been found by the Enfield Water Department.

5.	The owner shall not install a by-pass around any backflow preventer unless there is a backflow preventer of the same type on the by-pass.  Owners who cannot shut down operations for inspecting of the device(s) must supply additional devices necessary to allow inspecting to take place.

6.	The owner shall install backflow preventers in a manor and location approved by the Enfield Water Department.

7.	The owner shall only install backflow preventers approved by the Enfield Water Department or DES.

8.	Any owner having a private well or other private water source, must have a
permit if the well or source is cross-connected to the Enfield Water Department's system. Permission to cross-connect may be denied by the Enfield Water Department.  The owner may be required to install a backflow preventer at the service entrance if a private water source is maintained , even if it is not cross-connected to the Enfield Water Department's system.

9.	In the event the owner installs plumbing to provide potable water for domestic purposes which is on the Enfield Water Department's side of the backflow preventer , such plumbing must have its own backflow preventer installed .

10.	The owner shall be responsible for the payment of all fees for permits, annual or semi-annual device inspections, re-testing in the case that the device fails to operate correctly, and second re-inspections for non-compliance with the Enfield Water Department or DES requirements.

VII.	Degree of Hazard

The Enfield Water Department recognizes the threat to the public water system arising from cross­ connections.  All threats will be classified by degree of hazard and will require the installation of approved backflow prevention devices for high and low hazards.

A.	Low Degree of Hazard

Ifbackflow were to occur, the resulting effect on the water supply would be a change in its aesthetic qualities.  The foreign substance must be non-toxic to human.

B.	High Degree of Hazard
 



Ifbackflow were to occur, the resulting effect on the water supply could cause illness or death if consumed by humans.  The foreign substance may be toxic to humans rather from a chemical, bacteriological  or radiological standpoint.  The effects of the contaminants may result from short or long term exposure.

Only the following types of backflow prevention devices may be used for the containment of on-site contaminants for high and low hazard situations respectively:

C.	High Hazard:

a.	Air gap (AG)

b.	Reduced pressure principal backflow preventer (RPZ)

c.	Combination of the above


D.	Low Hazard:

a.	Air gap (AG)

b.	Atmospheric vacuum breaker (AVB)

c.	Pressure vacuum breaker (PVB)

d.	Double check valve assembly (DCVA)

e.	Reduced pressure principal backflow preventer (RPZ)

f.	Combination of the above

VIII.	Permits

The Enfield Water Department shall not permit a cross-connection within the public water supply system unless it is considered necessary and that it cannot be eliminated.

A.	Cross-connection permits that are required for each backflow prevention device are obtained from the Enfield Water Department.  A fee of [   ] dollars will be charged for the initial permit and [   ] dollars for the renewal of each permit.

B.	Permits shall be renewed every [   ] years and are non-transferable.  Permits are subject to revocation and become immediately revoked ifthe owner should so change the type of cross­ connection or degree of hazard associated with the service.

C.	A permit is not required when fixture isolation is achieved with the utilization of a non- testable backflow preventer.
 



IX.	Existing in-use Backflow Devices

Any existing backflow preventer shall be allowed by the Enfield Water Department to continue in service unless the degree of hazard is such as to supercede the effectiveness of the present backflow preventer, or result in an unreasonable risk to the public health.

X.	Periodic Testing

A.	Backflow prevention devices shall be inspected and tested at least semi-annually for high hazard devices and annually for low hazard devices.

B.	Periodic inspections shall be performed by the Enfield Water Department's certified inspector or his delegated representative.   The inspections will be done at the owner's expense on a time and materials basis for the current chargeable rates of the equipment and personnel involved.

C.	The inspections shall be conducted during the Enfield Water Department's regular business hours.  Exceptions to this, when at the request of the owner, may require additional charges to cover the increased costs to the Enfield Water Department.

D.	Any backflow preventer which fails during a periodic inspection will be repaired or replaced.  When repairs are necessary, upon completion of the repair the device will be inspected a second time at the owner's expense to insure correct operation.  High hazard situations will not be allowed to continue unprotected, if the backflow preventer fails the inspection and cannot be repaired immediately.  In other situations, a compliance date of not more than [thirty (30)] days after the inspection date will be established.  The owner is responsible for spare parts, repair tools, or a replacement device.  Parallel installation of two (2) devices is an effective means of
the owner insuring that uninterrupted water service during inspections or repair of devices; and is strongly recommended when the owner desires such continuity.

E.	These devices shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the owner whenever said devices are found to be defective.  Tests and repairs shall be recorded on forms approved by the Public Works Director; and copies distributed to the owner and Enfield Water Department within 10 days of the actual test.

F.	Backflow prevention devices will be inspected more frequently than specified in A. above, in cases where there is a history of test failures and the Enfield Water Department feels that due to the degree of hazard involved, additional inspections are warranted.  Cost of the additional inspections will be borne by the owner.

XI.	Records and Reports

A.	Records -The Enfield Water Department will initiate and maintain the following:

1.	Master files on customer cross-connection inspections and/or tests.
 



2.	Master files on cross-connection permits.

3.	Copies of permits and permit applications.

4.	Copies of inspection results and summaries supplied to DES.

B.	Reports -The Enfield Water Department will submit the following to DES:

1.	A copy of annual inspection reports or summaries.

XII.	Fees and Charges

The Enfield Water Department will publish a list of fees or charges for the following permits:

A.	Fees	
	
1.	
Inspection fees
	
2.	
Fees for re-inspections

B.	Charges

1.	Charges for after hours inspections



Addendum

I.	Residential Dual Check

A.	Effective the date of acceptance of this Cross-Connection Control Program for the Enfield Water Department, all new residential buildings will be required to install a residential dual check valve device immediately downstream of the water meter.  Installation of this residential dual check valve device on a retrofit basis on existing service lines will be instituted at a time and at a potential cost to the homeowner as deemed necessary by the Enfield Water Department.

B.	The owner should be aware that installation of a residential dual check valve results in a potential closed plumbing system with the residence.  As such, provisions may have to be made by the owner to provide for thermal expansion within the closed loop system, i.e., the installation of thermal expansion devices and/or pressure relief valves.

II.	Strainers

A.	The Enfield Water Department strongly recommends that all new retrofit installations of reduced pressure principle devices and double check valve backflow preventers include the
 


installation of strainers located immediately upstream of the device to prevent fouling of backflow devices due to unforeseen circumstances occurring to the water supply system such as water main repairs, water main breaks, fires, periodic cleaning and flushing of mains, etc.  These occurrences may 'stir up' debris within the water main that will cause fouling ofbackflow devices installed without the benefit of strainers.

Adopted:  March 18, 2013













B.	Fred Cummings




Donald J. Crate, Sr.
Enfield Board of Selectmen
 
Canine Ordinance



This ordinance applies to all dogs on all developed public property within the town of Enfield, including but not limited to streets, sidewalks, parking lots, parks, athletic fields, beach and grounds on which are located school, town or other public buildings.

1.	Pursuant to RSA 41-11 and 41-11a, it is the intent of this ordinance to regulate the control of dogs and their defecation, either of which can become a public health, safety or nuisance issue to Town residents.

2.	Prior ordinances of the Town require all dogs in Enfield “to be restrained from running at large” (1973), and “on a leash or otherwise in the control of a handler” (1976). Existing Rules for Huse Park prohibit the presence of dogs.

3.	This ordinance permits the presence of dogs on all developed Enfield town property where not otherwise prohibited, including but not limited to streets, sidewalks, parking lots, parks, athletic fields, beach and grounds on which are located school, town or other public buildings, as long as they are leashed or otherwise under positive control. Those persons controlling such dogs, however, must remove the animals’ defecation.

A.	An owner or person having custody of any dog shall not permit said dog to defecate on any streets, sidewalks, parking lots, parks, athletic fields, beach and grounds on which are located school, town or other public buildings, or any other developed Town property unless said defecation is removed immediately and properly disposed of in a container for trash or litter or similar manner. Further, no defecation or manure shall be dumped or left on any streets, sidewalks, parking lots, parks, athletic fields, beach and grounds on which are located school, town or other public buildings, or any other developed Town property.

B.	Any person having control over a dog, whether or not the owner, who allows the dog off his or her premises and has knowledge that such dog is defecating on any streets, sidewalks, parking lots, parks, athletic fields, beach and grounds on which are located school, town or other public buildings, or any other developed Town property and does not remove and properly dispose of the defecation shall be in violation of this ordinance and subject to a fine of $25.

4.	This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage.





19 March 2001 	 Date of Passage














f:\executive\regulations ordinances & policies\general\canine ordinance 3-19-01.doc
 
Dogs RULE!
This park is a place for fun. If your dog is having a bad day and not playing well with others, please take him home to avoid problems. The same goes for you humans!
But there are RULES for the park
Please review them before entering


Use and enjoy the Dog Park at your own risk. Neither the Town of Enfield nor Mascoma Valley Dog Park Supporters are liable for injuries or damage caused by any dog or person in the park. Handlers are solely responsible and liable for the actions of their dog(s). People not observing the following rules will be asked to leave the park.

DOGS
Dogs must be free of sickness, infections, parasites, and have current rabies and applicable license tags attached to their collars at all times.

All dogs over one year of age must be spayed/neutered to use the Small or Large Dog Parks.  Unaltered dogs of either sex are prohibited from using the Small or Large Dog Parks, but may use Ingrid’s Park.  Handlers of unaltered dogs must alert other users of Ingrid’s Park to the unaltered state of their dog(s).  Female dogs of any age, while in heat, are not permitted in any of the Parks (Small Dog, Large Dog, and Ingrid’s Park), in accordance with RSA 466:31.

Puppies must have core vaccines and be at least four months old. No spike, prong, pinch, or choke collars allowed (for safety reasons).
Aggressive dogs are not allowed in the park. Dogs showing signs of aggression must be leashed and removed from the park immediately.

Dogs under 30 lbs belong in the Small Dog Park.


PEOPLE
Pick up and dispose of pet waste immediately in the provided receptacles. SCOOP THE POOP!

Dogs must be constantly under the supervision of a mature Handler (16 years and older). No dog may be unattended.

Maximum of TWO dogs per Handler inside the park.


Dogs must be on-leash when entering and exiting the double-gated area and at all times outside the fenced park areas. Dogs must be off-leash, but wear a collar or harness in the park.
 
Handlers must have access to a leash for each dog at all times.
Dogs with excessive or constant barking that cannot be controlled must leave. Discourage dogs from digging outside of designated ‘dig areas.’ Fill any holes dug
outside of these areas.


CHILDREN: No children under the age of 12 permitted in the park. Children ages 12-15 must be accompanied by an adult (18 years and older).

NO smoking, glass containers, alcoholic beverages, human food, or dog food/treats.


Please limit cell phone use inside the park to picture taking and brief conversations; handlers must be focused on their dog(s) at all times.

NO OTHER ANIMALS ALLOWED IN THE DOG PARK FENCED AREAS
In the event of an emergency, call 911
 
When an incident occurs at the Dog Park, dog owners should follow the posted protocols (see below). Anyone wishing to file a formal report or make the Mascoma Valley Dog Park Supporters (MVDPS) Board aware of an ongoing situation must complete an Incident Report form in order to document occurrences & allow the MVDPS Board to properly investigate and resolve the matter.

Incident Report Forms can be obtained online at www.mascomavalleydogpark.com or in hard copy at the kiosks inside both the Large and Small dog park areas.

Incident report forms can be submitted as follows: Complete online form; E-mail to mascomavalleydogpark@gmail.com; Mail to MVDPS at the address below; Drop off in one of the Donation Boxes inside the dog park.

Violations that should be reported and will be automatically reviewed by the Board according to the Incident Protocol:
●	Person bit by a dog
●	Dog requiring medical treatment

Violations that can be reported and will be documented:
●	Dog bitten with no medical treatment necessary
●	Children under the age limit (12yrs) in the dog park
●	Unneutered/unspayed dogs older than one year within the Small or Large Dog Parks
●	Failure to alert other users of Ingrid’s Park to the unaltered state of a handler’s dog(s).
●	Failure to abide by Dog Park rules
●	Disruptive/abusive behavior to persons and/or dogs

Repeated offenses of the above listed violations will be reviewed by Board according to the Incident Protocol.



Incident Protocol

1.	When a formal complaint is received and is eligible for review, the report will be distributed and reviewed by the Mascoma Valley Dog Park Supporters Board.
2.	If a Board member is involved in the incident, she/he will be excluded from the review process, except for providing a written statement of what happened.
3.	If the incident resulted in serious harm to a person(s) or dog(s), a Board Designated Member (the President, or if he/she not available, then another Board member) will take initial but temporary action, such as restricting a handler and his/her dog from the Park for period of up to 10 days.
4.	A member of the Board may be designated to collect statements from parties named in the incident and statements from witnesses named in the incident.
 
5.	The Board will review provided information and may consult with canine behavior and/or training specialists in order to determine a recommended course of action, if any, to take. Actions may include but are not limited to: restricted use of the park, temporary or permanent bans on using the park, dog training, or testing requirements (e.g., Canine Good Citizen test).
6.	The Board will provide a report outlining the facts to the Town Manager, along with the Board’s recommendations.
7.	The Town Manager will make a final decision and inform all involved parties.
8.	The Town Manager’s decisions may be appealed to the Enfield Selectboard within 30 days and the Selectboard will hold a hearing to modify, affirm or reverse the Town Manager's decision.




 


Human Bite or Dog Fatality
 
Incident Categories
 
Call 911 or Enfield Police Dispatch at 603- 643-2222. Report immediately to Enfield Animal Control Officer (currently Enfield Police) at 603-632-7501. Exchange information to complete an incident report. Exchange information with other involved parties. All those involved should file an incident report form. All parties (handlers and their dogs) should leave the premises and not return to the Park until notified by a Board member.

Aggressive Dogs (Dogs showing signs of repeated aggression towards other dogs or people, or any dog that bites another dog which requires medical treatment.)  Separate and leash all involved dogs and take them out of the Park. Exchange information with other involved parties. All those involved should file an incident report form. All parties (handlers and their dogs) should leave the premises and not return to the Park until notified by a Board member.

Safety Issues (e.g., children under 12 years in the park, unneutered/unsprayed dogs older than one year within the Small or Large Dog Parks, not alerting other users of Ingrid’s Park to the unaltered state of a handler’s dog(s), dogs without collars/tags.) Complete and incident report form and submit to MVDPS. The Board will attempt to identify the parties involved and educate as needed. Continued infractions will be addressed by the Safety Protocol.
 



 
Town of Enfield
Planning Board
23 Main Street, P.O. Box 373 Enfield, New Hampshire 03748
TEL 603-632-4067 ext 5427 * FAX 603-632-7391



SUBDIVISION	REGULATIONS



TOWN OF ENFIELD NEW HAMPSHIRE

Adopted:	October 15, 1974
Amended:	May 23, 1979
September 9, 1981
August 11, 1982
August 14, 1985
February 26, 1986
July 28, 1993
June 28, 1995
June 12, 1996
May 9, 2007
November 18, 2015
October 11, 2017
 












SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS OF
THE TOWN OF ENFIELD, NEW HAMPSHIRE



TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION 1:	AUTHORITY AND STATEMENT OF PURPOSE	4
SECTION 2:	DEFINITIONS	6
SECTION 3:	APPLICATION PROCEDURE	6
	GENERAL	6
	APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL	7
	FILING OF APPLICATION	7
	NOTICE OF APPLICATION	7
	FEES	8
	SUBMISSION OF COMPLETED APPLICATION	8
	NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING FOR REVIEW OF APPLICATION	9
	PUBLIC HEARING FOR REVIEW OF APPLICATION	9
	FORMAL CONSIDERATION; TIME LIMITS	9
	NOTICE OF DECISIONS	9
	COMPLIANCE HEARINGS 	11
SECTION 4:	PLAN REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS	11
4.1	COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS, MASTER PLAN, OFFICIAL MAP, OTHER ORDINANCES AND REGULATIONS 	11
4.2	CHARACTER OF PROPERTY PROPOSED FOR SUBDIVISION 	11
4.3	PREMATURE SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT 	12
4.4	PRESERVATION OF EXISTING FEATURES 	12
4.5	SUBDIVISION DESIGN, GENERAL 	12
4.6	MINIMUM LOT SIZES 	13
4.7	LOT AND SITE LAYOUT 	13
4.8	ON-SITE SEWAGE DISPOSAL DESIGN STANDARDS 	14
4.9	STREET DESIGN STANDARDS 	14
4.10	STREET IMPROVEMENTS 	19
4.11	PARKING 	19
4.12	PEDESTRIAN WALKS 	19
4.13	FLOOD HAZARD AREAS 	20
 
4.14	DRAINAGE AND UTILITIES 	20
4.15	SEDIMENT AND EROSION CONTROL STANDARDS 	22
4.16	OPEN SPACE 	24
4.17	TREES AND PLANTING 	24
4.18	PUBLIC SCHOOLS 	24
4.19	FIRE PROTECTION 	24
4.20	SUBDIVISION WITH WATER ACCESS 	25
4.21	MONUMENTATION 	26
4.22	PERFORMANCE AND MAINTENANCE BONDS 	26
4.23	ACCEPTANCE OF STREETS AND OPEN SPACE 	27
SECTION 5:	SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS 	27
5.1	PHASE I: NON-BINDING CONSULTATION AND CONCEPTUAL REVIEW 	27
5.2	PHASE II: PRELIMINARY REVIEW 	27
5.3	MAJOR SUBDIVISION: PHASE III; FINAL REVIEW 	29
5.4	MINOR SUBDIVISION: PHASE III; FINAL REVIEW 	38
SECTION 6: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 	41
6.1	INTERPRETATION 	41
6.2	CONFLICT WITH OTHER REGULATIONS 	41
6.3	WAIVERS AND VARIANCES 	42
6.4	EXEMPTIONS 	42
6.5	ACCEPTANCE OF STREETS AND/OR UTILITIES 	43
6.6	COMPLIANCE HEARINGS 	43
6.7	ENFORCEMENT 	44
6.8	PENALTIES 	44
6.9	APPEALS 	45
6.10	AMENDMENTS 	45
6.11	SEVERABILITY 	46
6.13	CERTIFICATION 	47
 














SECTION 1:	AUTHORITY AND STATEMENT OF PURPOSE


Pursuant to the authority vested in the Enfield Planning Board by the voters of the Town of Enfield and in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 674: Section 35, New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated, 1985 as amended, the Enfield Planning Board, hereinafter referred to as the Board, adopts the following regulations governing the subdivision of land in the Town of Enfield, New Hampshire.

It is the purpose of the Regulations to safeguard and protect the interests of the Town of Enfield, of the Public, and of the general Taxpayer by:

1.	Providing against such scattered or premature subdivision of land as would involve danger of injury to health, safety, or prosperity by reason of the lack of water supply, drainage, transportation, schools, fire protection or other public services, or necessitate the excessive expenditure of public funds for the supply of such services;

2.	Providing for the harmonious development of the municipality and its environs and preserve the town’s natural rural character.

3.	Requiring the proper arrangement and coordination of streets within subdivisions in relation to other existing or planned streets.

4.	Providing for open spaces of adequate proportions;

5.	Requiring suitably located streets of sufficient width to accommodate existing and prospective traffic and to afford adequate light, air, and access for firefighting apparatus and equipment to buildings, and be coordinated so as to compose a convenient system;

6.	Requiring, in proper cases, that plats showing new streets or narrowing or widening of such streets submitted to the planning board for approval shall show a park or parks suitably located for playground or other recreational purposes;

7.	Requiring that proposed parks shall be of reasonable size for neighborhood playgrounds or other recreational uses;

8.	Requiring that the land located on plats submitted to the planning board shall be of such character that it can be used for building purposes without danger to health;
 



9.	Prescribing minimum areas of lots so as to assure conformance with local zoning ordinances and to assure such additional areas as may be needed for each lot for on-site sanitary facilities.

10.	Including provisions which will tend to create conditions favorable to health, safety, convenience, or prosperity.

11.	Encourage the installation and use of solar, wind, or other renewable energy systems and protect access to energy sources by the regulation of orientation of streets, lots, and buildings; establishment of maximum building height, minimum set back requirements, and limitations on type, height, and placement of vegetation; and encouragement of the use of solar skyspace easements under RSA 477.

12.	Provide for efficient and compact subdivision development which promotes retention and public usage of open space and wildlife habitat, by allowing for village plan alternative subdivision as defined in RSA 674:21, VI.

13.	Require innovative land use controls on lands when supported by the master plan.

14.	Include provision for waiver of any portion of the regulations. The basis for any waiver granted by the planning board shall be recorded in the minutes of the board. The planning board may only grant a waiver if the board finds, by majority vote, that:
(1)	Strict conformity would pose an unnecessary hardship to the applicant and waiver would not be contrary to the spirit and intent of the regulations; or
(2)	Specific circumstances relative to the subdivision, or conditions of the land in such subdivision, indicate that the waiver will properly carry out the spirit and intent of the regulations.

III.	ese regulations shall require as a condition precedent to the approval of the plat, the extent to which and the manner in which streets shall be graded and improved and to which water, sewer, and other utility mains, piping, connections, or other facilities shall be installed. The regulations or practice of the planning board:
(1)	May provide for the conditional approval of the plat before such improvements and installations have been constructed, but any such conditional approval shall not be entered upon the plat.
(2)	Shall provide that, in lieu of the completion of street work and utility installations prior to the final approval of a plat, the planning board shall accept a performance bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or other type or types of security as shall be specified in the subdivision regulations; provided that in no event shall the exclusive form of security required by the planning board be in the form of cash or a passbook. As phases or portions of the secured improvements or installations are completed and approved by the planning board or its designee, the municipality shall partially release said security to the extent reasonably calculated to reflect the value of such completed improvements or installations. Cost escalation factors that are applied by the planning board to any bond or other security required under this section shall not exceed 10 percent per year. The planning board shall, within the limitations provided in this subparagraph, have the
 

discretion to prescribe the type and amount of security, and specify a period for completion of the improvements and utilities to be expressed in the bond or other security, in order to secure to the municipality the actual construction and installation of such improvements and utilities. The municipality shall have the power to enforce such bonds or other securities by all appropriate legal and equitable remedies.
(3)	May provide that in lieu of the completion of street work and utility installations prior to the final approval of the plat, the subdivision regulations may provide for an assessment or other method by which the municipality is put in an assured position to do said work and to make said alterations at the cost of the owners of the property within the subdivision.




SECTION 2:	DEFINITIONS


For the purpose of these Regulations all definitions are included in the Enfield Zoning Ordinance Appendix.




SECTION 3:	APPLICATION PROCEDURE



3.1	General


There are three phases in the subdivision process; non-binding consultation and conceptual review (Phase I), preliminary review, (Phase II), and final application (Phase III).  Phase I and II are intended to help the applicant by providing guidance and feedback prior to submission of the final application, thereby helping to avoid major alterations in the final plat.  Phase II requires a public hearing. Phase III is mandatory for all developments and modifications subject to subdivision review.  It involves the submission and review of the final application for which a public hearing is required.

A.	Phase I: Conceptual Consultation:	In order to save expense and unnecessary changes later on, a person may request to be on the agenda of a regular meeting of the Board for a discussion of the proposed concept in general terms and for a review of applicable Subdivision Regulations, application forms, necessary supporting maps, and documents. There is no time limit for this nor is this consultation a review binding in any way on either the applicant of the Board.

B.	Phase II: Design Review	An applicant or authorized agent wishing a review of their subdivision project which goes beyond discussion of the proposed subdivision in conceptual form, may apply to the Board for a public hearing.  They shall apply in writing and include all other applicable materials as specified in Section 5 of these Regulations.  The Board shall then give public notice as specified in Section 3.04 of these Regulations of the public hearing for preliminary review of the application in accordance with these Regulations.
 



The preliminary review shall be conducted only at regular meetings of the Board. The Board may review the proposal in detail and receive testimony in person or in writing from any applicant, abutter or any other person as permitted by the Board.  Preliminary review shall bind neither the applicant nor the Board.  A regular meeting on a particular preliminary review may be adjourned to continue at a specific date and time with no further notice of the reconvened meeting required.



C.	Phase III:  Final Review:	An applicant or authorized agent wishing a final review of the project shall apply to the Board in writing and shall include all other applicable materials as specified in Section 5 of these Regulations.  The Board shall then give public notice as specified in Section 3.04 of these Regulations of the final subdivision application submission and review hearings in accordance with these Regulations.

There are two steps to Phase III, Submission of Application and Review of Application. The Board first holds a public hearing to determine whether or not the submitted application is complete.  If the Board determines that the application is complete, they then hold a public hearing to review the application for approval or denial.

The final submission and review of the application shall be conducted only at regular meetings of the Board.  The Board may review the proposal in detail and receive testimony in person or in writing from any applicant, abutter or any other person as permitted by the Board.  A regular meeting at which any portion of a particular final review may be adjourned to continue at a specific date and time with no further notice of the reconvened meeting.



3.2	Application for Approval:


The completed application shall be on the form designated by the Board and conform to the requirements and specifications outline in these Regulations. Submission requirements are listed in Section 5.



3.3	Filing of Application:


The applicant or authorized agent shall file the application by delivering the application to the duly authorized agent of the Board at least twenty one (21) calendar days prior to the regularly scheduled public meeting of the Board at which the applicant shall formally submit the application to the Board.



3.4	Notice of Application:


The Board shall notify the abutters and the applicant by certified mail of the date upon which the completed application will be formally submitted to the Board. Such notice shall be mailed at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the meeting.  Notice required shall not include the day notice
 

is posted or the day of the public meeting. At the same time the notice is mailed to the applicant and abutters, such notice shall also be posted in two public places in the Town. Notice shall also be given to the general public by publication of the notice in a newspaper of general circulation prior to the meeting.  The notice shall include a general description of the proposal which is the subject to the application and shall identify the applicant and the location of the property which is the subject of the application.  The Board may also give notice by regular mail to other landowners in the vicinity of the tract.

(d)(1) Notice to the applicant, holders of conservation, preservation, or agricultural preservation restrictions, abutters, and the public shall be given as follows: The planning board shall notify the abutters, the applicant, holders of conservation, preservation, or agricultural preservation restrictions, and every engineer, architect, land surveyor, or soil scientist whose professional seal appears on any plat submitted to the board by certified mail of the date upon which the application will be formally submitted to the board. Notice shall be mailed at least 10 days prior to submission. Notice to the general public shall also be given at the same time by posting or publication as required by the subdivision regulations. The notice shall include a general description of the proposal which is the subject of the application and shall identify the applicant and the location of the proposal. For any public hearing on the application, the same notice as required for notice of submission of the application shall be given. If notice of public hearing has been included in the notice of submission or any prior notice, additional notice of that hearing is not required nor shall additional notice be required of an adjourned session of a hearing with proper notice if the date, time, and place of the adjourned session was made known at the prior hearing. All costs of notice, whether mailed, posted, or published, shall be paid in advance by the applicant. Failure to pay such costs shall constitute valid grounds for the planning board to terminate further consideration and to disapprove the plat without a public hearing.
(2) For those proposals in which any structure or proposed building site will be within 500 feet of the top of the bank of any lake, pond, river, or stream, the planning board shall also notify the department of environmental services by first class mail at the same time that notice is provided to abutters, cost to be paid in advance by the applicant consistent with subparagraph 676:4d(1)



3.5	Fees:


The applications for Conceptual, Design Review and Final Review shall be accompanied by fees set forth in the Board’s current fee schedule.  The application will not be accepted for review until the fees set forth in the Board’s current fee schedule are paid. Additional fees may be imposed by the Board to cover fees for consultants to the Board including, but not limited to, engineers, surveyors, lawyers, and community planners. When a submitted application is determined not to be complete or is denied at a public hearing, the hearing, mailing and advertising fees will not be returned.



3.6	Submission of Completed Application:


The completed application shall be submitted to and accepted for review by the Board at the public meeting of the Board specified in the notice. The Board shall give the applicant a receipt
 

certifying acceptance of the application BUT ONLY IF the application is complete.  This step is not required for Boundary Line Adjustments.
The board shall, at the next regular meeting or within 30 days following the delivery of the application, for which notice can be given in accordance with the requirements of subparagraph (b), determine if a submitted application is complete according to the board's regulation and shall vote upon its acceptance. Upon determination by the board that a submitted application is incomplete according to the board's regulations, the board shall notify the applicant of the determination in accordance with RSA 676:3, which shall describe the information, procedure, or other requirement necessary for the application to be complete.

3.7	Notice of Public Hearing for Review of Application:


No accepted application will be approved or denied without a public hearing. Notice of the hearing for review of the application shall be given in the same way and with the same time limits as notice of submission of the application under these Regulations. The Board may give notice of submission and of the review of the application in the same notice for the same meeting.



3.8	Public Hearing for Review of Application:


The public hearing for final review of the application shall be conducted as described in Section 3.01, C of these Regulations.  Additional public hearings may be held at the discretion of the Board, with proper notification.
Except as provided in this section, no application may be denied or approved without a public hearing on the application. At the hearing, any applicant, abutter, holder of conservation, preservation, or agricultural preservation restriction, or any person with a direct interest in the matter may testify in person or in writing. Other persons may testify as permitted by the subdivision regulations or the board at each hearing. Public hearings shall not be required, unless specified by the subdivision regulations, when the board is considering or acting upon:
(1)	Minor lot line adjustments or boundary agreements which do not create buildable lots, except that notice to abutters and holders of conservation, preservation, or agricultural preservation restrictions shall be given prior to approval of the application in accordance with subparagraph (d) and any abutter or holder of conservation, preservation, or agricultural preservation restrictions may be heard on the application upon request; or
(2)	Disapprovals of applications based upon failure of the applicant to supply information required by the regulations, including identification of abutters or holders of conservation, preservation, or agricultural preservation restrictions; or failure to meet reasonable deadlines established by the board; or failure to pay costs of notice or other fees required by the board.



3.9	Formal Consideration; Time Limits:


Upon determination by the board that a submitted application is complete according to the board's regulations, the board shall begin formal consideration and shall act to approve or conditionally approve as provided in subparagraph Section 3:10 per RSA 676: (4) (i), or
 

disapprove within 65 days, subject to extension or waiver as provided in subparagraph 676:4(f) where, in the absence of a mutually agree upon extension of the time frame, the Board may apply to the selectman for an extension not to exceed 90 days before acting to approve or disapprove  an application. Upon failure of the board to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the application, the selectmen shall, upon request of the applicant, immediately issue an order directing the board to act on the application within 30 days. If the planning board does not act on the application within that 30-day time period, then within 40 days of the issuance of the order, the selectmen shall certify on the applicant's application that the plat is approved pursuant to this paragraph, unless within those 40 days the selectmen has identified in writing some specific subdivision regulation or zoning or other ordinance provision with which the application does not comply. Such a certification, citing this paragraph, shall constitute final approval for all purposes including filing and recording under RSA 674:37 and 676:18, and court review under RSA 677:15.



3.10	Notice of Decisions:


The Board shall issue a written decision on all applications for Final Review subdivision. If the application is approved, the Board shall issue a written decision which includes any and all conditions which have been required by the Board as a part of the approval decision. If the application is denied, the Board shall state the reason or reasons for denial. The decision of the Board (approval or denial) shall be mailed or given to the applicant. The decision shall be placed on file in the Board’s office and shall be made available for public inspection within 72 hours, after the decision is made.
In accordance with RSA 674:4(i) a planning board may grant conditional approval of a plat or application, which approval shall become final without further public hearing, upon certification to the board by its designee or based upon evidence submitted by the applicant of satisfactory compliance with the conditions imposed. Such conditions may include a statement notifying the applicant that an approval is conditioned upon the receipt of state or federal permits relating to a project, however, a planning board may not refuse to process an application solely for lack of said permits. Final approval of a plat or application may occur in the foregoing manner only when the conditions are:
(1)	Minor plan changes whether or not imposed by the board as a result of a public hearing, compliance with which is administrative and which does not involve discretionary judgment; or
(2)	Conditions which are in themselves administrative and which involve no discretionary judgment on the part of the board; or
(3)	Conditions with regard to the applicant's possession of permits and approvals granted by other boards or agencies or approvals granted by other boards or agencies, including state and federal permits.
All conditions not specified within this paragraph as minor, administrative, or relating to issuance of other approvals shall require a hearing and notice as provided in subparagraph I(d) except that additional notice shall not be required of an adjourned session of a hearing with proper notice if the date , times, and place of the adjourned session were made known at the prior hearing.
 

3.11	Compliance Hearings:


If the completed application is approved with one or more conditions to be fulfilled, the Board may hold a compliance hearing to determine whether the applicant has compiled with and fulfilled the conditions previously set by the Board.  Notice requirements, time limitations and hearing, mailing, and advertising fees for compliance hearings shall be the same as for public hearings of final review of the application. The plat will not be signed and recorded until all conditions have been met.
All conditions not specified within this subparagraph as minor, administrative, or relating to issuance of other approvals shall require a hearing, and notice as provided in Section 3.04 of these regulations except that additional notice shall not be required of an adjourned session of a hearing with proper notice if the date, time, and place of the adjourned session were made known at the prior hearing.

SECTION 4:	PLAN REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS


This section of the Subdivision Regulations sets forth the minimum standards to which all subdivisions shall conform.



4.1	Compliance with Regulations, Master Plan, Other Ordinances and Regulations:


No subdivision of land shall be made, and no land in any proposed subdivision shall be sold, transferred, rented, leased, altered or developed, and no street or utility construction shall be started until a final plat, prepared in accordance with the requirements of these regulations, has been approved by the Board, other required permits have been issued, and the approved plat has been recorded with the Register of Deeds of Grafton County.  The penalty for transferring lots in an unapproved subdivision shall be as prescribed in Section 6.08

All subdivisions shall conform with and give effect to the purposes of these Regulations and any pertinent Federal, State or local laws, ordinances, bylaws or regulations and with the Master Plan for the Town and Official Maps when adopted. No building permit shall be granted with respect to property involving a subdivision prior to review and approval of said subdivision by the Board and the recording in the Grafton County Registry of Deeds of the approved plat.

The applicant shall be familiar with all Federal, State and Town regulations relative to health, water supply, sanitary sewerage disposal, building, roads and other pertinent data so that the applicant is aware of the obligations and standards with which the proposed subdivision must comply.



4.2	Character of Property Proposed for Subdivision:


The Board shall not approve a proposed subdivision if it finds that the proposed subdivision would create, or risk the creation of, conditions unfavorable to health or safety, due to rock
 

formations, poor drainage, flood or fire hazard, inadequate water supply, inadequate access, damage to or negative effect on 1) air quality; 2) ground or surface water resources.

All lots shall conform with the existing Enfield Zoning Ordinance or the Board shall not approve it as a building lot.

Flood prone areas, marsh, wet peat areas and wetlands may be included as part of a lot but may not be altered, dredged, drained, filled, or relocated and may not be used for building sites, sewage disposal areas, driveways or otherwise. Natural water courses, ponds or lakes may not be altered, dredged, drained, filled or relocated. Minor alterations may be permitted in such areas or water bodies at the discretion of the Board if: such alterations are authorized by all Federal and State agencies having jurisdiction with and/or the Board finds that the alterations will not have significant negative environmental impact when analyzed in the context of the subdivision as a whole.

Special flood hazard area is the land in the flood plain within the Town of Enfield subject to a one-percent or greater possibility of flooding in any given year (refer to current FIRM – Flood Insurance Rate Map for the Town of Enfield).

Land with inadequate characteristics or capacity for sanitary sewage disposal shall not be subdivided for residential, commercial or industrial subdivision purposes unless connection to a municipal sewage system is available.



4.3	Premature Subdivision Development:


Scattered, premature or inappropriate subdivision of land that would involve danger or injury to health, safety, or prosperity by reason of lack of water supply, sanitary sewage disposal, drainage, transportation, school, fire highway, police, or other public services, or necessitate excessive expenditure of public funds for the supply of such services shall not be approved by the Board.

4.4	Preservation of Existing Features:


The sub divider shall give due regard to the preservation and protection of existing features, i.e. scenic points, brooks, streams, rock out-cropping, water bodies, wetlands, resources, landmarks, slopes, wildlife habitat and trails. Where possible the boundary lines should follow existing stone walls.



4.5	Subdivision Design, General:


Subdivision design and lot sizes within a subdivision shall be established by giving due regard to all of the factors outlined in these Regulations including water supply, sewage disposal, soil conditions, ground and surface water conditions, drainage, topography, the road system which serves or leads to the subdivision and the general area in which the subdivision is located (including the condition of the roads and the present and prospective use of the roads), the need
 

for off-street parking, the need to avoid scattered or premature subdivision, the nature and extent of existing development patterns in the area of the subdivision, the impact of the subdivision on Town services, availability of water supply for fire protection, protection of agriculture land, and the preservation of natural, unique, fragile, or historic features.



4.6	Minimum lot Sizes:


In the absence of municipal or community waste water system minimum lot sizes within all subdivisions shall, in addition to meeting the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance for the district the subdivision is proposed in, demonstrate that the proposed lots can have a septic system built to the New Hampshire State Standards built on them.



4.7	Lot and Site Layout:


When laying out or planning a subdivision, the following regulations shall govern the layout of lots and sites:

A.	The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation shall be appropriate for the parcel being subdivided, for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated.

B.	All lots shown of the final plat must conform to the minimum area and dimension requirements of these Regulations and Zoning Ordinance.

C.	Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for their intended use due to factors such as rock formation, water conditions, soil stability, or similar circumstances, the Board may require modification of such lot or lots or require a study of the proposal by outside consultant(s) to the Board, including, but not limited to engineers, surveyors, lawyers and community planners.

D.	Where extra right-of-way width has been indicated for widening of existing streets, lots shall begin at such extra width line and all setbacks shall be measured from such line.

E.	Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads shall be such as to provide for safe access, circulation control and safety of street and pedestrian traffic.

F.	In order to provide adequate corner visibility, corner lots shall have sufficient width to permit a front yard setback on each street.

G.	All lots or sites shall abut on a Class V or better highway, or a street shown on an approved subdivision plan, built in conformity with these regulations.
 

H.	Access to lots abutting existing Town or State Streets may require common driveways, or a subdivision street, to minimize the number of driveways and/or new streets entering onto existing street.

I.	Driveways shall be designed to provide safe, convenient access to control surface water runoff in accordance with Town Regulations.

J.	Engineered entrance-turning, acceleration and deceleration lanes along major routes may be required by the Board so through traffic flow will not be impeded.



4.8	On-Site Sewage Disposal Design Standards:


A.	All on-site Sewage Disposal Systems shall follow the State of New Hampshire Subdivision and Individual Sewage Disposal System Design Rules



4.9	Street Design Standards:
Proposed streets shall be in harmony and conformance with existing and proposed streets, the AASHTO “Green Book”- Policy for Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, the Town Master Plan and Official Map. Street patterns shall give due consideration to contours and natural features so as to blend with topography. Where required by the Board, provision shall be made for the extension of the street pattern to abutting undeveloped property. Every proposed street in a subdivision shall be laid out and constructed as required by the following standards:

A.	ROAD CLASSIFICATION: The classification of existing streets shall be as defined in the Town Master Plan or by the Board.

B.	MINIMUM ROAD STANDARDS: All streets bridges, culverts, drainage structures, storm sewers, gutters, drainage ditches, and other improvements required by the subdivision plat and accompanying documents, shall be installed in conformance with the minimum standards and specifications set forth in Table II.



C.	RIGHT-OF-WAY: The Board may require greater width of right-of-way where the demands of present or future traffic, sidewalks, and/or utilities make it desirable, or where topographic conditions create a need for greater width for grading. Where a proposed subdivision abuts an existing street with an inadequate alignment, or right-of-way width, the subdivision plat shall include a street dedication of all land needed to meet the standards established by these regulations.

D.	INTERSECTION LAYOUT: Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect at right angles as nearly as possible and no street shall intersect another at less than 60 degrees. Local and collector streets shall not intersect with arterial streets less than eight hundred (800) feet apart, measured from centerline to centerline.
 

Local/collectors shall not intersect each other at a distance of less than 300’. Intersections involving a junction of more than two streets shall be prohibited. Grades shall be constructed downward from the highway surface at a grade of not more than 6 percent, for at least 20 feet and shall slope up or down not more than 6 percent for a distance of 100 feet or as recommended by a traffic engineer.

E.	SIGHT DISTANCE: No structure signs, planting, or embankment shall impair sight distance at the intersection. All season safe sight distance is defined as a line which encounters no visual obstruction between all combinations of 2 points, between 3 feet and 10 feet, inclusive about the pavement, and so located as to represent the critical line of sight between the operator of a vehicle using the access and the operator of a vehicle approaching from either direction and shall maintain the minimum sight distances shown in Table III.


 



20-Mar-07
 
TABLE II
CLASSIFICATION AND STANDARD FOR ENFIELD STREET DESIGN
 
Average Daily Traffic (veh/day) 1	0-50	50-100	50-200	200-750 750-1,500	1,500+
Right-Of-Way Width (feet) 2	50	50	50	50	50	50
Minimum Pavement (Gravel) Width (feet)	18	18	20	20	22	24
Minimum Shoulder Width (feet)	2	2	2	4	4	4
Center of Road to Ditch Line (feet)	15	15	16	18	19-21	Varies
Minimum Horizontal Curve Radius (feet)	80	80	100	100	100	100
Cross Slope of Roadway	4%	4%	3%	2%	2%	2%
Maximum Grade	12%	12%	10%	8%	8%	5%
Pavement Type	Gravel or Hardpack	Hot Bituminous 2.5" Base/ 1" Wear
Base Course Depth (gravel) 3	18"	18"	18"	18"	24"	24"
Finish Course Depth (crushed gravel) 4	12"	12"	6"	6"	10"	10"
Minimum Sidewalk Width	5'	5'	5'	5'	5'	5'
Public or Private Street 5	Private	Private	Public	Public	Public	Public
Rate of Vertical Curve	4	4	4	9	14	14
Notes
1)	Trip per Day Formula: 10 Trips per day x number of dwelling units
2)	Slope easements shall be given if cuts and fills exceed ROW
3)	Base Course gravel shall not have aggregate which exceeds 6" diameter
4)	Gravel Finish Course for gravel road shall be 14% fines and shall be replaced if road is to be paved with gravel that meets the NHDOT Road and Bridge Specification
5)	The Planning Board may require paving or hardpack on steeper portions of private roads
 















TABLE III


 
Design Speed (mph)
 
Stopping Sight Distance (feet)
 
Intersection Sight Distance
(feet)
 
15	80	170
20	115	225
25	155	280
30	200	335
35	250	390
40	305	445
45	360	500
50	425	555

 



F.	CONNECTIVITY: The plan of any proposed subdivision may be required to show all work required to connect and complete the improvements and utilities between the proposed street pattern and any connecting street in an existing subdivision. Where a proposed subdivision abuts an existing subdivision, the design of the proposed subdivision street system will connect with dead end or “stub” streets of existing subdivisions if it permits safe and reasonable traffic flow. Local residential streets shall be designed so as to discourage through traffic.

G.	SHARED ACCESS: Developments will share access where reasonable to minimize curb cuts on collector and arterial streets.

H.	NO OUTLET: The following standards shall apply to dead-end streets:

1.	No outlet streets shall not exceed two thousand (2000) feet in length and shall terminate in a turnaround having an inside radius of at least fifty (50) feet or a “T” turnaround thirty (30) feet wide extending fifty (50) feet on either side of the centerline. No driveway entrance, exit or approach shall be constructed for a “T” turnaround at the end of highway.
2.	The cul-de-sac at the end of a no outlet street shall be located so that it drains away from its center.
3.	The center of a cul-de-sac shall be free of all structures.
4.	A cul-de-sac shall not be brought to the subdivision property boundary line, but shall be placed so that the new lots can back on the property line of the subdivision.

I.	STREET NAMES: No street shall have a name which will duplicate or closely duplicate the names of existing street. The continuation of existing street shall have the same name. All streets shall be named to comply with the provisions of the “Enhanced 911 System” (RSA 106-H:10,I) and the Town of Enfield Street naming and Numbering Ordinance.

J.	LIGHTING: Cul-de-sacs, t-turnarounds and Town road intersections may be required to be lighted, per recommendation by the Planning Board or Director of Public Works.

K.	REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS: the developer shall pay for traffic signs, street signs, and traffic signals or intersection improvements shown to be warranted by a professional traffic engineering study.

L.	DRAINAGE: Surface water shall be disposed of by means of culverts of sufficient capacity at water courses as determined by standard hydraulic design methods and by the construction of longitudinal storm drainage systems whenever required to relieve water in the ditch sections. Construction shall be in accordance with current New Hampshire Standard Specifications Sections 603, 604 and 605.
 

Where culverts are required, the minimum diameter is 18”. Proper sizing shall be established by current engineering practices.

M.	UTILITIES: Where utilities are on or near paved streets, roads or walkways, such utilities will be installed before pavement is in place to insure against damage to paved surfaces and the immediate areas.

N.	TRIP GENERATION: Daily trip generation rates shall be based on ten (10) trips per day per single-family dwelling. Trip generation rates for other uses will be based on trip rates defined in the most recent Trip Generation Manual (Institute of Transportation Engineers), or the results of a professional traffic engineering assessment.

O.	SUBGRADE PREPARATION: All loam, humus and unsuitable material such as, but not limited to, stumps, vegetation, demolition debris, and structures shall be removed from the roadway and replaced with suitable fill material. All boulders and ledge shall be removed to a uniform cross sectional depth of not less than 300 mm (12 in.) below the subgrade and replaced with sand or gravel.

P.	BRIDGES: Bridges, as defined by State Law (RSA 234:2), are all structures of
10.0 ft. or greater clear span, and shall be designed to AASHTO Specifications. The minimum roadway width shall be 24 ft.

Q.	SIDEWALKS: Sidewalks shall be of 2 in. thick asphalt, or 4” of concrete on a 4 in. gravel base, not less than 5 ft. in width. Sidewalks shall be offset a minimum of 4 feet with no curbing from the outside edge of the required shoulder and shall be constructed on one or both sides of the street, as directed by the Board of Selectmen  when in the opinion of the Selectboard such sidewalks are necessary.

R.	CENTERLINE OFFSET: The minimum distance between centerline offsets at street jogs shall be one hundred fifty (150) feet.

S.	ROAD ASSOCIATION: The applicant or developer shall provide for and establish a Mandatory Road Owners' Association (a private, non-profit corporation, association, or other non-profit legal entity established by the applicant or developer for the purposes of managing, maintaining and repairing the private road.) Membership in said association shall be mandatory for all property owners with lots fronting on the private road and made a required covenant in any deed issued or passed as a legal entity under the laws of the State of New Hampshire. The Planning Board shall approve its articles in writing after review by the Town Attorney, prior to subdivision approval. The cost of such legal review shall be borne by the applicant or the developer.
i.  Any changes in such articles of association or incorporation shall require the prior written approval of the Planning Board.  It shall be responsibility of the road association to maintain the road in a condition to allow the reasonable access of the lot owners and emergency vehicles.  A road association wishing to make their road a public street shall have a majority
 

vote of the lot owners belonging to the association and file a resubdivision application with the Planning Board and provide a new road design.

T.	MODIFICATION OF STANDARDS: The Board may allow Engineered modifications to the street design standards for short lengths of streets where in its judgment, existing topographic conditions or the preservation of natural features indicate that such modification will result in the best subdivision of land.



4.10	Street Improvements:


Any existing Town owned street which provides either frontage to new lots, or access to new streets shall meet the standards established by these regulations. The sub divider shall bear the expense to provide that the said existing street or streets meet these standards.

The Board shall impose reasonable limitations on the subdivision of areas served by existing streets which do not meet the standards of these regulations. Factors to be considered in establishing such limitations may include, but are not limited to, the following:  the standard to which the Town presently maintains such streets, the frontage and size of the proposed subdivision, the potential traffic increase from the proposed subdivision, the character and potential for development of the area served by such streets the present and potential traffic on such streets and compliance with the Town’s Master Plan. Such limitations shall be removed at such time as the Selectmen shall certify to the Board that funds have been assured to the Town of upgrade such streets.



4.11	Parking:


All subdivision development shall make provision for safe and convenient off-street parking in order to provide for the most efficient road maintenance, snow plowing and access by public safety vehicles.  In the case of commercial subdivision, including commercial building development, and multi-unit residential building development, parking area shall include landscaping and screening.



4.12	Pedestrian Walks:


Right-of-ways for sidewalks or walkways for pedestrian travel and access shall be required.  The Board may require these sidewalks or walkways to be constructed. The Board shall require that walkways or walks be constructed to be handicap accessible in accordance with State and Federal Regulations.
 

4.13	Flood Hazard Areas:


A.	The Planning Board shall review the proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by Federal or State law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended.
B.	The Planning Board shall require that all proposals for development greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is the lesser, include Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data within such proposals (i.e. floodplain boundary and 100-year flood elevation).

C.	The Planning Board shall require the applicant to submit sufficient evidence (construction drawings, grading and land treatment plans) so as to allow a determination that:
(i)	all such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage:
(ii)	all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage: and,
(iii)	adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards.



4.14	Drainage and Utilities:


A.	All subdivisions shall make adequate provisions for water supply, storm water, sanitary sewage disposal, and other required utilities and improvements. The Board may require the installation of all utilities including street lighting and underground installation of electrical, cable and telephone lines, the extension of public water, sewers, and storm drains to and within a proposed subdivision. All utilities shall be installed before pavement is in place to insure against damage to paved surfaces and the immediate areas.

B.	All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electric, telephone and water systems shall be located, and constructed to eliminate flood damage and shock hazards.  All new or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharges from the systems into flood waters.

C.	The sub divider or their successor in interest shall install laterals from all utilities in the street right-of-way to ten (10) feet beyond the street property line of each building lot.

D.	All such drainage and utility system installations shall be at the expense of the sub divider or their successor in interest and shall be installed under the supervision of the appropriate Town agency.
 

E.	All bridges, culverts, drainage structures, storm sewers, gutters drainage ditches, and other improvements required by the subdivision plat and accompanying documents, shall be installed in conformance with the following standards:

1.	An adequate surface storm water drainage system for the entire subdivision area shall be provided.  Storm drainage shall be carried to existing watercourses, connect to existing watercourses, or connect to existing storm drains. No storm water drainage system may create any additional flow over any property unless the sub divider has obtained easements(s) from all owners whose property the additional flow will cross, and those owners shall hold the Town of Enfield harmless from any claims for damage resulting there from.

2.	For the purposes of preparing drainage plans, the following basic design and construction criteria shall be utilized:

a.	Storm sewers and subdivision drainage facilities shall be based upon a design flow with a minimum return interval  fifty (50) years.

b.	The design of natural watercourse channels shall depend upon the drainage area according to the following table:

TABLE III
DESIGN RETURN INTERVALS FOR NATURAL WATERCOURSE

Drainage Area	Recurrence
Interval
Above 20 sq. miles	100 years
Between 4 and 20 sq. miles	50 years
Less than 4 sq. miles	25 years

c.	Established engineering practice as determined to be acceptable by the Board shall determine the need for the installation of catch basins and a storm sewer system or under-drains.  The determination shall be made on the basis of but not be limited to, the following considerations: high ground water; soil conditions; topography; road grades; maintenance considerations; safety.

d.	Culverts or other drainage facilities shall in each case be large enough to accommodate potential runoff from the entire subdivision.  The minimum size culvert installed shall be 18”. The minimum storm sewer pipe shall be 12” in diameter.  Proper sizing shall be established by engineering practices as determined to be acceptable by the Board.

e.	Pipes for storm sewers or culverts shall be corrugated galvanized steel pipe or better.

f.	Cover over all pipes shall be at least two (2) feet.
 



g.	Culvert headwalls shall be either concrete or mortar rubble masonry or better.

h.	Erosion protection of ditches or pipe outlets shall be provided by paving or use of stone where soil and velocity conditions warrant protection.

i.	No storm water pipe, catch basin, drainage outlet or other pipe floor drain, draining surface water, shall be connected to any sanitary sewer system, pipe or part of said system.

j.	Drainage from any spring or surface water in the right of way, that may exist either prior to or as a result of the subdivision, shall be routed within the road right-of-way.

k.	All storm water pipe installations shall be inspected and approved by an agent of the Town before being covered.





4.15	Sediment and Erosion Control Standards:


A.	General:	The purpose of this section is to control soil erosion and the resulting sedimentation from occurring in subdivision areas by requiring proper provisions for water disposal and the protection of soil surfaces during and after construction in order to promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the community.  Land shall be subdivided and improved in reasonable conformity to existing topography in order to minimize grading, cut and fill, and to retain, insofar as possible, the natural contours, limit storm water runoff and conserve the natural cover and soil.

B.	Standards:	The following standards shall be observed by the sub divider in the design, layout and engineering of the proposed subdivision.

1.	Stripping of vegetation shall be done in such a way that will minimize soil erosion.

2.	Whenever practical, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and/or supplemented.

3.	The disturbed areas shall be kept to a minimum and the duration of exposure shall be a maximum of six (6) months. In no case shall completed areas be left after October 1 of the current year without being seeded and mulched.
 

4.	Temporary seeding, stabilization, and/or mulching shall be used to protect any exposed areas during development.

5.	Provision shall be made to accommodate the increased runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after development.

6.	Sediment in the runoff water shall be trapped by the use of sediment basins, siltation fences, or other acceptable methods.  Adequate maintenance of the systems shall be provided at all times.

7.	Necessary diversions, sediment basins and other erosion control structures shall be installed prior to any on-site grading and disturbance of existing surface vegetation and maintained during all stages of construction until the area has stabilized.

8.	Buildings, streets, drives and parking areas shall be located no closer than fifty (50) feet from any surface water with the distance measured horizontally to the top of the bank above the surface water.
 




4.16	Open Space Section - deleted in 2015 update



4.17	Trees and Planting:


Due regard shall be given to preservation of existing trees, shrubbery, vegetation and other landscaping appropriate to the area being subdivided. The sub divider shall comply with the following requirements.

A.	To the fullest extent possible existing trees and shrubbery shall be protected and preserved by the sub divider during the construction of roads, utilities and development of the lots

B.	The sub divider shall not change the site plan without prior written permission from the Board.

C.	All topsoil moved during the course of construction shall be redistributed to cover all disturbed areas of the subdivision. At no time shall topsoil be removed from the site without prior written permission from the Board.

D.	All disturbed areas which are not covered by structures or paving shall be property seeded or replanted by the sub divider at the first opportunity for growth.



4.18	Public Schools: - deleted in 2015 update




4.19	Fire Protection:


The following standards shall be observed to provide protection to life and property for all developments of three (3) or more lots or buildings:

A.	For each dwelling unit there shall be at least two thousand (2,000) gallons of usable water available.  Total content of tank, reservoir, pond, or cistern shall not be less than ten thousand (10,000) gallons of usable water.

B.	Water supply shall be located to be available at all seasons of the year so that no more than fifteen hundred (1,500) feet of hose has to be laid to the furthest building to be protected.

C.	When questions develop not covered by this standard, the National Fire Protection Associated Standard 1231, 22, 24, 1141 or the most recent Town approved Standard (whichever is more stringent) will be used to determine the occupancy hazard and the fire protection required.
 



(1)	N.F.P.A. 22 -	Water tanks for private fire protection.
(2)	N.F.P.A.  24 -	Installation of private fire service mains and their
		appurtenances.
(3)	N.F.P.A. 1141 -	Fire protection in planned building groups.
(4)	N.F.P.A. 1231 -	Suburban and rural fire fighting.

D.	All plats shall include complete fire protection plans and/or fire suppression plans.

E.	All roads, driveways, and turn-arounds shall be built to accommodate fire apparatus.



4.20	Subdivision with Water Access:


Subdivisions with water access will meet these requirements:

A.	A single dwelling unit on a waterfront lot shall have a minimum of seventy-five
(75) feet of water frontage.

B.	For shared water access and/or Right-of-Way:

1.	There will be seventy-five (75) feet water frontage for the first dwelling unit and an additional, adjoining ten (10) feet of water frontage for each dwelling unit planned over one.

2.	For Hotels, Motels, Bed and Breakfasts, Inns, Motor Courts, etc., there will be seventy-five (75) feet water frontage plus an additional adjoining ten (10) feet water frontage per unit for when the facility is proposed and/or an adjoining ten (10) feet per camping unit.

C.	In addition to the above requirements, there shall be a minimum of seventy-five
(75) linear feet water frontage for every boat slip.

D.	Boating areas shall be adequately signed and shall be separated from the swimming area by appropriate safety devices.

E.	All boating and swimming areas must comply with standards of the State of New Hampshire, and all regulations of agencies of the State of New Hampshire applicable thereto.

F.	The same water frontage may not be allocated more than once.

G.	One public toilet facility each for males and females shall be provided for each 25 lots or dwelling units granted rights of access to water frontage, located within a reasonable distance to the waterfront.
 




4.21	Monumentation:


All Monumentation shall at a minimum follow the NH Land Surveyors Administrative Rules.




4.22	Performance and Maintenance Bonds:


No subdivision plat filed with the Board shall be accepted until the sub divider shall have filed with the Board an engineer’s estimate of costs of all improvements, together with maps, plans and supporting data.

As a condition precedent to the approval of the subdivision plan, the extent to which and the manner in which streets shall be graded and improved and to which water, sewer and other utility mains, piping, connections, fire protection systems, fire suppression systems or other facilities and landscaping shall be installed, the Planning Board shall, in lieu of the completion of street, utility and landscaping improvements and installations prior to the final approval of the subdivision plan, require cash escrow performance bond, or irrevocable Line of Credit in an amount to cover the full cost of all improvements plus an amount to cover the full costs of all improvements at the subdivision completion date name in the Board’s approval with surety and conditions satisfactory to the Board providing for and securing the Town the actual construction and completion of the improvements and installations within a period specified by the Board and expressed in the escrow performance bond or irrevocable Line of Credit and, further, the Town shall enforce such securities by all appropriate legal and equitable remedies. All improvements shall be completed within a period of two years unless extended by the Planning Board. The security requirement may be released in phases as determined by the Board or when the road is accepted by the Town.

The amount of the security shall include fees for inspection of improvements by the appropriate Town agents or their designated consultants.

In case of electric lines or other utilities to be installed by a public utility corporation or a municipal department, a statement shall be received in writing from such public utility, corporation or municipal department that the work will be done within a reasonable time, without expense to the Town, and prior to final road surfacing.

Any escrow or security required of an applicant shall not be released until the Selectmen and Planning Board have certified completion of the public utilities and improvements in accordance with the requirements, deeds covering land to be used for public purposes, easements and rights- of-way over property to remain in private ownership, and rights-to-drain onto or across private property are submitted in a form satisfactory to the Town Attorney and Planning Board at no expense to the Town.  All recording fees shall be borne by the sub divider.
 




4.23	Acceptance of Streets and Open Space:


No street or open space will be accepted by the Town for public ownership until such time as all improvements have been carried out as shown on the approved Final Plat, in accordance with the requirements of these Regulations, and subject to any conditions established for construction by the Board at the time of Final Plat approval.




SECTION 5:	SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS



5.1	Phase I:	Non-binding Consultation and Conceptual Review:


There are no submission requirements in the Conceptual Review phase other than a description of the developers proposed concept in general terms.



5.2	Phase II:	Design  Review:


The following plans, documents, and materials shall constitute the application for Design Review and shall be submitted unless the requirement of the submission is waived by the Board.  If components of the application are missing without a waiver or are inaccurate, the Board may not review the application.

A.	Plats:   Twelve (12) copies of plans shall be submitted.  The drawings may be in pencil, dimensions may be approximate, and the data may be tentative.  However, the plans shall be sufficiently clear to illustrate all conditions as well as to establish the basis and clarify the design requirements for the subdivision’s Final Plat.  The following information shall be included on the plans:

1.	Name of municipality and subdivision.

2.	Name and address of sub divider and any designer/consultant.

3.	Boundaries and size in acres of the entire parcel or parcels being subdivided, whether or not all land therein is to be subdivided.

4.	North point and bar scale with drawing at a scale of no more than one hundred (100) feet per inch.

5.	Date of preparation.
 

6.	Names of property owners and the Tax Map and lot numbers of those properties (as shown in the Town records not more than five (5) days before the filing date) within two hundred (200) feet of the subdivision boundary.

7.	General Site location map, shown as in inset, locating the subdivision boundary and proposed streets in relation to at least two existing intersecting streets.

8.	Existing and proposed:
a.	lot lines
b.	street right-of-way lines and widths of those streets
c.	proposed easements and deed restrictions
d.	dwellings and accessory buildings (existing only)
e.	building setback lines
g.	parks and other open space
g.	water courses and flood prone areas
h.	foliage lines
i.	significant natural and manmade features

9.	Municipal and Zoning District boundaries which lie within the subdivision.

10.	Any land-use designation from the Town’s Master Plan.

11.	A statement as to the compliance of the proposed lots with Zoning requirements.

12.	Most recent soil mapping units and unit boundaries.

13.	A statement of the conditions of the land as to soil suitability for development; revised Soil Maps as needed for supplementary data.

14.	Topographic contours at intervals of twenty (20) feet.

15.	Statement of deed restrictions and covenants.

B.	Abutters:	Names and addresses of all abutters (as shown in the Town records not more than five (5) days before the filing date) shall be provided.

C.	Fees:	The applicant shall pay all appropriate fees as specified in the Board’s fee schedule.
 

5.3	Major Subdivision: Phase III;	Final Review:


The following plans, documents, and materials shall constitute the application and shall be submitted unless the requirement of the submission is waived by the board.  If any component of the application is missing without a waiver or is inaccurate, the application will not be complete and will not be accepted by the Board for review.  All dimensions and documents must be accurate, current and exact.

A.	Plats:	Twelve (12) paper copies of site survey maps plus one (1) paper copy per lot shall be submitted.  One (1) copy in permanent black ink on permanent reproducible film (wash off or original plans on Mylar) must also be submitted but may be submitted after final approval has been granted.  The plats
shall include the following information and shall conform to the following specifications:

1.	Blue or back line paper prints (twelve plus one per lot) and one (1) Mylar.

2.	Sheet size in accordance with Grafton County Register of Deeds requirements, but not smaller than 8 ½” x 11” or larger than 22” x 34”.

3.	Scale no smaller than one hundred (100) feet per inch.

4.	Prepared, signed, and sealed by a New Hampshire registered surveyor.

5.	Name of municipality and subdivision.

6.	Name and address of sub divider and any designer/consultant.

7.	Boundaries of the entire parcel of parcels being subdivided, whether or not all land herein is to be subdivided.

8.	Boundary of subdivision registered to USGS benchmark in whatever manner practical if the subdivision is in the 100-year floodplain.

9.	North point and bar scale.

10.	Date or dates of any revisions.

11.	Any of the following which are within 200 feet of the boundaries of the subdivision:
a.	names of property owners and the Tax Map and lot number of their property (as shown in the Town records not more than five (5) day before the filing date)
b.	locations of buildings
c.	locations of roads and driveways
 

12.	Municipal and Zoning Districts boundaries which lie within the subdivision.

13.	Any land-use designations from the Town’s Master Plan.

14.	A statement as to the compliance of the proposed lots with Zoning requirements. If any lots do not comply with Zoning but are covered by a Zoning Variance or if any proposed use requires a Zoning Special Exception, the statement shall include the number of the Zoning Board of Adjustment file in which such Variance or Special Exception was granted.

15.	Existing and proposed streets including all existing and proposed:
a.	widths
b.	right-of-way lines
c.	stationing and dimensions of tangents, chords, and radii
d.	points of curvature and tangency of curved streets
e.	angles to lot lines
f.	intersection, turn-around, and/or cul-de-sac radii
g.	names (names of existing streets shall be according to the Towns’ Master List of Street Names and all new street names shall first be approved by the Planning Administrator per the Street Naming and (Numbering Ordinance)
h.	iron pins and/or monuments at street intersections and points of curvature or tangency of curved streets

16.	Existing and proposed lot lines including angles and dimensions and all existing and proposed iron pins and/or monuments at lot corners and points of curvature or tangency or curved lot lines.

17.	Area of existing and proposed lots in acres or square feet.

18.	Tax Map and lot numbers of existing and proposed lots (proposed lot numbers shall be consecutive).

19.	Numbers for each existing primary building and assigned building numbers for each new vacant lot per the Street Naming and Numbering Ordinance.

20.	Show location of existing and proposed easements and areas affected by existing and proposed covenants, reservations, and restrictions.

21.	Space reserved for endorsement by the Planning Board and all appropriate agencies providing places to record file number, date, and signature(s).

22.	The plat shall contain the following statement:  “The Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Enfield are a part of this plat, and approval of this plat is contingent on completion of all requirements of said
 

Subdivision Regulations.”

23.	General Site Location map, shown as in inset, locating the subdivision boundary in relation to major roads and community facilities in the town.

Note:   The following shall not be on the film copies; they shall be on overlay maps the same size and same scale as the Mylar copies of the site survey map.

24.	Show location of existing and proposed parks and other open space, flood prone areas, special flood prone areas, foliage lines, and significant natural and manmade features;

25.	Show location of existing and proposed utilities, including, but not limited to, telephone, electricity and gas, wells, water mains, hydrants, service entrances, septic systems, buildings, accessory buildings, building setback lines, drives, parking areas, storm water drainage lines, drainage structures, and drainage ways;

26.	Show existing topography and proposed changes in topography at five (5) foot intervals.   All low points, high points and other areas needing spot elevations shall be shown.  Contours shall be shown in dashed lines.
The Board may require verification that contour lines are accurate.

27.	Show the location of all percolation test sites, soil test pits, borings; and soil mapping units with boundaries as classified the most recent USDA Soil Conservation Service soils map with such corrections as are required to reflect the results of all soil tests. The legend on the soils map shall use the same soil mapping unit symbols and soil names as the US Soil Conservation Service.

28.	Show all surface water on and within two hundred (200) feet of the site including but not limited to, rivers, streams, intermittent streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, wetlands, flood prone areas, special flood hazard areas, drainage ditches and swales.

B.	Cover Sheet:   Application cover sheet shall be completed which includes (but is not limited to) the name and address of the applicant and his or her agent, location of the subdivision, Tax Map and Lot number of the subdivision, Zoning District
(s) in which the subdivision lies, signatures of applicant and agent, date of filing, and Planning Board file number.

C.	Abutters:	Names and addresses of all abutters (as shown in the Town records not more than five (5) days before the filing date) shall be provided.

D.	Fees:	The applicant shall pay all appropriate fees as specified in the Board’s fee schedule.
 

E.	Access:	A written analysis of the traffic to be generated by the proposed subdivision including direct and indirect volume of traffic, impact on the public roads leading to the area of the subdivisions to serve the subdivision safely and efficiently, and statement of work required on existing roads serving or leading to the subdivision to meet the road standards in these Regulations.

F.	Soils:  Results of all soil tests including dates, locations by reference to soil map, percolation rates, soil profile with depth to ledge, clay, hard pan and existing seasonal high water table, and analysis of suitability of soils in the areas proposed for septic systems, roads, drives, and buildings, including the most recent US Soil Conservation Service rating of the affected soils for the proposed uses taking topography into account.

G.	Sewage Disposal:	All proposed sewage disposal plans, including but not limited to type, class, and grades of proposed materials, all computations and an analysis and description of impacts on surface and ground water quality, invert elevations, original and finished ground profiles above those sewers and top of manhole elevations, proposed number of units and anticipated sanitary sewer flow, adequacy of site for septic system sewage disposal, identification of area(s) proposed for backup leach fields (s) in the event of field failure, and provisions for an adequate buffer zone between all portions of a septic system (including area(s) reserved for backup leach field(s) and surface water. Septic systems must be designed and constructed, at a minimum, in compliance with State design criteria; more stringent standards may be imposed in specific cases.  If applicable, a written statement from the municipal department or company attesting to the availability of sewer service is required.

H.	Water Supply: All proposed water supply plans, in detail, with a description and analysis of proposed water supply including computation of requirements and analysis of source in terms of flow rates and quality.  If applicable, a statement from the municipal department or company involved, attesting to the availability of water services is required.

Public water supply systems must be designed and constructed, at a minimum, in compliance with State design criteria.  For hookup to existing water supply systems a statement of acceptance into the system by system management will be required.

I.	Utilities:	Location and details of all existing and proposed utilities, including water mains, gas mains, telephone and electric lines, on and adjacent to the land  to be subdivided.  In the case of electric lines or other utilities to be installed by a public utility corporation or a municipal department, a statement in writing from such public utility corporation or municipal department that the work will be done within a reasonable time an without expense to the Town of Enfield.  Where utilities are on or near paved streets, roads or walkways, such utilities will be installed before pavement is in place to insure against damage to paved surfaces and the immediate areas.
 



J.	Surface Water Runoff, Sedimentation, and Erosion: All plans to control surface After runoff so as to protect surface water quality and prevent sedimentation and erosion. Such plans should include the following information:

1.	Written identification of all easements, expressed or implied, for the drainage of surface water onto or across the property from other properties, and from the property onto or across other properties. Cross-reference the easements to the documents provided in response to Item R of this application;

2.	Written identification of all easements expressed or implied, for changing slopes of the property or properties of others to accommodate surface water runoff, sedimentation and/or erosion;

3.	Identification of the complete watershed area within which the property is located with boundaries marked on the applicable USGS Topographic maps;

4.	Computation of rate of runoff before and after completion of the subdivisions for a fifty (50) year, twenty-four (24) hour rainfall;

5.	Computation of storm water drainage capacity based on estimated rate of runoff for a fifty (50)  year, twenty-four (24) hour rainfall  following completion of all phases of the subdivision including impact on downstream drainage structures;

6.	Drawings, specifications, calculations, maintenance estimates and agreements for each proposed runoff, erosion and sediment control measure, including identification of and location of natural drainage ways on the property and surrounding area; the location of the proposed measures for runoff, profiles, grades of storm lines, inlets, outlets; type, class and grades of proposed materials. There will be buffer zones at least fifty (50) feet measured horizontally, between developed area (e.g. ) roofs, drives, parking areas, etc.) and surface water; with the distance
measured to the top of the bank above the surface water; and

7.	Written analysis and description of the impact of the proposed subdivision on surface and ground water quality.

K.	Grading and Drainage Plan:   This plan shall be presented on a separate sheet(s) keyed to the Phase III Mylar and shall provide the following information for the entire area of the proposed subdivision, unless there is a determination by the board that a lesser area is sufficient:

1.	Basic street and lot layout, with all lots numbered consecutively;
 

2.	Exact location of all existing buildings and location of proposed buildings;

3.	Contours of existing and proposed grade at intervals of five (5) feet.
Intervals at less than five (5) feet may be required depending on the character of the topography.  USGS contour lines shall extend a minimum of two hundred (200) feet beyond the subdivision boundary.

4.	Final identification, location, elevation, grades and/or contours at intervals of five (5) feet for the existing and proposed drainage ways, drainage easements, drainage structures and water bodies;

5.	Final identification and relative location of proposed soil erosion, sediment control measures and structures;

6.	Final drawings and specifications for each proposed soil erosion and sediment control measure.

7.	Final drawings, details, and specifications for proposed flood hazard prevention measures and structures and for proposed storm water retention facilities;

8.	Final slope stabilization details and specifications;

9.	A timing schedule indicating the anticipated starting and completion dates of the development.  Time of exposure of each area prior to the completion of effective soil erosion and sediment control measures.

NOTE:	The sub divider shall bear the final responsibility for the installation and construction of all required drainage, slope stabilization, soil erosion and sediment control measures and structures.

L.	Solid Waste:	A written description and analysis of solid waste to be generated by the proposed subdivision and plan for disposal of wastes, including hazardous wastes, other than ordinary residential waste.

M.	Open Space:	Deleted in 2015 Update

N.	Police Protection:	A written description of any feature of the proposed subdivision which may require more than routine police protection. (i.e. high density, second and retirement home development, developments in isolated areas of town).

O.	Fire Safety:	A written analysis of and plans to assure the fire safety all year including fire safety of buildings, access to the site and buildings, fire detection and suppression systems, and adequate water supply for fire fighting.  Depending on the nature of the subdivision, an analysis of forest fire danger may be required.
 

P.	Existing and Planned Land Use: DELETED in 2015 Update



Q.	REGIONAL IMPACTS:

All applications shall be reviewed for potential regional impacts. Upon such a finding the Board shall furnish the Regional Planning Commission(s) and the affected municipalities with copies of the minutes of the meeting at which the determination was made.  The copies shall be sent within 72 hours of the meeting. At least 14 days prior to the scheduled public hearing , the Board shall notify by certified mail the regional planning commission(s) and the affected municipalities of the date, time and place of the hearing, and of their right to appear as abutters to offer testimony concerning the proposal

R.	Impact of Subdivision: An analysis of the proposed subdivision’s direct and secondary fiscal impacts and direct and secondary impacts on population growth and school enrollment shall be prepared by a qualified consultant. The analysis should cover the development period on a year-by-year basis plus the fifth year following completion of the development.  Fiscal impacts should be calculated on the basis of constant dollars and tax rates and assessment ratios in effect at the time the analysis is prepared. For subdivisions which are being carried out in phases, the analysis should reflect the timing and cumulative impact of all phases. This statement shall consist of an estimate of the tax revenue to be derived in each year from the subdivision and estimates of the cost to the Town, in each of these years, of new requirements by the subdivision for municipal services which shall include, but need not be limited to, schools, road maintenance, parking, water supply, sewage disposal, solid waste disposal, storm water and surface runoff disposal, traffic control, recreation, and fire, police, and ambulance protection. The statement shall show all computations and detail all data (and their source) on which calculations are based along with explicit statement of all assumptions made.

S.	Construction Plans:

1.	Plans:  Plans of all areas to be disturbed for construction of streets, driveways, drainage ways, and structures, sewer, water, gas, telephone, television and electric lines, erosion and sediment control structures,
and other areas to be disturbed for the construction of improvements shall be made with existing topography shown in dashed lines and proposed contours shown in solid lines at a contour interval of five (5) feet plus spot elevations, soil types and boundaries shown in dotted lines, existing tree lines and proposed trees and all other plantings, edge of all paved or graveled areas, location and size of all structures, piping and other materials, horizontal curve data at street center lines, centerline
stationing of all proposed roads at fifty (50) foot intervals and the location of all adjacent lot lines with the lot numbers of each lot taken from the site survey. Plans shall be drawn at a scale of not more than one (1) inch
 

equals one hundred (100) feet.

2.	Profiles:	Profiles of all proposed roadways (including driveways) showing existing and proposed elevations along the center line; and all structures piping and other materials. Profiles shall be drawn at a scale of one (1) inch equals five (5) feet vertical scale.

3.	Cross-Sections:	Cross-sections of all proposed roadways at fifty
(50) foot stations and at all catch basins, bridges, or culverts showing the roadway and all areas to be disturbed for the construction of all proposed roadways, existing grades, proposed sub grades, proposed final grades, and all utilities and other structures.  Cross-sections shall be drawn to a scale of one (1) inch equals ten (10) feet, both the  horizontal and vertical scales shall be the same.

4.	Details:	Construction details of all roadways, curbing, sidewalks, drainage structures, sediment and erosion control structures and any other require improvements shall be shown at a scale of no more than one hundred (100) feet per inch.

S.	Cost estimates:

Engineer’s estimate of costs of all improvements including but not
limited to costs of streets, public improvements, drainage structures and other utilities.

T.	Security for Completion of Improvements:

1.	The applicant shall submit a copy of the proposed, performance bond, or irrevocable Line of Credit providing for and securing to the Town the completion of the actual construction and installation of all improvements and utilities and their maintenance for two (2) years.

2.	In cases where the Planning Board stipulates, as a condition precedent to the approval of the subdivision plan, the extent to which and the manner in which streets shall be  graded and improved and to which water, sewer and other utility mains, piping, connections or other facilities and reasonable landscaping shall be installed, the Planning Board shall, in lieu of the completion of street, utility and landscaping improvements and installations prior to the final approval of the subdivision plan,
require, performance bond, or irrevocable Line of Credit in
the amount to cover the full cost of all improvements plus an amount to cover the full costs of all improvements at the subdivision completion date named in the Board’s approval, and with surety and conditions satisfactory to the Board providing for and securing the Town the actual construction and completion of the improvements and installations within
 

a period specified by the board and expressed in the other security and, further, the Town shall enforce such securities by all appropriate legal and equitable remedies.  All improvements shall be completed within a period of two years unless extended by the Planning Board.

The amount of the security shall include fees for inspection of improvements by the appropriate Town agents or their designated consultants.

In case of electric lines or other utilities to be installed by a public utility Corporation or a municipal department, a statement shall be received in writing from such public utility, corporation or municipal department that the work will be done within a reasonable time, without expense to the Town, and prior to final road surfacing.

Any performance bond, or irrevocable Letter of Credit required of an applicant shall not be released until the Selectmen and Planning Board have certified completion of the public utilities and improvements in accordance with the requirements, deeds covering land to be used for public purposes, easements and rights-of-ways over property to remain in private ownership, and rights-to-drain onto or across private property are submitted in a form satisfactory to the Town Attorney and Planning Board at no expense to the Town.

All recording fees shall be borne by the sub divider.

3.	Documents establishing the performance bond, or irrevocable Letter of Credit to be prepared and reviewed at sub divider’s expense and approved by the  Board.

U.	Title matter and legal Data:	The following shall be furnished to the Board in a form approved by the Board and/or Town Attorney.

1.	All present or proposed easements, covenants, reservations or restrictions benefiting or burdening the property the location of all areas affected or to be affected thereby shall be clearly identified by appropriate reference to the site survey;

2.	Names and addresses of all persons having a beneficial interest in the property;

3.	Most recent deed to the property; and proposed deed to all lots;

4.	Deed to convey the Town, land to be used for streets, open space and other public purposes, with transfer to title to such interest to be effective on such date as the Town accepts such land;
 

5.	Written easements and rights-of-ways for public purposes over property to remain in private ownership;

6.	Written easements to drain onto or across other property, for changing slopes of the	property or properties of others to accommodate surface water runoff, sedimentation, and/or erosion, whether public or private, including a street:

7.	Performance and maintenance bonds as previously described.

8.	A written acknowledgement and certificate of Insurance and Security covering of the sub divider’s responsibility for maintenance of easement areas, and the assumption by the sub divider to liability for injuries and damages that may occur on lands to be dedicated for public use, until such land has been legally accepted by the Town.

V.	Zoning Compliance:   If a Zoning Variance or Special Exception is necessary for the new lots to comply with Zoning, then a copy of the granted Variance or Special Exception shall be provided.

W.	Agency Approvals:	Submit copies of all applications and data submitted to, communications with, and approvals from any FEDERAL, STATE, or MUNICIPAL AGENCY having jurisdiction over any aspect of the proposed subdivision including but not limited to the following:

o	Significant Alteration of Terrain o	Septic Systems
o	Water Supply Systems
o	Driveway Permit
o	Wetland Permit

X.	Additional Information:	The Board reserves the right to request that the applicant provide additional information in the course of reviewing the proposed subdivision.



5.4	Minor Subdivision: Phase III - Final Review:


The following plans, documents, and materials shall constitute the application and shall be submitted unless requirement of the submission is waived by the Board.  If any component of the application is missing without a waiver or is inaccurate, the application will not be complete and will not be accepted by the Board for review.  All dimensions and documents must be accurate, current, and exact.

A.	Plats:   Twelve (12) paper copies of site survey maps plus one (1) paper copy per lot shall be submitted.  One (1) copy per lot shall be submitted. One (1) copy in permanent black ink on permanent reproducible film (wash off or original plans
 

on Mylar) must also be submitted but may be submitted after final approval has been granted.  The plats shall include the following information and shall conform to the following specification:

1.	Blue or black line paper prints (twelve plus one per lot) and one (1) Mylar

2.	Sheet size in accordance with Grafton County Register of Deeds requirements, but not smaller than 8 ½ “ x 11” or larger than 22” x 34”

3.	Scale no smaller than one hundred (100) feet per inch

4.	Prepared, signed, and sealed by a New Hampshire registered surveyor

5.	Name of municipality and subdivision

6.	Names and address of subdivider and any designer/consultant

7.	Boundaries of the entire parcel or parcel being subdivided, whether or not all land therein is to be subdivided

8.	Boundary of subdivision registered to USGS benchmark in whatever manner practical if the subdivision is in the 100 year floodplain

9.	North point and bar scale

10.	Date or dates of any revisions

11.	Any of the following which is within a 200 feet of the boundaries of the subdivision:
a.	names of property owners and Tax Map and lot number of their property (as shown in the Town of records not more than five (5) days before the filing date)
b.	approximate locations of buildings and driveway (not required for boundary line adjustments)
c.	locations of roads

12.	Municipal and Zoning District boundaries which lies within the subdivision.

13.	Any land-use designations from the Master Plan.

14.	A statement as to the compliance of the proposed lots with Zoning requirements. If any lots do not comply with Zoning but are covered by a Zoning Variance or if any proposed use requires a Zoning Special Exception, the statement shall include the number of the Zoning Board of Adjustment file which such Variance or Special Exception was granted.
 

15.	Existing streets including all existing:
a.	widths
b.	right-of-way lines
c.	stationing and dimensions of tangents, chords, and radii
d.	points of curvature and tangency of curved streets
e.	angles to lot lines
f.	intersection, turn-around, and/or cul-de-sac radii
g.	names according to the Town’s Master List of Street Names
h.	iron pins and/or monuments at street intersections and points of curvature or tangency of curved streets

(Items A, B, C, D, E, F, and H are not required for boundary line adjustments)

16.	Existing and proposed lot lines including angles and dimensions and iron pins and/or monuments at lot corners and points of curvature of tangency or curved lot lines.

17.	Area of existing and proposed lots in acres or square feet.

18.	Tax Map and Lot numbers of existing and proposed lots (proposed lot numbers shall be consecutive)

19.	Numbers for each existing primary building and assigned building numbers for each new vacant lot per the Street Naming and Numbering Ordinance.

20.	Location of existing and proposed easements and areas affected by existing and proposed covenants, reservation, and restrictions.

21.	Space shall be reserved for endorsement by the Planning Board and all appropriate agencies providing places to record file number, date, and signature (s).

22.	The plat shall contain the following statement: “The Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Enfield are a part of this plat, and approval of this plat is contingent on completion of all requirements of said Subdivision Regulations.”

23.	General Site Location map, shown as an inset, locating the subdivision boundary in relation to major roads and community facilities in the town.

B.	Cover Sheet:   Application cover sheet shall be completed which includes (but is Not limited to) the name and address of the applicant and his or her agent, location of subdivision, Tax Map and Lot number of the subdivision, Zoning District(s) in which the subdivision lies, signatures of applicant and agent, date of filing, and Planning Board file number.
 

C.	Abutters:	Names and addresses of all abutters (as shown in the Town records not more than five (5) days before the filing date) shall be provided.

D.	Fees:	The applicant shall pay all appropriate fees as specified in the Board’s fee schedule.

E.	Deeds: A copy of the most recent deed to each parcel being subdivided shall be provided.

F.	Covenants:	A copy of any proposed deed restrictions or covenants shall be provided.

G.	Zoning Compliance:   If a Zoning Variance or Special Exception is necessary for the new lots to comply with Zoning, then a copy of the granted Variance or Special Exception shall be provided.

H.	Agency Approvals:	Submit copies of all applications and data submitted to, communications with, and approvals from any FEDERAL, STATE, or MUNICIPAL AGENCY having jurisdiction over any aspect of the proposed subdivision including but not limited to the following:

•	Significant Alteration of Terrain
•	Septic Systems
•	Water Supply Systems
•	Driveway Permit
•	Wetland Permit

I.	Additional Information:  The Board reserves the right to request that the applicant provide additional information in the course of reviewing the proposed subdivision.

SECTION 6: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



6.1	Interpretation:


In matters of interpretation and application of these Regulations, the opinion of the Board shall prevail.



6.2	Conflict with Other Regulations:


Where these regulations are in conflict with other Federal, State or local laws, ordinances, statutes, rule, easement, agreement, bylaws or regulations, the more stringent shall apply.
 

6.3	Waivers and Variances:


Where the Board finds that due to the special circumstances of a particular plat, or because of exceptional and unique conditions of topography, access, location, shape, size, drainage, or other features of the parcel of interest, in its judgment provision of certain requirements if not requisite in the interest of public health, safety and general welfare or is inappropriate because of inadequacy or lack of connecting facilities adjacent or in proximity to the proposed subdivision it may, after public meeting, waive or vary such requirements subject to appropriate conditions. The Board reserves the right to waive or vary the requirements of these regulations in the course of reviewing any proposed subdivision or annexation when such requirements are manifestly applicable and when such waiver or variance will not demean or nullify the intent or purposes of the Regulations.

A.	In granting waiver or variance, the Board shall require such reasonable conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the requirements so waived or varied.

B	No such waiver or variance may be granted if it would have the effect of nullifying the intent and purposes of the Town Master Plan, Zoning Ordinance, these regulations or any other town regulations, ordinances, rules or agreements.

C.	The Board may waive the requirement of a perimeter survey of the entire parcel.
Whenever the Board waives the requirement for a perimeter survey of the entire parcel, there shall be submitted instead a perimeter sketch which shall indicate the size and shape of the entire parcel, the location of any structures thereon, the names of all abutters, the location of the proposed lot lines, the location and names of existing roads, the location and nature of important topographical features and other such information as well assist the Board in reviewing the subdivision requests.



6.4	Exemptions: 5 Year Exemption


I.	Every plat approved by the Board and properly recorded with the County Register of Deeds shall be exempt from all subsequent changes in subdivision regulations and zoning ordinances adopted by the Board, except those regulations and ordinances which expressly protect public health standards such as water quality and sewage treatment requirements, for a period five (5)  years after the date of recording, subject to each of the following conditions:

A.	Active and substantial development or building shall have commenced on the site by the owner or his successor in interest in accordance with the approved plat within twenty four (24) months after the date of approval, or, in accordance with the terms of said approval and where a bond, or other security to cover the costs or roads, drains, sewers or improvements are required in connection with such approval, such bond, or other security is posted with the Town prior to commencement of such development;
 



B.	Development remains in full compliance with the public health regulations and ordinances;

C.	At the time of approval and recording, the plat conforms to the subdivision regulations and zoning ordinances then in effect at the site of each plat.



II.	Once substantial completion of the improvements as shown on the subdivision plat or site plan has occurred in compliance with the approved subdivision plat or site plan or the terms of said approval or unless otherwise stipulated by the planning board, the rights of the owner or the owner's successor in interest shall vest and no subsequent changes in subdivision regulations, site plan regulations, or zoning ordinances, except impact fees adopted pursuant to RSA 674:21 and 675:2-4, shall operate to affect such improvements.



III.	The planning board shall,  as part of its subdivision and site plan regulations or as a condition of subdivision plat or site plan approval, specify the threshold levels of work that shall constitute the following terms, with due regard to the scope and details of a particular project:
(a)	"Substantial completion of the improvements as shown on the subdivision plat or site plan,'' for purposes of fulfilling paragraph II; and
(b)	"Active and substantial development or building,'' for the purposes of fulfilling paragraph I.

IV.	Failure of a planning board to specify by regulation or as a condition of subdivision plat or site plan approval what shall constitute "active and substantial development or building'' shall entitle the subdivision plat or site plan approved by the planning board to the 5-year exemption described in paragraph I. The planning board may, for good cause, extend the 24-month period set forth in subparagraph I(a).



6.5	Acceptance of Streets and/or Utilities:


A.	Nothing herein is intended to modify the requirements of law with reference to the acceptance of streets and/or utilities by the Town.

B.	Nothing herein is intended to modify or control the construction, reconstruction or extension of streets and/or utilities by the Town or State.



6.6	Compliance Hearings:


In cases where the Board has placed conditions precedent there must be a noticed public hearing in which abutters have a chance to review and comment on compliance with the conditions precedent.  Approval of a subdivision, subject to condition(s) precedent is conditional approval. It is not final approval.  Subdivision plans shall not be signed by the board until all conditions
 

precedent have been met.  Cost and mailings and advertising, shall be paid in advance as set forth in the Board’s current fee schedule.



6.7	Enforcement:


These regulations shall be enforced by the Planning Board or its duly authorized representative.




6.8	Penalties:


A.	Any person who violates any of the provisions of this title, or any local ordinance, code, or regulation adopted under this title, or any provision or specification of any application, plat, or plan approved by, or any requirement or condition of a permit or decision issued by, any local administrator or land use board acting under the authority of this title shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural person, or guilty of a felony if any other person; and shall be subject to a civil penalty of $275 for the first offense, and $550 for subsequent offenses as amended by RSA 676:17, for each day that such violation is found to continue after the conviction date or after the date on which the violator receives written notice from the municipality that the violator is in violation, whichever is earlier. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense.



B.	In any legal action brought by the Town to enforce, by way of injunctive relief as provided by RSA 676.15 or otherwise, these regulations, or to enforce any decision made by the Planning Board, or to seek the payment of any fine levied under paragraph (A), the Town may recover its costs and reasonable attorney’s fees actually expended in pursuing the legal action if it is found to be a prevailing party in the action. Recoverable costs shall include all out-of-pocket expenses actually incurred, including but not limited to, inspections fees, expert fees, and investigatory expenses.

C.	If any violation of these Regulations, or any decision of the Planning Board, results in the expenditure of public funds by the Town which are not reimbursed, the court in its discretion may order, as an additional civil penalty, that a violator make restitution to the Town for such funds so expended.

D.	The Superior Court may, upon a petition filed by the Town and after notice and a preliminary hearing as in the case of prejudgment attachments under RSA 511:A, require an alleged violator to post a bond with the court to secure payment of any penalty or remedy or the performance of any injunctive relief which may be ordered or both.  At the hearing, the burden shall be on the Town to show that there is a strong likelihood that it will prevail on the merits, that the penalties or remedies sought are reasonably likely to be awarded by the court in an amount
 

consistent with the bond sought, and that the bond represents the amount of the projected expenses of compliance with the injunctive relief sought.



F.	Penalties for Transferring Lots in Unapproved Subdivisions:
Any owner, or agent of the owner, of any land located within a subdivision in a municipality that has adopted subdivision regulations who transfers or sells any land before a plat of the subdivision has been approved by the planning board and filed with the appropriate recording official under RSA 674:35, II, shall forfeit and pay a civil penalty of $1,000  as amended by RSA 676:16 for each lot or parcel so transferred or sold; and the description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties. The municipality may enjoin a transfer or sale which violates the provisions of this section and may recover the penalty imposed by civil action.  In any action to recover a penalty, the prevailing party may recover reasonable court costs and attorney’s fees as may be ordered by the court.

G.	In accordance with RSA 676:17(V),the building inspector or other local official with the authority to enforce the provisions of this title may commence an action under paragraph I either in the district court pursuant to RSA 502-A:11-a, or in the superior court. The prosecuting official in the official's discretion may, change the offense as a violation and in such cases the penalties to be imposed by the court shall be limited to those provided for a violation under RSA 651:2 and the civil penalty provided in this section. The provisions of this section shall supersede any inconsistent local penalty provision.




6.9	Appeals
Any person, aggrieved by an official action of the Board, may appeal there from in accordance with the provisions of RSA 677:l5.



6.10	Amendments:


These regulations may be amended, from time to time, whenever this action is deemed necessary or advisable by the board, but not until a public hearing in compliance with RSA 675:6 and RSA 675:7 on the proposed amendment.  A majority vote of those present and voting shall prevail. No subdivision regulations or amendment or exception thereto shall be legal or have any force and effect until copies of such, certified by a majority of the Board members, are filed with the Town Clerk.


Revocation of Recorded Approval  RSA 676:4-a
I.	A subdivision plat, street plat, site plan or other approval which has been filed with the
appropriate recording official under RSA 674:37 may not be revoked, in whole or in part, by the
 

planning board, except pursuant to this section, and only under the following circumstances:
(a)	At the request of, or by agreement with, the applicant or the applicant's successor in interest.
(b)	When the applicant or successor in interest to the applicant has performed work, erected a structure or structures, or established a use of land, which fails to conform to the statements, plans or specifications upon which the approval was based, or has materially violated any requirement or condition of such approval.
(c)	hen the applicant or successor in interest to the applicant has failed to perform any condition of the approval within a reasonable time specified in the approval, or, if no such time is specified, within the time periods specified in RSA 674:39.
(d)	When the time periods specified in RSA 674:39 have elapsed without any vesting of rights as set forth therein, and the plat, plan or other approval no longer conforms to applicable ordinances or regulations.
(e)	hen the applicant or successor in interest to the applicant has failed to provide for the continuation of adequate security as provided by RSA 674:36, III(b) and 674:44, III(d) until such time as the work secured thereby has been completed.
II.	rior to recording any revocation under this section, the planning board shall give notice, as provided by RSA 676:4, I(d), to the public, the applicant or the applicant's successor in interest, and all abutters and holders of conservation, preservation, or agricultural preservation restrictions. The notice shall include the board's reasons for the revocation. A hearing with notice as provided in RSA 676:4, I(d) shall be held at the request of any party receiving such notice, submitted within 30 days of receiving such notice, or if the planning board determines to hold a hearing.
III.	declaration of revocation, dated and endorsed in writing by the planning board, and containing reference to the recording information for the plat, plan or other approval being revoked, shall be filed for recording with the register of deeds, no sooner than 30 days after written notification of the revocation is served on the applicant or the applicant's successor in interest, in person or by certified mail, or 30 days after any public hearing, whichever is later. If only part of an approval is revoked, that portion of land subject to revocation shall be clearly identified in the declaration. The declaration shall be recorded under the same name or names as was the original approval, as well as the names of subsequent owners, if any, of the land or part thereof subject to revocation, as identified by the municipality.
IV.	A revocation under this section may be appealed pursuant to RSA 677:15. Nothing in this section shall affect the municipality's ability, either before or after such a revocation, to pursue other remedies or penalties as set forth in RSA 676:15-17.




6.11	Severability


If any provision, section, or phrase of these Subdivision Regulations, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances, is found for any reason to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of these regulations.
 

6.12	Effective Date:

The effective date of these Regulations shall be October 15, 1974. As amended October 11, 2017

6.13	Certification:

Certification to be a true copy, attest:


Dan Kiley, Chair


David Fracht, Vice Chair


John Kluge, Selectman Ex-officio


Tim Taylor


Nancy Scovner


Kurt Gotthardt


Rita Seto


Paula Rowe Stone - Alternate


James Bonner - Alternate




Amended:	May 23, 1979	September 9, 1981	August 11, 1982
	August 14, 1985	February 26, 1986	July 28, 1993
	June 28, 1995	June 12, 1996	May 9, 2007
	November 18, 2015	October 11, 2017	



END OF DOCUMENT
 
I


TOWN OF ENFIELD BOARD OF SELECTMEN








POLICY FOR WHOLESALE/RETAIL SALES OF PERMISSIBLE FIREWORKS








STATEMENT





AUTHORITY

In accordance with RSA Chapter 160-A (as amended), the Board of Selectmen as the governing body of the Town of Enfield for the Town of Enfield hereby adopts this policy intended to regulate the sale of Class C "Permissible" fireworks as described in RSA 160-A:1,5,within the limits of the Town of Enfield.

Persons wishing to conduct the aforementioned retail/wholesale sales of Class C "permissible fireworks" shall obtain a permit from the Board of Selectmen prior to any such activities.

APPLICATION

Persons wishing to apply for a sales permit under this policy shall do so in writing to the Board of Selectmen on forms that may be prescribed by the Board. Completed applications shall be submitted to the Board of Selectmen no less than thirty (30) days prior to the desired date of proposed activity.

ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS

All persons wishing to obtain a permit for the sale of Class C Permissible Fireworks shall in addition to applicable State and Federal regulations, conform to the following guidelines:

Under no circumstances shall the Board issue a permit for the retail/wholesale sales of these products by any individual under the age of twenty-one (21).

Persons wishing to obtain a permit for the retail/wholesale sale of Class C Permissible Fireworks must hold a Federal sales permit issued under USC Title 18. The permit shall not become valid until the applicant successfully obtains a sales license from the State of New Hampshire'sDepartmentof Safety.
 
(2)


SITE LOCATION

Retail sales shall, only be conducted at such locations as listed upon the applicants federal license.

At no time shall the product be sold from temporary structures which are not those permanently affixed to the property (i.e., motor vehicles, trailers, campers, roadside stands, etc.).

Wholesale/retail sales locations must have successfully completed Site  Plan Review with the Enfield Planning Board prior to approval of the requested permit. Sales will only be permitted from those sites which meet all applicable land use regulations.

All sales locations within the Town of Enfield must undergo physical inspection of the property by the Fire Chief or his/her designee prior to issuance of the actual permit and be in compliance with all applicable building, life and fire safety codes. The Fire Chief of the Town of Enfield retains the right to disapprove any site at any time due to the existence of safety/fire hazards.

The holder of this permit shall assume all responsibility for liabilities arising from the storage, sale and display of Class C Permissible Fireworks.

CONDITIONS OF SALES

Persons permitted to sell Class C Permissible Fireworks (or their agents) must, prior to the sale, require the purchaser of these products to furnish photographic identification (State issued I.E. or Driver's license) indicating that they are at least 21 years of age. Persons engaged in the retail sales of Class C Permissible Fireworks shall not allow sales by persons (or their agents) who are under the age of eighteen (18).

No permits shall be issued under this policy for the retail/wholesale sales of Class C Permissible Fireworks when sales are to take place before 7:00 am. or after 9:00 pm.

All permits referenced herein shall be kept at the site permitted for sales and readily available for inspection by local authorities.

Applicants are expected to comply with all provisions of applicable Federal and State Regulations (Chapter 160-B).

DURATION

PerrT)its issued by the Board of Selectmen for this purpose will be issued on an annual basis and expire at the end of the calender year.

FEES

An annual fee shall be assessed by the Board of Selectmen for said permit. The permit fee shall be $500.00 until such time as amended by the Board.




';
)
 
(3)


REVOCATION

The Board of Selectmen shall have the authority to revoke any permits pertaining to Class C Permissible Fireworks. Any violation of the above terms shall  be deemed sufficientreason for revocation without a refund of the required fees paid.

Any appeal of a permit revocation must be made to the Board of Selectmen in writing, indicating the reason to reconsider the action of the Board. This submission must be made to their office within five (5) calendar days of revocation; The Board will convene to consider the appeal within ten (10) calendar days of the receipt of an appeal.

The sale of Class C Permissible Fireworks without or after the revocation of a permit from the Town of Enfield is subject to criminal prosecution and penalty under State statute.



Given under our hands this eighth day of June, 1992.







Donald J. Crae, Chairman



 






C. Jam	Martel
Enfield	oard of Selectmen


























 
 

CLASS B FIREWORKS DISPLAY ORDINANCE


By virtue of the authority granted the Town of Enfield pursuant to RSA 160-B: 10, the Town hereby adopts the following ordinance regulating the use of fireworks:

A.	Public displays of fireworks, as defined in RSA 160-B: 1, within the Town of Enfield is prohibited unless permission is obtained for such displays. Approval to make such a display shall granted by the Fire Chief and Police Chief or his/her authorized designee(s).

B.	A condition of approval of any display of Class B fireworks shall be that all requirements and procedures outlined in NH RSA 160-B, and the administrative rules adopted by the New Hampshire State Police, Saf-C 5000 shall be followed.

C.	The display and use of fireworks is allowed any Friday and Saturday until 10:30 pm.  The display and use of fireworks is not allowed any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday.  The display and use of fireworks is allowed on the following holidays until 10:30pm: New Year's Eve, Independence Day, and Labor Day.

D.	Any police officer of the Town of Enfield reserves the right to enforce this ordinance.

E.	The private property owner of the location of the fireworks discharge and/or the person responsible for the violation shall be subject to the following for failure to comply with any provision of this ordinance:

1.	First Offense: Written warning.
2.	Second Offense: $250.00 fine.
3.	Third Offense and subsequent violations: $500.00 fine.

All fines shall be paid to the Town of Enfield and deposited into the General Account.





Adopted November 7, 2016 Approved:




B. Fred Cummings

Board of Selectmen, Enfield, NH
 


CLASS C FIREWORKS DISPLAY ORDINANCE


By virtue of the authority granted the Town of Enfield pursuant to RSA 160-C:6, the Town hereby adopts the following ordinance regulating the use of fireworks:

The display and use of fireworks is allowed any Friday and Saturday until 10:30 pm.  The  display and use of fireworks is not allowed any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday.  The display and use of fireworks is allowed on the following holidays until 10:30pm: New Year's Eve, Independence Day, and Labor Day.

Enforcement:
A.	Any police officer of the Town of Enfield reserves the right to enforce this ordinance.

B.	The private property owner of the location of the fireworks discharge and/or the person responsible for the violation shall be subject to the following for failure to comply with any provision of this ordinance:

1.	First Offense: Written warning.
2.	Second Offense: $250.00 fine.
3.	Third Offense and subsequent violations: $500.00 fine.

All fines shall be paid to the Town of Enfield and deposited into the General Account.




 
Adopted November 7, 2016 Ap	oved:
 







B. Fred Cummings

Board of Selectmen, Enfield, NH
 
TOWN OF ENFIELD


HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT PLAN, 2014

Enfield has a number of housing and community development needs which must be addressed over the next several years.  They include major infrastructure improvements for the municipal water and sewer systems, housing rehabilitation, light industrial and commercial development to improve employment opportunities and expand the tax base, social service facilities, recreation facilities and revitalization of the Enfield Village area.

The following goals and objectives have been adopted as part ofEnfield's Master Plan to help guide the town in its efforts to meet its many housing and community development needs.



GOALS AND OBJECTIVES (LONG TERM GOALS)

 
Goal I:
 
Encourage economic development in Enfield.
 

 
Objective 1:



Objective 2:



Objective 3:


Objective 4:



Objective 5:


Objective 6:



Objective 7:
 
Promote the retention and expansion of employment opportunities.

Encourage full occupancy and use of existing commercial and industrial space.

Promote tourism in the Upper Valley Region.


Encourage cooperation among the Town government, business and civic organizations.
Promote vocational education and job training programs. Develop an Enfield Village Improvement Plan to strengthen
the Town's economy.


Encourage/require  adequate parking, roads, sidewalks, water/sewer service, etc. to meet the needs of businesses and their patrons.
 

Goal II:	Provide for safe and convenient circulation patterns in Enfield.


Objective 1:	Encourage adequate and accessible parking and directional signs directing drivers to off-street lots.
 
Objective 2:



Objective 3:
 
Provide pedestrian sidewalks and bicycle pathways to meet local needs.

Provide for safe and effective intersections of all roads and highways in Town.
 

 
Goal III:
 
Enhance the appearance of Enfield through the provision of attractive and well­ planned landscaping and park areas.
 

 
Objective 1:




Objective 2:




Objective 3:
 
Promote the planting and maintenance of trees, shrubs, and lawn areas where such landscaping will visually enhance the appearance of Enfield.

Reserve significant natural and man-made features of the landscape where such elements make a positive contribution to the overall appearance of Enfield.

Provide expanded access and public park space along lake and waterfront areas.
 

 
Goal IV:
 
Encourage the protection, enhancement and renovation of significant historical and architectural resources in Enfield.
 

 
Objective 1:




Objective 2:


Objective 3:
 
Encourage full use/occupancy of historic structures to retain/enhance their economic viability and ensure that they will be maintained.
Encourage proper rehabilitation of historic buildings. Encourage property owners to have their buildings placed on
the National Register of Historic Places, if appropriate and
acceptable to the owners.
 

 
Goal V:
 
Encourage adequate, safe and convenient housing for all age and income groups in the community.
 

 
Objective 1:



Objective 2:




Objective 3:
 
Increase and improve housing through rehabilitation of existing structures and through new development.

Encourage diversified housing patterns with a wide range of types and prices, including housing for the young, the elderly and the handicapped.

Encourage housing development and infill in existing community centers, such as Enfield Village and Enfield Center.
 

Goal VI:	Promote the health and safety of Enfield residents and visitors.

 
Objective 1:


Objective 2:



Objective 3:


Objective 4:


Objective 5:
 
Promote fire safety in all public and private buildings.


Provide adequate lighting to maintain safety and night-time visibility.

Provide adequate police and fire protection .


Provide safe sidewalks and crosswalks for pedestrian safety. Encourage safety in boating and other recreation activities.
 
Goal VII:
 
Encourage improvements in Enfield Village which will improve housing conditions, retain and create jobs, preserve historical resources and improve public  safety.
 

Goal VIII:		Coordinate improvements in Enfield Village with overall planning for the entire Town.

 
Objective 1:




Objective 2:



Objective 3:
 
The recommendation  and implementation strategies in the Village Improvement Plan should be coordinated with those in the Master Plan.

Extend sewer system to solve septic system/pollution problems in the Village.

Revitalize the Village area.
 

 
Goal IX:
 
Promote the social services required ofEnfield's residents.



PRIORITIES (SHORT TERM GOALS)
 



•	Encourage Commercial Development in the newly created Route 4 District.


•	Insure that funding is available for economic development.


•	Expand public access to Mascoma River and Mascoma Lake.


•	Expand public library
 
•	Continue to improve pedestrian safety by upgrading the Village area's sidewalks and crossings.


•	Consider renovation of Enfield Center's old Town Hall.


•	Study potential reuses for the Baltic Mill facilities.


•	Improvements to water and sewer systems, including expansions, to meet DES regulations.



It is the policy of the Town of Enfield to minimize the involuntary displacement of households from their neighborhoods.



Adopted: April 7, 2014






B.	Fred Cummings, Chairman




Donald J. Crate, Sr.
 
Town of Enfield
Board of Selectmen



ENFIELD INVESTMENT POLICY



I.SCOPE:

This investment policy applies to all financial assets of the Town and is the investment policy that applies to all transactions involving the financial assets and related activity of all the funds defined in Section II of this policy.

These funds are accounted for in the Town's annual financial report and include any new funds created by the Town Meeting or the Board of Selectmen, unless specifically exempted by the articles of its creation.

II.	OBJECTIVES:

Safety of principal is the foremost objective of the Town. Each investment transaction shall seek first to ensure that capital losses are avoided, whether they are from securities defaults or erosion of market value.

The Board of Selectmen seeks to attain market rates of return on its investments, consistent with constraints imposed by its safety objectives, cash flow considerations and state laws that restrict the placement of public funds.  The Town Treasurer is encouraged to represent the Town's best interests in seeking to remove constraints to the efficient investment of its funds.

All participants in the investment process shall seek to act responsibly as custodians of the public trust.  They shall avoid any transaction that might impair public confidence in the board of Selectmen's ability to govern effectively.

The financial assets are accounted for in the Town's annual financial report, and include: o	General Fund
o	Special Revenue Funds o	Capital Project Funds
o	Forfeiture/Seizure Fund
o	Any new fund created by the Town's citizens at Town meeting or by the Board of Selectmen, unless specifically exempted by the articles of its creation.

III.	GENERAL POLICY:


1)	AUTHORIZED DEPOSITORIES: All depository CJ.ccounts of the Town must be held in the name of the Town.  All income payable to the Town and all revenue received by the Town
shall be forwarded to the Town Treasurer.


Depositories shall be selected through the Town's banking services procurement process and awarded by the Board of Selectmen.  In selecting depositories, the credit worthiness of
 
institutions shall be considered, and the treasurer shall conduct a comprehensive review of the prospective depositories' credit characteristics and financial history.

Banks and savings and loan associations seeking to establish eligibility for the Town's certificate of deposit purchase programs shall submit information as required by the Town Treasurer, who shall regularly report to the Board of Selectmen, the list of eligible banks and savings and loan associations.

Before accepting funds or engaging in investment transactions with the Town, the supervising officer at each depository shall submit a certification.  The document will certify that the officer has reviewed the investment policies and objectives and agrees to disclose potential conflicts or risks to public funds that might arise out of business transactions between the depository and the Town.  All financial institutions shall agree to undertake reasonable efforts to preclude  imprudent transactions involving the Town's funds.

The supervising officer shall agree to exercise due diligence in monitoring the activities of other officers and subordinate staff members engaged in transactions with the Town.  Employees of any financial institution offering securities or investments to the Town shall be trained in the precautions appropriate to public sector investments and shall be required to familiarize themselves with the Town's investment objectives, policies and constraints.

2)	AUTHORIZED INVESTMENTS:  Assets of the Town may be invested in the following:

a)	Obligations of the U.S. government such as U.S. Treasury securities maturing in less than one year and short-term obligations of U.S. Government agencies approved for investment purposes by the Treasurer of the State of NH;
b)	Participation accounts established with the New Hampshire Public Deposit Investment
Pool  established   pursuant   to  RSA  383:22;	·
c)	Savings accounts in solvent banks in New Hampshire;
d)	Certificates of deposit at banks incorporated under New Hampshire law, and
e)	Certificates of deposit at national banks located in New Hampshire.

3)	DIVERSIFICATION: It is the policy of the Town to diversify its investment portfolio. Investment of assets held in the common cash fund and any other investments shall be diversified to eliminate the risk of loss resulting from over-concentration of assets in a specific maturity, a specific issuer or a specific class of securities. Diversification strategies shall be determined and revised periodically by the Treasurer and reviewed by the Board of Selectmen.

Deposits placed in the NH Deposit Investment Pool (NHDIP) shall by definition meet this requirement.

4)	ETHICS AND CONFLICT OF INTEREST:  Investment officials involved in the investment process shall refrain from personal business activity that could conflict with proper execution of the investment program, or which could impair their ability to make impartial investment decisions.  Investment officials shall disclose to the Selectmen any material financial interests in financial institutions that conduct business within the town, and they shall further disclose any large personal financial investment positions that could be related to the performance of the town portfolio.
 
5)	MATURITIES:  Investments of the Town shall be limited to instruments maturing within one year at the time of purchase


6)	POLICY REVIEW: Annually, at the meeting next following the spring election, the Selectmen shall review this policy for the investment of public funds in conformance with the provisions of applicable statutes.

7)	RISK AND PRUDENCE:  The Town recognizes that investment risks can result from issuer defaults, market price changes or various technical complications leading to temporary non-liquidity . Both the Treasurer and the Trustees are expected to display prudence in the selection of investments in a way to minimize default risk.

The standard of prudence to be used by investment officials shall be the "prudent person" and shall be applied in the context of managing an overall portfolio.  Investment officials acting in accordance with written procedures and exercising due diligence shall be relieved of personal responsibility for an individual security's credit risk or market price changes, provided deviations from expectations are reported to the Selectmen in a timely fashion and appropriate action is taken to control adverse developments.

IV.	TOWN TREASURER DUTIES (RSA 41:29):

1)	AUTHORITY AND PROCESS:  The town treasurer shall have custody of all moneys belonging to the town, and shall pay out the same only upon orders of the selectmen, or, in the case of a conservation fund established pursuant to RSA 36-A:5, upon the order of the conservation commission or in the case of a heritage commission fund established pursuant to RSA 674:44-a upon the order of the heritage commission, or in the case of fees held pursuant to RSA 673: 16, II, upon the order of the local land use board or its designated agent, or in the case of a recreation revolving fund established pursuant to RSA 35-B:2, upon the order of the recreation or park commission, or other board or body designated by the town to expend such a fund.

The town treasurer shall deposit all such moneys in participation units in the public investment pool established pursuant to RSA 383:22 or in solvent banks in the state. The amount of collected funds on deposit in any one bank shall not for more than 20 days exceed the sum of its paid-up capital and surplus.

The town treasurer shall keep in suitable books provided for the purpose a fair and correct account of all sums received into and paid from the town treasury, and of all notes given by the town, with the particulars thereof.  At the close of each fiscal year, the treasurer shall make a report to the town, giving a particular account of all financial transactions during the year. The Treasurer shall submit monthly reports to the Selectmen that reconcile all depository cash accounts and public fund accounts established pursuant to RSA 383:22, and submit the treasurer's books and vouchers to them and to the town auditors for examination, whenever so requested.

Whenever the town treasurer has in custody an excess of funds which are not immediately needed for the purpose of expenditure, the town treasurer shall, with the approval of the Selectmen, invest the same in obligations of the United states government , in the public deposit investment pool established pursuant to RSA 383:22, in savings banks deposits of banks incorporated under the laws of the state of New Hampshire or in certificates of deposits of banks
 
incorporated under the laws of the state of New Hampshire, or in national banks located within this state.

2)	WRITTEN PROCEDURES:  Management responsibility for the general funds of the Town is hereby delegated to the Treasurer, who shall establish written procedures for the prudent investment of town funds consistent with this investment policy.  Such procedures shall include explicit delegation of authority to persons responsible for investment transactions . No person may engage in an investment transaction except as provided under the terms of this policy and  the procedures established by the Treasurer.  The Board of Selectmen shall review the written procedures.  The Treasurer shall be responsible for all transactions undertaken.

3)	REPORTING:   The Treasurer shall see that an investment report is created quarterly that summarizes the quarter's total investment return.  The report shall include an appendix that discloses all transactions during the past quarter.

Each quarterly report shall indicate any areas of policy concern and suggested or planned
revision of investment strategies .  Copies shall be transmitted to the Town's independent auditor.

Within sixty days following the end of the fiscal year the Treasurer shall create a comprehensive annual report on the investment program and investment activity . The annual report shall include 12-month and separate quarterly comparisons of return and shall suggest policies and improvements that might be made in the investment program .


V. TRUSTEES OF TRUST FUNDS DUTIES (RSA 31)


1)	AUTHORITY AND PROCESS: Management responsibility for Trust Funds and Capital Reserve funds is hereby delegated to the Trustees of Trust Funds.

(31 :22)All Trust Funds and Capital Reserve funds shall be administered by a three member Board of Trustees and one trustee shall be elected by ballot at each annual town meeting for a 3- year term. Vacancies shall be filled by the selectmen for the remainder of a term. The trustees shall organize by electing one of their number bookkeeper who shall keep the records and books for the Trustees, and shall require a voucher or other appropriate evidence before making any disbursements of funds from the trust or capital reserve funds.

(31 :25) The trustees shall have custody of all Trust Funds and Capital Reserve funds held by the town. The funds shall be invested only in deposits in any federally or state chartered bank or association authorized to engage in a banking business in the state or in deposits in any credit union in the state, or in state, county, town, city, school district, water and sewer district bonds and the notes of towns or cities in the state ; and such stocks and bonds as are legal for investment by any bank or association chartered by the state; and in participation units in the public deposit investment pool established by RSA 383:22; or in obligations with principal and interest fully guaranteed by the United States government. Shares of mutual funds are also permitted if they are registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission, qualified for sale in the State of New Hampshire consistent with the investment policy adopted by the Trustees of
Trust Funds and reviewed annually. When so invested the Trustees shall not be liable for the loss thereof.

(31:36) All deposits and investments shall be made in the name of the town and shall appear upon the books thereof that the same is a trust fund or a capital reserve fund.
 
(31:25) The Trustees may retain investments as received from donors until the maturity thereof.

(31:25C) The Trustees shall issue an investment report created quarterly that summarizes the quarter's total investment and shall indicate areas of investment or policy concern and suggested strategy.

(31:33) Within sixty days following the end of the fiscal year the Trustees shall create a comprehensive annual report on the investment returns and balances. The annual report shall include year-end balances and annual accrued interest.

(31:38) Copies ofreports required of the Trustees and of the auditor thereof shall be filed annually with the attorney general and The New Hampshire Charitable Trust Division and /or as required by New Hampshire statutes.

VI. SAFEKEEPING AND  CUSTODY:

Investment officials shall be bonded to protect the public against possible embezzlement and malfeasance.  Collateralized securities such as repurchase agreements shall be purchased using the delivery vs. payment procedure.  Unless prevailing practices or economic circumstances dictate otherwise, ownership shall be protected through third-party custodial safekeeping.  The independent auditor shall review safekeeping procedures annually.

Adopted by Enfield Board of Selectmen this  L3	day of	MCLA..-t.-	' 2015.




/'_	·

 




Enfield Board of Selectmen
 
Town of Enfield
Office of the Town Manager 23 Main Street, P.O. Box 373
Enfield, New Hampshire 03748
VOICE/TDD 603-632-5026 * FAX 603-632-5182
EMAIL townhall@enfield.nh.us






Noise Ordinance


Town Meeting, March 9, 1948:

Article 14.  Pursuant to a petition of Louis J. Rowell and others;  “To see if the Town of Enfield will vote to establish the following By-Law:”

"It is hereby declared to be unlawful in the Town of Enfield, New Hampshire for any person or persons to make, continue or cause to be made or continue, or to maintain, or operate from any building or from any place or premises at any time, or suffer or allow, any loud, unnecessary, excessive or unusual noise in the operation of any radio, phonograph or other mechanical sound making device or instrument or any amplifying or reproducing device or instrument attached to or connected thereto, of such character, intensity or duration as to be annoying or detrimental, to the quiet, comfort, peace or repose or in any manner injurious to the health of any individual or individuals residing in the Town of Enfield, New Hampshire, and any such is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is hereby prohibited"

"Penalty for violation of this By-Law is to be subject to provisions of the Revised Laws, Chapter 51, Section 32, pertaining to By-Laws or any amendment thereof."

Article 14 passed as amended

Amended to read, "excepting Manufacturing noises, Sound wagon's of Politicians."
 
 

Secion . I.		No person shall drink or costml= 2i:	-Y time· intoxicating liquor (as dtfiued by Ne Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated 21:33)  nor .carry or·
have in his/her possession any open container(s) of intoxicating liquor upon any  public sidewalk, public street or way, public	ters, publi.d parking lots, public beach areas, public park and/or public playgromid vi.thin the Town of Enfield.

Section II. Any person violating the foregoing ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by
a fine not exceeding $100.00 for each offense.·

Sect i on  I I I. This ordinance shal I  be in effect immediatly upon passage .


Section  IV.	This ordinance super.:::edes :::-°'· :::>:;"7-st:::-iding ordinances
rs : ting to pub! ic consump7ion or display of i ntoxicating
I iquor (if any) within the Town of Enfield.








Given under our hands , this fifteenth
day  of August , 1989




 
&ames E.{\S\\
 
p.sl\
 
-n-airman
 
<>	•	i..-,._::GO::::::::>
.Dona Id J . Crate
ZJ;,c ·		L.A./
Evely	L.	aimer


Enfie ld Board of Selectmen
 
Policy for Removal of Members and Filling of Vacancies on Town Boards, Commissions and Committees



Introduction
Active volunteer board, commission and committee members are highly valued and very important to
local government operation. The Enfield Board of Selectmen strongly believes regular meeting attendance is important to the functioning of our volunteer committees.



I.	Budget Committee:  [RSA 32:15 VI & VII]
Pursuant to the applicable State statutes, as amended, the following procedures will be followed for removal of Budget Committee members and filling of vacancies.

Removal:
A member-at-large shall cease to hold office immediately upon missing 4 consecutive scheduled or announced meetings of which that member received reasonable notice, without being excused by the Chair.

Notice to the subject member shall be made by the Chair within 7 days of the date of removal from office.

Filling Vacancies:
Given that Enfield has an elected Budget Committee, in accordance with state law, vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the Budget Committee. Persons appointed to fill vacancies shall serve until the next annual meeting at which time a successor shall be elected or appointed to either fill the unexpired term or start a new term, as the case may be.



II.	Land Use Boards (Planning, Zoning, Heritage): [RSA 673:12 & 13]
Pursuant to the applicable State statutes, as amended, the following procedure will be followed for removal of Planning Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment and Heritage Commission members and the filling of vacancies.

Removal:
After a public hearing, appointed members and alternate members of an appointed local land use board may be removed by the appointing authority upon written findings of inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office.

The Board of Selectmen may, for any cause enumerated in RSA 673:13, paragraph I, remove an elected member or alternate member after a public hearing.

The appointing authority (Board of Selectmen) or the Planning Board shall file with the town clerk a written statement of reasons for removal under this section.
 
Notice of the public hearing shall be provided to the subject member at least 7 days in advance of the public hearing date and shall cite the reason for the proposed removal from office.   A notice of decision shall be provided to the subject member within 7 days of the date of the public hearing.

Four consecutive unexcused absences, or being absent from fifty percent (50%) or more of a land use board’s posted meetings during a 12-month period, shall be considered Neglect of Duty and cause for removal.

Filling Vacancies:   Vacancies in the membership of a local land use board occurring other than through the expiration of a term of office shall be filled as follows:

•	For an elected member, by appointment by the remaining board members until the next regular municipal election at which time a successor shall be elected to either fill the unexpired term or start a new term, as appropriate.
•	For an appointed, ex officio, or alternate member, by the original appointing or designating authority, for the unexpired term.

The Chairperson of the local land use board may designate an alternate member of the board to fill the vacancy temporarily until the vacancy is filled in the manner set forth in RSA 673:12, paragraph I or II. If the vacancy is for an ex officio member, the Chairperson may only designate the person who has been appointed to serve as the alternate for the ex officio member.



III.	Conservation Commission [RSA 36-A:3]
Pursuant to the applicable State statutes, as amended, the following procedures will be followed for removal of Conservation Commission members and filling of vacancies.


Removal:
Any member of a commission appointed in accordance with RSA 36-4:3, as amended, may, after a public hearing, if requested, be removed for cause by the appointing authority.

Notice of the public hearing shall be provided to the subject member at least 7 days in advance of the public hearing date and shall cite the reason for the proposed removal from office.   A notice of decision shall be provided to the subject member within 7 days of the date of the public hearing.

Four consecutive unexcused absences, or being absent from fifty percent (50%) or more of the Conservation Commission’s posted meetings during a 12-month period, shall be considered Neglect of Duty and cause for removal.

Filling Vacancies:
A vacancy occurring other than by expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as an original appointment.



IV.	Other Appointed Boards, Committees and Commissions
The following procedure will be followed for removal of members and filling of vacancies on appointed Boards, Committees and Commissions, which are not specifically addressed by State statute.
 

Committees subject to the procedures in this section include the following Committees, as well as any committees created subsequent to adoption of this policy which are not specifically addressed by State statute:

•	Capital Improvement Program Committee
•	Energy Committee
•	Mascoma Lakeside Park Committee
•	Old Home Days Committee
•	Recreation Commission
•	Tax Increment Finance District Advisory Committee
•	Enfield Shaker Village Scenic Byway Advisory Board

Removal:
Any member of an appointed Board, Commission or Committee addressed in Section IV may, after a public hearing, if requested, be removed for cause by the appointing authority.

Notice of the public hearing shall be provided to the subject member at least 7 days in advance of the public hearing date and shall cite the reason for the proposed removal from office.

Four consecutive unexcused absences, or being absent from fifty percent (50%) or more of a given board/committee/commission’s posted meetings during a 12-month period, shall be considered Neglect of Duty and cause for removal.

Filling Vacancies:
A vacancy occurring other than by expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as an original appointment.




Adopted: July 1, 2019



John W. Kluge, Chair Katherine D. P. Stewart Meredith C. Smith
Enfield Board of Selectmen
 
TOWN OF ENFIELD


RESIDENTIAL ANTI-DISPLACEMENT  AND RELOCATION ASSISTANCE PLAN




Every effort will be made to avoid temporary or permanent displacement of an individual due to a CDBG funded project undertaken by the Town.

However, ifthe situation should arise the Town of Enfield will comply with the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970, as amended, to any household regardless of income, which is involuntarily and permanently displaced.

Ifthe property is acquired, converted or demolished and will not be used for low/moderate income housing under 104(d) of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended, the Residential Anti-Displacement  and Relocation Assistance Plan shall provide:

1.	One-for-one replacement of low/moderate - income dwelling units.
2.	Replacement low/moderate - income units may be provided by any government agency or private developer.
3.	Units will be sufficient in number and size to house no fewer than the number of occupants who could have been housed in the units  demolished or converted.
4.	Units will be in standard condition.
5.	All units will initially be made available for occupancy during the period beginning one­ year before the state recipient's submission of the information and ending three years after the commencement of the demolition or rehabilitation relating to the conversion.
6.	Units must be designed to remain low/moderate - income dwelling units forat least 10 years from the date of initial occupancy.
7.	Before the recipient enters into a contract committing it to provide funds under this point for any activity that will directly result in the demolition of low/moderate - income dwelling units or conversion to another use, the Town will make public and submit the following information in writing to the State:
a.	A description of the proposed activity.
b.	The location on a map and the number of dwelling units by size (number of bedrooms) that will be demolished or converted to a use other than low/moderate
- income dwelling units.
c.	A time schedule for the commencement and completion of the demolition or conversion.
d.	Ifthe above information is not available at the general submission, the specific location and number of units by size will be submitted and disclosed to the public as soon as it is available.
e.	The source of funding and a time schedule for the provision of replacement dwelling units.
 
f.	The basis for concluding each replacement dwelling will remain low/moderate - income for at least ten years.
g.	Provide information that any proposed replacement of low/moderate - income
dwelling units with smaller dwelling units is consistent with the housing needs of low/moderate - income households in the recipient's jurisdiction.

Optional relocation assistance, under section 570.496a Revised 4/1/94 570.488 of the Act, may provide relocation payments and other relocation assistance to persons displaced by activities not subject to the URA, only with permission from the State.




CERTIFICATION OF COMPLIANCE


The Town of Enfield anticipates no displacement or relocation activities will be necessitated by this project.  Should some unforeseen need arise, the town certifies that it will comply with the Uniform Relocation Act and Section 104(d) of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended.






DATE	NAM	TITLE



SIGNATURE
 
TOWN OF ENFIELD NEW HAMPSHIRE



MUNICIPAL  SEWER ORDINANCE


Pursuant to enabling authority in New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated 149-1:6 as adopted by the Town on 10 March 1992, the following is an ordinance regulating
the use of public sewers and drains, the installation and connection of building sewers, and discharge of waters and wastes into public sewer systems(s): and providing penalties for violations thereof: in the Town of Enfield, county of Grafton, state of New Hampshire.

Be it ordained and enacted by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Enfield, state of New Hampshire as follows:



ARTICLE I

Definitions

Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this ordinance shall be as follows:

Sec. 1	"Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)" shall mean the quality of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at 20° C, expressed in milligrams per liter.

Sec. 2	"Building Drain" shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five (5) feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall.

Sec. 3	"Building Sewer" shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called house connection.

Sec. 4	"Bypass" shall mean the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a wastewater treatment facility.

Sec. 5  "Combined Sewer" shall mean a sewer intended to receive both water- carried household and toilet wastes or waste from sanitary conveniences, excluding ground, surface or storm water.
 
Sec. 6	"Domestic Wastewater", or "sanitary sewage" shall mean normal water- carried household  and toilet wastes or waste from sanitary conveniences,  excluding ground,  surface or storm water.

Sec. 7	"Floatable Oil" shall mean oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pre­ treated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system.

Sec. 8	"Force Main" shall mean a line without access from individual properties, providing a connection from a pump station to a pump station, trunk, or sanitary sewer main.

Sec. 9 "Garbage" shall mean the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and serving of foods.

Sec. 10	"Industrial User" shall mean a person who discharges industrial wastes to the sanitary sewer of the Town.

Sec. 11	"Industrial Wastes" shall mean the wastewater from industrial processes, trade, or business as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes.

Sec. 12	"Interference" shall mean a discharge by an industrial user which, alone or in conjunction with discharges by other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal and which  is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with groundwater protection rules, Ws 410, solid waste rules, He-P 1901, hazardous waste rules, He-P 1905 and Appendix III, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection Research and Sanctuaries Act.

Sec. 13	"May" is permissive (see "shall", Sec. 25)

Sec. 14	"National Categorical Pretreatment  Standard or "Categorical Pretreatment Standard" shall mean  any regulations  containing pollutant  discharge limits  promulgated by USEPA in accordance with Section 307 (b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1347), which apply to a specific category of industrial users and which are found in the Code of Federal Regulations 40 CFR, Subchapter N, parts 401 through 471.

Sec. 15	"Natural Outlet" shall mean any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or any other body of surface or groundwater.
 
Sec. 16	"Pass Through" shall mean the discharge of pollutants through the POTW into surface waters in quantities or concentrations, which, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirements of the POTW's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination system (NHDES) permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of applicable water quality criteria.

Sec. 17	"Person" shall mean any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, group, partnership,  municipality,  government  subdivision  or other entity.

Sec. 18	"pH" shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion concentration .  The concentration is the weight  of hydrogen-ions, in grams, per liter of solution.  Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of 7 and a hydrogen-ion concentration of  1Q-7•

Sec. 19	"POTW or Publicly Owned Treatment Works" shall mean a wastewater treatment works which is owned by a State or a municipality.   This definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage treatment recycling and reclamation  of municipal sewage or industrial waste of a liquid nature.  It also includes sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to a POTW wastewater  treatment works.   The term also means the municipality which has jurisdiction  over discharges to the discharges  from such a treatment  works.

Sec. 20	"Property Shredded Garbage" shall mean the animal or vegetable wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particles greater than Yi inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.

Sec. 21	"Public Sewer" shall mean the common sewer controlled by the Town, sometimes ref erred to as the municipal sewer system.

Sec. 22	"Sanitary Sewer" shall mean a gravity sewer (in contrast to a force main sewer) that  carries liquid and water-carried  wastes from residences,  commercial building,  industrial  plants,  and institutions  together  with minor  quantities of  ground, storm, and surface waters that  are not  admitted intentionally.  ·

Sec. 23	"Screening Level" means that concentration of a pollutant which under baseline conditions, would cause a threat to personnel exposed to the pollutant, or would cause a threat to structures of wastewater facilities.  To be administered as limits applicable to a particular discharge, the screening levels must be adjusted to account for conditions at the point of discharge which differ from baseline conditions.

Sec. 24	"Sewage" is the spent water of a community.  The preferred term is "wastewater", Sec. 31.
 
Sec. 25 water.
 
"Sewer" shall mean a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage
 

Sec. 26	"Shall" is mandatory (see "may", Sec. 12)

Sec. 27	"Significant Industrial User" shall mean all industrial users subject to categorical  pretreatment  standards,  any other  industrial user  that: discharges  an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater (excluding sanitary, non-contact  cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater);  contributes  a process wastream which makes up 5 percent  or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW or is designated as such by the Control Authority (EPA) on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable  potential  for adversely affecting the POTW or for violating  any pretreatment  standard or requirement.

Sec. 28	"Slug" shall mean any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty­ four (24) hour concentration or flows during normal operation or which shall adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater treatment works.

Sec. 29   "Storm Drain" (sometimes termed "storm sewer") shall mean a drain or sewer for conveying stormwater, groundwater, subsurface water, or unpolluted water from any source.

Sec. 30	"Superintendent" shall mean the supervisor of wastewater facilities, and/or of wastewater treatment works, and/or of water pollution control of the Town of Enfield, or his authorized deputy, agent, or representative.

Sec. 31	"Suspended Solids" (SS) shall mean total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" and referred to as non-filterable residue.

Sec. 32	"Unpolluted Water" is water of a quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.

Sec. 33	"Wastewater" shall mean the spent water of a community.  From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residence, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present.

Sec. 34	"Wastewater Facilities" shall mean the structures, equipment, and processes required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent.
 
Sec. 35	"Wastewater Treatment Works" shall mean an arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge.

Sec. 36	"Watercourse" shall mean a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either continuously or intermittently.

Sec. 37	"WSPCD" shall mean the Water Supply and Pollution Control Division of the New Hampshire Department  of Environmental Services, or any related successor division or bureau  established following agency reorganization.


ARTICLE II

Use of Public Sewers Required

Sec. 1	It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited  any untreated  and/or uncomposted  human  or animal  excrement, uncomposted  garbage, or other objectionable waste, in any unsanitary manner  on public or private property within the Town of Enfield, or in any area under the jurisdiction  of said Town.  The restrictions  set forth in this article are not intended to discourage or prohibit the practice of proper  and sanitary composting of human, animal, or garbage wastes done in accordance with rules and regulations  established by the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services and in compliance with such requirements as the Town of Enfield Health Officer may impose.

Sec. 2	It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Town of Enfield, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said Town, any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with federal, state and local requirements.

Sec. 3	Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater within the sewer service area.

Sec. 4	The owner(s) of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the Town and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of -way in which a public sanitary sewer (gravity system) of the Town is located, is hereby required at the owner(s) expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, within one hundred twenty (120) days after the date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within  three hundred (300)feet of said house or building, except as noted below:

A	The one hundred twenty (120) day period for compliance with this section may be reduced if, in the opinion of the Town of Enfield Health
 
Officer, a shorter time period for compliance is warranted due to health and safety concerns.
B.	A waiver for compliance with this section may be granted by the Board of Selectmen, subject to the following:
1.	The building must be served by an adequate alternative
wastewater  disposal system approved for operation by the WSPCD , which is no more than twenty (20) years of age, and which is in good  operating condition, and,
2.	The owner(s) of said building must make written application for the waiver to the Board of Selectmen within the (120)day period from the date of notification by the Board of Selectmen to have said buildings connected to the municipal sewer system and must clearly document the design, construction, and date of WSPCD approval of operation for the private wastewater disposal facility, and,
3.	The owner(s) of said building must connect said building
immediately, regardless of any current connection waiver, upon written notification from the Town Health Officer and/or Board of Selectmen that make the private wastewater disposal system has failed. The owner(s) may not make substantial repairs to, or alter in any manner the original approved design of, the private wastewater disposal facility that would prevent or remedy the facility's failure, other than to conduct minor routine operating maintenance such as pump repairs and sludge pumping, and,
4.	The owner(s) of said building may be required to pay, for the
period of the waiver, applicable fees and charges to guarantee that reserve capacity in the municipal sewer system is maintained for the future hook-up of said building, and, may be liable for any
buy-in, construction assessment, or other similar fees, at the time municipal sewer service is made available.
5.	The Town Health Officer and/or Board of Selectmen designee may
inspect a private wastewater system if they have been notified of a possible failure of said private wastewater system.

Sec. 5	The owner(s) of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the Town and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which a force main sewer of the Town is located shall not be required to connect to the public sewer system but shall be subject to all the requirements articulated in Article 2, Section 4, at such time as a connection to the public force main sewer system is established.
 

ARTICLE III

Building Sewers and Connections

Sec. 1	No person(s) shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining written permission from the Board of Selectmen.

Sec. 2.	There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: (a) for residential and commercial service producing only domestic wastewater, and (b) for service to establishments producing industrial wastes.  In either case, the owner(s) or his agent shall make a written application to the Board of Selectmen, which shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information as requested by the Board. Permit application, construction inspection, and other fees shall be charged and collected as set forth in the Water and Sewer User Charge Ordinance.

Sec. 3	All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner(s). The owner(s) shall indemnify the Town from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.

Sec. 4	A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear of the building through an adjoining alley, court , yard, or driveway, the front building sewer may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, but the Town  does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection aforementioned.

Sec. 5	Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the superintendent, to meet all requirements of this ordinance.

Sec. 6	The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the Town. In absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WEF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.

Sec. 7	Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer at the owners expense.
 
Sec. 8	No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.

Sec. 9	The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the Town, or procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WEF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the superintendent before installation.

Sec. 10	The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the superintendent or his representative.

Sec. 11	All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.  Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Town at the expense of the owner.

Sec. 12	Any person proposing a new discharge into the system, or a discharge of listed or characteristic waste, or an increase in the volume, or in the strength or character of pollutants that are discharged beyond limits previously permitted into the system shall notify the Board at least 60 days prior to the proposed change and connection. Proposed new discharges from residential or commercial sources
involving loading exceeding 50 population equivalents (5,000 gpd), any new industrial discharge, or any alteration in either flow or waste characteristics in industrial discharge must be approved by the Water Supply and Pollution Control Division.



ARTICLE IV

Use of the Public Sewers

Sec. 1	No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged to the wastewater facilities any unpolluted waters such as stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, or non-contact cooling water.

Sec. 2	Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or a natural outlet approved by the superintendent. Industrial cooling water or process waters require an NPDES permit prior to discharge to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
 
Sec. 3
A.


B.
 


Pollutants introduced into the sanitary sewer by an industrial user shall not pass through or interfere with operation or performance of the POTW No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:

1.	Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in thePOTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees Centigrade using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
2.	Any industrial wastes including oxygen demanding wastes (BOD, etc.) at a flow rate and/or concentration which would cause interference with the wastewater treatment works, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance exceed any applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, or cause pass through.
3.	Any waters or wastes having pH lower than 5.0 or higher than 12.0 of having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard  to structures, equipment, and personnel of the wastewater works.
4.	Solid or viscous substances in qualities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to, ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
5.	Wastewater sufficiently hot to cause the influent at the wastewater treatment facilities to exceed 104° F (40°C) or cause inhibition of biological activity in the POTW.
6.	Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of
mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through.
7.	Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems.
8.	Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the POTW.
 

Sec. 4   The following described substances, minerals, waters, or waste shall be limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentrations or quantities which will not harm the sewers, wastewater treatment process or equipment, will not have an
 
adverse effect on the receiving system, or will not otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance.  The superintendent may set limitations lower than the limitations established in the regulations below if in his opinion such limitations are necessary to meet the above objectives. In forming his opinion as the acceptability, the superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantity of subject waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, the wastewater treatment process employed, capacity of the wastewater treatment plant, degree of treatability of the waste in the wastewater treatment plant, and other pertinent factors.  The superintendent shall not permit those discharges which are prohibited by Section 3 of this Article.  The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the superintendent are as follows:


A.	Wastewater containing more than 2 5 milligrams per liter of petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oils, or product of mineral oil origin.
B.	Wastewater  containing more than 100 milligrams per liter of oil and grease or floatable oil not limited by paragraphs A of this Section.
C.		Any garbage that has not been properly shredded (See Article I, Section 19). Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served · by caterers.
D.	Any waters or wastes containing heavy metals, solvents, and similar objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any such material discharged to the public sewer exceeds the limits established by the superintendent, the WSPCD, or the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, as promulgated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, for such materials.
E.	Any waters or wastes containing odor-producing substances exceeding
limits which may be established by the superintendent.
F.	Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the superintendent in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
G.	Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a "slug" as defined herein.
H.	Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment  only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the permitted discharge.
I. ·	Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form suspended solids
 
which interfere with the collection system, or create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes.
].	Wastewater with any of the following constituents at concentrations greater than those indicated below:
K.	Wastewater which has a concentration of any pollutant  above the
following screening levels. Such screening levels, generated on the basis of standard conditions shall be adjusted for the particular conditions applicable to the specific discharge. Fume toxicity screening levels shall be adjusted when administered as limits to account for the pH, temperature, dilution, other toxic fumes and ventilation present at the site of the particular discharge.  The screening level for sulfate shall be adjusted when administered as a limit to account for the type of concrete used in sewer construction and dilution present.

Sec. 5	If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in Section 4 of this Article, and which in the judgment of the superintendent, may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities,
processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the superintendent may, subject to limitations in Sections 3 and 11 of this Article.

A.	Reject the wastes;
B.	Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers
C.	Require control over the qualities and rates of discharge; and/or
D.	Require payment to cover added cost of handling and treating wastes.

If the Town permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the pretreatment facilities shall be subject to the review and approval of the Town and the WSPCD, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.  Such facilities shall not be connected to the sanitary sewer until said approval is obtaining in writing.  Such approval shall not relive the owner of the responsibility of discharging treated waste meeting the requirements of this ordinance. Plans and specifications for a proposed pretreatment facility shall be the result of the design of a professional engineer registered in New Hampshire.

Sec. 6	Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the superintendent, they are necessary for the property handling of liquid wastes containing floatable oil or grease in excessive amounts, as specified in Section 4(B), or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units.  All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the superintendent, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.  In the
 
maintaining of these interceptors the owner(s) shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain records of the dates, and means of disposal which are subject to review by the superintendent.  Any removal and hauling of the collected material not performed by owner(s) personnel must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms.

Sec. 7	All industrial waste shall be pretreated in accordance with federal and state regulations and this ordinance to the extent required by applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, state pretreatment standards or standards established by the superintendent, whichever is more stringent. Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or required for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner(s) at his expense.

Sec. 8	When required by the superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control structure together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observations, sampling, and measurement of the wastes.  Such structure, when required, shall be accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the superintendent.  The structure shall be
installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe
and accessible at all times

All industrial users shall perform such monitoring as the Board of Sewer Commissioners or duly authorized employees of the Town may reasonably require including installation, use and maintenance of monitoring equipment, keeping records and reporting the results of such monitoring to the Board.  Such records shall be made available upon request by the Board to other agencies having jurisdiction over discharges to the receiving waters.

Sec. 9	The superintendent may require a user of sewer services to provide information needed to determine compliance with this ordinance.  These requirements may include:

A	Wastewater discharge peak rates and volume over a specified time period.
B.	Chemical  analyses  of  wastewaters.
C.		Information on raw materials, processes, and products affecting wastewater volume and quality.
D.	Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent, or other materials important to sewer use control.
E.	A plot plan of sewers on the user's property showing sewer and
pretreatment facility location.
F.	Plans & specifications of wastewater pretreatment facilities.
 
G.	Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials through spills to the municipal sewer.


Sec. 10	All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this ordinance shall be determined in accordance with EPA approved methods published in the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40,
Part 136 (40 CFR 136), or if none are available, then with methods specified in the
latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association. Sampling methods, locations, times, durations, and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the superintendent.

Sec. 11	No statement contained in this article, except for Section 3, shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the Town and any industrial user whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the Town for treatment, provided that such agreements do not contravene any requirements of existing Federal or State laws, and/or regulations promulgated thereunder, are compatible with any User Charge System in effect, and do not waive applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
Sec. 12	Septic tank waste (septage) shall not be accepted into the sewer system. Sec. 13	It shall be illegal to meet the requirements of this Sewer Ordinance by
diluting wastes in lieu of proper treatment.

Sec. 14	Each industrial user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this Ordinance.  Facilities to prevent accidental discharges shall be provided and maintained at the industrial user's expense.

Sec. 15	Bypass is prohibited except where the bypass is unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage.  The industrial user shall notify the superintendent immediately in the event of any bypass.

Sec. 16	A notice shall be permanently posted plainly visible to an industrial user's personnel responsible for managing wastewater discharges, which shall instruct all employees whom to call in the event of a spill, slug discharge, pretreatment upset or bypass.  Employers shall insure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a discharge to occur, know of the required notification of the superintendent.

Sec. 17	If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the user shall notify the Town within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the Town within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation, except that
the Industrial User is not required to resample if:
 
(i)	The Town performs sampling at the Industrial User at a frequency of at least once per month, or
(ii)	The Town performs sampling at the Industrial User between the time
when the user performs its initial sampling and the time when the user receives the results of this sampling.



ARTICLEV

Industrial Pretreatment

Sec. 1	Applicability.   All persons  discharging industrial process wastes into public or private sewers connected to the Town's wastewater  facilities, shall comply with  applicable  requirements  of  the federal  and state industrial pretreatment regulations (as amended), in addition to the requirements of these INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT RULES.

 
Sec. 2

A






B.
 
Industrial Discharge Permit (IDP)

IDP Required. Effective 120 calendar days after this provision is adopted by the Town, the discharge of any industrial waste to the Town's wastewater works or to a public or private sewer connected to the Town's wastewater facilities is prohibited without a valid Industrial Discharge Permit (IDP).
IDP Application. Within 60 days after the effective date of these INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT RULES, and subsequently when required by the Town, persons subject to these rules shall submit an application for an IDP containing information required under applicable federal and
state industrial pretreatment reporting regulations.  Such information, as a minimum, shall include.
1.	The name and address of the facility, including the name of the
operators and owners.
2.	A list of all environmental permits held by or for the facility.
3.	A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and Standard Industrial Classification of the operations carried out at such facility.
4.	An identification of the categorical pretreatment  standards applicable to each regulated process.
5.	An analysis identifying the nature and concentration of pollutants
in the discharge.
6.	Notification to the Town of any proposed or existing discharge of listed or characteristic hazardous waste (as required by 40 CFR
403.12 (p)).
7.	In those instances in which the industrial user provides notification of the discharge of hazardous waste, the industrial
 
user shall also provide the following certification: I certify that [the company] has a program in place to reduce the volume and
toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree [the
company] has determined to be economically practical.
8.	Information showing the measured averaged daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the public sewer from regulated process streams and from other streams.
9.	A schedule of actions to be taken to comply with discharge limitations.
10.	Additional information as determined by the Town may also be required.
11.	Any other information which may be needed to meet the baseline
monitoring requirements applicable to industrial users subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards.

C.	Provisions. The IDP will outline the general and specific conditions under which the industrial waste is accepted for treatment at the Town's wastewater treatment plant. Specifically, included in the IDP are the following:
1.	Pretreatment and self monitoring facilities required.
2.	Parameters to be monitored, type of samples and monitoring frequencies required.
3.	Location of sampling site.
4.	Notification by the Industrial User of slugs, bypass or noncompliance.
5.	Penalties of noncompliance.
6.	Compliance schedules.
7.	Effluent limitations on the industrial process waste.
8.	Reporting Requirements.
a.	Industrial users shall submit periodic reports as required, but not less often than semi-annually, indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge from the regulated processes governed by pretreatment  standards and the average and maximum daily flow for these process units.  The reports shall state whether the applicable categorical pretreatment  standards and effluent limitations are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation and maintenance practices and/or pretreatment are necessary.  Additional requirements for such reports may be imposed by the Town.
b.	If an individual user subject to the reporting requirements
in the previous paragraph of this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the Town, using
 
procedures prescribed in Article V, Section 10, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.

9.	Monitoring Records.
a.	Industrial users subject to the reporting requirements under this Section shall maintain records of information resulting from monitoring activities required to prepare such reports.  Such records shall include for each sample.
i.	The date, exact place, method and time of sampling and the names of persons taking the sample.
ii.	The dates analyses were performed.
iii.	The laboratory performing the analyses.
iv.	The analytical techniques and methods used.
v.	The results of such analyses.


b.	Such records shall be maintained for a minimum of three years and shall be made available for inspection and copying the Town.

10.	Additional Conditions.
a.	The permit will be in effect for one year, and will be automatically renewed for one year periods by issuance, on the anniversary, of a revised cover page or complete IDP, unless the applicant is notified otherwise by the Town.
b.	The Permit is non-transferable, and may be revoked by the
Town for non-compliance, or modified so as to conform to discharge limitation requirements that are enacted by Federal or State Rules and/or Regulations.
c.	An industry proposing a new discharge or a change in volume or character of its existing discharge must submit a completed IDP Application to the Town at least 60 days prior to the commencement of such discharge.  The submitted Application must include plans and engineering drawings, stamped by a professional engineer registered in New Hampshire, of the proposed pretreatment facilities. Upon approval of the Application by the Town, a Discharge Permit Request is submitted by the community to the WSPCD on behalf of the industry. Upon approval of the Discharge Permit Request by the WSPCD, the industry and the Town will enter into a new or mended IDP in accordance with the procedure outlined in this subpart.
d.	Industrial users will be assessed an annual fee by the Town
to defray the administrative costs of the IDP program.
 

D.	Signature for Reports.  The reports required by Section 2.B, Section 2.C4.a, and Section 3, subsections E and F, shall include the certification as set forth in Section 2.E, and shall be signed as follows.
1.	By a responsible corporate officer, if the Industrial User submitting the reports required by this Ordinance is a corporation.  For the purpose of this paragraph a responsible corporate officer means
a.	A president, manager, treasurer,  or vice-president  of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or an person who performs similar policy or decision making functions  for the corporation  or
b.	The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or
operation facilities.
2.	By a general partner or proprietor if the Industrial User submitting the reports required by this Ordinance is a partnership or sole proprietorship respectively.
3.	By a duly authorized representative  of the individual designated in paragraph  1 or 2 of this subsection if:
a.	The authorization is made in writing by the individual described in paragraph 1 or 2;
b.	The authorization specified either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility from which the Industrial Discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager, or a position of
equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company; and
c.	The written authorization is submitted to the Town.
4.	If an authorization under paragraph 3 of this sub-section is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of paragraph 3 of this sub-section must be submitted to the Town prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative.

E.	Certification. All reports required to be signed as specified in Section 2.D shall include the following certification:
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to ensure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted.  Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best
 






Sec. 3
 
of knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.

National  Categorical Pretreatment  Standards.

A.		Notification.   The Town shall provide timely notification to appropriate industries  of  applicable  categorical  pretreatment  standards.
 
B.		Compliance Date for Categorical Standards.  Compliance with categorical pretreatment  standards shall be achieved within three (3) years of the date such standards are effective, unless  a shorter compliance time is specified  in the  standards.
c.	Amendment to IDP Required. An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards shall not discharge wastewater directly or
indirectly to Town wastewater facilities after the compliance date of such standards unless an Amendment to its IDP has been issued by the Town.
D.	Application for IDP Amendment. Within 120 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, an industry subject to such standards shall submit an application for an IDP Amendment.  The application shall contain the information noted under Section 2.B of the Article
E.	Categorical Compliance Schedule Reports.  Each user subject to a compliance schedule as required under Article VI, Section 2.B.7, or federal regulation 40 CFR 403.12(b)(7),  shall report on progress toward meeting compliance with these regulations  as follows:
a.	Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule, and the
final date for compliance, the industrial user shall submit a progress report to the Town indicating whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date, and if not, the date on which it expects to comply, the reason for the delay, and steps being taken by the industrial user to return the progress to the schedule established.
b.	The time for nay increment in the schedule, or the interval
between reports required in paragraph 1, shall not exceed 9 months. An increment is the time between the dates for commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of pretreatment facilities necessary to achieve compliance with this ordinance and national categorical pretreatment  standards.

F.	Report on Compliance with Categorical Standard Deadline. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new industrial user following introduction of wastewater into Town sewer, any industrial user subject
 
to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the Town a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment standards and the average and maximum daily flow for these process lines.  The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and if not, what additional operation and maintenance and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the industrial user into compliance with the application pretreatment standards.  This statement shall be signed by an authorized
representative (see Section 2.D) and certified by a qualified professional
engineer.

Sec. 4	Slug Discharge Notification.  All industrial users shall notify the superintendent immediately of all discharges which could cause problems to the wastewater treatment facilities, including any slug loadings as defined in Section 26, Article I. Within five (5) days of the unallowed discharge, the industrial user shall provide the superintendent with a written report fully describing the unallowed discharge, the pollutants involved, the cause of the unusual discharge and the measures taken and to be taken to avoid recurrence of the unallowed discharge.

Sec. 5	Imminent Endangerment. The Town may, after informal notice to the industrial user discharging wastewater to the public sewer, to immediately halt or prevent any such discharge reasonably appearing to present an imminent endangerment to the health and welfare of person, or any discharge presenting , or which may present, and endangerment to the environment, or which threatens to interfere with operation of the public sewer or wastewater treatment facilities.  Actions which may be taken by the Town in response to violations of this ordinance include ex parte judicial injunctive relief, entry on private property to halt such discharge, blockage of a public sewer to halt such discharge, or demand of specific action by the industry,

Sec. 6	Monitoring and Surveillance. The Town shall as necessary sample and analyze the wastewater discharges of contributing industrial users and conduct surveillance and inspection activities to identify, independently of information supplied by such industrial users,  occasional and continuing non-compliance with industrial pretreatment standards.  Each industrial user will be billed directly for costs incurred for analysis of its wastewater. All industrial users shall allow unrestricted access by Town, WSPCD, and EPA personnel for the purposes of investigating and a sampling discharges from the industries.

Sec. 7	Investigations.  The Town shall investigate instances of non-compliance with industrial pretreatment  standards and requirements.

Sec. 8	Public Information.  Information and data submitted to the Town under this Part relating to wastewater discharge characteristics shall be available to the
 
public without restriction.  Other such information shall be available to the public at least to the extent provided by 40 CFR Section 2.302.

Sec. 9	Public Participation.   The Town shall comply with the public participation requirements of 40 CFR Part 2 5 in the enforcement  of industrial pretreatment  standards and requirements.  A list of  significant violations  shall be published  in the Valley News at least annually.



ARTICLE VI

Powers and Authority of Inspectors

Sec. 1	The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the Town bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, inspection and copying of records and testing pertinent to discharge to the wastewater facilities, in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance.

Sec. 2	The superintendent or other duly employees are authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the public sewer.  The industrial user may request that the information in question not be made available to the public if it can establish the revelation to the public might result in an advantage to competitors.  The burden of proof that information should be held confidential rests with the industrial user. However, information about wastewater discharged by the industrial user (flow, constituents, concentrations, characteristics and similar information) shall be available to the public without restriction.

Sec. 3	While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in Article VII, Section 1, above, the superintendent or duly authorized employees of the Town shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises, established by the company.  The company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the Town employees, and the Town shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by Town employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in Article V, Section 8.
 

Penalties

Sec. 1	No person(s) shall break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the wastewater facilities. Any person(s) violating this provision shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

Sec. 2	Any person found to be violating any provision of this ordinance except Section 1 of this Article shall be served by the Town with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correcting thereof.  The off ender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.  The Town may, after informal notice to the person discharging wastewater to the wastewater facilities, immediately halt or prevent any such discharge reasonably appearing to present an imminent endangerment to the health and welfare of the public, or any discharge presenting, or which may present, and endangerment to the environment, or which threatens facilities. Actions which may be taken by the Town in response to violations of this Ordinance include ex parte
judicial injunctive relief, entry on private property to halt such discharge, blockage of a
public sewer to halt such discharge, or demand of specific action by the person.

Sec. 3	Any person found to be violating any provisions of this ordinance except Section 1 of the Article shall be fined in the amount not to exceed $10,000 per day of such violation.  Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.

Sec. 4	Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall become liable to the Town for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the Town by reason of such violation.



ARTICLE VIII

 



Sec. 1 repealed.
 
Validity

All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby
 

Sec. 2	The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence, or provision of this ordinance shall not affect the validity of any other part of this ordinance which can be given effect without such invalid part or parts.
 

Ordinance  in Force

Sec. 1	This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval, recording and publication as provided by law.

Duly Enacted and Ordained this 2Qth day of November, 2017 by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Enfield in Grafton County, State of New Hampshire, at a duly noticed and duly held session of the said Board of Selectmen.


Enfield,  New Hampshire By:















Jo
F ELD BOARD OF SELECTMEN
 






 
Town of Enfield
Planning Board
23 Main Street, P.O. Box 373
Enfield, New Hampshire 03748
TEL 603-632-4067 ext 5427 * FAX 603-632-7391









SITE PLAN REVIEW REGULATIONS TOWN OF
ENFIELD, NEW HAMPSHIRE
Planning Board


Adopted:  September 15, 1976
Amended:  October 11, 1978
February 26, 1986
September 24, 1986
April 11, 2007
October 11, 2017
 





Table of Contents
ARTICLE 1.	GENERAL PROVISIONS	4
1.1	Authority
1.2	Purpose and Scope
1.3	Compliance with other Regulations
1.4	Definitions
1.5	Applicability
1.6	Communications between Town and Applicant
1.7	General Guidance

ARTICLE 2.	PROCEDURE FOR SITE PLAN REVIEW	9
2.1	General
2.1.1	Phase I Non binding Consultation and Conceptual Consultation
2.1.2	Phase II - Design Review
2.1.3	Phase III - Final Application Review
2.2	Application for Site Plan Review Approval
2.3	Filing of Application
2.4	Notice of Application
2.5	Fees
2.6	Submission of Completed Application and Application Acceptance
2.7	Formal Consideration
2.8	Public Hearings: Notice of Public Hearings
2.9	Regional Notice
2.10	Notice of Decision
2.11	Appeals
2.12	Revocation of Approval

ARTICLE 3.	PROCEDURE WHEN SPECIAL EXEMPTION, VARIANCE OR SUBDIVISION APPROVAL IS REQUIRED	13

ARTICLE 4.	APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS	13
4.1	Major Review Submission Requirements
4.2	Minor Review Submission Requirement

ARTICLE 5.	STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS	17
5.1	All information
5.2	Site Characteristics
5.3	Perimeter
5.4	Screening
5.5	Traffic, Parking, Loading and Safety
5.6	Water Drainage
5.7	Exterior Lighting and Signs
5.8	Dimensional Guidelines
5.9	Water Supply
 


5.10	Sewage Disposal
5.11	Snow Removal
5.12	ADA Compliance
5.13	Floodplain
5.14	Solid Waste Disposal and Recycling
5.15	Safety Review
5.16	As-Built Plans
5.17	Protection of Natural and Historic Features
5.18	General Standards
ARTICLE 6.	GENERAL REGULATIONS	24
ARTICLE 7.	INSPECTIONS AND COMPLIANCE HEARINGS	24
ARTICLE 8.	SECURITY FOR COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS………………………	25
ARTICLE 9.	REVOCATION OF PLANNING BOARD APPROVAL	25
ARTICLE 10.	WAIVER OF STANDARDS	26
ARTICLE 11.	PENALTIES	26
ARTICLE 12.	AMENDMENTS	27
ARTICLE 13.	SEPARABILITY	27
APPENDIX A - DEFINITIONS - Moved to the Enfield Zoning Ordinance Appendix Definitions APPENDIX B - OUTDOOR LIGHTING DESIGN STANDARDS………………….………………28
APPENDIX C - TEMPLATE FOR ISSUANCE OF BOND …………………………………………33
 


ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS

1.1	Authority:

Pursuant to the authority vested in the Enfield Planning Board by the voters of the Town of Enfield, New Hampshire, at the annual Town Meeting in March 1975 (Nonresidential Use) and March 1985 (Multi-Family Use) and in accordance with the provisions of RSA 674:43 the Enfield Planning Board adopts the following regulations for Site Plan Review.

1.2	Purpose and Scope:

The general purpose of this regulation is to guide the character of non-residential and multi-family development, re-development, expansion, and change of use in order to visit.  No site plan review shall be required for a one-family or a two-family dwelling per lot and their associated accessory uses.  In keeping with this general purpose, the following are specific objectives:

1.2.1	Promote the harmonious and aesthetically pleasing development of the Town, ensuring visual harmony of the sites with their surrounding neighborhoods, establishing site designs consistent with and/or complimentary to traditional New England designs, providing adequate green space and open space, providing for proper building location to ensure adequate sunlight and air circulation, and protecting the natural beauty of the Town.

1.2.2	Enhance the downtown village area and riverfront by providing an appropriate mix of uses, improving appearance, maintaining traditional New England character, enhancing pedestrian accessibility, and promoting mixed use mill re- development.

1.2.3	Protect the public from undue hazards, disturbances, and nuisances.

1.2.4	Promote commercial development, including opportunity for home-based work, to broaden the tax base and employ residents.

1.2.5	Protect environmental quality by means such as controlling erosion and site run- off.

1.2.6	Ensure that land is of sufficient character to be used for building purposes without danger to health, and additionally ensuring that development does not exceed the capability of the land to safely provide on-site water supply and sewage disposal in areas not served by municipal water and sewer systems.

1.2.7	Guard against such conditions as would involve danger or injury to health, safety, or prosperity by reason any one or more of the following:

	inadequate drainage;

	conditions conducive to flooding;

	inadequate protection for the quality of groundwater;

	undesirable and preventable elements of pollution such as noise, smoke, light,  soot,  particulates,  or  any other  discharge  into the  environment
 


which might prove harmful to persons, structures, or adjacent or neighboring properties;

	Inadequate provision of fire safety, prevention and control.

1.2.8	Facilitate adequate provision of public facilities, utilities and services; and

1.2.9	Provide for adequate transportation by requiring appropriate provision and arrangement of roads, driveways, sidewalks, traffic aisles, parking, loading areas, bicycle facilities, emergency vehicle accesses, transit amenities, and off- site connections.



1.3	Compliance with Other Regulations:

The Site Plan Review process shall in no way relieve an applicant from compliance with the Enfield Zoning Ordinance, Enfield Subdivision Regulations, or any other local or State ordinances, regulations or bylaws which pertain to the proposed development. No Site Plan Application shall be approved unless such plan complies with all applicable ordinances and regulations. If, for some reason, there is a conflict in regulations, the more restrictive provisions shall apply.



1.4	Definitions:

For the purposes of these Regulations, certain words and terms are defined as provided in the Enfield Zoning Ordinance.



1.5	Applicability:

There are three possible applications of this Regulation to the development or change of a non-residential or multi-family site. The following criteria specify the level of review necessary:

1.5.1	Not Applicable. Upon  receipt  of  a  written  letter  of  acknowledgment  from  the Code  Enforcement  Officer,  this  Regulation  is  not  applicable   for   the following:

	Temporary Events which require no permanent alterations to the site and which function safely within the approved configuration of the site, as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer;

	Special Events approved by the Board of Selectmen;

	Home Occupations with no regular interaction with the public;

	Commercial excavations as regulated pursuant to RSA 155-E and the Enfield Excavation Regulations.
 


1.5.2	Minor Review. A Minor Review by the Planning Board shall be required for the following:

	Change of use of a non-residential site, for which no change in floor area is proposed, and which either maintains or decreases the intensity of use on the site with respect to parking demand and traffic generation or for a site with 2,500 square feet or less of gross floor area;

	Expansion of non-residential floor space by 500 square feet or less, with no change of use;

	Site improvement alterations without new development, re-development, expansion or change of use;

	Other minor amendments to existing site plans or non-conforming uses that the Board decides not to require Major Review;

	Home Occupations with regular interaction with the public.

1.5.3	Major Review. A Major Review by the Planning Board shall be required for the following:

	Establishment of non-residential uses where no non-residential use currently exists;

	Establishment of multi-family use where no multi-family use currently exists;

	Any other development, re-development, change of use or expansion of a multi- family or non-residential site, and not addressed in Sections 1.5.2 or 1.5.3.



1.6	Communications between Town and Applicant:

There are many people involved in the processing of each application, and communication problems develop quickly if great care is not taken from the start. To prevent communication problems from developing, it is important for both the Town and the applicant to designate one person each to coordinate all communications. This prevents repetition of questions, prevents two people from giving different answers to the same question, and should help to keep interpretation of opinions consistent.

1.6.2	Applicant's Authorized Representative. The application form shall designate one person to act as the "authorized representative." All communication to the applicant shall be made through this person, and this person shall be present at all meetings with the Board. In the text of these Regulations, references to the applicant shall also imply the authorized representative.

1.6.3	Town

1.6.3.1	All communications to the Town shall be directed to the Community Development Director in writing unless otherwise directed by the Chairman of the Board. This may be more likely during larger applications, such as when an engineer reviewing the road design needs to talk to the design engineer to clarify issues.
 


1.6.3.2	Individual Board members must exercise care when discussing application matters with the applicant, abutters, or other parties outside the forum of the Board's meetings. An individual Board member has no authority to bind the Board. Care must be taken to keep an open mind throughout the entire process, not drawing conclusions until all relevant information has been received at the public hearing. Additionally, Board members should tell the Board and the public the substance of any information they have received from the applicant, abutters or other parties so that all can benefit from this knowledge, and to provide an opportunity to challenge any information provided.

1.6.3.3	RSA 673:14 Disqualification of Member

I.	No member of a zoning board of adjustment, building code board of appeals, planning board, heritage commission, historic district commission, agricultural commission, or housing commission shall participate in deciding or shall sit upon the hearing of any question which the board is to decide in a judicial capacity if that member has a direct personal or pecuniary interest in the outcome which differs from the interest of other citizens, or if that member would be disqualified for any cause to act as a juror upon the trial of the same matter in any action at law. Reasons for disqualification do not include exemption from service as a juror or knowledge of the facts involved gained in the performance of the member's official duties.
II.	When uncertainty arises as to the application of paragraph I to a board member in particular circumstances, the board shall, upon the request of that member or another member of the board, vote on the question of whether that member should be disqualified. Any such request and vote shall be made prior to or at the commencement of any required public hearing. Such a vote shall be advisory and non-binding, and may not be requested by persons other than board members, except as provided by local ordinance or by a procedural rule adopted under RSA 676:1.
III.	If a member is disqualified or unable to act in any particular case pending before the board, the chairperson shall designate an alternate to act in the member's place, as provided in RSA 673:11.

1.7	General Guidance: The following advice is offered to assist the applicant, especially if the applicant is unfamiliar with land development processes.

1.7.2	All applicants will need to hire professionals to prepare part or all of the application. A NH Licensed Land Surveyor and/or licensed Professional Engineer are required. In some cases, other specialists will be needed, possibly including an attorney, a certified soil scientist (CSS), certified wetland scientist (CWS), Permitted Septic Designer (PSD) or others. While such assistance does cost money, their skills and abilities are essential to ensure that the Town and applicant have sound information on which to base their decisions.

1.7.3	The Board’s goal is to process all applications fairly and quickly. To accomplish this, the applicant shares certain responsibilities. The applicant must be properly
 


prepared. This includes reading these Regulations to understand the issues that must be addressed, and includes dealing with all the significant issues up front. Incomplete submittals, poorly drafted plans, or failure to properly address issues will result in unnecessary delays in obtaining a final decision from the Board. If a potential conflict of interest arises between a Board Member and Applicant due to a personal, professional or other relationship between a Board Member and an applicant, unfair bias, etc. The party claiming bias on the part of a Planning Board member must raise the issue before the Board at the earliest possible time. The Board member may volunteer or be asked by the Board and/or applicant to recuse themselves from discussions or formal voting related to review of the application. This disqualified individual may still be counted as “present” as necessary to provide a quorum.

1.7.4	The application process is similar for all applications, although the amount of work and time to obtain an approval vary widely.

1.7.4.1	Process. All applications follow this basic process:

	Preparation. The applicant prepares the application, usually done  by hired professionals. This may involve some discussion with the Board through a Phase I nonbinding conceptual consultation or Phase II design review meetings.

	Application Acceptance. Upon submittal of the application materials to the Town and the payment of all fees, the application is placed on the next available Planning Board agenda for consideration. By State law, there is a minimum requirement for posting and notification of hearings. Because of this applications are due at least 21 calendar days prior to next scheduled hearing date in which an application must be submitted for consideration on the agenda.

	Public Hearing. All applications will have a public hearing. This is the official opportunity for the public to ask questions about the application, to raise issues, offer suggestions, or indicate their support or opposition. The Hearing may be interspersed with periods of deliberation by the Board, and may be continued to future dates.

	Decision. In the end, the Board must decide whether to approve or deny the application. In the majority of cases, the Board approves the application with conditions, which means that there are additional administrative  or  technical  requirements,  which  must  be  satisfied  to obtaining the final approval.



1.7.4.2	Timing. The Planning Board meets 1-2 times per month on the second and/or fourth Wednesday of the month. At a minimum, there must be a meeting with the Board, and this alone requires at least 21 calendar day’s lead-time between when application is submitted to the hearing date. Simple applications are often approved at a single meeting, while more complex  applications  may  take  two  or  three  months  to  complete.
 


However, this is all based on the assumptions that the applicant is properly prepared, and that no unusual circumstances arise. Without the applicant's consent, it is very unlikely that an application process can take longer than three months.



ARTICLE 2.	PROCEDURE FOR SITE PLAN REVIEW


2.1	General:

There are three phases in the site plan review process: Non-binding Consultation and Conceptual Consultation (Phase I), Design Review (Phase II), and Final Application Review (Phase III). Phase I, which involves a discussion of the proposed concept only in general terms, is optional and does not require a public hearing. Phase II involves a more detailed discussion and review of the site plan proposed. This phase is also optional, although a public hearing is required by state law. Phase I and Phase II are intended to help the applicant by providing the applicant with guidance and feedback prior to submission of the final application, thereby helping to avoid major alteration of the final drawings. The last phase, Phase III, is submission and review of the final application. This phase is required for all developments and modifications subject to site plan review. A public hearing is required for Phase III. A single hearing for Phase II and Phase III may be held if the hearing notice indicates the Board will be considering both phases at the one hearing.

2.1.1	Phase I - Nonbinding Consultation and Conceptual Consultation: In order to save expense and unnecessary changes later on, an applicant may request to be on the agenda of a formal meeting of the Board for discussion of their proposed concept in general terms and for a review of applicable Site Plan Review Regulations, application forms, necessary supporting maps, and documents. There is no application fee or time limit for this nor is this consultation and review binding in any way on either the applicant or the Board.

2.1.2	Phase II - Design Review: If an applicant wishes a review of their project which goes beyond discussion of the proposed site plan in conceptual form, the applicant shall apply to the Board in writing on the designated Application Form and pay the required fees. The Board shall then give public notice (and notify the abutters and the applicant) of the Design Review application and review hearing in accordance RSA 676:4 and these regulations. Submission requirements are listed in Article IV and V. The review shall be conducted only at formal meetings of the Board.

2.1.3	Phase III - Final Application Review: Any applicant desiring final approval for site plans, as defined in these regulations and RSA 676:4, shall apply to the Board in writing on the designated Application Form and pay the required fees. The Board shall give public notice of the final site plan review application and hearing in accordance with these regulations. The final review shall be conducted only at formal meetings of the Board. The Board may review the proposal  in  detail  and  receive  testimony  in  person  or  in  writing  from  any
 


applicant, any abutter or any other person as permitted by the Board. The Board shall give a formal response to the applicant with respect to the proposal by informing the applicant in writing of approval or disapproval within 65 days of the submission and acceptance of the final application. A formal meeting on a particular final review may be adjourned to continue on a specific date with no further notice of the reconvened meeting required. Submission requirements are listed in Articles IV and V. The Board shall give the applicant a receipt certifying acceptance of the application BUT ONLY IF the application is complete and all fees have been paid. Only after such acceptance will the legal time limits take effect. Applicant may voluntarily request an extension from the Board during final review if the applicant wishes to present additional information to the Board that may be pertinent to the Board’s determination, or wishes to provide the Board with additional time for completing its review.

2.2	Application for Site Plan Review Approval: The completed application shall be on the form designated by the Board and conform to the requirements and specification outlined in these Regulations.

2.3	Filing of Application: The applicant shall file the application by delivering the application to the designated agent of the Board at least twenty one (21) calendar days prior to the regularly scheduled public meeting of the Board at which the applicant will formally submit the application to the Board.  The application shall include the names and addresses of the applicant, any licensed professional whose stamp appears on the plans and each abutter (as shown in the Town records not more than five (5) days before the filing date).

2.4	Notice of Application: The Board shall notify the abutters, easement holders on the subject property, licensed professionals whose stamps appear on any portion of the submitted application, and the applicant by certified mail of the date, time and location upon which the completed application will be formally submitted to the Board in accordance with RSA 676:4. Such notice shall be given at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the hearing.  Notice required shall not include the day notice is posted or the day of the public hearing. At the same time the notice is mailed to the applicant and abutters, such notice shall also be given to the general public by publication of the notice in a newspaper of general circulation and by posting a copy of the notice in two public places in the Town. The notice shall include  a  general  description  of  the proposal, which is the subject of the application and shall identify the applicant and the location of the property, which is the subject of the application.  The Board may also give notice by regular mail to other landowners in the vicinity of the tract.

2.5	Fees: The applications for Preliminary and Final Site Plan Review shall be accompanied by the application fee (which is based on building and/or site development or improvement costs) and additional fees to pay for mailings, advertising, hearing clerk and tax mapping costs, as set forth in the Board’s current fee schedule. Failure to pay such costs shall constitute valid grounds for the Board to terminate further consideration and to disapprove the plat without a public hearing. The application will not be accepted for review until the fees set forth in the Board’s current fee schedule are paid. The current Planning board Fee Schedule is located on the Town Website.  Additional fees may be imposed by the Board during the review
 


process and to cover fees and disbursement to consultants to the Board including, but not limited to, engineers, surveyors, lawyers, and community planners.

2.6	Submission of Completed Application and Application Acceptance: The completed application shall be submitted to and accepted for review by the Board at the public hearing of the Board specified in the notice. The Board shall give the applicant a receipt certifying acceptance of the application but only if the application is complete and all costs of notice of the application have been paid.

2.7	Formal Consideration: Time Limits: The board shall begin formal consideration of the final application within thirty (30) calendar days after the date of the public hearing at which the completed application is submitted to and accepted by the Board.  The Board shall act to approve, approve with conditions or disapprove the application within sixty five (65) calendar days after submission provided, however, in accordance with RSA 676: I (f), the Board may apply to the Selectmen of the Town for an extension not to exceed an additional ninety (90)  calendar  days  before  acting to approve or disapprove the application and, provided further, that the applicant may waive the requirement for Planning Board action within the foregoing time periods and consent to such extension as may be mutually agreeable. Upon failure of the Board to approve or disapprove the application within the foregoing time periods, the applicant may obtain from the Selectmen an order directing the Board to act within thirty (30) calendar days. Failure of the Board to act upon such order of the Selectmen, the matter shall be considered by the Selectmen and the Selectmen have forty (40) days to identify in writing specific regulations or ordinances with which the application does not comply. If the Selectmen fail to act the matter may be referred to the Superior Court, upon petition of the applicant, to issue an order approving the application, if the Court  determines  that  the  proposal  complies  with  existing  site  plan  review  and subdivision regulations and zoning and other ordinances. If the Court determines that the  failure to act within the time specified was the fault of the Board and was not justified, the Court may order the Board to pay  the  applicants  reasonable  costs, including attorney’s fees, incurred in securing such order.

2.8	Public Hearings: Notice of Public Hearing: No complete application may be denied or approved without a public hearing on the application. Notice of the hearing shall be given in the same way and with the same time limits as notice of submission of the application under these Regulations. The Board may give notice of submission and notice of the public hearing in the same notice. Additional notice of an adjourned session of a public hearing is not required if the date, time and place of the adjourned session is made known at the prior hearing. At the hearing, the applicant, any abutter or any person with a demonstrable interest in the matter may testify in person or in writing. Other persons may testify as permitted by the  Board  at  each  hearing. Additional public hearings may be held at the discretion of the Planning Board.

2.9	Regional Notice. In accordance with RSA 36:54-58, applications which might have a potential regional impact shall require additional public notices and additional posting time.
 


2.9.1	Determination of potential regional impact may be found only for applications which qualify for Major Review and which also meet one or more of the following criteria:

	Any portion of the property is located within 500 feet of the border of the Town of Enfield;

	The application involves 10,000 square feet or more of new non- residential (commercial or industrial) floor space adjacent to a neighboring municipality;

	The proposal involves 20 or more residential units adjacent to a neighboring municipality;

	Other as the Board may reasonably determine, including but not limited to:

	Generation of greater than 100 peak hour vehicle trips that extend outside of the municipal boundaries

	Potential effect on groundwater, surface water and wetlands that may affect a municipal water source.

	Potential  to  disturb  or  destroy  a  regionally  significant  or important natural environment, habitat or historical resource.

	Anticipated  emissions  such  as  light,  noise,  smoke,  odors,  or particulates.

	Potential impact to the municipal services in another town.


2.9.2	Notice of findings including minutes of meeting at which finding of potential regional impact was made shall be sent by certified mail 14 calendar days in advance of the scheduled public hearing to the Upper Valley Lake Sunapee Regional Planning Commission and to each town reasonably likely to be affected, with each governmental entity to be considered an abutter for purposes of listing on the Abutters List, offering testimony, and computing public notice fees.

2.10	Notice of Decision: The Board shall issue a written final decision on all applications for Site Plan Review. If the application is approved, the Board shall issue a written decision, which includes any and all conditions, which have been required by the Board as a part of the approval decision. If the application is denied, the Board shall state the reasons for denial. The decision of the Board (approval or denial) shall be mailed to the applicant and be available at the Planning/Zoning office for public inspection within 72 hours after the decision is made.

2.11	Appeals: Any person aggrieved by any decision made in the course of applications pursuant to this chapter may appeal as follows:
 


2.11.1	Decisions by the Planning Board based solely upon interpretation of the Zoning Ordinance may be appealed first to the Zoning Board of Adjustment or, as determined by the provisions of RSA 676:5,III. Appeals to the ZBA must be filed within thirty (30) days from the date of the vote to approve, approve with conditions or disapprove the application. Appeals made to Superior Court must be filed as specified in
§2.17(B).

2.11.2	All other decisions by the Planning Board may be appealed to Grafton County Superior Court per the provisions of RSA 677:15. The appeal shall be presented to the Court within 30 days after the vote to approve, approve with conditions or disapprove the application.

2.11.3	The minutes of the meeting at which the Board voted, including written decision, shall be filed in the Planning Board Office within 144 hours of the decision.

2.12	Revocation  of  Approval.  The  Board  may  act  to  revoke  an  approval  per  the requirements of RSA 676:4-a.




ARTICLE 3. PROCEDURE WHEN SPECIAL EXEMPTION, VARIANCE OR SUBDIVISION APPROVAL IS REQUIRED

When a special exception or variance is required by the Enfield Zoning Ordinance, the applicant shall first obtain the special exception or variance before applying for site plan approval. The planning board as a part of site plan approval may require additional conditions. When both subdivision and site plan approval are required for a proposed development, the Board may hold the Site Plan Review hearing at the same time as the hearing required by the subdivision regulations.



ARTICLE 4. APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS

4.1	Major Review Submission Requirements:

4.1.1	Seven sets of full sized prints and twelve 11” x 17” copies of the Site Plan Map shall be submitted. The Site Plan Map shall be drawn to a scale of 1” = 20’. If the plan drawn to this scale will not fit on a 22” by 34” sheet of paper, the Board may authorize an appropriately smaller scale. The Site Plan Map shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor or registered professional engineer. Applicant shall submit a completed application form accompanied by a Site Plan Map or other appropriate submittal such as report, calculations, etc. with the following items unless a written request for waiver (s) is provided and granted by the Board:

•	The boundary lines of the area included in the site including angles or bearings of lines, dimensions and the lot area (in acres);

•	Locations of all existing and proposed easements (utility, well, etc.), deed restrictions (conservation, preservation, agricultural preservation or
 


other restrictions) and covenants as well as names and addresses of all holders;

•	Names and addresses of owners of record of subject property;

•	Names and addresses of developer, holding corporation or other if different from owners of record;

•	Names and addresses of all abutting landowners and those within 200 ft of the subject property, updated from Town records not more than five
(5) days before the date of filing;

•	A site Location Map, shown as an inset on the Site Plan Map, which shall show the proposed development in relation to major roads of the town (site boundary overlay on a USGS map is acceptable);

•	North point, bar scale, date of preparation and dates of any revisions;

•	The shape, size and location of existing and proposed structures including building elevations;

•	Existing and proposed grades, base flood elevations and Special Flood Hazard areas (if applicable), drainage systems, structures, and topographic contours at intervals not exceeding 2 feet and spot elevations where appropriate;

•	Any existing streams (intermittent and perennial) or wetlands, marshes, lakes or ponds, drainage ways, whether natural or man-made, rock or stone walls, retaining walls, ledge outcrops, existing landscaping areas, existing and proposed foliage lines, and proposed open space for preservation;

•	Surface waters identified and delineated in accordance with RSA 485-A: 2, XIV, NH Water Pollution and Waste Disposal and NH Code of Administrative Rules.

•	Soil boundaries delineated over entire site area with description of soil complex and all data pertinent to proposed development. This can be mapped from NRCS County Soil Survey, but depending on nature and intensity of development, Board may require Site Specific Soil Map for site. Percolation test information should be provided with soil data for all developments utilizing proposed infiltration or detention drainage measures.

•	Existing and proposed streets, driveways, parking spaces and sidewalks with indication of direction of travel for one-way streets or driveways. The location and dimensions of streets, driveways, access entrances, sidewalks, layout of parking spaces, turnarounds, and facilities associated with any structure on the site shall be shown. Road alignment profiles and cross sections at 50 foot stations should be provided for all proposed roads or modifications to existing roadways;
 


•	Layout of sewage collection and/or disposal system, including sewer service lines, curb stops and building connections, septic tanks, leach field, control panels and associated piping;

•	Proposed landscaping plan including buffering plans along adjacent properties and public highways;

•	Existing and proposed utility service and infrastructure including water supply system, power, telephone, gas or other utility infrastructure (poles, lines, transformers), fire protection and suppression systems (if applicable) fire hydrants, location of wells on property or abutting property that have protective radius overlapping onto subject property, water supply pipes, and water sources available for fire suppression;

•	Existing and proposed exterior lighting and signage on the site;

•	Watershed delineation and maps depicting pre-development and post- development conditions including all contributing areas and drainage features.

•	Drainage design showing location and size of existing and proposed drainage structures including culverts, pipes, catch basins, manholes, ditches, holding basins, etc. This shall be supported by copies of the design computations based on a 50 year design frequency for all major culverts and brooks that affect any Town or State highway;

•	Right-of-Way and travel surface of all fronting streets.

•	The amount of existing and proposed impervious surface located within the fifty (50) foot setback of any river, stream, wetland, lake or public pond.

4.1.2	One copy of each of the following shall be submitted:

	A cover letter declaring the intent and outlining the details of the proposed use.

	All material submitted to the New Hampshire Water Supply and Pollution Control Commission for sewage disposal system approval;

	New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services - Subsurface Bureau approval of proposed sewage disposal system (State Subdivision and/or Individual Sewage Disposal System approval) or a Town of Enfield sewer system hook up approval.

	Approvals from the New Hampshire Department of Transportation for access driveway approval for any access onto a State Highway or Approval from the Town of Enfield Public Works Department granting driveway access onto a Town Road.

	Approvals from the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services - Site Specific Bureau if applicable or letter of intent.
 


	Approvals from New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services
– Wetland Bureau for any proposed wetland or stream impacts.

	Copy of any local zoning variances obtained for the project.

	A Town water hook up approval if the project will be on the Municipal water system.

	Any other State or Federal Permits.

	One copy of a boundary survey map of the property

	One Copy of the deed of the property

	A statement of proposed hours and days of operation;

	An estimate of peak period traffic generated by the development, and an assessment of peak period traffic impacts at all adjacent intersections;

4.1.3	The Planning Board may require other information it deems necessary in  order to evaluate the proposal. This might include but is not limited to traffic studies, fiscal impact studies, title search, and discussion of natural and historical resource impacts and preservation.

4.2	Minor Review Submission Requirements:

4.2.1	Twelve sets of the Site Sketch no smaller than 11” x 17” shall be submitted.
The Site sketch shall be drawn to scale and shall show:

	The boundary lines of the area included in the site including angles or bearings of lines, dimensions and the lot area (in acres);

	A site Location Map, shown as an inset on the Site Sketch, which shall show the proposed development in relation to major roads of the town;

	North point, bar scale, date of preparation and dates of any revisions;

	The shape, size and location of existing and proposed structures;

	Name, address of property owner and person or firm preparing the Sketch;

	The key elements of the site including but not limited to parking spaces, driveways, wells, septic  systems,  surface  water,  wetlands,  pedestrian facilities, sign locations, lighting and utilities.

4.2.2	One copy of each of the following shall be submitted:

	A cover letter declaring the intent and outlining the details of the proposed use.

	New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services - Subsurface Bureau approval of proposed sewage disposal system or a Town of Enfield sewer system hook up approval.

	Approvals from the New Hampshire Department of Transportation for access driveway approval for any access onto a State Highway or
 


Approval from	the  Town  of  Enfield  Public  Works  Department granting driveway access onto a Town Road.

	Approvals  from  New  Hampshire  Department  of  Environmental  Services
– Wetland Bureau for any proposed wetland or stream impacts.

	One copy of a boundary survey map of the property.

	One copy of the deed of the property

	A statement of proposed hours and days of operation;

	An estimate of peak period traffic generated by the development, and an assessment of peak period traffic impacts at all adjacent intersections;

4.2.3	The Planning Board may require other information it deems necessary in order to evaluate the proposal.



ARTICLE 5.	STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS

The Planning Board shall approve the proposed Site Plan only upon determination that the following requirements have been met:


5.1	All information required for a completed application, as defined in Article IV, has been submitted to the Planning Board.

5.2	Site Characteristics. The development shall conform to the extent appropriate to the natural topography of the site. Major cut and fill proposals shall not be considered to be appropriate. Site clearing shall be kept at the minimum required for the construction of buildings and improvements, taking into consideration the need for pedestrian and vehicular safety and the need for light and air. Natural cover shall be retained to supplement required landscaping to the extent possible and reasonable. Landscaping shall be provided which is in keeping with the character of the area where the site is located, the purpose of the development, and the location of buildings and improvements.

5.3	Perimeter. A landscaped buffer shall be provided to assure that the development of the project conforms at its boundaries with the character of the adjoining land and its uses. These buffer areas shall be of sufficient width to provide privacy and noise protection, but in no case shall the width of such buffer be less than the setbacks otherwise required in that zoning district.

5.4	Screening. Storage areas, waste collection areas, and service areas shall be fenced or screened from on-site and adjoining parking areas and from neighboring properties.

5.5	Traffic, Parking, Loading and Safety:

5.5.1	Parking and loading areas shall conform to Article IV, Section 409 of the Enfield Zoning Ordinance.

5.5.2	To minimize the likelihood that public safety will be endangered by the extensive use of internal roads and parking areas for recreation, a Site
 


Plan for multi-family structures shall make adequate provision for on- site recreational needs of the residents of the proposed development.

5.5.3	There shall be adequate access to each structure for fire, school, police, and medical emergency vehicles and personnel.

5.5.4	Through traffic on fronting streets shall not be significantly impeded or endangered by vehicles entering or leaving the site.

5.5.5	Provision shall be made for the safe accommodation of pedestrian traffic along fronting streets in the vicinity of the development.

5.5.6	There shall be adequate circulation and parking including loading facilities to ensure the safety of vehicles and pedestrians on the site.

5.5.7	Speed limits reductions will be recommended where deemed necessary to address potential safety issues such as limited sight distance, inadequate roadway geometry, etc. All speed limit changes are subject to review by the Director of Public Works and approval by the Selectboard.

5.5.8	In cases where the Planning Board has determined that entry lanes, turning	lanes, traffic signal(s), signs, lights, and/or road improvements/upgrading are needed and are necessitated by the proposed site plan, the improvements shall be constructed at the expense of the applicant as a condition of the permit.

5.5.9	All parking and facility accessibility requirements shall be consistent with the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act – Accessibility Guidelines for Buildings and Facilities (ADAAG).

5.5.10	The centerlines of all new driveways should be aligned with driveways, and road intersections on the opposing side of the highway, if they exist.

5.5.11	All streets and parking facilities shall conform to the standards and requirements in Article IV, Section 409 of the Enfield Zoning Ordinance and Section 4:10 of the Subdivision Regulations.

5.5.12	Commercial driveways shall not exceed 36 feet in width, measured perpendicular to the driveway at its narrowest point. The driveway shall be flared at the property line with minimum radii of 25’ in rural areas and 10’ in village areas. All commercial driveway entrances (regardless of the presence of curbing on the highway) shall be curbed from the edge of the highway to at least the end of the radii at the driveway throat.

5.5.13	Lots which have frontage on one highway only shall be allowed a single driveway, except that two, one-way driveways may be substituted for a single driveway, provided that the minimum required distance between driveways can be met.

5.5.14	In order to minimize the number of driveways along highways, shared driveways shall be encouraged for adjacent sites.

5.5.15	All projects subject to Site Plan Review shall provide interconnecting driveways or easements for future construction of driveways that will
 


provide and promote vehicular and pedestrian access between adjacent lots, without accessing the highway to all property lines, and shall be designed to provide safe and controlled access to adjacent developments where they exist. Every effort should be made by the Planning Board to require construction of these driveways in anticipation of future developments.

5.5.16	Lots with frontage on both an arterial highway and an adjacent or intersecting road of lower functional classification (i.e. collector or local) shall not be permitted to access the arterial highway, except where it can be proven that other potential access points would cause greater environmental or traffic impacts.

5.5.17	The minimum throat length of a driveway shall be of adequate length to accommodate the queuing of the maximum number of vehicles, as defined by the peak period of operation identified in the traffic study accompanying the site plan. The design of the driveway shall, to the maximum extent possible, result in no spillback of entering cars onto the highway.

5.5.18	Lots with frontage on an arterial highway and an adjacent or intersecting road, which, due to environmental or traffic impacts, cannot access the adjacent or intersecting streets shall comply with the access and street design standards in the Enfield Subdivision Regulations:

5.5.19	Adequate aisle widths, raised medians, tractor-trailer access, and number of parking spaces promote safe and efficient movement into and out-of the site.

5.5.20	Landscaping and buffering is especially important along road frontages, and within parking lots. Adequate buffers and properly designed landscaping assists in the identification of driveway entrances and necessary signage, in addition to controlling light diffusion onto abutting properties. Landscaping located within raised medians, separating aisles of parking spaces, controls internal lot circulation and establishes safe and efficient traffic patterns.

5.6	Water Drainage.

5.6.1	Provisions for handling surface and subsurface waters and storm drainage will be adequate and will not adversely affect abutting properties or Town facilities or groundwater sources.

5.6.2	Drainage onto other properties shall not be increased. Applicant shall obtain and provide for consideration a drainage easement from abutting property owner for any increase in stormwater flow deemed necessary onto adjacent properties.

5.6.3	No stream, brook, river, wetland, lake, pond, reservoir, groundwater source, aquifer or public or private groundwater supply shall be affected adversely.
 


5.6.4	Projects under major review shall be designed to State of New Hampshire Site Specific Standards.



5.7	Exterior Lighting and Signs.

5.7.1	Exterior lighting shall confirm with Article IV, Section 409 Item 12 of the Enfield Zoning Ordinance and shall conform to the Outdoor Lighting Design Standards, See Appendix (B)

5.7.2	Signs shall conform with Article IV, Section 408 of the Enfield Zoning Ordinance with light sources so placed that they will not constitute a hazard to street or highway driving.

5.8	Dimensional Guidelines. Dimensional guidelines will comply with all applicable New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services regulations including, but not limited to, the following:

5.8.1	The maximum height of structures shall conform to the Zoning Regulations.

5.8.2	The minimum distance between septic leach fields and water bodies (lakes, ponds, rivers and brooks) shall be 75 feet.

5.8.3	The minimum distance between septic system leach fields and community water supply sources shall be 400 feet.

5.8.4	The minimum distance between septic leach fields and wetlands shall be 75 feet.

5.8.5	No structure, signs, planting, or embankment shall impair safe sight distance at an intersection. All season safe sight distance is defined as a line which encounters no visual obstruction between all combinations of 2 points, between 3 feet and 10 feet, inclusive above the pavement, and so located as to represent the critical line of sight between the operator of a vehicle using the access and the operator of a vehicle approaching from either direction and shall maintain the minimum stopping sight distances shown in the table below.


 
Design Speed (mph)
 
Stopping Sight Distance  (feet)
 
Intersection Sight Distance
(feet)
 
15	80	170
20	115	225
25	155	280
30	200	335
35	250	390
40	305	445
45	360	500
50	425	555

 


5.8.6	All structures shall comply with the appropriate setback requirements of the Zoning District in which they are to be located.



5.9	Water Supply.

5.9.1	All sites shall provide adequate water supply for consumption and fire protection.

5.9.2	All projects using municipal water shall comply with the Enfield Water Ordinance.

5.9.3	Connection requirements shall be established by the Public Works Director.

5.9.4	Users to be served by the municipal water shall be reviewed in terms of the planned long-term capacity of the system and shall not be permitted when the additional demands will overload the municipal system.

5.9.5	Public Works and Water and Sewer Department may require as-built plans depicting location of all proposed water supply systems and related appurtenances with survey ties to permanent property monumentation.

5.10	Sewage Disposal.

5.10.1	All sites shall provide adequate and sanitary disposal of sewage.

5.10.2	All projects using municipal sewer shall comply with the Enfield Sewer Ordinance.

5.10.3	Connection requirements shall be established by the Public Works Director.

5.10.4	In areas outside of the municipal sewer service area, provisions shall be made for on-site sewage disposal. A State approved disposal system design is required prior to final approval, and the approval number shall be indicated on the plat. The system shall be installed and functioning prior to the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy.

5.10.5	Public Works and Water and Sewer Department may require as-built plans depicting location of all proposed water supply systems and related appurtenances with survey ties to permanent property monumentation.

5.11	Snow Removal.

5.11.1	Snow removal shall be reviewed for all sites, and the general plan for snow removal shall be indicated as a note on the plan or addressed in the Letter of Intent.

5.11.2	Areas suitable for snow storage shall be designated on the plan and shall be located such that no direct discharge discharges to receiving waters are possible from the site.

5.11.3	A plan for snow removal from the site may be required if insufficient storage areas exist.
 


5.11.4	Landscaping of snow storage areas shall be such that it can withstand a snow pile.

5.11.5	Snow shall not be pushed onto adjacent lots or right-of-ways without the owner’s written consent.

5.12	ADA Compliance.

5.12.1	Adequate provisions shall be made to ensure compliance of sites with the Americans with Disabilities Act – Accessibility Guidelines for Buildings and Facilities (ADAAG).

5.12.2	An appropriate number of ADA compliant parking spaces, based on use, shall be shown on the site plan.

5.13	Floodplain.

5.13.1	Floodplains are identified as Special Flood Hazard Areas in the "Flood Insurance Study for the Town of Enfield, N.H." together with the associated Flood Insurance Rate Maps and other maps on file in the Town of Enfield.

5.13.2	The application shall comply with the Floodplain Development Ordinance.

5.13.3	The 100-year flood elevation shall be shown on the plan.

5.13.4	Site plan proposals, including their utilities and drainage, shall be located and designed to be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

5.13.5	All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, electrical and water systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate potential flood damage.

5.13.5.1	New and replacement water systems (including on-site systems) shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize infiltration of flood waters and avoid impairment.

5.13.5.2	New and replacement sanitary sewer systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.

5.13.6	Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.

5.13.7	Within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse, the applicant shall submit to the Board, certification, prepared by a NH licensed Professional Engineer specializing in Civil Engineering, demonstrating that the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse has been maintained.

5.14	Solid Waste Disposal and Recycling.

5.14.1	All sites shall provide adequate facilities for both recycling and disposal of solid waste and shall be designed to prevent contamination of groundwater and the surrounding environment.
 


5.14.2	The types of facilities and their enclosure shall be adequately detailed on the plat.

5.14.3	All such facilities shall be screened from sight from abutting properties and streets to the extent reasonably possible by means of a fenced or landscaped enclosure.

5.15	Safety Review.

5.15.1	A letter describing each application shall be sent by the Applicant to the Police Chief and to the Fire Chief, alerting them of the pending application. Approval of the chiefs is not required, except as provided below. The Board may require modification of the site design to enhance public safety or provide suitable fire protection system as warranted.

5.15.2	For a site, which will receive, handle, store, process, sell or discharge hazardous or toxic materials, written approval of the Fire Chief shall be required. Further, no interior floor drain shall be directed to any stream, storm drain or septic system, or directed into a sanitary sewer without sufficient on-site treatment.

5.16	As Built Plans.

5.16.1	As built plans will be submitted to the Town prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.

5.16.2	If as-built plans and survey ties are required by Public Works and/or Water and Sewer Department for all proposed utilities and/or roads, these shall be submitted prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.

5.17	Protection of Natural and Historic Features.

5.17.1	All significant natural and historic features on the site, such as large or unusual trees, natural stone outcroppings, cellar holes, rock lined wells, stonewalls, etc. shall be shown on the plan. Board approval shall be obtained for removal of such features.

5.17.2	If a historic building is to be demolished as part of the project, proper documentation of the buildings existence shall be given to the Town and/or State Historian and Board approval shall be obtained prior to demolition.

5.17.3	Architectural features of the site should be consistent with the character of the neighborhood and the Town, in terms of size, scale and design.

5.18	General Standards.

5.18.1	The land shown on the plan shall be of the character as to be used for building purposes without danger to the health, safety and welfare of the community.

5.18.2	The plans shall be consistent with and enhance the appearance of the neighborhood.
 


5.18.3	The plan must provide for the harmonious and aesthetically pleasing development of the neighborhood and the Town, and provide adequate open space.


ARTICLE 6. GENERAL REGULATIONS


6.1	No building permit required under the Enfield Building Code shall be issued for the development of tracts for multi-family or non-residential uses whether or not such development includes a subdivision or re-subdivision of the site until the Planning Board grants site plan approval as provided herein.

6.2	No site preparation work, nor any road, driveway or building construction, shall be undertaken until the Planning Board grants site plan approval as provided herein and all other necessary State and local permits have been obtained.

6.3	The threshold defining “active and substantial development” under NH RSA 674:39 shall be referred to as the construction of footings and foundation, and the extension of utilities to the site or as stated as a condition in the final approval granted by the Planning Board.

6.4	No change in use coming under the authority of these regulations shall be effected until the Planning Board grants site plan approval as provided herein.

6.5	Site Plans must be in conformance with the Enfield Master Plan, all applicable requirements of the Enfield Zoning Ordinance and all other State and local by- laws, ordinances and regulations.


ARTICLE 7.	INSPECTIONS AND COMPLIANCE HEARINGS

7.1	In order to confirm that various items and features delineated on plans presented to the Planning Board for approval (or which are otherwise required in connections with the development) are, in fact, constructed in accordance with those plans and/or in accordance with applicable codes and standards, the Planning Board may, at the time of approval, require the applicant to establish an appropriate escrow account, or other security, in addition to the security for completion of improvements, acceptable to the Planning Board, which will be used by the Town of Enfield to underwrite the costs of retention of appropriate engineers or other consultants to conform the construction is in conformance with the approved plans and/or applicable codes and standards.

7.2	In accordance with RSA 676:4 I (i) a planning board may grant conditional approval of a plat or application, which approval shall become final without further public hearing, upon certification to the board by its designee or based upon evidence submitted by the applicant of satisfactory compliance with the conditions imposed. Such conditions may include a statement notifying the applicant that an approval is conditioned upon the receipt of state or federal permits relating to a project, however, a planning board may not refuse to process an application solely for lack of said permits. Final approval of a plat or
 


application may occur in the foregoing manner only when the conditions are:
(1)	Minor plan changes whether or not imposed by the board as a result of a public hearing, compliance with which is administrative and which does not involve discretionary judgment; or
(2)	Conditions which are in themselves administrative and which involve no discretionary judgment on the part of the board; or
(3)	Conditions with regard to the applicant's possession of permits and approvals granted by other boards or agencies or approvals granted by other boards or agencies, including state and federal permits.
All conditions not specified within this subparagraph as minor, administrative, or relating to issuance of other approvals shall require a hearing, and notice as provided in subparagraph I(d), except that additional notice shall not be required of an adjourned session of a hearing with proper notice if the date, time, and place of the adjourned session were made known at the prior hearing.



ARTICLE 8. SECURITY FOR COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS

Before any site plan is signed by the Planning Board, the applicant must file a performance guaranty, in an amount and form acceptable to the Town (cash, performance bond and letter of credit (see Appendix C)) to serve as surety that all proposed improvements, such as lighting, landscaping, paving, along with necessary erosion and sedimentation control measures and site restoration, are completed in accordance with the approved plans. Any performance guaranty shall be approved as to form and amount by the Planning board, and conditioned on the completion of such improvements within the period specified therein, unless released earlier by the Planning Board, upon request of the applicant. If improvements for which security is given are not completed within the period specified in the performance security, or in proper conformance with the approved plans, the Town of Enfield may draw such funds as may be necessary from the security, in accordance with its terms.




ARTICLE 9. REVOCATION OF PLANNING BOARD APPROVAL

An approved site plan may be revoked by the Board in whole or in part, by the Planning Board according to RSA 676:4a, only under the following circumstances: (1) at the request of or by agreement with the applicant or successor-in-interest; (2) when the applicant or successor-in-interest to the applicant has performed work, erected a structure or structures, or established the use of the land, which fails to conform to the statements, plans or specifications upon which the approval was based, or has materially violated any requirement or condition of such approval; (3) when the applicant or successor-in-interest has failed to perform any condition of the approval within the time specified or four years: (4) when four years have elapsed without any vesting of rights and the plan no longer conforms to applicable regulations; or (5) when the applicant or successor-in- interest has failed to provide for the continuation of adequate security.
 



ARTICLE 10.	WAIVER OF STANDARDS

The Board may waive any portion of the standards contained in these regulations in such cases where, in the opinion of the Board, strict conformity would pose an unnecessary hardship to the applicant and waiver would not be contrary to the spirit and intent of these regulations, other state and local rules and regulations and the town’s master plan.

Applicant may request a waiver for any standards contained in these regulations and shall do so by submitting a written request to the Board with initial application, or at the appropriate time during the review process.

ARTICLE 11.	PENALTIES


11.1	Any violation of these regulations may be made punishable, as determined by	the Board of Selectmen, by either:

11.1.1	Civil fines as stated in RSA 676:17 if the violations are found by a court to continue after the conviction date or after the date on which the violator receives written notice from the Town that the applicant is in violation of these regulations, whichever date is earlier, or

11.1.2	A criminal penalty as stated in RSA 676:17, which shall be:

1.1.1.1.A misdemeanor if the violation is committed by a natural person; or

1.1.1.2.A felony if the violation is committed by any other person.

11.2	In any legal action brought by the Town to enforce, by way of injunctive relief as provided by RSA 676:15 or otherwise, these regulations, or to enforce any decision made by the Planning Board, or to seek the payment of any fine levied under Article 11, the Town shall recover its costs and reasonable attorney’s fees actually expended in pursuing the legal action if it is found to be a prevailing party in the action.  Recoverable costs shall include all out-of-pocket expenses actually incurred, including but not limited to, inspection fees, expert fees, and investigatory expenses.

11.3	If any violation of these regulations, or any decision of the Planning Board, results in the expenditure of public funds by the Town which are not reimbursed, the court in its discretion may order, as an additional civil penalty, that a violator make restitution to the Town for such funds so expended.

11.4	The Superior Court may, upon a petition by the Town and after notice and a preliminary hearing as in the case of prejudgment attachments under RSA 511-A, require an alleged violator to post a bond with the court to secure payment of any penalty or remedy or the performance of any injunctive relief, which may be ordered, or both. At the hearing, the burden shall be on the Town to show that there is a strong likelihood that it will prevail on the merits that the penalties or remedies sought are reasonably likely to be awarded by the court in an amount of the projected expense of compliance with the injunctive relief sought.
 



ARTICLE 12.	AMENDMENTS

These regulations may be amended, changed, altered, added to, or rescinded from time to time whenever this action is deemed necessary or advisable by the Board, but not until public hearing on the proposed amendment, change, alteration, or rescission. A majority vote of those present and voting will prevail. The Town Planner shall transmit a record of any changes so enacted to the Register of Deeds of Grafton County.

No site plan review regulations or amendment or exception thereto shall be legal or have any force and effect until copies of such, certified by a majority of the Board members, are filed with the Town Clerk and the Board of Selectmen.

ARTICLE 13.	SEPARABILITY

If any provision in these regulations shall be held to be invalid for any reason by any court such holding shall not invalidate in any manner any other provisions contained herein.

Amended and Adopted by the Enfield Planning Board on October 11, 2017.


Dan Kiley, Chair	Paula Rowe Stone - Alternate


David Fracht, Vice Chair	Jim Bonner - Alternate


John Kluge, ex-officio Selectboard Representative


Tim Taylor


Nancy Scovner


Kurt Gotthardt


Rita Seto
 


APPENDIX A

DEFINITIONS

The definitions for these regulations are found in the Enfield Zoning Ordinance Appendix Definitions.




APPENDIX B

OUTDOOR LIGHTING DESIGN STANDARDS

Definitions
The following words and terms related to outdoor lighting are defined as follows:

Disability Glare: The eye’s Line-of-Sight contact with a direct light source, which causes a partial blindness.

Foot-candle: A unit of measure for luminance. A unit of luminance on a surface that is everywhere one foot from a uniform point source of light of one candle and equal to one lumen per square foot.

Full cut off type fixture: A luminaire or light fixture that; by design of the housing, does not allow any light dispersion or direct glare to shine above 90 degree, horizontal plane from the base of the fixture.

Horizontal Luminance: The measurement of brightness from a light source, usually measured in foot-candles or lumens, which is taken through a light meter’s sensor at a horizontal position.

Light Trespass: Light from an artificial light source that is intruding into an area where it is not wanted or does not belong.

Uplighting: Any light source that distributes illumination above a 90-degree horizontal plane.

Uniformity Ratio: (U. Ratio) Describes the average level of illumination in relation to the lowest level of illumination for a given area. Example: U. Ratio =4:1 for the given area, the lowest level of illumination (1) should be no less than 25% or “4 time less” than the average (4) level of illumination.

Sky glow: Light from a luminaire that is emitted above the horizontal plane that passes through the lowest part of the luminaire.
 



Purpose

It is the goal of this section to provide further guidance to developers in implementing
minimum requirements for lighting for all non-residential projects (non-residential projects include multi-family proposals). Recognizing that inappropriate and poorly designed or installed outdoor lighting causes unsafe and unpleasant conditions, limits residents’ ability to enjoy the nighttime sky, and results in unnecessary use of electric power. Conversely, it is also recognized that some outdoor lighting is appropriate in areas such as civic, commercial and industrial centers. To ensure appropriate lighting while minimizing its undesirable side effects, the following regulations are established.

General Requirements

1.	That all exterior lights and illuminated signs shall be designed, located, installed and directed in such a manner as to prevent objectionable light trespass, and glare across, the property lines and or disability glare at any location on or off the property.
The “maintained horizontal luminance recommendation” set by the illuminating Engineers Society of North America (IES) shall be observed. (See “LIGHTING TABLE”)

2.	All street lighting shall be full cut off fixtures.

3.	All parking area lighting shall be full cut-off type fixtures.

4.	Full cut-off fixtures must be installed in a horizontal position as designed, or the purpose of the design is defeated, and disability glare will result.

5.	Uplighting is prohibited. Externally lit signs, display, building and aesthetic lighting must be shielded to prevent direct glare and/or light trespass in excess of 0.2 foot-candles. The lighting must also be, as much as physically possible, contained to the target area.

6.	All building lighting for security or aesthetics will be full cut-off or a shielded type, not
allowing any upward distribution of light. Flood lighting is discouraged, and if used, must be shielded to prevent:

a.	Disability glare for drivers or pedestrians;

b.	Light trespass beyond the property line; and

c.	Light above a 90 degree, horizontal plane. Unshielded wallpack type fixtures are not acceptable.

7.	Adjacent to residential property, no direct light source will be visible at the property line at ground level or above.

8.	All non-essential lighting will be required to be turned off after business hours, leaving only the necessary lighting for security. (“Non-essential” can apply to: display, aesthetic, parking, and sign lighting).
 


9.	When outdoor lighting installation or replacement is part of a development proposal for which site plan approval is required under these regulations, the Planning Board shall review and approve the lighting installation as part of its site plan approval.

10.	The applicant shall submit to the Town sufficient information, in the form of an overall exterior lighting plan, to enable the Town to determine that the applicable provisions will be satisfied. The lighting plan shall include at least the following:

a.	A site plan, drawn to the required scale, showing all buildings, landscaping, parking areas, all proposed exterior lighting fixtures;

b.	Specification (details) for all proposed lighting fixtures including photometric data, designation as IESNA “cut-off” fixtures, Color Rendering Index (CRI) of all lamps (bulbs), and other descriptive information on the fixtures;

c.	Proposed mounting height of all exterior lighting fixtures;

d.	Analyses and luminance level diagrams showing that the proposed installation conforms to the lighting level standards in this section. Off-site lighting should be considered in the analyses; and

e.	Drawing of all relevant building elevations showing the fixtures, the portions of the walls to be illuminated, the luminance levels of the walls, and the aiming points for any remote light fixtures.

11.	Gas Station type canopy luminaires mounted on a canopy shall be recessed in the ceiling of the canopy so that the lens cover is recessed or mounted flush with the ceiling of the canopy and fully shielded. Luminaires shall not be mounted on the sides or top of the canopy, and the sides or fascias of the canopy shall not be illuminated.

12.	When an outdoor lighting installation is being modified, extended, expanded, or added to, the entire outdoor lighting installation shall be subject to the requirements of this section.

13.	Expansion, additions, or replacements to outdoor lighting installations shall be designed to avoid harsh contrast in color and or lighting levels.

14.	Moving, fluttering, blinking, or flashing lights or signs and electronic message signs are prohibited.

15.	The outdoor operation of searchlights, lasers, or other high-intensity beams for advertising purposes is prohibited.

16.	Any luminaire that replaces a non-conforming, pre-existing luminaire, or any luminaire that is moved, shall meet the standards of this Ordinance.

17.	Pre-existing luminaires that cause glare on any public roadways shall fully comply with this Ordinance immediately.
 


18.	Proposed lighting installations that are not covered in this section may be approved if the Planning Board finds that they are designed to minimize glare, do not direct light beyond the boundaries in excess of 0.2 foot-candles of the area being illuminated or onto adjacent properties or streets, and do not result in excessive lighting levels.

19.	For the purposes of these regulations, the mounting height of a lighting fixture shall be defined as the vertical distance from the grade elevation of the surface being illuminated to the bottom of the lighting fixture (i.e. luminaire).

20.	The following are exempt from this Ordinance:

a.	Temporary luminaires required for construction projects (not to exceed 30 days);

b.	Luminaires related to police, fire, or other emergency services;

c.	Hazard warning luminaries required by federal regulatory agencies; and

d.	Low intensity temporary seasonal lighting.

21.	The Planning Board may modify or waive the requirements of this section if it determines that in so doing, it will not jeopardize the intent of these regulations.
 



Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA, or IES)


Lighting Table



Levels of activity (Examples)	Recommendations (Foot-candles)

Parking Lot	General Parking	Vehicles Only
& Pedestrian




High	Min.

.9	U Ratio

4:1	Min.

.67	U. Ratio

3.1

Civic Recreational Facilities				
Regional Shopping Centers
Fast Food Facilities				
Gas/Convenience Store				
	
Min.	
U Ratio	
Min.	
U. Ratio

Medium	
.6	
4:1	
.33	
3:1

Community Shopping Ctr.				
Office Parks				
Hospital Parking				
Transportation Parking				
(Commuter Lots, Etc.)				
Residential Complex Parking				
	
Min.	
U Ratio	
Min.	
U. Ratio

Low	
.2	
4:1	
.13	
4:1

Neighborhood Shopping				
Industrial Employee Parking				
Educational Facility Parking				
Church Parking				

IES States: “This recommendation is based on the requirement to maintain security at any time where there is low level of nighttime activity.”
 


APPENDIX C

Date



Town of Enfield Board of Selectmen PO Box 373
Enfield, NH 03748 Re:
Dear Town Officials:

By this document the	Bank (hereinafter “Issuer”) hereby issues an irrevocable Letter of Credit in the amount of $_		to the Town of Enfield on behalf of
 	(hereinafter “Developer”). This irrevocable Letter of Credit is issued to guarantee completion of all improvements required by the Enfield Planning Board and the town of Enfield subdivision regulations in conjunction with a subdivision plan entitled                                    “		,” dated	, prepared by
 	 and approved by the Planning Board on
 	.

It is understood that the improvements guaranteed by this irrevocable Letter of Credit include, but are not limited to the following:

1.	Construction of	linear feet of roadway along with all associated utilities. Said roadway being shown on the above referenced plan as
 	.

2.	Restoration of the site and control of erosion. 3.



It is agreed and understood by the issuer of this Letter of Credit that it shall be issued for a period of	months. If all improvements guaranteed by this Letter of Credit are not completed by
 	(Date) and if a certificate indicating completion of all improvements has not been issued by the Town Building Inspector, then this Letter of Credit shall be automatically considered to have been called and without further action of the Town of Enfield or its Planning Board, the		Bank shall forthwith forward a check in the amount of
$	to the Treasurer of the Town of Enfield. The funds so forwarded to the Town treasurer shall be used exclusively for the purpose of completing the improvements, which are guaranteed by this Letter of Credit. Any funds not needed by the Town to complete improvements
 


required by the subdivision plan referred to above shall be returned to the
 	 Bank.
Upon receipt of written approval of the Town, the issuer may reduce (“draw down”) the amount of this Letter of Credit in accordance with the authorization of the Town. Provided, however, that 10% of the principal amount held for the constructed portion of the project shall be retained for one year after completion of the improvements to cover any latent defects appearing during the year and shall thereafter be returned to the issuer or become the property of the Town of Enfield, if necessary to remedy any such latent defects.


 
Dated: 	
 


Signature of Bank Official
 




I have read this Letter of Credit and agree to its terms.

 
Dated: 	
 


Signature of Developer
 




Sincerely,
 
Standard Operating Procedures
Town of Enfield Department of Public Works
Enfield, New Hampshire


No: 200-001-2003	Date: October 23, 2003


Policy: Snow Removal and Ice Control


Governing Laws: RSA 231:92-a, RSA 507-B:2-b


Approval Date: November 1, 2004


Next Review Date: October 2005




OBJECTIVE:	It is the goal and intent of the Town of Enfield Public Works Department to provide timely, efficient and cost-effective winter maintenance, snow removal and ice control on the roadways of the municipality for the safety and benefit of the Town’s residents and the general motoring public.

PROCEDURE:  The objective stated above will be attempted by implementation and execution of the procedures and tasks outlined in the Town of Enfield Winter Operations Snow Removal and Ice Control Procedures. Due to the many variables that are inherent in New England weather, each storm and/or weather event may require slightly different effort, or emphasis on any number of maintenance tasks, which together, determine the overall winter maintenance, snow removal and ice control strategy.

LEVEL OF SERVICE: It is not possible to maintain a black, snow and ice-free roadway or sidewalk during a storm. It is the intent of the Department to provide practical, safe access to homes, businesses and municipal facilities, within our limits of service, during winter storm events.

It is our intent to start to conduct snow removal operations upon accumulations of one inch of snowfall. The Public Works Director or Highway Supervisor, may, at his or her discretion based upon weather information reports obtained by emergency services and forecasting, elect to not remove snow until greater or lesser accumulation has ceased.

During the night, when traffic volumes are low, the Department may elect to cease operations for a few hours if the snowfall is not significant in intensity and no change in the intensity of snowfall is predicted.
 
Chemical pre-treatment and ice control may be addressed prior to the actual storm beginning, during the actual storm as seen effective, and after the storm. It should be noted that salt has a much slower effect on melting snow and ice at temperatures below 20 degrees, and may not be applied until it is warmer.
Sidewalk snow clearance and chemical treatment will be conducted during winter storms. Chemical treatments of road surfaces are done throughout the storm on an as needed basis in
problematic areas at a minimum. However, at or towards the close of the storm event the plan will call for a more aggressive treatment to assist in the clearing process of all roadways in the Town.



COMMAND:  Direction of all winter maintenance activities for the Town of Enfield is vested with the Public Works Director or Highway Supervisor or his or her designee.  Any & all requests, comments, or problems SHALL be directed through the chain of command at all times.

EXECUTION: The policy outlined above is intended to serve as the normal operating procedures for winter maintenance, snow removal and/or ice control for the Town of Enfield, Department of Public Works.  One or more of the following may delay, prevent or impact the implementation of this policy in part or as a whole.

•	Equipment Breakdown
•	Snow Accumulation in Excess of 1” Per Hour
•	Freezing Rain or Other Icing Conditions
•	Traffic Congestion
•	Emergencies
•	Personnel illness
•	High winds and drifting
•	Power failures
•	Personnel fatigue
 
ADOPTION:

The Town of Enfield has adopted the Winter Operations Snow Removal and Ice Control Policy effective November 1,  2004.  All other policies and ordinances are superceded by enactment of this Snow and Ice Operating Procedure Policy.  All residents are encouraged to familiarize themselves with the content as it describes the condition that one might expect to encounter before, during and following a winter storm event.



BOARD OF SELECTMEN ENFIELD, NEW HAMPSHIRE
 
TOWN OF ENFIELD WINTER OPERATIONS SNOW REMOVAL AND ICE CONTROL PROCEDURES
(Includes Highways, Sidewalks, Parking Areas and Emergency Service Facilities)



EQUIPMENT: The Public Works Department utilizes all available assets as needed to address snow emergencies. A list of available rolling stock assets is included in the appendix A of this policy.

ROUTES:  Currently, the Town is divided into eight major plow and/or treatment routes.  Three of the routes encompass the Town Village compact area roads and are assigned to one each of the Town’s trucks. Additionally, one of these trucks with 4-way plow is used to maintain emergency service facilities, municipal parking areas, and to assist in support of trucks assigned specific routes by cleaning up of intersections.

The Town has one 4WD Utility Tractor with a power angle blade and interchangeable sidewalk snow blower used for sidewalks.  This unit is also equipped with a spreader and dump body to carry treatment materials as needed during the event.

As noted in Appendix A, available rolling stock, there are some backup units that are not utilized unless needed during an event. Appendix B

MANPOWER:  The Town of Enfield has ten (10) full-time personnel and (4) full-time backup personnel assigned to its winter maintenance operations.

MATERIALS:  The Department uses approximately 1600 tons of rock salt and 5000 cubic yards of sand each season.  The sand is used as an abrasive and is applied to the road to improve motor vehicles traction.  The Department utilizes salt as a de-icing and anti-icing agent, which utilization is also referred to as chemical treatment. Some salt may be applied prior to a storm event, dependant upon projected accumulation, to get ahead of an on coming storm event and potentially deter the call in activation. The entire supply of sand is purchased each year and stockpiled at the Public Works Facility on Lockehaven Road. A stockpile is also located at the Shedd Street Facility for the public to utilize for their own personal, private, non- commercial use.  The material is stockpiled and stored with a trace amount, approximately 1- 3% concentration, salt to help keep it from freezing. Rock salt is purchased from a chosen supplier on an as needed, on call basis. A limited quantity of approximately 40 tons is stockpiled at the Shedd Street Facility under cover in the enclosed shed. Due to volume constraints we cannot store all of our winter treatment material at one time and utilize the on call chosen supplier for treatment chemicals.  Weather conditions require a different approach to winter maintenance route treatment with different mixture concentrations of sand and salt, unless you live on a gravel road then the stocked sand is the only treatment. This is done because the application of high concentrations of salt to gravel roads would cause the frozen roads to prematurely thaw creating a muddy unmanageable mess. The mixture is applied to the roadway where traffic can work the mix traveling either way. The mixture, in conjunction with traffic action, creates a watery brine melting snow and/or ice, and resisting snow and ice packing on the roadway. This process is accelerated at the end of the storm on the last pass by a final scraping and the use of a higher concentration application.  The road crown further
 
assists with the spreading of the mixture brine. The sand/salt mixture is only effective to approximately 20 degrees Fahrenheit. Other deicing agents are effective to lower temperatures, but cost and need for specialized equipment have forestalled their use to this time.

COMMUNICATIONS: The majority of the Public Works rolling stock is equipped with low band radios capable of transmitting and receiving on a frequency of 156.225.  Command vehicle radios are equipped with multiple broadcasts and receive frequencies.  These frequencies allow us to communicate with in and adjacent Town Emergency, Public Work Services.  In the event that mutual aid is needed in a neighboring Town the “Command” vehicles have the  ability to also communicate with them. Each plow and equipment operator is assigned a unique call number. A copy of the current call numbers is included in Appendix B to this policy. Radios are also maintained at the Public Works Facility, Whitney Hall, Police Department and Fire Departments.

PARKING:  The Town has enacted a parking ban effective December 12, 1998.  This ban prohibits parking within the Town of Enfield and is included in Appendix C with all State of New Hampshire RSA’s associated with public way maintenance. The purpose of parking bans is to allow maintenance crews unobstructed snow removal and ice control routes, as much as possible, to maintain the maximum effectiveness of their efforts and prevent the possibility of bodily injury and property damage.

PLOW ROUTE PRIORITIES: With a total of 59 miles of roads, which calculates out to 118 lane miles, from which to remove snow and control ice for the traveling publics safety. The Public Works Department has to assign priorities for winter maintenance route activities in order to maximize the utilization and effectiveness of their efforts for the public.

A.	School bus routes, while school is scheduled in session, will be given the first priority during school days. Each plow route will ensure that the best possible snow clearance will be completed within one hour ahead of the bus route time.

B.	The business district will be maintained as possible during business hours, with the main snow clearance effort to be done between the hours from 9 P.M. to 7
A.M. of the evening following the event. Public Safety is a very great concern in this area due to cars and pedestrians.

C.	Public parking areas at the rear of the Town Offices, all Municipal Facilities, Huse Park, and the boat landing parking lots will be maintained by plowing during the winter storm. The application of slip resistant materials will be applied after the storm as determined to be needed by the Director of Public Works and/or Highway Supervisor and/or Facility Care Taker.

D.	Transfer Station/Recycle Center: Transfer station personnel shall be required to assist with the Town’s general winter maintenance operations. If the facility is open during the snow or ice storm, personnel will plow this area prior to opening for public use and allow access to other Public Works equipment to maintain a passable facility during a storm event. Public areas shall be kept as clear as possible to provide as safe an access as reasonably possible. Sand and other slip resistant materials shall be used in public areas. It often will not be possible
 
to maintain clear ground, but a reasonable effort will be made during storm events.  In the event of heavy icing there is a sand container there on site and the highway truck will pass through on its route. Should the intensity of the storm reach a point of unmaintainability the Department may close the facility at the discretion of the Public Works Director.

E.	Fire Hydrants: Fire Department personnel shall clear Hydrants as soon as possible after a storm event.

F.	Each specific plow route is listed in Appendix D of this policy.

ROADS, AREAS AND SIDEWALKS NOT RECEIVING WINTER MAINTENANCE: The Town
of Enfield does not maintain a number of roadways as part of its ongoing winter maintenance activities.  The areas not maintained by the Town include:

A.	Town roads classified as Class VI roads

B.	Private roads

C.	Summer Maintained Roads Not Winter Maintained
•	William Gage Road
•	Blackwater Road
•	West Farms Road

D.	Winter Maintained Roads Not Summer Maintained
•	Main Street
•	Methodist Hill Road (Lebanon Exit 16 Side)
•	Methodist Hill Road (Lebanon Meriden Side)
•	Maple Street (Canaan)
•	May Street (Canaan)

E.	Upper parking lot at Mascoma Town Beach

F.	School District sidewalks and parking areas, which are the responsibility of the school district.

G.	Routes 4 & 4A are both maintained by the New Hampshire Department of Transportation. However, it is the Town’s responsibility to maintain the sidewalks along these routes.



SALT FREE AREAS: The Town of Enfield has established the following roadways or portion of roadways as “salt free” areas to protect drinking water resources or other natural resources, which is believed to have been damaged in the past due to roadway salt.	A “salt free” area is one in which the municipality has determined it will not use salt as part of its ice control efforts for winter maintenance. The Town will post the area to warn traveling motorists that they are in a “salt free” area.
 
A.	Gravel roads will not be treated with salt in a concentration higher than what it is mixed with for storage at any time to prevent the frozen gravel travel surfaces from melting.

B.	At this time the Town has not designated any reduced salt treatment areas.
Should it be chosen to do so the Department will have to delineate and post these areas to warn all users that there may be a diminished treatment operation and that use may be hazardous.



DAMAGE TO PRIVATE PROPERTY: It should be noted that the municipality is not held responsible for damage to private property that is located within the public right of way. (RSA 231:92-a) The right of way (ROW) is often 50’ wide, and is often confused by property owners as their own property. In most cases, the ROW often extends 10 to 20 feet of either side of the paved or gravel road. Homeowner often cultivate extensions of their lawns, place mailboxes, erect fences or stonewalls in these areas, which improves the appearance of the street greatly, but is obstructive to good maintenance from being conducted on the roadway.

In the event of personal property damage, the Town of Enfield will only be responsible to repair or replace damaged property having been in actual contact with the snow removal equipment that is on private property and not within the public right-of-way. The exception to this rule would include damage sustained to mailboxes. (Please note that it is the homeowner’s responsibility to conduct maintenance around the mailbox for visibility purposes of the snow plow driver. The Town will accept no liability for any mailboxes that are not maintained and are not visible due to snow and ice build-up). Damaged mailboxes must be brought to the Public Works Director to have physical evidence of damage verified within the first 24 hours and the Town will only be held responsible for the first $25 of damage if the damage is verified by the PWD. The Town of Enfield is not responsible for the resetting of any mailbox.

At NO time shall any homeowner or private contractor shovel or push snow into or across a public way, including sidewalks. This practice is dangerous to the motoring public as well as the person performing the task.  It also creates a hazard in which the person or company that performed the task can be held responsible for all liability associated with incident that occurred as a result of their action.

Plowing snow across roadways also causes maintenance problems for the crews like:
•	Plugged ditches
•	Hard banks that cannot be shelved for future snow removal
•	Impacts on the Town equipment from hitting these hidden frozen walls

POST STORM OPERATIONS: As determined by the Highway Supervisor, the snow banks resulting from the previous accumulations shall be pushed back, or shelved, using the wing of the trucks or other suitable equipment to make space for future snow storms.

As accumulations warrant and at the discretion of the Public Works Department, we will monitor snow banks within the village areas and intersections and remove snow from these areas on an as needed basis.  Snow removed from these areas will not occur during every
 
event due to lack of acceptable snow dump sites that do not have an adverse effect on the environment.

Throughout the winter culvert thawing is an ongoing post storm operation, this takes a lot of time to complete.  Not all problem culverts can be dealt with between every storm event, but we try to get the worst ones first. Should anyone witness a frozen culvert that appears to be causing a problem or having an adverse effect, they should notify the Department at their earliest convenience.

SIDEWALK SNOW REMOVAL: The Department shall start sidewalk maintenance and treatment as soon as dispatched to proceed with winter storm operations as long as the following are met.

A.	Sidewalk snow clearance will not begin until:

D	All other snow removal operations are manned and in progress.

D	If there are insufficient personnel available to conduct sidewalk snow removal operations, as well as street and road clearance, the streets and roads will take priority.

B.	The sidewalks will be treated as quickly possible after the storm.

If pedestrians or vehicles cause obstructions to the sidewalk snow removal operations, the Town’s winter maintenance operators are encouraged to request their cooperation. Otherwise, the operator is expected to call the Police for assistance and removal of the obstruction. The operator is cautioned to avoid confrontation at all possible costs.
 
























Appendix A RSA’s & Ordinance
 
TITLE XX TRANSPORTATION CHAPTER 231
CITIES, TOWNS AND VILLAGE DISTRICT HIGHWAYS
Liability of Municipalities
C.	Section 231:90
231:90 Duty of Town After Notice of Insufficiency. –
I.	Whenever any class IV or class V highway or bridge or sidewalk thereon in any municipality shall be insufficient, any person may give written notice of such insufficiency to one of the selectmen or highway agents of the town, or the mayor or street commissioners of the city, and a copy of said notice to the town or city clerk. The notice shall be signed and shall set forth in general terms of the location of such highway, bridge, or sidewalk and the nature of such insufficiency.
II.	For purposes of this subdivision, a highway or sidewalk shall be considered "insufficient'' only if:
(a)	It is not passable in any safe manner by those persons or vehicles permitted on such sidewalk or highway by state law or by any more stringent local ordinance or regulation; or
(b)	There exists a safety hazard which is not reasonably discoverable or reasonably avoidable by a person who is traveling upon such highway at posted speeds or upon such sidewalk, in obedience to all posted regulations, and in a manner which is reasonable and prudent as determined by the condition and state or repair of the highway or sidewalk, including any warning signs, and prevailing visibility and weather conditions.
III.	A highway or sidewalk shall not, in the absence of impassability or hidden hazard as set forth in paragraph II, be considered "insufficient'' merely by reason of the municipality's failure to construct, maintain or repair it to the same standard as some other highway or sidewalk, or to a level of service commensurate with its current level of public use.
Source. 1893, 59:2, PL 82:8. RL 98:8. 1945, 188:1, part 18:9. RSA 247:9. 1981, 87:1. 1991,
385:3, eff. Jan. 1, 1992.
TITLE XX TRANSPORTATION CHAPTER 231
CITIES, TOWNS AND VILLAGE DISTRICT HIGHWAYS
Liability of Municipalities
D.	Section 231:91
231:91 Municipality to Act; Liability. –
I.	Upon receipt of such notice of insufficiency, and unless the highway agents or street commissioners determine in good faith that no such insufficiency exists, the municipality shall immediately cause proper danger signals to be placed to warn persons by day or night of such insufficiency, and shall, within 72 hours thereafter, develop a plan for repairing such highway, bridge, or sidewalk and shall implement such plan in good faith and with reasonable dispatch until the highway, bridge, or sidewalk is no longer insufficient, as defined by RSA 231:90, II.
II.	If the municipality fails to act as set forth in paragraph I, it shall be liable in damages for all personal injury or property damage proximately caused by the insufficiency identified in the notice, subject to the liability limits under RSA 507-B:4.
Source. 1893, 59:2, PL 82:9. RL 98:9. 1945, 188:1, part 18:10. RSA 247:10. 1981, 87:1. 1991,
385:4, eff. Jan. 1, 1992.TITLE XX TRANSPORTATION
 
CHAPTER 231
CITIES, TOWNS AND VILLAGE DISTRICT HIGHWAYS
Liability of Municipalities
E.	Section 231:91
231:91 Municipality to Act; Liability. –
I.	Upon receipt of such notice of insufficiency, and unless the highway agents or street commissioners determine in good faith that no such insufficiency exists, the municipality shall immediately cause proper danger signals to be placed to warn persons by day or night of such insufficiency, and shall, within 72 hours thereafter, develop a plan for repairing such highway, bridge, or sidewalk and shall implement such plan in good faith and with reasonable dispatch until the highway, bridge, or sidewalk is no longer insufficient, as defined by RSA 231:90, II.
II.	If the municipality fails to act as set forth in paragraph I, it shall be liable in damages for all personal injury or property damage proximately caused by the insufficiency identified in the notice, subject to the liability limits under RSA 507-B:4.
Source. 1893, 59:2, PL 82:9. RL 98:9. 1945, 188:1, part 18:10. RSA 247:10. 1981, 87:1. 1991,
385:4, eff. Jan. 1, 1992 TITLE XX TRANSPORTATION


TITLE XX TRANSPORTATION CHAPTER 231
CITIES, TOWNS AND VILLAGE DISTRICT HIGHWAYS
Liability of Municipalities
F.	Section 231:92
231:92 Liability of Municipalities; Standard of Care. –
I.	A municipality shall not be held liable for damages in an action to recover for personal injury or property damage arising out of its construction, maintenance, or repair of public highways and sidewalks constructed thereupon unless such injury or damage was caused by an insufficiency, as defined by RSA 231:90, and:
(a)	The municipality received a written notice of such insufficiency as set forth in RSA 231:90, but failed to act as provided by RSA 231:91; or
(b)	The selectmen, mayor or other chief executive official of the municipality, the town or city clerk, any on- duty police or fire personnel, or municipal officers responsible for maintenance and repair of highways, bridges, or sidewalks thereon had actual notice or knowledge of such insufficiency, by means other than written notice pursuant to RSA 231:90, and were grossly negligent or exercised bad faith in responding or failing to respond to such actual knowledge; or
(c)	The condition constituting the insufficiency was created by an intentional act of a municipal officer or employee acting in the scope of his official duty while in the course of his employment, acting with gross negligence, or with reckless disregard of the hazard.
II.	Any action to recover damages for bodily injury, personal injury or property damage arising out of municipal construction, repair or maintenance of its public highways or sidewalks constructed on such highways shall be dismissed unless the complaint describes with particularity the means by which the municipality received actual notice of the alleged insufficiency, or the intentional act which created the alleged insufficiency.
III.	The acceptance or layout of a private road as a public highway shall not be construed to confer upon the municipality any notice of, or liability for, insufficiencies or defects which arose or were created prior to such layout or acceptance.
IV.	The setting of construction, repair, or maintenance standards or levels of service for highways and sidewalks by municipal officials with responsibility therefore, whether accomplished formally or informally, shall be deemed a discretionary, policy function for which the municipality shall not be held liable in the absence of malice or bad faith.
 
Source. RS 57:1. CS 61:1, 7. GS 69:1, 2. GL 75:1, 2. PS 76:1. 1893, 59:1. 1915, 48:1. 1921,
107:1. 1925, 52:2, 4. PL 89.1. 1935, 118:1. RL 105:1. 1945, 188:1, part 18:17. RSA 247:17.
1981, 87:1. 1991, 385:5, eff. Jan. 1, 1992.


TITLE LII
ACTIONS, PROCESS, AND SERVICE OF PROCESS
CHAPTER 507-B
BODILY INJURY ACTIONS AGAINST GOVERNMENTAL UNITS
G.	Section 507-B:2-b
507-B:2-b Snow, Ice, and Other Weather Hazards. – Notwithstanding RSA 507-B:2, a municipality or school district shall not be liable for damage arising from insufficiencies or hazards on any premises owned, occupied, maintained, or operated by it, even if it has actual notice of them, when such hazards are caused solely by snow, ice, or other inclement weather, and the municipality's or school district's failure or delay in removing or mitigating such hazards is the result of its implementation, absent gross negligence or reckless disregard of the hazard, of a winter or inclement weather maintenance policy or set of priorities with respect to such premises, adopted in good faith by the official responsible for such policy. All municipal or school district employees, officials, and agents  shall be presumed to be acting pursuant to such a policy or set of priorities in the absence of proof to the contrary. Source. 1995, 109:2, eff. Jan. 1, 1996. 1998, 249:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1999.


Enfield On Street Parking Ordinance


No vehicle shall at any time be parked on any public or public maintained street, alley, roadway, or way open to the public in a manner which hinders or impedes the movement of traffic as defined in RSA 259:110 or hinders in any manner the proper maintenance of the way. The term maintenance includes plowing snow, grading, ditching, and attendance to utilities such as water and sewer lines.

No parking within or on any Town maintained roadway or parking lot for November 1 through April 15 during the hours of 9:00 PM to 7:00 PM.  Obstructions will be removed by Per Order of Selectmen by any Town Personnel including but not limited to Police, Fire and Public Works.
 

























Appendix B Plow Routes
 


WINTER STORM EVENT PLOW ROUTE NUMBER ONE

Revised: January 30,2004

Call Number: 201
Principal Operator: Mike Sousa
Primary Vehicle: Truck 2, 1997 Ford F-350, 4WD, Dump w/ Nose, Wing and Live Salt Body


Primary Roads (not listed in sequential order):
•	Bryant Lane
•	Fitzgerald Drive
•	Jones Hill Road
•	Kluge Road
•	Lockehaven Road






DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS ENFIELD, NEW HAMPSHIRE


WINTER STORM EVENT PLOW ROUTE NUMBER TWO

Revised: January 30, 2004



Call Number: 202
Principal Operator: Don Lashua
Primary Vehicle: Truck 9, 2001 Ford F-550 Muni live body Dump with nose and wing

Primary Roads (not listed in sequential order):
•	Alfano Drive
•	Algonquin Road
•	Anthony Court
•	Crystal Lake Road
•	Mascoma Heights drive
•	Mountainview Road
•	Patricia Court
•	Ridge Road
•	Shaker Hill Road
•	Fuller Road
 


WINTER STORM EVENT PLOW ROUTE NUMBER THREE

Revised: January 30, 2004


Call Number: 203 Principal Operators: Primary Vehicle:

Primary Roads (not listed in sequential order):

•	Blood Road
•	Choate Road
•	Ibey Road
•	Potato Road
•	White House Road
•	Oak Hill Road*
•	Grafton Pond Road*
•	Boys Camp Road*


Parking Lots:

•	Whitney Hall
•	Fire Station
•	Fast Squard
•	New Community Building
•	Hughes Park
•	Beach Parking Lot
•	Intersection
•	Out of the Woodworks
 


WINTER STORM EVENT PLOW ROUTE NUMBER FOUR

Revised: January 30, 2004


Call Number: 204
Principal Operators: Scott Johnston
Primary Vehicle: Truck 11, 2002 International 2574 6x4 Muni dump with nose and wing

Primary roads (not listed in sequential order):

•	Eastman Hill Road
•	Follensbee Road
•	Fuller Road
•	Methodist Hill Road
•	Old Route 10
•	Rice Road
•	Smith Pond Road
•	Whaleback Mountain Road
 
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS ENFIELD, NEW HAMPSHIRE


WINTER STORM EVENT PLOW ROUTE NUMBER FIVE

Revised: January 30, 2004


Call Number: 205
Principal Operators: Edmund Tourville
Primary Vehicle: Truck 6, 1996 Ford F-350 live dump with nose and wing

Primary Roads (not listed in sequential order):

•	Anderson Hill Road
•	Baltic Street
•	Blacksmith Alley
•	Bridge Street
•	Brown Street
•	Hardy Road
•	High Street
•	Lovejoy Brook Road
•	Main Street
•	Maple Street
•	May Street
•	McConnell Road
•	Oak Grove Street
•	Pine Drive
•	Riverside Drive
•	Sargent Street
 
DEEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS ENFIELD, NEW HAMPSHIRE


WINTER STORM EVENT PLOW ROUTE NUMBER SIX

Revised: January 30, 2004


All Number: 206
Principal Operators: Doug King
Primary Vehicle: Truck 3, 1995 International live body dump with nose and wing

Primary Roads (not listed in sequential order):

•	Bog Road
•	Boys Camp Road*
•	George Hill Road
•	Grafton Pond Road*
•	King James Road
•	Ledge Road
•	Oak Hill Road*
•	Palmer Road

* Will be taken off these roads upon satisfactory operation with 203





DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS ENFIELD, NEW HAMPSHIRE


WINTER STORM EVENT PLOW ROUTE NUMBER SEVEN

Revised: January 30, 2004


Call Number: 207
Primary Operators: Alfred Grace
Primary Vehicle: Truck 5, 2003 Ford F-550 Muni side dump with nose and wing

Primary Roads (not listed in sequential order):

•	Abear Road
•	Enfield Center Fire Station
•	Bud Mil Road
•	Goodhue Hill Road
•	Hackett Road
•	Shaker Boulevard
•	Sloan Road
•	Warren Road
•	Arnold Drive
 
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS ENFIELD, NEW HAMPSHIRE


WINTER STORM EVENT PLOW ROUTE NUMBER SEVEN

Revised: January 30, 2004


Call Number: 208
Primary Operators: Bill Spaulding
Primary Vehicle: Truck 8, 2003 Ford F-550 grounds body dump with hopper, nose and wing

Primary Roads (not listed in sequential order):

•	Dartmouth Street
•	Depot Street
•	Lake Street
•	Livingstone Lodge Road
•	Mill Street
•	Moore Street
•	Pillsbury Street
•	Shedd Street
•	Stevens Street
•	Union Street
•	Wells Street
•	Georgia Avenue
•	Lapan Circle
•	Margery Road
•	Melinda Road
•	Westcott Road
 
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS ENFIELD, NEW HAMPSHIRE

TABLE 2

1996-1997 WINTER STORM EVENT CHECKLIST WHITNEY HALL
Revised: 1/30/04

1.	The custodian shall take primary responsibility for shoveling and clearing the entrances, out to an area where plow vehicles can reach, prior to 7am each morning.	As snow continues to fall during business hours, the custodian shall keep the entrances clear and safe.

Applying ice melt crystals prior to storm events is recommended.

The custodian shall rake the front entrance porch roof as necessary to prevent ice build- up and injury to pedestrians.
 
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS ENFIELD, NEW HAMPSHIRE

TABLE 3

MUNICIPAL WATER AND WASTEWATER FACILITIES

Revised: 1/30/04



Clean up done by Water and Wastewater employees with an assigned vehicle upon completion of storm events.

McCONNELL ROAD WELL PUMP STATION.

•	Plow parking area as necessary.

•	Clear snow from entrance and provide a path to bleed off discharge.

•	Shovel path to propane tanks. Clear top of tanks. Continue path to clear discharge area of pressure relief valve (outlet is located about 1/2 way down the back-side of the building, about one foot off the ground). Let someone know if the relief discharge is frozen.

•	Shovel out hydrant in front of building.

PRIOR I & II WELL PUMP STATIONS (Lovejoy Brook road).

•	Plow access roads past both buildings. Do not salt roads as these are in the wellhead sanitary zone.

•	Clear snow from both building entrances.

•	Shovel path up to wellhead bunker on Prior I. Clear top of bunker.

•	Shovel path up to wellhead bunker on Prior II. Clear top of bunker.

•	Shovel out hydrant near Prior I building.

MAPLE STREET STORAGE BUILDING (Maple street).

•	Plow out parking area if needed.

•	Clear snow from building entrance and garage bay door.

MARSH WELL PUMP STATION (Moose Mt. road).

•	Plow out access road and parking area. Do not salt this road as it is in the wellhead sanitary zone.

•	Clear snow from building entrance.

•	Shovel path to wellhead bunker. Clear top of bunker.
 
SHAKER BRIDGE SEWER PUMP STATION (Pine drive).

•	Plow parking area and path to inlet manhole.

•	Clear snow from main building entrance, and stairs to chemical building.

•	Clear snow from around inlet manhole in front of chemical building.

ROUTE 4A SEWER PUMP STATION.

•	Be very careful of traffic in this area. Do not attempt to turn a vehicle around at the pump station -- go up the street to a safer place.

•	Plow out the parking area if needed.

•	Shovel off top of dry well and wet well and path to control panel. Clean off top of control panel.



WELLS STREET SEWER PUMP STATION.

•	Plow out the parking area if needed.

•	Shovel off top of dry well and wet well area around control panel, and area around a small yard hydrant.
Clean off top of control panel.

LOWER SHAKER VILLAGE SEWER PUMP STATION

•	Plow entire paved parking area.

•	Plow parallel to side fence to a point past the last well storage hatch.

•	Shovel area clean inside fenced area so as to provide clear access to building, dry well, wet wells, generator, headworks and propane tank.
 
APPENDIX C TERMINOLOGY

In an effort to avoid confusion, the following standard terminology with activity definitions is established. When directed to do so, operators will perform winter maintenance tasks in accordance with these definitions and associated direction.



Treat Roads  Roads will be spread with salt, or a mixture of sand and salt. The Director of Public Works or Highway Supervisor or his or her designee will determine the proportion of the sand/salt mixture. Mixture will be spread along the roadway in a strategic manner to optimize the treatment capability.

Treat Main	Treat just the high traffic volume roads and areas of safety concern to the department based on historic events and conditions. I.e. Bridges, Steep Inclines and bridges.

Open	As snow gets deeper, the driver will need to make extra passes at Routes/intersections to allow vehicle traffic to flow better. This is also aimed at Intersections getting the whole route done in as short a time as possible.

Cleanup	Clean up and push back all roads. Clean-up intersections turn arounds, Routes and cul- de-sacs. Some areas may require more than one pass.

Slush Off	Scrape off any snow/ice that has loosened up from treating with salt. Route Normally, it will require one pass each way unless advised to slush off and clean up.

Push/Back	After several large storms it may be necessary to send a truck or the grader out to shelf or back snow winrows. A loader will normally go along to clean up driveways and intersections.
 
AN ORDINANCE FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT
of a
STREET NAMING & NUMBERING SYSTEM
for the
TOWN OF ENFIELD, NEW HAMPSHIRE




Section I.	PURPOSE

A.	To establish the locations and names of all streets and roads.
B.	To establish a uniform method of numbering primary buildings on streets and roads.
C.	To promote efficiency in locating primary buildings.
D.	To provide more expedient emergency response.
E.	To provide a consistent system for mailing addresses.

Section II.	PARTIES AFFECTED

All primary buildings, streets, and roads within the boundaries of the Town of Enfield shall hereafter be identified according to the uniform street naming and numbering system as herein contained as adopted or amended by the Board of Selectmen pursuant to their authority as outlined in RSA 231:133 and 231:133-a.

Section III.	DEFINITIONS

For the purpose of this ordinance the following definitions will apply:

Street:  A state highway, town road, avenue, lane and/or any other way whether public or private used or in existence for vehicular travel exclusive of a driveway which serves not more than two adjacent lots or sites. The word street shall include the entire right-of-way.

Primary Building: Any residential dwelling temporary or permanent, used seasonally or throughout the year, or any building which represents or is used for the central purpose of the lot.

Section IV.	NAMING SYSTEM

A uniform street naming system has been developed for all streets based upon the following process:

A.	There shall be no duplication of street names within the Town.
B.	Street names shall not sound alike (e.g. Beach and Peach, Lynwood and Linwood).
C.	The use of directional words such as north, south, east, and west shall be discouraged.
D.	Street names shall not be differentiated solely by their suffix (e.g. Pine Place, Pine Lane, and Pine Avenue).
E.	Each street shall have only one name along its entire length.
 
F.	The Board of Selectmen shall establish names for all streets and shall maintain an updated and accurate master list of all street names to be known as the Master Street Name List.

Section V.	NUMBERING SYSTEM

A uniform street numbering system has been developed for all primary buildings based upon the following process:

A.	The starting point for each street is generally determined by its relationship to U.S. Route 4 (a.k.a. School Street, Prospect Street, Miracle 1/4 Mile, Drybridge Hill) and U.S. Route 4A (a.k.a. Lebanon Road) or its logical direction given existing usage as indicated on the Master Street List in Appendix B.
B.	All primary buildings on the left side of a street beginning at its starting point will have
odd numbers.
C.	All primary buildings on the right side of a street beginning at its starting point will have even numbers.
D.	One odd and one even number will be assigned to each fifty (50) foot interval of frontage on the street as measured from the starting point of each street.
E.	Numbers will be assigned by determining the point at which the main vehicular access (or main pedestrian access if no vehicular access is provided) to the primary building coincides with a fifty foot interval on the street as outlined by the formula the chart in Appendix A. [ex: If the driveway serving a single family house is on the left side of a road and is in the tenth 50 foot segment, then the street number would be #19.]
F.	Unused numbers will be held for future use to ensure against the need for renumbering.
G.	Condominium complexes, shopping centers, malls, and properties with multiple primary buildings shall be assigned one street number corresponding to the primary entrance location. Pre-existing developments and units shall be internally numbered according to a logical pattern and manner as approved by the Planning Board.
H.	Street numbers shall be assigned by the Planning/Zoning Administrator.

Section VI.	PROCEDURES

A.	All property owners within the boundaries of the Town of Enfield shall affix, or cause to have affixed, the assigned street number(s) in accordance with this section.
1.	For all primary buildings the street number shall be conspicuously displayed on that side of the building which faces the main vehicle access.
2.	For primary buildings not readily visible from the street, the assigned street number(s) shall also be conspicuously displayed at the main vehicular (or pedestrian if no vehicular access exists) access to the property, so as to be visible on a year-round basis. The preferred method of display at the main vehicular or pedestrian access shall be on both sides of a mailbox. The front may be used when applicable. (see Appendix C. However, if a mailbox is not located at the main access, or if there is no mailbox, then the assigned street number shall be displayed on a sign post or similar means at the main access.
 
B.	All displayed street numbers shall be of a contrasting color to the means of support such as the primary building, mailbox, post, etc.
C.	All displayed street numbers shall be at least three and one-half (3-1/2) inches in height and two and one-half (2-1/2) inches in width and affixed in a permanent manner.
D.	All displayed street numbers shall be in Arabic form (0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9).

Section VII.	NEW BUILDINGS AND SUBDIVISIONS

A.	Whenever a primary building is erected, located, or expanded in the Town of Enfield, the assigned street number shall be affixed in the appropriate locations a provided by this ordinance. Owners of new or expanded primary buildings shall procure their number assignment from the Planning/Zoning Administrator. Number assignment is required prior to the issuance of a building permit and shall be displayed during construction. Numbers shall be displayed prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.
B.	Every subdivision or site plan submitted to the Planning Board for approval shall show an assigned street number for each primary building as applicable.
C.	Every subdivision or site plan submitted to the Planning Board for approval shall show the approved street name for all existing streets and a name approved by the Planning/Zoning Administrator in consultation with the Master Street Name List for all proposed new streets.
D.	In all cases, the Planning/Zoning Administrator shall notify the Selectmen's (assessing) office, Police and Fire Departments, FAST Squad, and Dispatch Center as appropriate, of new assigned street numbers and names.

Section VIII. PENALTY

A.	Any property owner who fails to comply with any relevant provision of this ordinance within one year of the mailing date of the Notification of Street Naming and Numbering  Assignment shall be guilty of a violation with a penalty of not more than $25.00 for each day of non-compliance.
B.	Any property owner who shall affix to or display upon a structure any number other than that assigned to it pursuant to this ordinance shall be guilty of a violation with a penalty of not more than $25.00 for each day of non-compliance.
C.	Property owners in non-compliance shall be notified by certified mail and given 30 days from the post date to comply with the ordinance before penalty is enforced and begins to accrue. The penalty will continue to accrue until the violation ceases.
D.	This section shall not apply to the display of "date of origin" numbers for historic buildings provided that they are displayed so as to not be confused with the display of the assigned street numbers.

Section IX.	ADMINISTRATION

A.	This ordinance shall be administered by the Planning/Zoning Administrator.
 
Section X.	APPEALS

A.	Any property owner aggrieved by the implementation or administration of the provisions of this ordinance may appeal in writing to the Planning/Zoning Administrator.
B.	The decision of the Planning/Zoning Administrator may be appealed to the Board of Selectmen who shall have the final administrative authority over the implementation of the provisions of this ordinance.
C.	All appeals shall be in written form to the Board of Selectmen (see Appendix), setting forth the basis for the appeal, and said board shall act upon the appeal within 60 days from date of receipt.

Section XI.	SEVERABILITY CLAUSE

A.	If any part of this ordinance is found to be invalid, it shall have no effect on the balance of this ordinance.

Section XII.	EFFECTIVE DATE

The above described ordinance shall take effect immediately upon adoption by the Board of Selectmen.



Adopted:	April 17, 1995
By:	Enfield Board Of Selectmen
 
TOWN OF ENFIELD SOLID WASTE ORDINANCE


Whereas, the Selectboard of the Town of Enfield has the authority to establish regulations to promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare, and this ordinance is declared to be an exercise of the Town’s police powers; and

Whereas, this ordinance is intended to promote the public health, safety and welfare and to protect the interests of Town residents by regulating the accumulation, storage, collection, removal and disposal of solid waste so that conditions that create fire, health or safety hazards, harbor undesirable pests, or impair the aesthetic appearance of neighborhoods are prevented and eradicated.

Now, Therefore, Be it ordained by the Selectboard of the Town of Enfield, New Hampshire, that:

Section 1.    Definitions:

For the purpose of this ordinance, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings set forth:

A.	Bulky Waste: All large, heavy or otherwise difficult to handle wastes with weights and/or volumes greater than that allowed for an acceptable container, including, but not limited to, appliances, white goods and furniture.

B.	Commercial Building: Any building, or part of a building, used for any business enterprise, commercial enterprise, industrial enterprise or institutional establishment, including a building containing five
(5) or more rental dwelling units.

C.	Commercial Solid Waste: All solid waste which results from the operation of any business enterprise, including commercial waste, industrial waste, institutional waste, or waste from the cleanup or maintenance of property rental operations. For the purposes of this ordinance, commercial solid waste shall also include solid waste generated from a building containing five (5) or more rental dwelling units.
 
D.	Container: A receptacle designed and intended for the storage of solid waste, and where permitted, may include bags.

E.	Dwelling Unit: Any room or  group  of  rooms  located  within  a building and forming a single habitable residence with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.

F.	Hazardous Waste: Any material, solid waste, chemical or substance determined to be hazardous by state or federal regulations or may be potentially hazardous to any person, to property, or to the environment.

G.	Occupant: The person in actual possession of  the  property, premises, building or dwelling unit, whether or not the owner.

H.	Owner: The legal or equitable owner of record who has a right to participate in  controlling  the  property,  premises,  building  or dwelling unit, whether or not the occupant.

I.	Person:  Any  individual,  firm,   association,   partnership   or corporation.

J.	Residential Building: Any building, or  part  of  a  building,  that contains one (1) or more dwelling units, but excluding a building containing five (5) or more dwelling units.

K.	Residential Solid Waste: All household solid waste originating from a dwelling unit within the Town and generated by the occupant. For  the purposes of this ordinance, residential solid waste  shall exclude solid waste generated from a building containing five (5) or more rental dwelling units.

L.	Solid Waste:   All solid and semisolid wastes, including garbage, litter, trash, refuse and rubbish.

M.	Yard Waste: Vegetative matter resulting from landscaping and garden maintenance including, but not limited to, leaves, grass clippings, branches, brush, shrubbery, trees and flowers.
 
Section 2.    Administration and Enforcement:

Enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance shall be under the jurisdiction of the Town of Enfield Health Officer. A representative of the Police Department and the Zoning Officer shall have the authority to make inspections, determine violations, and take action to enforce the provisions of this ordinance.



Section 3.    Unlawful Disposal of Solid Waste:

A.	It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, place, throw or deposit, or cause or permit any other person to leave, place, throw or deposit, in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, public place, public property, or private property within the Town limits, solid waste of any kind.

B.	It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, place, throw or deposit within the Town limits, or cause or permit any other person to leave, place, throw or deposit within the Town limits, solid waste of any kind for the purpose of collection and disposal by the Town when the solid waste is generated at a location outside the Town limits or from a location where the Town does not collect solid waste.

C.	It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, place, throw or deposit any yard waste at the Town of Enfield Stump Dump unless such waste is generated at a location within the Town limits. However, no tree service contractor, landscaping contractor, nursery or similar business enterprise shall leave, place, throw or deposit any yard waste at the Town of Enfield Stump Dump.

D.	It shall be unlawful for any person to bury solid waste within the Town limits.

E.	It shall be unlawful for any person to allow an accumulation of solid waste which creates a fire, health or safety hazard, or harborage for rodents or insects.

F.	No person shall deposit in a solid waste container, or otherwise set out for solid waste collection and disposal by the Town, or its authorized representative, any yard waste consisting of leaves, tires, or hazardous waste.
 
Section 4.	Duty of Occupant:

A.	The occupant of any premises within the Town, whether business, commercial, industrial, institutional or residential premises, shall maintain the premises in a clean, orderly, safe and sanitary condition, free from any accumulation of solid waste which creates a fire, health or safety hazard, or harborage for rodents or insects.

B.	The occupant of any premises within the Town shall ensure that all solid waste are stored on the premises in containers complying with the requirements of this ordinance. All waste stored outside a building shall be stored in such containers, except that waste may be stored in a plastic bag complying with the requirements of Section 7, provided that such plastic bag is placed outside no earlier than the day prior to collection.

C.	The occupant of any premises within the Town shall cover and/or secure all solid waste containers, keeping the storage area and area surrounding any containers in a clean, orderly and sanitary manner and preventing the waste from being scattered by animals, wind or other means. In the event that any solid waste stored in a plastic bag or other container becomes torn, spilled or otherwise scattered, the occupant shall be responsible for clean-up of the area.

D.	The occupant of any premises within the Town shall not store any solid waste, including bulky waste, outside for more than seven (7) days.



Section 5.	Duty of Owner:

A.	The owner of any multi-family dwelling shall provide the premises with a sufficient number of covered solid waste containers complying with the requirements of Section 7 to allow the occupants to adequately store the solid waste generated by the occupants of the premises between collection days.  The owner shall provide a minimum of one
(1)	45-gallon container for every two(2) persons residing on the premises. For a single occupant, a minimum of one (1) 32-gallon container must be provided.

B.	The owner of any premises shall not allow the accumulation of solid waste on the premises to such an extent that the solid waste creates a fire, health or safety hazard, or harborage for rodents or insects.
 
Section 6.	Collection and Disposal of Solid Waste:

A.	Commercial Solid Waste Collection and Disposal. The occupant of any commercial building shall be responsible for the lawful collection and disposal of all commercial solid waste generated from the location, except that the owner of a building containing five (5) or more rental dwelling units shall also be responsible for the lawful collection and disposal of all solid waste generated from the location.

B.	Residential Solid Waste Collection and Disposal. The Town, or its authorized representative, shall provide residential solid waste collection and disposal services from eligible  residential  buildings. The Town, or its authorized representative, is not required to collect any	residential solid waste that does not comply with the requirements of this ordinance.

1.	The occupant shall place all residential solid waste at the designated location for collection and disposal by the Town, or its authorized representative, no later than 7:00 a.m. on the day of collection, nor earlier than the day prior to collection if the collection site is adjacent to a Town street. The occupant shall retrieve all solid waste containers from any street side collection site and return the containers to the storage area by 10:00 p.m. on the day of collection.

2.	The occupant shall place all residential solid waste for collection by the Town, or its authorized representative, within five feet (5’) of the edge of the traveled portion of the alley if an alley is available, or if there is no alley, within five feet (5’) of the edge of the street, or at such other place as approved or designated by the Town.



Section 7.	Containers Required:

A.	Commercial Buildings/Commercial Solid Waste.

1.	The occupant responsible for the condition of property used as any business enterprise and generating commercial solid waste shall have and use solid waste containers of a number and size sufficient to contain all solid waste generated from the location. The owner of a building containing five (5) or more rental dwelling  units  shall  supply  the  building  with  containers  of
 
sufficient number and size to contain all waste generated from the location.

2.	All containers in which solid waste is placed shall be made of metal or plastic, insect-proof, rodent-proof and have a tight- fitting, watertight cover.

3.	All containers shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, and in good repair.

4.	Any container that does not conform to the provisions of this section must be promptly removed and replaced by a proper container upon receipt of notice to that effect from the Town.

B.	Residential Buildings/Residential Solid Waste.

1.	The occupant of a property shall have and use either or a combination of:

a.	Bags of sufficient strength and tightly secured to contain all solid waste generated from the location without tearing or breaking when lifted. Bags, however, may not be stored outside a building unless placed in solid waste containers meeting the limitations set forth in subsection 2. Bags, however, may be placed at the designated collection site without a container no earlier than the day before collection.

b.	Solid waste containers of a number and size sufficient to contain all solid waste generated from the location, and meeting the limitations set forth in subsection 2.

2.	All containers in which solid waste is placed shall be made of metal or plastic, insect-proof, rodent-proof and have a tight- fitting, watertight cover. A container shall be of such size and shape as to be easily handled by one person, and shall have a maximum capacity of 45 gallons and not exceed 50 pounds when full. A container with a greater capacity and weight limit may be utilized only if authorized by or provided by the Town, or its authorized representative.


3.	All containers shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, and in good repair.
 
4.	Any container that does not conform to the provisions of this section, or that may have ragged or sharp edges or any other defect that will hamper or injure the person collecting  the contents thereof, or is likely to cause bags to tear, must be promptly removed and replaced by a proper container upon receipt of notice to that effect from the Town.

C.	Use of unapproved containers, such as wooden  containers, screen/wire containers or 35-gallon drums for the storage and collection of solid waste are prohibited. The owner or occupant shall remove and replace  such  unapproved  containers  upon  the condition of the container becoming deteriorated. Replacement containers shall meet the limitations set forth in subsection A if considered to contain commercial solid waste or subsection B if considered to contain residential solid waste.



Section 8.	Notice:

A.	Upon discovery of a violation of this ordinance, the person or persons in violation shall be given written notice describing the violation, and if the Town is seeking abatement of the violation, the Town shall give the violator three (3) days from the service of the notice to abate the violation.

B.	The notice shall contain the following information:

1.	Date;

2.	Name of the person(s) to whom the notice is given, however, if the name of the occupant cannot reasonably be determined, it will be deemed sufficient for the notice to be given to “Occupant”;

3.	Address and/or parcel number of the real property that is subject to the notice;

4.	Nature of violation and the action required, including the period of time in which the action is required to be accomplished measured from the time the notice is given;

5.	Statement indicating the opportunity for a hearing or the date of any court appearance required;
 
6.	If the Town is seeking abatement of the violation, a statement indicating that the notice becomes final three(3) days after the notice is given if a hearing is not requested in writing and delivered to the Town before the end of the three (3) day period;

7.	Statement briefly indicating what action can be taken by the Town if the notice is not complied with; and

8.	Name, address and telephone number of the enforcement authority.

C.	Service of this notice is deemed sufficient if given by one  of  the following:

1.	Sending a copy by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the person(s) to be notified; or

2.	Delivering a copy personally to the person(s) to be notified; or

3.	Leaving  a  copy  at  the  residence  of  the  person(s)  to  be notified.

D.	It shall be the responsibility of the occupant to abate the existing violation after receipt of a notice. If the notice is not complied with, the Town may take appropriate action to abate the violation, and cost thereof shall be assessed pursuant to Section 10, or the Town may elect to notify the owner of the premises of the violation and order the owner to abate the violation. The owner shall be entitled to the same notice and period of time to abate the violation that was originally given to the occupant. If the owner does not then abate the violation, the Town may take appropriate action to abate the violation and assess the costs of the abatement to either the occupant or the owner.

E.	Enforcement of this ordinance against any owner of record shall not in   any manner diminish the ability of  the  Town  to  enforce  the ordinance against an occupant of the real property, and the enforcement of this ordinance against any occupant shall not in any manner diminish the ability of the Town to enforce the ordinance against an owner of record of the real property.
 
F.	This ordinance shall not prohibit a landlord from including a provision in a lease agreement to collect any enforcement costs imposed by the Town against the landlord due to the actions or inactions of a tenant.



Section 9.	Hearing:


A.	In the event that a person receiving a notice seeking abatement of a violation does not believe that he or she is in violation of this ordinance, the person may request a hearing before the Board of Selectmen.

B.	The request for a hearing before the Board of Selectmen must be in writing and delivered to the Town Manager’s Office within three (3) days after the date the notice is given.

C.	A hearing will be scheduled to be held within ten (10) days of receipt of the written request.

D.	At the hearing, the person will be given the opportunity to appear, with or without counsel, to present such evidence to the Board of Selectmen that reasonably relates to whether the presence of the solid waste on the real property is in violation of this ordinance. Each person appearing will also be given the opportunity to cross-examine any opposing witnesses and present evidence and arguments.



Section 10.  Abatement of Violation by the Town; Collection of Costs:

A.	The Town may take action to abate the violation from real property if any person who has been provided written notice fails, neglects or refuses to comply with the notice; and has not requested a hearing, or, if a hearing was requested, the Board of Selectmen affirmed the notice; and the notice is not being reviewed by the Court system. The Town may abate the violation by contract with a contractor or with Town personnel and equipment.

B.	The owner an occupant of the real property shall be jointly and severally responsible for the Town’s cost for the abatement of the violation under this ordinance. The costs for abatement shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) or the actual costs of the work performed by a Town department or contractor, whichever is greater.
 
C.	The Town Manager shall send a bill to the person violating this ordinance for the Town’s cost for abatement of the violation. Payment shall be due fifteen (15) days after the billing date.

D.	If the bill is not paid within forty-five (45) days of the due date, the Town may file a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction in Grafton County against the violator to collect the costs for the abatement of the violation, including reasonable attorney’s fees.



Section 11.  Penalty:

Any person who violates a provision of this ordinance may be subject to a fine in an amount not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. If the violation is of a continuing nature, each day of failure to comply with the provisions of this ordinance shall constitute a separate offense. A complaint for violation seeking imposition of a fine may be filed with any court of competent jurisdiction in Grafton County.



Section 12.  Other Ordinances:


All other ordinances and parts of ordinances inconsistent or conflicting with any part of this ordinance are herby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency or conflict.



Section 13.  Severability:

If any provision, clause, sentence, or portion of this ordinance is held invalid by a court of law, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions of the ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid provisions.



Section 14.  Effective Date:


This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and publication according to the laws of the State of New Hampshire.

Adopted March 5, 2007 Enfield Board of Selectmen
 
Town of Enfield Department of Public Works

Tree Removal Policy Non-Scenic Roadways

Intent:	The intent of this policy is to notify of and request permission from abutters to and along a public way to the intent of removing a tree or trees, with a circumference of 15-inches or more at a height 4 feet above the ground, that the Department of Public Works Director or Highway Supervisor has deemed a hazard, nuisance or liability issue to the Town. The Town Manager or Selectboard may override this policy upon written directive to do so with alternative resolution and instruction in writing to the Department.

Application	Application of this policy pertains to routine daily maintenance and shall not be applicable to removal of vegetation as a result of, or associated to, natural occurrences (i.e. snowfall, lightening, icing and such).

Purpose:	The purpose of this policy is to follow those applicable laws as contained in RSA’s that pertain to the removal of trees within the public way and shall remain in effect until such time it is removed as a policy or deemed unlawful practice.

Procedure:	The following procedure shall be followed at all times in regards to the removal of trees from all roads within the Town.

1.	Determine whether or not the tree is a nuisance, hazard or liability.

2.	Fill out the attached form of “notification of intent” and include a very descriptive detail as to the location off the road edge, intent of removal method, intent of waste material from the operation, reasoning of why the removal is being conducted, like dead, rotten or hazard to traveling public.

3.	Obtain house numbers of all dwelling within 500 feet in each direction from the location of the tree or trees. If the removal is taking trees in a longer area than the 500 feet shall start from the ends of the intended cut.

4.	Flag all of those trees, bushes or shrubs intended for removal with hash striped clearing flagging.

5.	Obtain the address of all abutters within the 500-foot work limit area. This means on both sides of the road not just the one side where the trees are.

6.	Make copies and mail the “notification of intent to remove” to all abutters with the attached notification of intent cover letter to allow a thirty day response period.

7.	Gather all responses, if any, so that the Department can reply if needed prior to commencement of the removal operation.  Do not commence removal operation until the Director or Highway Supervisor has issued a work order for the removal.

8.	File all responses for each incident as an individual situation/project. Include the work order issued in the file to show that the issue has been completed.

It shall be noted that this policy pertains only to tree takedown on Non Scenic Roads. Tree takedown on designated scenic roads shall follow legal statute i.e. RSA 231:157 & 158.


Adopted:	November 22nd, 2004
 
Notification of Intent to Remove Town of Enfield
Department of Public Works Cover Letter



Dear  	


It has been determined that the tree or trees in front of, adjacent to or opposite your property are either a hazard to the traveling public, a liability or a nuisance and have been flagged for removal for the purposes stated in the attached notice of intent. This letter is meant to notify and inform you of the situation and our intent to remove or resolve the issue associated with the condition and why.

We are giving thirty days to respond to this notification. If the Department does not receive a response from you we will assume that you have no issue with the removal and will commence with scheduling it to be removed at our next convenience.

If you would like us to remove the usable wood, like firewood, from the area please return a letter of request to us and we will remove it also.  If there is usable firewood that comes out of the removal we will leave it there and only remove the associated brush. Softwood such as hemlock, pine or spruce will be removed in it entirety if we do not  hear from you.

Thank you for your time and input on this manner to assist us in providing a safe travel environment to our residents and our visitors.  If you have any questions please feel free to contact me at your convenience at 632-4605 or the Highway Supervisor at 632- 7301 ext. 201
Sincerely, Ken Daniels
Director of Public Works



CC:	Board of Selectmen
April Whittaker, Town Manager Enclosure:	Notification of Intent to Remove



KD/kd
 


Town of Enfield
Department of Public Works Notification of Intent to Remove



Date:
Immediate Adjacent Abutter Address (Physical):


Location Address / From & To:



Inspected By:	
Flagged	
YES	
NO

Approved By:	
Need Utility Notification	
YES	
NO

Type of R-O-W:	DEEDED	PASSIVE	(Deeded means we own the trees and land)

Reasoning:	Nuisance	Hazard	Liability

Problems:


Top	Dead

Base	Throughout	

Top	Rotten

Base	Throughout	

Plowing	Obstacle

Travel	Sight Distance

Description of Problem (Be very descriptive & use reverse side if necessary):






















Signed:

Approved:

Work Order Issued:	YES	NO	Date: Denial Notification Sent:	YES	NO	Date:
 



Town of Enfield
Zoning Board of Adjustment
P.O. Box 373
Enfield, New Hampshire 03748 Tel. 603-632-4067
FAX 603-632-5182  * TDD 603-632-5026
E-MAIL: townhall@enfield.nh.us






ZONING AND



FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT



ORDINANCE


Adopted:	March 13, 1990

Amended:	May 1, 1991
March 8, 1994
March 12, 1996
April 8, 1997
March 9, 1999
March 14, 2000
March 13, 2001
March 12, 2002
March 11, 2003
March 13, 2004
March 12, 2005
March 16, 2006
March 17, 2007
March 11, 2008
March 9, 2010
March 8, 2011
March 12, 2013
March 11, 2014
March 8, 2016
March 14, 2017
March 13 2018
March 12, 2019
 

 





TABLE OF CONTENTS

 
ARTICLE I - INTRODUCTION	1
100	TITLE 	1
101	PURPOSE 	1
102	LOCATION AND THE PUBLIC COST OF FUTURE GROWTH 	2
103	NATURAL ENVIRONMENT 	2
ARTICLE II - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS	3
200	TYPES OF DISTRICTS 	3
ARTICLE III - DISTRICT BOUNDARIES	4
300.1	RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R1) - ENFIELD VILLAGE – MASCOMA 	4
300.2	RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R1) - ENFIELD CENTER - ROUTE 4A 	5
301	RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R3) 	5
302	COMMUNITY BUSINESS DISTRICT (CB) REVISED MARCH 12, 2013 	7
303.1	COMMERCIAL-INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (C/I) - EXIT 16 AREA 	8
303.2	COMMERCIAL-INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (C/I) – EXIT 15 AREA 	8
303.3	COMMERCIAL-INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (C/I) - EXIT 14 AREA 	8
303.4	COMMERCIAL-INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (C/I) - OLD ROUTE 10 AREA. 9
303.5	COMMERCIAL-INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (C/I) - BALTIC MILL 	9
304.1	ENFIELD CONSERVATION DISTRICT- ROUTE 4A - SE SIDE 	10
304.2	ENFIELD CONSERVATION DISTRICT- ROUTE 4A - NW SIDE 	10
304.3	ENFIELD CONSERVATION DISTRICT - I-89 – SOUTHERLY SIDE 	10
304.4	ENFIELD CONSERVATION DISTRICT - I-89 - NW SIDE 	11
304.5	ENFIELD CONSERVATION DISTRICT - NORTHERLY SIDE 	11
304.6	ENFIELD CONSERVATION DISTRICT - SOUTHERLY SIDE 	11
305	RURAL RESIDENTIAL-AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT (R5) 	11
ARTICLE IV - REGULATION OF USES 	12
400	APPLICATION 	12
401	DISTRICTS OTHER THAN CONSERVATION DISTRICT 	12
401.1	R1 DISTRICT 	12
401.2	R3 DISTRICT 	14
401.3	R5 DISTRICT 	16
401.4	COMMUNITY BUSINESS DISTRICT (CB) 	17
401.5	COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL (C/I) DISTRICT 	19
401.6 ROUTE 4 DISTRICT 	21
402	CONSERVATION DISTRICT (C) 	29
403	SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS 	30
1.	R1 DISTRICT 	30
2.	R3 DISTRICT 	31
3.	R5 DISTRICT 	31
Page i
4.	CB DISTRICT 	32
5.	C/I DISTRICT 	32
6.	ROUTE 4 DISTRICT 	32
7.	C DISTRICT 	32
404	HOME OCCUPATION 	33
405	OPEN SPACE /CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT 	34
405.1	STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS FOR CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT .. 34
405.2	VILLAGE PLAN ALTERNATIVE 	37
406	SENSITIVE RESOURCE PROTECTION AREAS 	39
406.1	WETLAND AREAS 	39
406.2	STEEP SLOPE AREAS 	41
406.3	FORESTED AREAS 	42
406.4	CLASS VI ROADS 	42
407	SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS 	42
408	SIGNS 	43
408.1	R1, R3, AND R5 DISTRICT SIGNS 	44
408.2	CB AND C/I and Route 4 DISTRICT SIGNS 	45
408.3	TEMPORARY SIGNS 	46
408.4	EXEMPTED SIGNS 	46
408.5	SIGN PERMIT REQUIREMENTS 	47
408.6	FEES 	47
408.7	ENFORCEMENT 	47
408.8	REMOVAL OF SIGNS 	47
409	PARKING AND LOADING AREAS 	47
410	SIGHT DISTANCE 	50
411	REMOVAL OF NATURAL MATERIAL 	50
412	UNDISTURBED AREA 	50
413	NON-CONFORMING LOTS AND USES 	51
414	PERMITS 	52
415	ADDITIONAL STUDIES AND INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS 	52
416	ZONING ADMINISTRATOR 	52
417	ENFORCEMENT 	53
418	RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN STATE AND LOCAL REGULATIONS 	53
419	OUTDOOR LIGHTING 	53
419.1	GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 	53
420	WETLAND DECISION ACCOUNTABILITY 	54
ARTICLE V - ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 	55
500	CREATION 	55
501	MEETING OF THE BOARD, ADOPTION OF RULES 	55
502	POWERS OF THE BOARD 	55
503	HEARINGS BEFORE THE BOARD 	55
504	SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS 	56
505	VARIANCES 	56
506	APPEALS 	57
507	NOTICE TO CONSERVATION COMMISSION 	57
508	EQUITABLE WAIVER OF DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 	57
ARTICLE VI - CONSERVATION MANAGEMENT 	59
600	CONSERVATION COMMISSION 	59
601	DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION 	59
ARTICLE VII - SEVERABILITY CLAUSE EFFECTIVE DATE AND AMENDMENT 	60
700	SEVERABILITY CLAUSE 	60
701	EFFECTIVE DATE 	60
702	AMENDMENT 	60
ARTICLE VIII - WIRELESS TOWERS 	61
801	DEFINITIONS 	61
802	APPLICABILITY 	61
803	GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 	62
804	SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS 	65
805	WAIVERS 	67
806	SECURITY AND INSURANCE 	67
807	REMOVAL OF ABANDONED ANTENNAS AND TOWERS 	68
808	INSPECTIONS, ENFORCEMENT 	68
ARTICLE IX - IMPACT FEES 	69
901	DEFINITIONS 	69
902	AUTHORITY TO ASSESS IMPACT FEES 	69
903	ASSESSMENT METHODOLOGY 	69
904	ADMINISTRATION OF IMPACT FEES 	70
905	RETURN OF IMPACT FEE 	70
906	APPLICABILITY 	70
APPENDIX A- LAND USE DEFINITIONS 	74
PLANNING BOARD APPROVAL 	87
FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE 	88
ITEM I - DEFINITION OF TERMS 	88
ITEM II 	92
ITEM III 	92
ITEM IV 	93
ITEM V 	93
ITEM VI 	93
ITEM VII 	93
ITEM VIII 	94
ITEM IX- VARIANCES AND APPEALS 	96
 

 

 

 
ARTICLE I - INTRODUCTION




100	TITLE


This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Enfield, New Hampshire.



101	PURPOSE


In pursuance of the authority conferred upon the Town of Enfield by Chapter 674:16 of the New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated (hereinafter referred to as RSA) and in order to put into effect the policy and proposals of the Town's Master Plan, the following ordinance is hereby enacted by the voters of the Town of Enfield, New Hampshire for the following purposes; as enumerated in RSA Chapter 674:17:

A.	To lessen congestion on the streets.

B.	To secure safety from fires, panic and other dangers.

C.	To promote health and the general welfare.

D.	To provide adequate light and air.

E.	To prevent the overcrowding of the land.

F.	To avoid undue concentration of population.

G.	To facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, solid waste facilities, water, sewerage, schools, parks.

H.	To assure proper use of natural resources and other public requirements.

I.	To provide for harmonious development of the land and its environs.
 

102	LOCATION AND THE PUBLIC COST OF FUTURE GROWTH


The citizens of Enfield wish to guide the location of future land development where it will provide a balanced community; that is, having the greatest benefits to present and future citizens of Enfield, without unduly increasing tax burdens to pay for additional town services.



103	NATURAL ENVIRONMENT


The citizens of Enfield wish to conserve its rural residential character, its air and water quality, its productive crop and forest lands, its wildlife habitat and its freedom from noise and traffic congestion.
 
Town of Enfield, NH	Zoning Ordinance	Amended March 12, 2019




ARTICLE II - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS




200	TYPES OF DISTRICTS


For the purposes of this ordinance the Town of Enfield is hereby divided into the following types of districts:

A.	Districts Other Than Conservation District

1.	Residential District (R1)

2.	Rural Residential District (R3)

3.	Rural Residential-Agricultural District (R5)

4.	Community Business District (CB)

5.	Commercial/Industrial District (C/I)

6.	Route 4 District




B.	Conservation District (C)
 


ARTICLE III - DISTRICT BOUNDARIES


Where zoning districts boundary lines are indicated as following a road or body of water, they shall be construed as following the center of the traveled way for roads, and the center of the water for bodies of water.

Where zoning district boundary lines are indicated as going to, meeting, or measured from a road or body of water, they shall be construed as going to, meeting, or measured from, the center of the traveled way for roads and the center of the water for bodies of water, unless otherwise indicated. (Such as the I-89 Right of Way.)



300.1	RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R1) - ENFIELD VILLAGE – MASCOMA LAKE


1.	Beginning, at the Enfield/Lebanon/Hanover/Canaan Town Line corner monument;

2.	thence, southeasterly along the Enfield/Canaan Town Line, to the Mascoma River;

3.	thence, southerly along the Mascoma River, to Webster Brook;

4.	thence, southerly along Webster Brook, to where it meets Lockehaven Road;

5.	thence, westerly along Lockehaven Road, to where it meets Shaker Hill Road;

6.	thence, southeasterly along Shaker Hill Road, to where it meets Fuller Road;

7.	thence, westerly along Fuller Road, to where it meets Shaker Boulevard;

8.	thence, westerly along Shaker Boulevard, to where it meets Route 4A;

9.	thence, southwesterly along a line from Shaker Boulevard, to where it meets the closest Conservation District 900 foot MSL contour line;

10.	thence, northwesterly along the Conservation District 900 foot MSL contour line, to where it meets the Enfield/Lebanon Town Line;

11.	thence, northeasterly along the Enfield/Lebanon Town Line, to the point of beginning.

The Community Business District (CB) is excluded from the above Residential District (R1) boundary description.
 



300.2	RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R1) - ENFIELD CENTER - ROUTE 4A


1.	Beginning at a point, located on Shaker Hill Road, that is 700 feet northeasterly from  Route 4A;

2.	thence, southeasterly along a line located 700 feet to the east of Route 4A, to where it meets King James Road;

3.	thence, southerly along King James Road, for a distance of 350 feet;

4.	thence, easterly along a line located 350 feet to the north of Route 4A, to a line that runs perpendicular through the center of the intersection of Route 4A and Grafton Pond Road;

5.	thence, southerly along said line for a distance of 700 feet;

6.	thence, westerly along a line located 350 feet to the south of Route 4A, to where it meets Bog Road;

7.	thence, southerly along Bog Road, to where it meets the Enfield New Hampshire Wildlife Management Area property line;

8.	thence, westerly along the Enfield New Hampshire Wildlife Management Area property line, to where it meets the Enfield Conservation District boundary line;

9.	thence, westerly along the Enfield Conservation District 1,100 MSL contour line to where it meets Goodhue Hill Road;

10.	thence, northeasterly along Goodhue Hill Road, to where it meets with the 900 foot MSL contour line;

11.	thence, northwesterly along the 900 foot MSL contour line to a point where a line drawn from Shaker Hill Road, intersects with the Enfield Conservation District 900 foot MSL contour line;

12.	thence, northeasterly along said line, to the point of beginning.




301	RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R3)


1.	Beginning, at the intersection of the Mascoma River and the Enfield/Canaan Town Line;
 


2.	thence, southeasterly along the Enfield/Canaan Town Line, to where it meets Mud Pond Road;

3.	thence, southerly along Mud Pond Road, to where it meets Lockehaven Road;

4.	thence, easterly along Lockehaven Road, to where it meets Boys Camp Road;

5.	thence, southerly along Boys Camp Road, to a point located 350 feet to the north of Route 4A;

6.	thence, westerly along a line located 350 feet to the north of the Route 4A, to where it meets King James Road;

7.	thence, northerly along King James Road, for a distance of 350 feet;

8.	thence, northwesterly along a line located 700 feet to the north of Route 4A, to where it meets Shaker Hill Road;

9.	thence, southerly along Shaker Hill Road to where it meets Route 4A;

10.	thence, southerly along a line drawn from Shaker Hill Road, to the closest Enfield Conservation District 900 foot MSL contour line;

11.	thence, northwesterly along the Enfield Conservation District 900 foot MSL contour line, to a point where it meets with a line extended from Shaker Boulevard, to the closest Enfield Conservation District 900 foot MSL contour line;

12.	thence, northeasterly along said line to Shaker Boulevard;

13.	thence, northeasterly along Shaker Boulevard, to where it meets Fuller Road;

14.	thence, easterly along Fuller Road, to where it meets Shaker Hill Road;

15.	thence, northerly along Shaker Hill Road, to where it meets Lockehaven Road;

16.	thence, easterly along Lockehaven Road, to where it meets Webster Brook;

17.	thence, northerly along Webster Brook, to where it meets the Mascoma River;

18.	thence, northerly along the Mascoma River, to the point of beginning.
 


302	COMMUNITY BUSINESS DISTRICT (CB) Revised March 12, 2013


1.	Beginning at a point, located on Oak Grove Street, that is 350 feet southwesterly from  Route 4;

2.	thence, westerly along a line parallel to Route 4 and at a distance of 350 feet from Route 4, for a distance of 2,300 feet;

3.	thence, northerly along a line perpendicular to and crossing Route 4, for a distance of 700 feet;

4.	thence, easterly along a line parallel to Route 4, and at a distance of 350 feet from Route 4, to where it meets Flanders Street;

5.	thence, northerly along Flanders Street, to a point 400 feet from Route 4;

6.	thence, easterly along a line parallel to Route 4, and at a distance of 400 feet from	Route 4, to a point located 500 feet easterly of Anderson Hill Road;

7.	thence, northeasterly along a line parallel to Anderson Hill Road, at a distance of 500 feet from Anderson Hill Road, to the Enfield/Canaan Town Line;

8.	thence, southeasterly along the Enfield/Canaan Town Line, to the intersection with the western boundary of Lot 14-69.

9.	thence, south along the western boundary of Lot 14-69 to the western boundary of Lot 36-1;

10.	thence, south along the western boundary of lot 36-1 to the intersection with US Route 4:

11.	thence across US Route 4 to the western boundary of lot 36-26;

12.	thence, south and east along the western and southern boundaries of lot 36-24;

13.	to the intersection with the centerline of the Northern New Hampshire Rail Trail;

14.	thence, westerly along the centerline of the Northern New Hampshire Rail Trail, to a point on a line extending from Oak Grove St, and perpendicular to Main St;

15.	thence, northerly along said line, to Oak Grove Street;

16.	thence, northerly along Oak Grove Street, to the point of beginning.
 



303.1	COMMERCIAL-INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (C/I) - EXIT 16 AREA


1.	Beginning at a point, located at the intersection of the I-89 right-of-way, and 50 feet west of Eastman Hill Road;

2.	thence, northeasterly along a line located 50 feet west of Eastman Hill Road, to a point where it meets with Furlow Lane;
3.	thence, westerly along Furlow Lane, to a point where it meets a straight line drawn from Furlow Lane to the Enfield/Lebanon Town Line;

4.	thence, westerly along said straight line, to the Enfield/Lebanon Town Line:

5.	thence, southwesterly along the Enfield/Lebanon Town Line, to the I-89 right-of- way;

6.	thence, southeasterly along the I-89 right-of-way, to the point of beginning.




303.2	COMMERCIAL-INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (C/I) – EXIT 15 AREA


1.	Beginning at a point, where Smith Pond Road meets with the I-89 right of way;

2.	Thence, easterly along Smith Pond Road, to the 1,420 foot MSL contour line;

3.	thence, northerly along the 1,420 foot MSL contour line, to where it meets with the AMCA property line;

4.	thence, westerly along the present (1988) AMCA property line lying outside of the Enfield Conservation District;

5.	thence, southerly along the I-89 right-of-way, to the point of beginning.




303.3	COMMERCIAL-INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (C/I) - EXIT 14 AREA


1.	Beginning at a point, where the I-89 right-of-way meets with the Enfield/Grantham
Town Line;
 


2.	thence, southeasterly along the Enfield/Grantham town Line, to the Enfield Conservation District 1,500 foot MSL contour line;

3.	thence, northwesterly along the Enfield Conservation District 1,500 foot MSL contour line, to a point where a line drawn from the Enfield Conservation District 1,500 foot MSL contour line, is closest to the I-89 right-of-way;

4.	thence, westerly along said line to the I-89 right-of-way;

5.	thence, southerly along the I-89 right-of-way to the point of beginning.

303.4	COMMERCIAL-INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (C/I) - OLD ROUTE 10 AREA


1.	Beginning at a point, where the Enfield/Lebanon Town Line meets with the I-89 right-of-way;

2.	thence, southeasterly along the I-89 right-of-way, to the Enfield/Grantham Town Line;

3.	thence, northwesterly along the Enfield/Grantham Town Line, for a distance of 1,000 feet;

4.	thence, northwesterly along a line 1,000 feet westerly of the I-89 right-of-way and paralleling the I-89 right-of-way, to the Enfield/Lebanon Town Line;

5.	thence, northeasterly along the Enfield/Lebanon Town Line, to the point of beginning.



303.5	COMMERCIAL-INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (C/I) - BALTIC MILL


The Old Baltic Mill is considered a pre-existing commercial/industrial facility which shall be allowed to continue.



303.6	TE 4 DISTRICT ( adopted  March 12, 2013)

1.	District bounded by the Enfield/Canaan Town Line on the north beginning at the intersection with the western boundary of Lot 14-69;

2.	thence, east along the Enfield/Canaan Town Line to the intersection with the centerline of the Northern New Hampshire Rail Trail;
 


3.	thence, westerly along the Northern New Hampshire Rail trail to the intersection with the southern boundary of lot 36-24;

4.	thence, north and west along the boundary of Lot 36-24 to the intersection with the southern boundary of lot 36-25;

5.	thence, west along the southern boundary then north along the west boundary of lot 36-25 to the intersection with US Route 4;

6.	thence, across US Route 4 to the intersection with the south end of the west boundary of Lot 36-1;

7.	thence, north along the west boundary of lot 36-1 to the south west intersection with the west boundary of lot 14-69;

8.  thence, north along the west boundary of lot 14-69 to the Enfield Canaan Town

304.1	ENFIELD CONSERVATION DISTRICT- ROUTE 4A - SOUTHEASTERLY SIDE


1.	Beginning at a point, where the 1,100 foot MSL contour line meets with Goodhue Hill Road;

2.	thence, southeasterly along the 1,100 foot MSL contour line, to where it meets with the most southern section of the Enfield/Grantham Town Line.

304.2	ENFIELD CONSERVATION DISTRICT- ROUTE 4A - NORTHWESTERLY SIDE


1.	Beginning at a point, where the 1,100 foot MSL contour line meets with Goodhue Hill Road;

2.	thence, northeasterly along Goodhue Hill Road, to where it meets with the 900 foot MSL contour line;

3.	thence, northwesterly along the 900 foot MSL contour line, to where it meets with the Enfield/Lebanon Town Line.



304.3	ENFIELD CONSERVATION DISTRICT - I-89 – SOUTHERLY SIDE
1.	Beginning at a point, where the 1,500 foot MSL contour line meets with Smith Pond Road;

2.	thence, southerly along the 1,500 foot MSL contour line, to where it meets with the Enfield/Grantham Town Line;
 



304.4	ENFIELD CONSERVATION DISTRICT - I-89 - NORTHWESTERLY SIDE


1.	Beginning at a point, where the 1,500 foot MSL contour line meets with Smith Pond Road;

2.	thence, westerly along Smith Pond Road, to where it meets with the 1,420 foot MSL contour line;

3.	thence, northwesterly along the 1,420 foot MSL contour line, to where it meets with the Enfield/Lebanon Town Line.

304.5	ENFIELD CONSERVATION DISTRICT - NORTHERLY SIDE


A.	Beginning at the most northwesterly point of the 1,420 foot MSL contour line, as described in the Enfield Conservation District - I-89 - Northwesterly Side;

B.	thence, northeasterly along the Enfield/Lebanon Town Line, to where it meets with the most northwesterly point of the 900 foot MSL contour line, as described in the Enfield Conservation District - Rt. 4A - Northwesterly Side.

304.6	ENFIELD CONSERVATION DISTRICT - SOUTHERLY SIDE


1.	Beginning at the most southerly point of the 1,500 foot MSL contour line, as described in the Enfield Conservation District - I-89 - Southerly Side;

2.	thence southeasterly along the Enfield/Grantham Town Line, to where it meets with the most southerly point of the 1,100 foot MSL contour line, as described in the Enfield Conservation District - Rt. 4A - Southeasterly Side.

305	RURAL RESIDENTIAL-AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT (R5)


All remaining areas of the Town of Enfield not previously included in the R1, R3, CB, C/I and Conservation Districts.
 


ARTICLE IV - REGULATION OF USES
(See also Subdivision and Site Plan Review Regulations)



400	APPLICATION


1.	The regulations set forth by this ordinance within each district shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure, land and land use. No building, structure, or land shall hereinafter be used or occupied and no buildings or structure or part thereof shall hereinafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered unless in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located.

2.	Lots crossed by Town Lines: When part of a lot in single or joint ownership lies outside the Town, the portion within the Town shall conform to the use regulation of the ordinance. In applying dimensional controls to that portion of the lot within the Town, the dimensions of the whole lot shall be considered without reference to the Town Line.



401	DISTRICTS OTHER THAN CONSERVATION DISTRICT



401.1	R1 DISTRICT


In the Residential District (R1) land may be used and buildings may be erected or altered for the following purposes only and subject to the following regulations and limitations:

A.	One-family, two-family and multi-family dwellings, and manufactured homes on individual lots.

B.	Cemeteries, churches and places of formal worship.

C.	Home occupations subject to the provisions of Section 404.

D.	The growing of grain, fodder, fruits, vegetables and ornamental plants.

E.	Produce stands for the sale of fruits, vegetables and ornamental plants, whether or not grown on the premises.

F.	Fairs run or sponsored only by local church, school, fraternal, youth or other civic organizations.
 


G.	Private yard sales and auctions.

H.	Growth and harvesting of forest products are permitted. This includes the clearing of land for a dwelling, bonafide agricultural, wildlife management, and silvicultural purposes and other uses permitted in the District and by special exception. (See Section 403.)

I.	Non-Commercial outdoor recreational activities such as hunting, fishing, hiking, cross-country skiing, snowmobiling and sailing groups.

J.	Accessory uses customarily incidental to A through I of this section, including accessory dwelling units.

K.	Minimum lot size shall be one (1) acre except for dwellings, in which minimum lot size shall be one (1) acre per dwelling unit with on-lot water and sewer supply, but may be one-half acre lot size for a dwelling where municipal water and sewer are used.

L.	No structure shall be located nearer than twenty (20) feet from any edge of a lot line contiguous to a street or fifteen (15) feet from any other lot boundary or shall be higher than 35 feet or two stories. This provision shall not apply to conventional television antennas, lightning rods, cupolas, steeples, or chimneys. An exception to the 20-foot setback may be granted only where a new dwelling is constructed beside or between two dwellings with modest pre-zoning front setback. Here the minimum setback may be reduced to within the five (5) feet of the average setback.

M.	No structure shall be placed, located, or constructed within fifty feet from the seasonal high water line of any river, stream, wetland, lake or public pond, and no dock may be located nearer than 25 feet from a side lot line.  Dry hydrants, culverts and bridges may be permitted by Planning Board and with State permits as required.

N.	At least two (2) on-lot parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit of three bedrooms or less and one (1) additional parking space for each additional bedroom. Each individual open-air parking space shall be at least ten (10) feet wide and twenty (20) feet long.

O.	Multi-family dwellings consisting of three (3) or more dwelling units require Site Plan approval by the Planning Board.

P.	The width of any lot shall be a minimum of 75 feet at the public right-of-way and a minimum of 100 feet at the front of the proposed building.

Q.	Cluster development is permitted as per Section 405.
 


S.	A recreational vehicle, such as a motor home or camper, may be permitted on a lot, with an existing dwelling unit, so long as it is not used for occupancy or as a dwelling in excess of three weeks in a calendar year.

T.	A recreational vehicle such as a motor home or camper, may be permitted on a lot without an existing dwelling unit, so long as sewage and gray water disposal is in accordance with State law.  Occupancy shall be limited to six months in a calendar year.

U.	No lot shall have more than one dwelling or principal building.




401.2	R3 DISTRICT


In the R3 District, land may be used and buildings may be erected or altered for the following purposes only and subject to the following regulations and limitations:

A.	One-family, two-family, multi-family dwellings, and manufactured homes on individual lots.

B.	Cemeteries, churches and places of formal worship.

C.	Home occupations subject to the provisions of Section 404.

D.	The growing of grain, fodder, fruits, vegetables and ornamental plants.

E.	Produce stands for the sale of fruits, vegetables and ornamental plants whether or not grown on the premises.

F.	Fairs run or sponsored only by local church, school, fraternal, youth or other civic organizations.

G.	Private yard sales and auctions.

H.	Growth and harvesting of forest products are permitted. This includes the clearing of land for a dwelling, bona fide agricultural, wildlife management, and silvicultural purposes and the other uses permitted in this District and by special exception.  (See Section 403.)

I.	Non-commercial outdoor recreational activities such as hunting, fishing, hiking, cross-country skiing and snowmobiling.

J.	Accessory uses customarily incidental to A through I of this section, including accessory dwelling units.

L.	No structure shall be located nearer than thirty (30) feet from any edge of the lot line contiguous to the street or twenty (20) feet from any other lot boundary, or shall be higher than 35 feet or 2 and one-half stories; however, this provision shall not apply to conventional television antennas, lightning rods, cupolas, steeples or chimneys.

M.	No structure shall be placed, located or constructed within fifty feet from the seasonal high water line of any river, stream, wetland, lake or public pond, and no dock may be located nearer than 25 feet from a side lot line. Dry hydrants, culverts and bridges may be permitted by Planning Board and with State permits as required.


N.	At least two (2) on-lot parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit with three (3) bedrooms or less and one (1) additional parking space for each additional bedroom. Each individual open-air parking space shall be at least ten
(10) feet wide and twenty (20) feet long.

O.	No lot shall have more than one dwelling or principal building.

K.	Minimum lot size shall be three (3) acres 

P.	The width of any lot shall be a minimum of 100 feet at the public right-of-way and a minimum of 150 feet at the front of the proposed building. A Special Exception to this requirement may be granted, where soil and slope conditions permit, for counter-balancing considerations such as preservation of wetlands, natural features, open space and habitat such as deer yards.

Q.	Cluster development is permitted per Section 405.

S.	A recreational vehicle such as a motor home or camper may be permitted on a lot, with an existing dwelling unit, so long as it is not used for occupancy or as a dwelling in excess of three weeks in a calendar year.

T.	A recreational vehicle such as a motor home or camper may be permitted on a lot without an existing dwelling unit, so long as sewage and gray water disposal is in accordance with State law.  Occupancy shall be limited to six months in a calendar year.

U.	Agriculture, including farm animals and other generally accepted land uses for farm purposes.

V.	Riding stables and non-commercial equestrian activities.
 



401.3	R5 DISTRICT


The general purpose of the Rural Residential-Agricultural District (R5) is to maintain a low density rural character primarily as a district of farms, residences and woodlands where the natural conditions of the area are maintained.

In the Rural Residential-Agricultural District (R5), land may be used and buildings may be erected or altered for the following purposes only and subject to the following regulations and limitations:

A.	One-family dwellings including manufactured homes on individual lots.

B.	Cemeteries, churches and places of formal worship.

C.	Home occupations subject to the provisions of Section 404.

D.	The growing of grain, fodder, fruits, vegetables and ornamental plants.

E.	Produce stands for the sale of fruits, vegetables and ornamental plants, whether or not grown on the premises.

F.	Fairs run or sponsored only by local church, school, fraternal, youth or other civic organizations.

G.	Private yard sales and auctions.

H.	Growth and harvesting of forest products is permitted. This includes the clearing of land for a structure, bona fide agricultural, wildlife management, and silvicultural purposes, and other uses permitted in the District and by special exceptions. (See Section 403.)

I.	Non-commercial outdoor recreational activities such as hunting, fishing, hiking, cross-country skiing and snowmobiling.

J.	Accessory uses customarily incidental to A through I of this section, including accessory dwelling units.



K.	Minimum lot size shall be five (5) acres except for dwellings, in which case minimum lot size shall be five (5) acres per dwelling unit [i.e. one (1) dwelling unit
= five (5) acres, two (2) dwelling units = ten (10) acres].

L.	No structure shall be located nearer than thirty (30) feet from any edge of the lot line contiguous to the street or twenty (20) feet from any lot boundary or shall be
 

higher than 35 feet or 2 and one-half stories; however, this provision shall not apply to conventional television antennas, lightning rods, cupolas, church steeples, chimneys, and silos.

M.	No structure shall be placed, located, or constructed within fifty feet from the seasonal high water line of any river, stream, wetland, lake or public pond, and no dock may be located nearer than 25 feet from a side lot line.  Dry hydrants, culverts and bridges may be permitted by Planning Board and with State wetland permits as required.

N.	At least two (2) on-lot parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit with three bedrooms or less and one (1) additional parking space for each additional bedroom. Each individual open-air parking space shall be at least ten
(10) feet wide and twenty (20) feet long.

O.	No lot shall have more than one dwelling or principal building.

P.	The width of any lot shall be a minimum of 250 feet at the public right-of-way and minimum of 250 feet at the front of the proposed building.  A Special Exception to this requirement may be granted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment (where soil and slope conditions permit) for counter-balancing considerations such as preservation of wetlands, natural features, open space and habitat such as deer yards.

Q.	Cluster development is permitted as per Section 405.

S.	A recreational vehicle such as a motor home and camper may be permitted on a lot with an existing dwelling unit, so long as it is not used for occupancy or as a dwelling in excess of three weeks in a calendar year.

T.	A recreational vehicle such as a motor home or camper may be permitted on a lot without an existing dwelling unit so long as sewage and gray water disposal is in accordance with state law.  Occupancy shall be limited to six months per year.
U.	Agriculture, including farm animals and other generally accepted land uses for farm purposes.

V.	Riding stables and non-commercial equestrian activities.




401.4	COMMUNITY BUSINESS DISTRICT (CB)


In the Community Business District land may be used and buildings may be erected or altered for the following purposes only and subject to the following regulations and limitations:
 

A.	One-family, two-family dwellings, accessory dwelling units and manufactured homes on individual lots.

B.	Cemeteries, churches and places of formal worship.

C.	Home occupations subject to the provisions of Section 404.

D.	The growing of grain, fodder, fruits, vegetables and ornamental plants.

E.	Produce stands for the sale of fruits, vegetables and ornamental plants whether or not grown on the premises.

F.	Fairs run or sponsored only by local church, school, fraternal, youth or other civic organizations.

G.	Private yard sales and auctions.

H.	Professional or business offices.

I.	Non-commercial outdoor recreational activities such as hunting, fishing, hiking, cross-country skiing and snowmobiling.

J.	Retail stores, shopping centers and service establishments, including banks, restaurants, and auto service stations.

K.	Public and private schools.

L.	Public buildings, utility stations and other essential service facilities.

M.	Motels, Marinas.

N.	Minimum lot size shall be one (1) acre for buildings with on-lot water and sewer supply but may be a minimum one-half acre lot size for a commercial building where community or municipal water and sewer are used.

O.	Growth and harvesting of forest products is permitted. This includes the clearing of land for a dwelling or bona fide agricultural, wildlife management, and silvicultural purposes and other uses permitted in the District and by special exception. (See Section 403.)

P.	No structure shall be located nearer than thirty (30) feet from any lot line contiguous to the street or twenty (20) feet from any other lot boundary, or shall be higher than 35 feet or two and one-half stories.

Q.	No structure shall be placed, located, or constructed within fifty feet from the seasonal high water line of any river, stream, wetland, lake, or public pond, and
 

no dock may be located nearer than 25 feet from a side lot line.  Dry hydrants, culverts and bridges may be permitted by Planning Board and with State permits as required.

R.	In the Community Business District parking areas will as a minimum conform to Section 409.

S.	Site Plan approval by the Planning Board must be obtained for any commercial or business use, alteration or conversion to another commercial or business use.

T.	Educational facilities and museums

U.	Bus stop shelters.

V.	Within the downtown area, defined as those properties abutting Main Street and Blacksmith Alley and between High and Oak Grove Streets, lot size, development and the placement of non-residential and mixed-use structures are exempted from dimensional (with the exception of building height), and parking requirements. The use of all floors of all structures directly accessible to grade, except areas used to access upper floors, shall be nonresidential, except by special exception. Parking may be leased or owned, on or off site. Planning Board site plan approval is not exempted.




401.5	COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL (C/I) DISTRICT


Purpose

The purpose of the C/I District is to concentrate commercial and industrial growth in those areas which can best serve the overall interest of the community.

1.	Permitted Uses

In the C/I District, land may be used and buildings may be erected or altered for the following purposes only and subject to the following regulations and limitations:

A.	Professional or business offices.

B.	Retail stores, shopping centers and service establishments, including banks and auto service stations.

C.	Commercial recreational uses, including ski facilities.

D.	Non-commercial outdoor recreational activities such as hunting, fishing, hiking, cross-country skiing and snowmobiling.
 


E.	Offices, publishing houses, research and testing laboratories, contractor's yard.

F.	Sales, service, repair or storage businesses.

G.	Commercial greenhouses.

H.	Private yard sales and auctions.

I.	Restaurants and eating places.

J.	Essential public service facilities.

K.	Funeral homes.

L.	Cluster Development.

M.	Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above.

N.	Automotive uses (such as service stations, repair garages and car washes)

O.	Assembly and packaging facilities

P.	Bus stop shelters.



2.	Use Restrictions

In the C/I District, all uses must at all times comply with any and all decisions of the Zoning Board of Adjustment and the Planning Board and with the following restrictions:

A.	All operations are to be conducted in such a manner that all resulting dust, cinders, fumes, odors, smoke and vapor are effectively confined to the premises or disposed of so as to prevent any air or ground pollution.

B.	The activity conducted shall not pollute adjacent wetlands, streams, lakes, aquifers or other bodies of water.

C.	That on-site activities shall not be detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare.

D.	That the use shall not create a hazardous traffic condition on adjacent right-of-way or highways or impose destructive loads on said travel ways.
 

E.	That all lighting be indirect and shielded from adjoining property.  No light shall be allowed to directly illuminate the night by being focused upward onto a building or high free-standing sign.

F.	Minimum lot size shall be two (2) acres.

G.	No structure shall be located nearer than fifty (50) feet from any lot line contiguous to the street or twenty-five (25) feet from any lot boundary or shall be higher than thirty-five (35) feet. No structure shall be placed, located, or constructed within fifty feet from the seasonal high water line of any river, stream, wetland, lake, or public pond.  Dry hydrants, culverts and bridges may be permitted at Planning Board discretion and with State wetland permit as required.

H.	The coverage of each lot used for Commercial/Industrial purposes, including buildings and parking areas, drives and any impervious surfaces shall not exceed 50 percent of the net developable land, and twenty-five (25) feet green space or landscaped area shall be reserved along lot boundaries.

I.	Site Plan approval by the Planning Board must be obtained for any commercial or business use, alteration or conversion to another commercial or business use.




401.6 ROUTE 4 DISTRICT


401.6	Route 4 District Purpose:
The Route 4 District is intended to promote compact, mixed-use, walkable development supported by the availability of public water and sewer infrastructure, and characterized by: high-quality, multi-story buildings designed to be compatible with traditional New England architecture; a multi-modal, interconnected transportation network, including safe routes for pedestrians, bicyclists and other trail users, and front yards dominated by landscaped green space rather than parking. The following standards shall apply to all future development within the Route 4 District.

A.	Lots and Uses

Lots in the Route 4 District shall comply with the following requirements:

Lot Requirements
Road Frontage	100 ft. (minimum)
Lot Size	15,000 SF (minimum)
Impervious Surface Coverage	70% (maximum)
Residential Density	12 dwelling units per acre (maximum)
 

Allowed uses in the Route 4 District shall be limited to:

By-Right Uses
Retail Trade	Upper-floor Residential
Retail Service	Ground-floor Residential(2)
Office	Food Service
Light Industry(1)	Lodging
Research and Development(1)	Entertainment and Recreation
Roof and ground mounted community net
metered solar arrays located 100 or more feet from Route 4	
Special Exceptions
•	Buildings or lots developed solely for residential use less than 600 feet from Route 4.
•	Any by-right use occurring primarily outside an enclosed building.
•	Roof and ground mounted community net metered solar arrays(3)
Notes
(1) Shall be located 400 or more feet from Route 4. (2) Shall be located 600 or more feet from Route 4. (3) Shall be located 100 or more feet from Route 4 by right.

•	A recreational vehicle, such as a motor home or camper, may be permitted on a lot, with an existing dwelling unit, so long as it is not used for occupancy or as a dwelling in excess of three weeks in a calendar year.

•	A recreational vehicle such as a motor home or camper, may be permitted on a lot without an existing dwelling unit, so long as sewage and gray water disposal is in accordance with State law.  Occupancy shall be limited to six months in a calendar year.
 


B.	Building Placement Along Route 4

Buildings on lots with frontage on Route 4 shall be placed in compliance with the following requirements:

Principal Building Setback
from Lot Lines
Front Setback (<2
story building)	25 ft. (min)-
55 ft. (max)	A
Front Setback (2+ story building)	25 ft. (min)-
80 ft. (max)	B
Side Setback	0 ft. or 15 ft.
(min) (1)	C
Rear Setback	20 ft. (min)	D
Accessory Building Setback
from Lot Lines
Front Setback	85 ft. (min)
Side and Rear
Setback	15 ft. (min)
Distance Between Buildings
Between Principal Buildings	0 ft. or 25 ft.
(min) (1)
Between All Other
Buildings	15 ft. (min)
Notes
(1) Attached buildings may be approved
with no side setback or space between buildings.
C.  Building Placement Along Streets Other than Route 4

Buildings on lots fronting streets other than Route 4 shall be placed in compliance with the following requirements:
Principal Building Setback from Lot Lines
Front Setback	30 feet (min)
Side Setback	0 feet or 20 feet (min) (1)
Rear Setback	20 feet (min)
Accessory Building Setback from Lot Lines
Front Setback	35 feet (min)
Side and Rear Setback	20 feet (min)
Distance Between Buildings
Between Principal Buildings	0 feet or 30 feet (min) (1)
Between All Other Buildings	20 feet (min)
Notes
(1) Attached buildings may be approved with no side setback or space between buildings.
 


D.	Building Form

Buildings in the Route 4 District shall comply with the following requirements:

Principal Building(1)
Building Height	16 ft. (min)-32
ft. (max)	A
Ground Floor-to- Ceiling Height(2)	12 ft. (min)-24
ft. (max)	B
Upper Floor-to-
Ceiling Height	8 ft. (min)-16
ft. (max)	C
Building Footprint	40,000 SF (max)
Notes
(1) Buildings with a footprint of less than 10,000 SF shall be designed with pitched
roofs. Buildings with a footprint of 10,000 SF or greater may be designed with flat roofs, but shall provide a parapet at least 3 feet in height. The design of parapets shall be reviewed by the Enfield Fire Department. Flat-roofed buildings shall incorporate pitched-roof architectural elements such as enclosed entrances, porches, arcades or awnings along street-facing facades.
(2) The minimum ground-floor-to-ceiling
height may be 8 feet for solely residential buildings.

Accessory Buildings
Building Height	24 feet (maximum)	A
Building Footprint	10,000 SF (maximum)
Architectural Encroachment Beyond Setback
Eaves, balconies, chimneys	3 feet (maximum)	D
Porches, awnings, arcades(1)	10 feet (maximum)	E
Notes
(1) Applies only to front setback.
 

E.	Principal Building Facades

The street facing-facades of principal buildings shall comply with the following requirements:



Principal Building Facades
Bay Width	24 ft. (min)-64 ft.
(max)	A
Depth Change
Between Bays	4 ft. (min)	B
Ground Floor Blank Wall Width	16 ft. (max)	C
Upper Floor Blank
Wall Width	32 ft. (max)	D
Ground Floor
Fenestration	40% (min)-80%
(max)
Upper Floor
Fenestration	20% (min)-60%
(max)


F.	Pedestrian Access

Pedestrian access shall comply with the following requirements:

1.	Sidewalks shall be provided along all road frontage. For lots fronting Route 4, the sidewalk may be located on the interior side of the front planting area.
2.	Sidewalks shall be provided from the road sidewalk to the public entrances of principal buildings and between principal buildings on a lot.
3.	Pedestrian access shall be provided from parking areas to the public entrances of principal buildings. The Planning Board may require provision of pedestrian ways within parking areas to enhance pedestrian safety.
4.	Crosswalks shall be provided where pedestrians are directed to cross vehicular travel lanes, and shall incorporate accessibility features.
5.	Lots abutting the Northern Rail Trail shall provide pedestrian access from the trail to the public entrances of principal buildings unless the Planning Board finds that natural constraints make access infeasible.
6.	Pedestrian access shall be provided between adjoining lots unless the Planning Board finds that natural constraints make access infeasible.
7.	Pedestrian access may be located within setbacks, but shall not be located within the front planning area.
 

G.	Location of Parking

In addition to the requirements of Section 409, parking shall be primarily located to the side and rear of principal buildings and shall comply with the following requirements:

Location of Parking(2)(3)
Between Principal
Building and Route 4	2 rows
(max)	A
Setback from Property Line(1)	0 or 10 ft. (min)	B
Notes
(1)	Shared parking or access located on
or across side or rear lot lines may be approved.
(2)	No parking shall occur within the front planting area. (C)
(3)	Vehicular access shall be provided between adjoining lots unless the Planning Board finds that natural constraints make the connection infeasible. This vehicular access shall be considered internal site circulation, not a street subject to dimensional and setback requirements. (D)

H.	Landscaping Landscaping shall comply with the following requirements:



Landscaping Along Frontages(1)(2)
A planting area at least 10 feet deep shall be
established along all front lot lines, excluding areas used for access. The planting area shall be landscaped as specified below:
Shade
Trees	1 per 50 feet of frontage (min)
Small
Trees	1 per 30 feet of frontage (min)
Shrubs	1 per 20 feet of frontage (min)
Notes
(1) Plants may be clustered and do not have to be evenly distributed within the planting
area.
(2) Existing vegetation to be retained may be
counted towards landscaping requirements.
 

Landscaping in Parking Areas(1)(2)(3)
Parking lot landscaping shall consist of:
Shade Trees	1 per 8 spaces (minimum)
Small Trees	1 per 6 spaces (minimum)
Shrubs	1 per 4 spaces (minimum)
Notes
(1) Landscaping shall be located at each end of and within parking rows so that no row of
parking exceeds 15 contiguous spaces.
(2) Landscaped areas (strips and islands) shall be at least 180 SF in area and shall not
measure less than 5 feet in any dimension.
(3) Use of Low-impact development (LID) approaches to stormwater management within
surface parking lots is encouraged and landscaped areas may be used to collect and infiltrate runoff.

Landscaping Buffers from Residential Development
Where a non-residential use will abut a residential lot or zone, a vegetated buffer at least 25 feet deep shall be established or retained to maintain residents’ visual privacy and quality of life.

Planting and Maintenance(1)
Required landscaping shall meet the following size requirements when planted:
Shade Trees	2 inch caliper or 8 feet high (minimum)
Small Trees	1 inch caliper or 5 feet high (minimum)
Shrubs	1 gallon size (minimum)
Notes
(1) Required landscaping shall be maintained. Dead, dying, damaged, or removed plants
shall be replaced in a timely manner (no later than the next growing season).
“Shade Trees” are defined as a tree with a mature height of at least 30 feet.
“Small Trees” are defined as a tree with a mature height of at least 15 feet.


I.	Signs

In addition to the requirements of Section 408, signs shall comply with the following requirements (where these standards conflict with Section 408, the standards below shall govern):

Sign Setbacks
Front Setback (signs may be located in planting area)	2 feet (minimum)
Side and Rear Setback	10 feet (minimum)

1.	One freestanding sign, not to exceed 32 SF in area and 16 feet in height to the top of the sign, may be allowed per road entrance. Multiple uses accessed via the same entrance shall not erect separate signs, but may erect a directory sign.
 

2.	Freestanding directory signs for multiple lots or uses may be located within 15 feet of shared road entrances. The maximum sign area may be increased by 8 SF for each lot or use listed on the sign.
3.	One freestanding sign, not to exceed 12 SF in area and 6 feet in height may be allowed per Northern Rail Trail entrance. Multiple uses accessed via the same entrance shall not erect separate signs, but may erect shared sign. The maximum sign area may be increased by 4 SF for each use listed on the sign.
4.	One wall sign or hanging sign per façade facing a street or customer parking area, not to exceed 1 SF x the width of the wall the sign will be mounted on or hanging from, may be allowed for each use.
5.	One pedestrian-oriented portable sign placed on or adjacent to a sidewalk advertising daily specials or sales, not to exceed 8 SF in area and 4 feet in height, may be allowed for each use. These pedestrian-oriented portable signs shall not require a sign permit. The sign shall be taken in when the business is closed and
shall be located on the same lot as the business.



J.	Natural Resource Protection Requirements

1.	No structure shall be placed, located, or constructed within fifty (50) feet from the seasonal high water line of any river, stream, wetland, lake, or public pond, and no dock may be located nearera side lot line  than the distance permitted for building setbacks in the Zoning District the property is located in.. Dry hydrants, culverts, and bridges may be permitted by the Planning Board and with State permits as required.
2.	No structure shall be placed, located, or constructed within four hundred (400) feet from a wellhead associated with the Town of Enfield drinking water supply.
 

402	CONSERVATION DISTRICT (C)


In the Conservation District land may be used and buildings may be erected or altered for the following purposes only and subject to the following regulations and limitations. Within the Conservation District the topographic information and data required for subdivision approval by the State of New Hampshire Water Supply and Pollution Control Commission (WS&PCC) shall be recorded in actual elevation above mean sea level (MSL), and said data shall be submitted to the Zoning Board of Adjustment in duplicate for purposes of record.

A.	Forestry: Growth and harvesting of forest products (not to include the clear cutting of timber);

B.	Agriculture, including farm animals and other generally accepted land uses for farm purposes;

C.	Single family dwellings and accessory dwelling units.

D.	Cluster development is permitted as per Section 405.

E.	Water supply.

F.	Non-commercial recreation activities such as hunting, fishing, hiking, cross-country skiing and snowmobiling.

G.	Private yard sales and auctions.

H.	Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above uses and not detrimental to the neighborhood to include the construction of access roads and buildings other than dwellings.

I.	A recreational vehicle such as a motor home or camper may be permitted on a lot, with an existing dwelling unit, so long as it is not used for occupancy or as a dwelling in excess of three weeks in a calendar year.

J.	A recreational vehicle such as a motor home or camper may be permitted on a lot without an existing dwelling unit, so long as sewage and gray water disposal is in accordance with State law.  Occupancy shall be limited to six months in a calendar year.

K.	Dwellings shall be limited to a density of one dwelling unit to ten acres of land and no structure shall be constructed within 300 feet of an existing river, stream, wetland, lake or public pond.
 

L.	Electric, telephone and cable television distribution systems shall be underground including services to residents and to street lights.

M.	No structure shall be located nearer than seventy-five (75) feet from any lot line contiguous to the street or fifty (50) feet from any other lot boundary or shall be higher than twenty-five (25) feet or two (2) stories.

N.	In the Eastman Subdivision as shown by Tax Map 51, existing lots 1-127, no structure shall be located nearer than twenty (20) feet from any edge of a lot line contiguous to a street or fifteen (15) feet from any other lot boundary or higher than 35 feet or two and one-half stories.

O.	In the Eastman District no structure shall be constructed within 50 feet of an existing river, stream, wetland, lake or public pond.



403	SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS


The Zoning Board of Adjustment, upon application and after public hearing, shall have the power to permit the following special exceptions in accordance with the restrictions contained in Sections 401 and 402 of Article IV.



1.	R1 DISTRICT


A.	Public and private schools
B.	Public buildings, utility stations and other essential services
C.	Antique Shops
D.	Bed and breakfasts
E.	Restaurants
F.	Home occupation in an existing accessory building
G.	Agricultural, including farm animals and other generally accepted land uses for farm purposes
H.	Day care centers
I.	Professional offices
J.	Recreational facilities
K.	Educational facilities and museums
L.	Bus stop shelters
M.	Clustered manufactured housing.
a.	Wireless Towers
b.	Artisan Workshop
 

2.	R3 DISTRICT


A.	Public and private schools
B.	Public buildings, utility stations and other essential services
C.	Antiques shops
D.	Bed and breakfasts
E.	Home occupation in an existing accessory building
F.	Sand and gravel pits
G.	Day care centers
H.	Professional offices
I.	Recreational facilities
J.	Educational facilities and museums
K.	Bus stop shelters
L.	Clustered manufactured housing
M.	Commercial equestrian facilities
N.	Wireless Towers
O.	Estates
P.	Roof and ground mounted community net metered solar arrays


3.	R5 DISTRICT


A.	Public and private school
B.	Public buildings, utility stations and other essential services
C.	Seasonal recreation camps and camp grounds
D.	Saw mills
E.	Antique Shops
F.	Bed and breakfasts
G.	Home occupation in an existing accessory building
H.	Boarding and/or breeding kennels
I.	Two-family dwelling
J.	Sand and gravel pits
K.	Day care centers
L.	Professional offices
M.	Recreational facilities
N.	Educational facilities and museums
O.	Bus stop shelters
P.	Commercial equestrian activities
Q.	Clustered manufactured housing
R.	Wireless Towers
S.	Estates
T.	Aircraft Landing Strips
U.	Accessory Apartment
V.	Roof and ground mounted community net metered solar arrays
 

4.	CB DISTRICT


A.	Wholesale business
B.	Day care centers
C.	Recreational facilities
D.	Commercial recreational facilities.
E.	Parking as described in Section 409.13.
F.	Wireless Towers
G.	Multi-family dwellings
H.	Aircraft Landing Strips
I.	Roof and ground mounted community net metered solar arrays
J.	Kennels

5.	C/I DISTRICT


A.	One-family dwelling, including manufactured homes.
B.	Warehouse and distribution centers
C.	Restaurants with entertainment or night club facilities
D.	Manufacturing and processing facilities
E.	Sand and gravel pits
F.	Motels
G.	Boarding and/or breeding kennels.
H.	Wireless Towers
I.	Aircraft Landing Strips
J.	Roof and ground mounted community net metered solar arrays

6.	ROUTE 4 DISTRICT


A.	Buildings or Lots developed solely for residential use less than 600 feet from Route 4
B.	Any by right use occurring primarily outside an enclosed building
C.	Roof and ground mounted community net metered solar arrays
D.	Kennels


7.	C DISTRICT

A.	Construction of buildings for non-dwelling purposes
B.	Construction of roads not reasonably related to forestry, agricultural or residential use
C.	Bus Stop Shelters
D.	Golf Courses with a minimum of 100 acres and no commercial structures above the 1600-foot elevation mark.
E.	Estates
 

The above Special Exceptions may be permitted, however, only if the Zoning Board of Adjustment makes all of the following findings of fact:

A.	The proposed site is found to be an appropriate location for such use.

B.	The proposed use will not adversely affect property values or improvements in the adjacent area.

C.	Appropriate and adequate facilities will be provided for the proper operation of the proposed use.

D.	The proposed use will comply with the applicable regulations of the District in which it is to be located.


404	HOME OCCUPATION


An accessory use conducted entirely within a dwelling, or as may be permitted by special exception in an existing accessory building that is incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes, and does not change the residential character thereof, or of a neighborhood, which does not result in levels of noise, odor, or traffic which would disturb the reasonable enjoyment of properties in the area, which does not involve the storage or display of goods and equipment visible from Town or State roads, or from other properties, and which will not create a safety hazard to the public.

A home occupation may be permitted in a residential district only if it is customary and incidental to the use of the premises as a dwelling, and is subordinate to the residential use of the property.  Activities such as baby-sitting, dressmaking, hairdressing, tutoring, professional offices and artistic endeavors, such as painting or pottery studio are valid home occupations. There shall be no more than one employee not living in the dwelling.

A home occupation shall provide additional off-street parking area reasonably adequate to accommodate the needs created by the home occupation.  Such occupation shall involve no advertising visible from the right-of-way except one identification sign not to exceed five (5) square feet in area.
 

405	OPEN SPACE /CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT

In order to preserve open spaces, particularly forestland, natural habitats, wetlands and scenic views, for the enjoyment of the general public, a residential subdivision of a parcel of land may cluster the dwelling units on lots of reduced dimensions for the purposes of preserving fifty percent [50%] of the gross buildable land as Common Open Space. This Common Open Space is not be developed, subdivided, or any structure placed thereon, and must be permanently reserved as common land to be held by a mandatory Home Owner’s Association and so registered at the Grafton county Registry of Deeds, before Planning Board approval is given and construction is permitted.



405.1	STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS FOR CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT


Tract Area: A cluster development tract shall be at least ten [10] acres.

A.	Permitted Uses and Mix: Cluster development shall be restricted to one- family, dwellings.

B.	General Provisions:

1.	Any proposed development of ten [10] or more dwelling units (as opposed to building lots) shall conform to the standards and regulations for a Cluster Development. An exception to this requirement may be granted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment, to allow for conventional lot sizes permitted for in the district in which the proposed subdivision would occur, if the developer can demonstrate that the intent of Section 405, which is to maintain fifty percent [50%] or more of the gross buildable land as permanent open space and preserves special places, is not violated.

2.	Lot dimensions and set back requirements for a Cluster Development may be reduced by up to fifty five percent [55%] of that required for a conventional lot in the appropriate district allowing cluster development.

3.	Common land areas and improvements thereon, shall be held, managed, and maintained by the developer until owned and controlled by the "Mandatory Homeowners' Association.”

4.	Two plans may be required by the Planning Board when a request for a Cluster Development of less than ten [10] dwelling units is presented. One plan shall show how the land could be best developed following the zoning guidelines for the district in which the cluster subdivision is proposed. The second plan shall show how the proposed Cluster Development would be sited on the same tract of land. The first plan
 

may be rejected by the Planning Board for its comparison if the plan appears so contrived so as to make the proposed cluster development the best choice.

5.	Individual lots, buildings, streets and parking areas shall be designated on the plans and so situated as to: minimize alteration of the site features to be preserved; to lessen the area devoted to motor vehicle access; to avoid adverse effects of noise, shadows and traffic; and to retain aesthetic qualities.

6.	All utilities serving the development shall be placed underground. This requirement may be waived for lengthy entrance roads that are visually separated from the cluster housing units.

7.	A timetable for completion of the Cluster Development shall be established and provisions made to indemnify the occupants of the development and/or Town of Enfield if the Cluster Development is not completed. Such provision shall be in the form of a bond or escrow agreement. Refer to; Subdivision Regulations 4.22 Performance and Maintenance Bonds; 5.03 Major Subdivision: Phase III: Final Review: S. Cost Estimates, and T. Security for Completion of Improvements.

8.	If the developer expects the Town of Enfield to assume ownership of any infrastructure, such as, but not limited to, roads, water, sewer, recreational facilities, etc., the developer shall be required to pay for a site inspector of the town’s choosing to ensure that the completed infrastructure is consistent with the approved construction documents.

9.	The developer shall provide to the Town of Enfield a set of “as built plans,” for any infrastructure that will be owned by the Town of Enfield.

10.	All pertinent provisions of the Town of Enfield Zoning Ordinance, unless specifically superseded in this Cluster Development Section, must be complied with by the developer and the Mandatory Home Owners' Association.



D.	Permitted Density: The permitted density is the number of dwelling units in the development that shall not exceed the number allowed using the Net Buildable Land available and the cluster lot requirements for the zoning district in which the cluster development is proposed. If the proposed Cluster Development is located in more than one zoning district, then the total number of dwelling units allowed within the tract shall be the sum of those allowed for the portion of the net developable land lying within each zoning district.
 

E.	Common Open space: Common open space within the Cluster Development tract will be established and maintained in accordance with the following requirements:

1.	The applicant or developer shall provide for and establish a Mandatory Home Owners' Association (a private, non-profit corporation, association, or other non-profit legal entity established by the applicant or developer for the purposes of managing and maintaining all common land.) Membership in said association shall be mandatory for all property owners and made a required covenant in any deed issued or passed as a legal entity under the laws of the State of New Hampshire for the ownership, care, and maintenance of all such land and improvements. Its articles shall be approved in writing by the Planning Board after review by the Town Attorney, prior to subdivision approval. The cost of such legal review shall be borne by the applicant or the developer. Any changes in such articles of association or incorporation shall require the prior written approval of the Planning Board.

2.	Such association shall be created by a covenant. Such association shall be composed of all persons having ownership within the development and shall be responsible for the perpetuation, maintenance, and uses and functions of all common land and facilities.

3.	All common lands and improvements shall be described and identified as to location, size, use, and control in the covenant. Such covenant shall set forth the method of assessment for the maintenance of such land. The covenant shall be written so as to run with the land and become part of the deed to each lot or dwelling unit within the development.

4.	Such covenant and association shall continue in effect so as:  to control the availability of facilities and land thereby provided; to maintain the land and facilities for their intended function; and to protect the development from additional and unplanned densities. Such association shall not be dissolved, nor shall such association dispose of any common area by sale or otherwise except to an organization conceived and organized to own and maintain such areas, without the prior written consent of the Board of Selectmen.

5.	The individual property owners shall be assessed for their share of the Common land, and the developer shall be assessed for all undeveloped lots and the undeveloped lots share of the Common Open Space.

6.	The Open Space land shall be available for recreational use by the residents of the development.
 

7.	The required open space shall be equal to or greater than fifty percent [50%] of the gross buildable land. It shall not include wetlands, steep slopes, drainage facilities, floodways or road reserves.

8.	The minimum required Open Space Land shall be placed in undivided preserves that are equal to, or greater than three [3] acres. All Open Space Parcels between three [3] and ten [10] acres shall have a length to width ratio equal to, or less than four to one [4:1].

9.	The Open Space Land shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within the development. The plan shall  provide safe and convenient pedestrian access to the Open Space Land. For lots not adjoining the open space land, an access/entrance area, with a minimum width of fifty [50] feet between lot lines, shall be provided to the Open Space Land. This access area may be counted as part of the Open Space Land.

10.	The Planning Board, at its discretion, is empowered to designate: specific areas for Common Open Space including but not limited to, natural habitats, scenic areas/vistas, and prime agricultural land; the placement, design and construction of internal streets, and the location of the home cluster(s).

11.	A fifty [50] linear foot upland buffer, of natural vegetation shall be maintained adjacent to wetlands, and surface waters, including but not limited to, brooks, streams, rivers, lakes or ponds.

F.	Perimeter Buffer Zone:

1.	A perimeter buffer zone having a minimum depth of one hundred [100] feet shall be provided between any building lot boundary line and the perimeter of the tract. Said buffer zone shall be comprised of vegetation, either natural or planted, and no structure shall be permitted within the buffer zone.

2.	The perimeter buffer zone shall not be counted towards the open space requirement.

405.2	VILLAGE PLAN ALTERNATIVE


A.	In this section, "village plan alternative'' means an optional land use control and subdivision regulation to provide a means of promoting a more efficient and cost effective method of land development. The village plan alternative's purpose is to encourage the preservation of open space wherever possible. The village plan alternative subdivision is meant to encourage beneficial consolidation of land development to permit the efficient layout of less costly
 

to maintain roads, utilities, and other public and private infrastructures; to improve the ability of political subdivisions to provide more rapid and efficient delivery of public safety and school transportation services as community growth occurs; and finally, to provide owners of private property with a method for realizing the inherent development value of their real property in a manner conducive to the creation of substantial benefit to the environment and to the political subdivision's property tax base.

B.	An owner of record wishing to utilize the village plan alternative in the subdivision and development of a parcel of land, by locating the entire density permitted by the existing land use regulations of the political subdivision within which the property is located, on 20 percent or less of the entire parcel available for development, shall grant to the municipality within which the property is located, as a condition of approval, a recorded easement reserving the remaining land area of the entire, original lot, solely for agriculture, forestry, and conservation, or for public recreation. The recorded easement shall limit any new construction on the remainder lot to structures associated with farming operations, forest management operations, and conservation uses, and shall specify that the restrictions contained in the easement are enforceable by the municipality. Public recreational uses shall be subject to the written approval of those abutters whose property lies within the village plan alternative subdivision portion of the project at the time when such a public use is proposed.

C.	The submission and approval procedure for a village plan alternative subdivision shall be the same as that for a conventional subdivision. Existing zoning and subdivision regulations relating to emergency access, fire prevention, and public health and safety concerns including any setback requirement for wells, septic systems, or wetland requirement imposed by the department of environmental services shall apply to the developed portion of a village plan alternative subdivision, but lot size regulations and dimensional requirements having to do with frontage and setbacks measured from all new property lot lines, and lot size regulations, as well as density regulations, shall not apply.

(1)	The total density of development within a village plan alternate subdivision shall not exceed the total potential development density permitted a conventional subdivision of the entire original lot unless provisions contained within the political subdivision's land use regulations provide a basis for increasing the permitted density of development within a village plan alternative subdivision.

(2)	In no case shall a political subdivision impose lesser density requirements upon a village plan alternative subdivision than the density requirements imposed on a conventional subdivision.
 

D.	If the total area of a proposed village plan alternative subdivision including all roadways and improvements does not exceed 20 percent of the total land area of the undeveloped lot, and if the proposed subdivision incorporates the total sum of all proposed development as permitted by local regulation on the undeveloped lot, all existing and future dimensional requirements imposed by local regulation, including lot size, shall not apply to the proposed village plan alternative subdivision.

E.	The approving authority may increase, at existing property lines, the setback to new construction within a village plan alternative subdivision by up to 2 times the distance required by current zoning or subdivision regulations, subject to the provisions of subparagraph (c).

F.	Within a village plan alternative subdivision, the exterior wall construction of buildings shall meet or exceed the requirements for fire-rated construction described by the fire prevention and building codes being enforced by the state of New Hampshire at the date and time the property owner of record files a formal application for subdivision approval with the political subdivision having jurisdiction of the project. Exterior walls and openings of new buildings shall also conform to fire protective provisions of all other building codes in force in the political subdivision. Wherever building code or fire prevention code requirements for exterior wall construction appear to be in conflict, the more stringent building or fire prevention code requirements shall apply.



406	SENSITIVE RESOURCE PROTECTION AREAS


The following Sensitive Resource Protection Areas are hereby established:

1.	Wetland Areas
2.	Steep Slope Areas
3.	Forested Areas
4.	Class VI Roads



406.1	WETLAND AREAS


A.	Description of Wetland Areas

A wetland is an area that is inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support and that under normal conditions does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands include, but are not limited to, swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas.
 

B.	Delineation of Wetland Areas

Mapping: The descriptions of Wetland Areas as given above are solely determinative of the boundaries of the Wetland Area. As a guide, the most recent SCS soils maps of the Town of Enfield should be viewed along with the wetland areas map (Figure B), both of which are on file in the Planning/Zoning office and the Town Clerk's office. Where the precise location of a wetland's boundary is difficult to establish, or where it is alleged that an area has been incorrectly delineated as a wetland or that an area not so designated is subsequently found to meet the criteria for wetlands designation, the Planning Board shall make its judgment under this section only upon the determination of a qualified soil scientist(s) and/or wetland scientist(s) on the basis of additional
on-site investigation or other suitable research that the information on the Town Wetlands Map is incorrect. This evidence shall be acceptable only when presented in written form by said scientist(s) to the Planning Board. Any necessary soil testing procedures shall be conducted at the expense of the landowner or developer.

C.	Permitted Uses

In a Wetland Area, permitted uses are only those uses which will not alter the natural surface configuration by the addition of fill or by excavation or dredging.  The permitted uses are:

1.	Forestry and tree farming, using best management practices in order to protect streams from damage and to prevent sedimentation.

2.	Cultivation and harvesting of crops according to recognized soil conservation practices, including the protection of wetlands from pollution caused by fertilizers, pesticides and herbicides used in such cultivation.

3.	Wildlife refuges, conservation areas and nature trails.

4.	Open space and outdoor recreation.

5.	Water supply wells.

D.	Special Exception

In a Wetland Area the following uses may be allowed by Special Exception.  All applications for special exception uses in Wetland Areas shall be referred by the Zoning Board of Adjustment to the Conservation Commission, Health Officer and Planning Board for review and comment at least twenty (20) days prior to the hearing.

1.	Roads, driveways and utility easement, including power lines and pipe lines, if essential to the productive use of land located outside the Wetland Area and if constructed to minimize any detrimental impact upon the wetlands.
 

2.	Water impoundments.

3.	Accessory building or structures customarily incidental to permitted uses allowed by C above, provided any such buildings are not used for occupancy purposes and provided no on-site waste disposal facilities are required.


406.2	STEEP SLOPE AREAS


The purpose of a Steep Slope Area is to prevent development on slopes in excess of twenty-five percent.  Development of such slopes causes:

1.	Soil erosion and stream sedimentation;
2.	Unnecessary loss of vegetative ground cover and destruction of trees;
3.	On-site waste disposal problems;
4.	Difficult street construction; and
5.	Expensive maintenance.



A.	Description of Steep Slope Areas

A Steep Slope Area includes all areas of the Town of Enfield with slopes in excess of twenty-five percent. The slope of the natural terrain, as determined by the SCS soil survey, shall be determinative of whether or not land is in a Steep Slope Area.

B.	Mapping

The descriptions of Steep Slope Areas as given above are solely determinative of the boundaries of the Steep Slope Area. As a guide, the Steep Slope Area map of the Town of Enfield (Figure C), on file in the Town Clerk's and Planning/Zoning Board's office, should be viewed. Where the precise location of a steep slope is difficult to establish, a steep slope map prepared by a professional engineer may be required to establish the location of the area.

C.	Permitted Uses

1.	Forestry and farming using best management practices in order to protect streams from damage and to prevent sedimentation.

2.	Wildlife refuges, conservation areas and nature trails.

3.	Open space and outdoor recreation.

4.	Downhill and cross-country ski trails.
 

D.	Special Exceptions

Structures customarily incidental to ski lift operations such as lift towers and related powering facilities, snow-making equipment and related pumping facilities and first aid shelter but not lodges, parking lots or equipment structures.

The Zoning Board of Adjustment may consider an exception for roads where findings show that water runoff resulting from the proposed use will not result in soil erosion, down slope pollution or stream turbidity or where the visual impact of such development would not adversely impact the scenic or natural rural features of the area. A registered state hydrologist, soil scientist or engineer shall be utilized to help assess the impact of the proposed development on water runoff, potential soil erosion and down slope movement of sewerage and pollutants. The Board shall request the recommendations of the Conservation Commission and shall give due consideration the Commission's recommendations and findings. Where development may be granted on slopes over 25 percent, mandatory controls required to prevent down slope soil slumping, erosion or excess tree cutting must be inspected by the Zoning Administrator and any infraction shall require a stop to the development.

406.3	FORESTED AREAS


Definition of a Clearcut

A clearcut shall be defined as any tree harvest that leaves less than 40 square feet of residual basal area per acre on a minimum area of three acres.

Permitted Uses

In a Forested Area, permitted clearcuts shall be only those that are planned and conducted with the assistance of a forester licensed in the State of New Hampshire. Clearcutting for land conversion purposes is permitted if all permits have been obtained. Said permits include, but are not limited to, building, subdivision, excavation and site plan approval where necessary.


406.4	CLASS VI ROADS


No Class VI Road shall be upgraded without prior review and written recommendation to the Board of Selectmen from the Planning Board, the Conservation Commission, Town Planner/Zoning Administrator, Director Public Works, and the Town Manager.


407	SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS


As approved at Enfield Town Meeting 1988, all lands designated as special flood hazard areas by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its Flood
 

Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) and Flood Boundary and Floodway maps of the Town of Enfield, NH dated November 17, 1987 are declared to be a part of this Ordinance.

Applications for variances or exceptions shall be made to and be considered by the Zoning Board of Adjustment; after examining the applicant's hardships, the Zoning Board shall approve or disapprove a request based on the criteria set forth in Section
60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) with Amendments and Related Regulations dated June 30, 1987 and other criteria consistent within the total Ordinance.

408	SIGNS


In all districts signs or advertising devices shall conform to the following regulations:

A.	No sign other than official street signs or traffic directions shall be erected or maintained within the street right-of way.

B.	No sign shall be placed in such a position as to endanger motor vehicle or pedestrian traffic or obscure or otherwise cause confusion with official street or highway signs or signals.

C.	Signs shall refer only to a use, activity or business carried on the lot upon which they are situated, except that the Zoning Administrator may grant permission for erection, off the premises, of a limited number of non-illuminated signs, providing the following conditions are met:

1.	Each sign not exceeding three square feet.

2.	Intended solely to give directional information.
3.	No more than three signs for any one business townwide.

D.	Signs may be illuminated only by continuous exterior indirect white light, with the light sources so placed and shielded that they will not constitute a hazard to road or highway driving by glare, nor shall glare be allowed to infringe upon a neighbor's visual serenity.

E.	No flashing or animated signs with visible moving parts or intermittent lighting to create the visual effect of movement are permitted.

F.	No sign shall project more than six inches above the roof or parapet line of building, nor more than four inches out from and parallel to the wall to which it is attached.

G.	Signs shall be constructed of durable materials and shall be maintained in good condition and repair.
 


H.	No portable signs are permitted.

I.	Regulations A through H shall not apply to non-illuminated signs that are displayed from within a building.

J.	Posting of land is permitted.

K.	Signs on awnings are limited to the name of the enterprise and a maximum of six-inch high letters.

L.	No outdoor sign shall be permitted which does not pertain to the use, activity or business of the premises on which it is located unless otherwise permitted in this section.

M.	No mural or message shall be painted onto a building's surface. Exceptions are granted to historic landmark signs which may be preserved and maintained.

N.	No sign shall be affixed to any public utility pole, lamp post, street or highway sign, traffic control device or sign post.



408.1	R1, R3, AND R5 DISTRICT SIGNS


A.	Home occupations or other approved uses are permitted one (1) free-standing or building-mounted sign per lot that conforms to the following specification:

1.	Sign may not exceed five (5) square feet.

2.	Solely announces the name, address and/or the profession of the premises on which the sign is located.

B.	Churches and institutional buildings are also permitted one (1) bulletin, announcement, or identification sign per lot that conforms to the following specification:

1.	Sign may not exceed twelve (12) square feet.

2.	Sign may not be located nearer than twelve (12) feet to a right-of-way or lot line.

C.	Non-profit organizations may be granted additional sign area up to 24 square feet by Special Exception if the Board determines that:
 

1.	The circumstances, unique to the structure, use, or access and the area in which the structure use or access is located are unique.

2.	The additional sign area is necessary or desirable for public information and/or safety.

3.	The additional sign area is compatible with the area in which the sign will be located.



408.2	CB AND C/I and Route 4 DISTRICT SIGNS


Any sign permitted in the above paragraphs is permitted.  Also permitted:

A.	One sign attached to a building, not exceeding a total area of one (1) square foot for each foot of building frontage upon a right-of-way or highway. The area of the sign shall not exceed forty (40) square feet.

B.	A non-illuminated directory sign, bearing the name and /or the type of business of the principal tenants, provided it is located at the principal entrance or access to such rented areas and the area of such sign devoted to each tenant shall not exceed five (5) square feet, and the total combined area of such a sign directory does not exceed sixteen (16)square feet not including supports. The restrictions of this subsection shall not apply to ordinary directory panels and information signs maintained within a building and not intended for view from the public street.

C.	Each business lot, site, tract, shopping mall, or business center may display one free-standing sign, not to exceed twelve (12) feet in height from ground level and not to exceed forty (40) square feet including supports nor to be located nearer than twelve (12) feet from the street lot line.

D.	The lighting may be direct white lighting.

E.	A temporary "For Sale" or "For Rent" sign not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in area is permitted per lot or building.

F.	In the C/I District, any sign permitted in the above paragraphs is permitted. In addition each business lot, site tract, shopping mall or business center may display one free-standing sign.  The free-standing sign may not exceed twenty- five (25) feet in height from the ground level, not to exceed one hundred (100) square feet, and not to be located nearer than twelve (12) feet from the street lot line.

G.	Route 4 District sign requirements as noted in Section 401.6 Section I
 

In the C/I District, one (1) internally lit sign per building lot may be erected by special exception.


408.3	TEMPORARY SIGNS


Temporary signs are permitted in all districts to indicate the following:

A.	A construction-in-progress sign which shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area in the R1, R3, R5, C, CB, C/I and Route 4  Districts.  Such signs shall be removed within ten days following completion of the project.

B.	A promotional sign erected for a special event sponsored by a non-profit organization and not for advertising a business or service.  Such a sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area, not extend into or over a right-of-way, be erected more than two weeks prior to the special event and be removed no later than one week after the event. Such sign is permitted in all districts.

C.	Election promotion signs (as defined in RSA 652:1) shall conform to the provisions of RSA 664:17. These signs are permitted in all districts, shall not be placed in a right-of-way and shall be removed one week after the election.

D.	An auction, garage sale, rummage sale, produce sale or current event sign may be displayed on the premises of the event for a period not to exceed one week. Such a sign shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area and shall be removed the day of the event. This use is permitted in all districts.

E.	One time grand opening banners, pennants, flags and inflatable displays are permitted in the CB and C/I Districts.  Such events displays shall not exceed two weeks duration and shall not create a safety hazard.  No special light displays (i.e., strobe lights, spot lights, search lights) are allowed.

F.	A temporary "For Sale" or "For Rent" sign is permitted per building or lot in the R1, R3 and R5 Districts in which the sign may not exceed five (5) square feet and in the CB and C/I Districts in which the sign may not exceed twelve (12) square feet.


408.4	EXEMPTED SIGNS


The following signs are exempt from these regulations and no permit shall be required for their erection.

A.	One sign per lot, not exceeding one (1) square foot in area, and bearing only property numbers, post box numbers, names of occupants of premises or other identification of premises.
 


B.	Flags and insignia of the local, state, or federal government.

C.	Legal notices, identification, information, or directional signs erected as required by governmental authorities.

D.	Instructional signs directing or guiding traffic and parking on private property.
These signs shall be limited to five (5) square feet in size.

E.	Time and temperature displays without advertising matter, providing all clearances and glare restrictions prescribed for in the Ordinance are met.

F.	Signs for the posting of land.


408.5	SIGN PERMIT REQUIREMENTS


A permit shall be obtained from the Zoning Administrator to erect any sign permitted, allowed by Special Exception or by Variance, except for those signs specifically exempted from obtaining a permit in Subsection 408.4.


408.6	FEES


A schedule of fees for a sign permit may be established and amended from time to time by the Planning Board.

408.7	ENFORCEMENT


The Zoning Administrator is authorized to order the repair or removal of any sign and its supports if said sign and/or supports are judged to be dangerous, or in disrepair, or if erected or maintained contrary to this provision.


408.8	REMOVAL OF SIGNS


Any sign which has been ordered removed by the Zoning Administrator, or is abandoned or discontinued, shall be removed by the person, firm, or corporation responsible for the sign within thirty days of written notice to remove.


409	PARKING AND LOADING AREAS


Adequate off-street loading and parking areas shall be provided when any new use is established or any existing use is enlarged in accord with the following specifications:
 

1.	Dimensions

Parking Space Size- 10 ft. x 18 ft. (Minimum)
Parking Aisle Width- 20 ft. (Minimum) for two-way aisles
12 ft. (Minimum) for one-way aisles



2.	Number of Spaces

Retail- 1 Space per 500 Sq. ft. of GLA (Minimum) Business- 1 Space per 800 Sq. ft. of GLA (Minimum) Industrial- 1 Space per 500 Sq. ft. of GLA (Minimum)
Multi-family Residential/Lodging- 1 space per dwelling unit/lodging unit (Minimum)

3.	On-Street Parking

Off-street parking requirements may be reduced by 1 space for every 20 feet of frontage on a road where on-street parking is allowed.

4.	Parking Serving Multiple Uses

Parking designed to serve multiple uses shall be calculated by adding up the number of spaces required for the individual uses and dividing the total by the applicable shared parking factor from the table below.

	Business	Lodging	Residential
Retail	1.2	1.4	1.3
Business		1.7	1.5
Lodging			1.1


5.	Handicapped-accessible Parking

Handicapped-accessible Parking shall be provided as necessary to meet the requirements of the Americans With Disabilities Act, according to the table below.
 




Total Parking Spaces in Lot	Required Minimum Number of Accessible Spaces
1 to 25	1
26 to 50	2
51 to 75	3
76 to 100	4
101 to 150	5
151 to 200	6
201 to 300	7
301 to 400	8
Over 400	Percent of Total Parking Spaces

6.	Lighting of Parking Areas

Only indirect lighting of parking and loading areas shall be permitted. All lighting shall be so directed and shaded to prevent any direct glare from illuminating adjacent properties. No lighting shall be directed upward that may illuminate the night sky. All lighting of parking and loading areas shall conform to the provisions of Section 419 of this Ordinance.

7.	Parking in the Community Business District

In the Community Business District, a Special Exception may be granted from these requirements for parking for new uses in structures that pre-date the adoption of this Ordinance and non-conforming lots.

8.	Other Considerations

The Planning Board shall require applicants to submit a parking study before approving a project that includes more than twice the minimum amount of parking and may require phased construction of the additional parking upon demonstration of the need. For applicants proposing uses that do not reasonably fall into the categories of “Retail”, “Business”, “Industrial”, or “Residential/Lodging”, the Planning Board shall require a parking study to quantify parking demand.

Only surface parking spaces shall be used to determine whether a project includes more than twice the minimum.

Any business requesting to place signage at an entrance to the Northern Rail Trail shall be required to have a bicycle rack.

“Retail” uses shall include retail trade, retail service, food service, and restaurants.
 

“Business” uses shall include offices, light industry, and research and development. “Industrial” uses shall include assembly and packaging facilities.
“Lodging” uses shall include hotel, motel, and other overnight tourist accommodations. “GLA” is Gross Leasable Area.

410	SIGHT DISTANCE


Safe sight distance is defined as a straight line view, which encounters no obstruction, measured between two points at a height of four feet above the road surface.  One point shall be located at the nearest side of the proposed driveway/entrance and at the shoulder of the existing public right-of-way, to another point located at the centerline of the public right-of-way.

Minimum safe sight distances along right-of-ways providing access to driveways and/or entrances to commercial or business facilities shall be as follows:

1.	For highways with speed limits of 30 mph or lower: 200 feet.

2.	For highways where the speed limit is between 31 and 40 mph: 275 feet.

3.	For highways where the speed limit is between 41 and 50 mph: 350 feet.

4.	For all State highways or roads with speed limits in excess of 50 mph: 400 feet.



411	REMOVAL OF NATURAL MATERIAL


The removal of sand, gravel, rock or construction aggregate shall be permitted as a Special Exception in the R3 and R5 Districts upon the approval of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, and must be in compliance with the provisions stated in the Town of Enfield Local Excavation Regulations.



412	UNDISTURBED AREA


Table 1 expresses the dominant environmental rationale of protecting the natural functions of hillsides, under the basic principle that steep-slope areas are more sensitive to runoff, erosion, pollution migration and hazards than areas of lesser slope.
Therefore, the requirements listed below shall apply to the following slope categories:
 


TABLE 412.1

SLOPE/NATURAL STATE REQUIREMENTS
Average Slope (%)	Undisturbed Vegetation (% Per Acre)
0-10	5
10-15	10
15-20	20
20-25	30
25-30	40
30-35	50
35-40	60
*Ski trails in a bonafide ski area are exempt from this requirement.



413	NON-CONFORMING LOTS AND USES


1.	Any lot of record existing on the effective date of this Ordinance shall be consid- ered a lawful lot and may be continued. Even though the lot does not comply with the minimum lot size or frontage requirements, the lot may be built upon provided all other standards of the district in which it is located are met.

2.	Any non-conforming uses existing on the effective date of this Ordinance shall be considered a lawful use and may be continued.  Even though the lot where the use is located does not comply with the minimum lot size or frontage requirements, the use may be continued provided all other standards of the district in which it is located are met.

3.	Any non-conforming uses existing on the effective date of this Ordinance shall be considered a lawful non-conforming use and may be continued.  Any expansion of a non-conforming use may be permitted only if approved by the Zoning Board of Adjustment as a Variance. If a lawful non-conforming use is abandoned, discontinued or destroyed for any reason for a continuous period of one year or more, any subsequent use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance.

4.	Any and all non-conforming uses of land, buildings or structures which are aban- doned, discontinued or vacated or which are partially or wholly destroyed by reason of any cause whatsoever, including obsolescence, fire, explosion, storm, or other acts of God, may be resumed or restored and operated in their former non-conformity if same is started within one year following the disruption and completed within twelve (12) months thereafter. The replacement buildings and
 

structures must be in the same location, and of the same or less dimensions as before the damage.  The dimensions include length, width, and height of the original structure.

5.	Any life safety equipment mandated by a qualified agency and recommended by the Enfield Fire Department shall be permitted on existing non-conforming buildings or structures.



414	PERMITS


No building permit shall be issued for the erection, placement, extension or alteration of any structure unless the Building Inspector has determined that the proposed construction and use are in compliance with the Ordinance and has so certified on the building permit. All applications for a building permit, except for alterations which will not change the exterior dimensions, shall be accompanied by a site plan drawn to a scale of not smaller than one (1) inch equals twenty (20) feet showing the boundaries, dimensions and location on the lot of the building/s to be erected, placed or extended and such other information as may be necessary to determine conformity with and provide for the enforcement of this Ordinance.

All permits will be posted such that they shall be seen from the road for the period of construction. The permit shall be valid for one (1) year.

Where, by the nature of development, a building permit is not required, no land develop- ment for non-residential purposes may commence and no land or structure may be devoted to a new or changed use for non-residential purpose within the Town without a Site Plan Review and approval by the Planning Board, in accordance with the Enfield Site Plan Review Regulations.



415	ADDITIONAL STUDIES AND INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS


The Zoning Board of Adjustment may require special studies and/or additional information that is deems necessary to carry out the purposes of these regulations. Such studies shall be undertaken at the expense of the applicant.



416	ZONING ADMINISTRATOR


The administrative and enforcement officer for this Ordinance shall be known as the Zoning Administrator and shall be hired or appointed by the Selectmen. The Zoning Administrator shall administer the Zoning Ordinance literally and shall not have the power to permit any use of land or buildings which is not in conformance with this Ordinance.
 



417	ENFORCEMENT


It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator, and he or she is hereby given the power and authority, to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance.  Notification of violation shall be issued by the Zoning Administrator.



418	RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN STATE AND LOCAL REGULATIONS


Where both state and local regulations are applicable, or where overlapping local regulations exist, (for example, the Special Flood Hazard Regulations, as approved at the 1988 Enfield Town Meeting, and the Enfield Subdivision Regulations), the most stringent regulation or the one with the higher standard shall govern.  If the state regulation addresses an issue not included in the local regulation or vice versa, the regulation addressing the issue shall automatically apply.



419	OUTDOOR LIGHTING


Purpose

To prevent inappropriate and poorly designed or installed outdoor lighting, that causes unsafe and unpleasant conditions, limiting residents ability to enjoy the nighttime sky, and results in unnecessary use of electric power.


419.1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS


1.	All lighting shall be located on the owner’s property.

2.	All new or replacement street lighting will be a full cut off type fixture.

3.	All building lighting for security or aesthetics shall be designed, located, installed, and directed in such a manner as to prevent objectionable light trespass and glare across property lines, or cause disability glare at any location off the property.
 

420	WETLAND DECISION ACCOUNTABILITY


When an owner of private, taxed property in Enfield is denied his/her requested use of said property based on wetlands, the denying body (local or state) will, upon request, provide the property owner objective evidence as to the significant measurable benefit of said property to the Town of Enfield or State of New Hampshire.

421	COMMUNITY NET METERED SOLAR ARRAYS

In order to mitigate the impact of community net metered solar arrays on neighbors and to protect public safety and welfare:

A.	Roof and ground mounted community net metered solar arrays shall be permitted by special exception in accordance with Section 504, Special Exceptions of the Zoning Ordinance, in the following districts:  Community Business CB, Rte 4 (by right 100 ft setback), Rural Residential  R3, Rural Residential Agricultural R5, and Commercial/Industrial C/I.

B.	Community net metered solar arrays shall not be a permitted use in the following districts: R1, Conservation C and the parcels shown in the Enfield Village National Historic Register District.
 

ARTICLE V - ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT



500	CREATION


The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have five members in accordance with the provisions of RSA 673:3.  A Chair, Vice-Chair, and Clerk shall be elected annually by a majority vote of the Board at the first available meeting after Town Meeting.  All officers shall serve for one year and shall be eligible for re-election. Three alternate Members shall be appointed by a majority vote of the Board as provided for by RSA 673:6, IIa. Each member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be a resident of the Town of Enfield in order to be elected.


501	MEETING OF THE BOARD, ADOPTION OF RULES


All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public, and the Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, which records shall be immediately filed in the Office of the Board and shall be a public record. The Board shall adopt rules to govern its proceedings in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance and the provisions of RSA 91-A and 676:1.


502	POWERS OF THE BOARD


The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the power to hear and decide in accordance with the standards and procedures set forth in this Ordinance, any application for Special Exceptions, Variances, and Administrative Appeals, and shall further have  those powers granted to the Zoning Board of Adjustment by RSA 674:33 and as it may from time to time be amended.


503	HEARINGS BEFORE THE BOARD


Any person seeking a Special Exception, Variance, or Appeal for the provisions hereof shall be entitled, upon application, to a hearing before the Board. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing following the procedures outlined in RSA 676:7, give public notice thereof, as well as notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time.  At the time of the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney.
 


504	SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS


In appropriate cases and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards listed in Section 403, the Zoning Board of Adjustment has the power to hear and decide applications of exception as provided for in this Ordinance.  In acting upon an application for exception, the Zoning Board shall take into consideration the appropriateness of the specific location for the proposed use and its probable effect upon the district as a whole, its wildlife, soil, streams and ponds, forests, and other recreational and environmental qualities.  It shall permit the exception only when it finds that, in view of these considerations, it is consistent with the spirit of the Ordinance to do so.


505	VARIANCES


The Zoning Board may authorize a Variance from the terms of this Ordinance only when it finds that all conditions listed in RSA 673:33 apply:

1)	The variance will not be contrary to the public interest.


2)	The spirit of the ordinance is observed.

3)	Substantial justice is done.


4)	The values of surrounding properties are not diminished.


5)	Literal enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance would result in an unnecessary hardship.

(A)	For purposes of this subparagraph, "unnecessary hardship'' means that, owing tospecial conditions of the property that distinguish it from other properties in the area:
(i)	o fair and substantial relationship exists between the general purposes of the ordinance provision and the specific application of that provision to the property; and
(ii)	The proposed use is a reasonable one.
 

(B)	If the criteria in subparagraph (A) are not established, an unnecessary hardship will be deemed to exist if, and only if, owing to special conditions of the property that distinguish it from other properties in the area, the property cannot be reasonably used in strict conformance with the ordinance, and a variance is therefore necessary to enable a reasonable use of it.
The definition of "unnecessary hardship'' set forth in subparagraph (5) shall apply whether the provision of the ordinance from which a variance is sought is a restriction on use, a dimensional or other limitation on a permitted use, or any other requirement of the ordinance.

506	APPEALS


If it is alleged that an error has been made, any aggrieved person, officer, department, board or bureau of the town affected by any decision of the administrative officer may appeal to the Board. Such appeals must occur within thirty (30) days of the decision, by filing with the Zoning Board a notice of appeal specifying the ground for appeal.

An appeal stays all proceedings under the action appealed from unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the ZBA, after notice of appeal shall have been filed him or her, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property.  In such case, proceedings shall be stayed by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board of the Superior Court. Any and all decisions rendered by the ZBA prior to enactment of this Ordinance shall remain in force and be nonrevokable.


507	NOTICE TO CONSERVATION COMMISSION


The ZBA shall notify the Conservation Commission, in advance, of all hearings concerning the granting of a Special Exception or Variance, and the Commission shall have the opportunity to attend and participate in such hearings.



508	EQUITABLE WAIVER OF DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS



When a lot or other division of land, or structure thereupon, is discovered to be in violation of a physical layout or dimensional requirement the zoning board of adjustment shall, upon application by and with the burden of proof on the property owner, grant an
 


equitable waiver from the requirement, if and only if the board makes all of the following findings:

A.	The violation was not noticed or discovered by any owner, former owner, owner's agent or representative, or municipal official, until after a structure in violation had been substantially completed, or until after a lot or other division of land in violation had been subdivided by conveyance to a bona fide purchaser for value.

B.	The violation was not an outcome of ignorance of the law or ordinance, failure to inquire, obfuscation, misrepresentation, or bad faith on the part of any owner, owner's agent or representative, but was instead caused by either a good faith error in measurement or calculation made by an owner or owner's agent, or by an error in ordinance interpretation or applicability made by a municipal official in the process of issuing a permit over which that official had authority;

C.	The physical or dimensional violation does not constitute a public or private nuisance, nor diminish the value of other property in the area, nor interfere with or adversely affect any present or permissible future uses of any such property.

D.	Due to the degree of past construction or investment made in ignorance of the facts constituting the violation, the cost of correction so far outweighs any public benefit to be gained, that it would be inequitable to require the violation to be corrected.

Waivers shall be granted under this section only from physical layout, mathematical or dimensional requirements, and not from use restrictions. An equitable waiver granted under this section shall not be construed as a nonconforming use, and shall not exempt future use, construction, reconstruction, or additions on the property from full compliance with the ordinance. This section shall not be construed to alter the principle that owners of land are bound by constructive knowledge of all applicable requirements. This section shall not be construed to impose upon municipal officials any duty to guarantee the correctness of plans reviewed by them or property inspected by them.
 

ARTICLE VI - CONSERVATION MANAGEMENT




600	CONSERVATION COMMISSION


The Conservation Commission for the Town of Enfield shall have the responsibility for the promotion and development of the natural resources and for the protection of watershed resources within a conservation district.




601	DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION


A.	The Commission shall conduct surveys, investigations and research relating to the conservation and development of the conservation districts and may advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts, plans and pamphlets which in its judgment it deems necessary for its work.

B.	The Commission shall develop and maintain an index of all owners of land within a conservation district and the uses to which the land is being put by the owner.

C.	The Commission shall develop comprehensive plans for the conservation and development of the soil, water and related natural resources of the conservation district and may recommend to the Selectmen, the Planning Board, or the ZBA a program for the better promotion, development or utilization of such districts.

D.	The Commission shall cooperate with the owners and occupiers of land within a conservation district in order to promote the conservation of such areas and the development of such areas for public use. The Commission may acquire leases, easements and other rights to property located within a conservation district for the purpose of public access and recreation.












Page 59
 
Town of Enfield, NH	Zoning Ordinance	Amended March 12, 2019




ARTICLE VII - SEVERABILITY CLAUSE EFFECTIVE DATE AND AMENDMENT






700	SEVERABILITY CLAUSE


The invalidity of any section or provision of this Ordinance shall not invalidate any other section or provision thereof.




701	EFFECTIVE DATE


This Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon its adoption.




702	AMENDMENT


Amendment in accordance with the requirements and procedures established in Chapters 674:1, 675:3, 5, and 7, and amendment thereto.
























Page 60
 




ARTICLE VIII - WIRELESS TOWERS



801	DEFINITIONS


"Alternative tower structure" - innovative siting techniques that shall mean man- made trees, clock towers, light poles, and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.

"Antenna" shall mean any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, television, personal communications service (PCS), pager network, or any other communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves of any bandwidth.

"Buildings and Related Structures" shall mean any structure, improvement, land development, or infrastructure, including rights-of-way, necessary for the operation of telecommunication facilities defined in this section.

"Co-location" means locating wireless communication facilities from more than one provider on a single tower.

"FAA" - an acronym that shall mean the Federal Aviation Administration
"FCC" - an acronym that shall mean the Federal Communications Commission. “Height” shall mean, when referring to a tower or other structure, the distance
measured from the average existing ground level within ten feet of the tower
location at the time of application to the highest point on the tower or other structure, including antennas or other appurtenances.

“Telecommunications facility" shall mean any structure, antenna, tower or other device which provides, but is not limited to the following services: commercial mobile wireless services, unlicensed wireless services, cellular phone services, specialized mobile radio communications (SMR), enhanced SMR, personal communications service (PCS), paging and similar services that are marketed to the general public.



802	APPLICABILITY


1.	Amateur Radio; Receive-Only Antennas. This Ordinance shall not govern any tower or antenna that is less than 35 feet in height and is owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive-only antennas.
 




2.	Essential Services and Public Utilities.  Telecommunications facilities shall not be considered infrastructure, essential services, or public utilities; siting for telecommunications facilities is considered a use of land subject to Planning Board review.



803	GENERAL REQUIREMENTS


1.	Telecommunications facilities are permitted by Special Exception provided that all standards set forth in this Article are met as well as all other applicable ordinances and regulations (including Site Plan Review). Existing towers or structures that are not presently used as telecommunications facilities must meet all requirements of this Ordinance once they are proposed for use as a telecommunication facility.
Applicants proposing an increase in height of an existing telecommunications facility must also meet all requirements of this Ordinance.

2.	Principal or Secondary Use. Subject to this Ordinance, an applicant who successfully obtains permission to site under this Ordinance as a second and permitted use may construct a telecommunications facility in addition to the existing permitted use.  A different existing use or an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on such lot. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a tower or antenna complies with development regulations, including but not limited to setback requirements, lot-coverage requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the tower or antenna may be located on a leased parcel within such lot. Telecommunications facilities that are installed in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance are not considered an expansion of a non-conforming use or structure.

3.	MAXIMUM HEIGHT: Height: In no case shall a wireless telecommunications facility exceed ten (10) feet over the average tree canopy height. The Planning Board will consider a 15' extension provided that the applicant can demonstrate the technical necessity of such extension and provided that the performance and design standards of Sections 5 and 6 are met. The applicant will pay for the Town to hire an independent qualified radio frequency engineer to substantiate the applicant's claim of technical necessity. Technical considerations include, but are not limited to, the availability of alternative sites, collocation and improved reception and cover within the Town. The Planning Board shall not grant the extension for any siting within scenic vistas designated by the Planning Board.
 



a.	Height, Existing Structures and Utility Poles: Carriers that locate new wireless telecommunications facilities on water towers, electric transmission and distribution towers, utility poles and similar existing utility structures, guyed towers, lattice towers, masts and monopoles may be permitted with no increase in height.

b.	Height, Other Existing Structures: The height of a wireless telecommunications facility shall not increase the height of a structure unless the facility is completely camouflaged; for example, a facility completely within a flagpole, steeple, or chimney.  The increase in height of the structure shall be in scale and proportion to the structure as originally configured.  A carrier may locate a wireless telecommunications facility on a building that is legally non-conforming with respect to height, provided that the provisions of this Ordinance are met.

4.	Guyed Wires are prohibited.

5.	Aesthetics and Lighting.

a.	Towers shall maintain a non-glossy, galvanized steel finish or be painted a neutral color (subject to FAA requirements) to reduce visual obtrusiveness. The use of alternative tower structures is strongly encouraged by the Town.

b.	At a telecommunications facility site, the design of buildings and related structures, including utility service to the facility, shall use materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that will allow it to blend with the natural setting and built environment. These buildings and related structures shall also be subject to all other Site Plan Review requirements.

c.	If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of neutral color that is identical to or compatible with the existing structure, and shall be made as visually unobtrusive as possible.  In no case shall the height of any antenna be more than 20 feet greater than the height of the existing structure with which it is associated, and shall not exceed the maximum height limitation specified herein.

d.	Towers and related structures shall not be lighted unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority.
 



e.	Telecommunications facilities shall not contain any permanent or temporary signs, writing, or graphical representation of any kind, other than warning or safety signs placed within 10 feet of the ground surface.

6.	Building Codes, Safety Standards. To ensure the structural integrity of towers, antennas, and accessory structures, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards published by the Electronic Industry Association and local building codes. Telecommunications facilities shall be surrounded by security fencing not less than 6 feet in height and shall be equipped with an appropriate anti- climbing device.  If, upon inspection, the Town concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have 30 days to bring the facility into compliance with such standards. If the owner falls to bring such tower into compliance within 30 days, such action shall constitute an abandonment and grounds for the removal, in accordance with Section G. of this Ordinance, of the tower and antenna(s) at the owners expense through execution of the posted security.

7.	Setbacks and Separation Requirements. The following requirements shall supersede any other applicable standards of the Zoning Ordinance that are less strict:

a.	Towers must be set back a minimum distance equal to the tower height from all lot lines.

b.	Towers and accessory structures must satisfy all other setback requirements of the Enfield Zoning Ordinance.

c.	A telecommunications tower or antenna over 70 feet in height shall not be located within two miles of an existing tower or antenna over 70 feet in height, whether or not such existing tower is located within the Town of Enfield.

8.	Landscaping/Natural Growth Buffer. Telecommunications facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the view of the tower from occupied portions of adjacent property.  Existing mature tree growth and natural landforms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible, and constitute the preferred method of screening.
 



9.	Towers Excluded.

a.	Construction of telecommunications facility towers is specifically excluded from areas within a horizontal distance of 300 feet of topographic summits greater than 700 feet elevation National Geodetic Vertical Datum, or 300 feet from a ridgeline leading to such topographic summit.

b.	No telecommunications facility shall be constructed within 1000 feet of a historically or culturally significant location designated as such by the Town of Enfield, State of New Hampshire or federal government agencies.

10.	Co-Location. A permittee shall cooperate with other telecommunications providers in co locating additional antennas on towers or existing structures, provided that such proposed co locators have received approval by Special Exception from the Town. A permittee shall exercise good faith in co-locating with other providers and sharing the permitted site, provided that such shared use does not give rise to a substantial technical level impairment of the ability to provide the permitted use (i.e., a significant interference in broadcast or reception capabilities as opposed to a competitive conflict or financial burden). Such good faith shall include sharing technical information to evaluate the feasibility of co-location. In the event a dispute arises as to whether a permittee has exercised good faith in accommodating other users, the Town may require a third party technical study at the expense of either or both the applicant and permittee.



804	SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS


All applicants under this Ordinance shall apply to the Planning Board for Site Plan Review, in accordance with the Town of Enfield Site Plan Review regulations. At least two weeks prior to approval, a weather balloon with a color that will contrast with the background shall be erected to denote the impact and location of the proposed tower. Said balloon will be the same height as the proposed tower.

Applicants shall also be required to submit the following information:

1.	A map showing the service area and an explanation of need.
 



2.	A map showing the locations and service areas of other existing or proposed sites operated by the applicant which are close enough to impact service within the Town's borders.

3.	A diagram and/or map showing the view shed of the proposed telecommunications facility, including all buildings and accessory structures.

4.	Photo simulations from at least four directions, which simulations adequately represent the appearance of the completed structure when viewed from inhabited areas and/or traveled roads within the Town.

5.	A site and landscaping plan, which also meets the requirements of Site Plan regulations.

6.	If the applicant is proposing a new tower, written evidence demonstrating that no existing structure within two miles of Town borders can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. This evidence can consist of:

a.	Substantial Evidence that no existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area.

b.	Substantial Evidence that existing towers are not of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering requirements or do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed equipment.

c.	Substantial Evidence that the applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the existing antenna(e) on the towers or structures, or vice-versa.

7.	An agreement with the Town that allows for the maximum allowance for co-location upon the new telecommunications structure. Such statement shall become a Condition to any approval, and shall, at a minimum, require that the applicant supply available co-location for reasonable fees and costs to other telecommunications providers.

8.	Engineering information detailing the size and coverage required for the telecommunications facility location. Structural plans shall bear the seal of a qualified Professional Engineer licensed in the State of New
 



Hampshire. The Planning Board may have any submitted information reviewed by a consultant for verification of any claims made by the applicant regarding technical limitations and feasibility of alternative locations, or any other matter required by the application. Cost for this review shall be borne by the applicant in accordance with RSA 676: 4, 1(g).



805	WAIVERS


Where the Planning Board feels that extraordinary hardships, technical difficulties, or unreasonable expense would result from strict compliance with the foregoing regulations, or to encourage innovative approaches to providing telecommunications services, it may approve waivers to these regulations. The purpose of granting waivers under provisions of these regulations shall be to insure that an applicant is not unduly burdened, as opposed to merely inconvenienced, by said regulations. The Board shall only approve any waivers(s) when a majority of those present and voting, where proper quorum requirements are met, shall find that any waiver would not be detrimental to the public safety, health or welfare, or be injurious to other property; would promote the public interest; and will substantially secure the objectives and requirements of these regulations. A petition for any such waiver shall be submitted in writing by the applicant along with the application for Board review.



806	SECURITY AND INSURANCE


1.	Recognizing the extremely hazardous situation presented by abandoned or unmonitored towers, the Planning Board shall set the form and amount of security that represents the cost for removal and disposal of abandoned towers in the event that the tower is abandoned and the tower owner is incapable or unwilling to remove the tower in accordance with Section I.

2.	Furthermore, the Planning Board shall require the annual submission of proof of adequate insurance covering accident or damage. Such insurance shall provide for a minimum 30 days notice of cancellation to the Town.
 



807	REMOVAL OF ABANDONED ANTENNAS AND TOWERS


Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned and hazardous to the public health and safety, unless the owner of said tower provides proof of quarterly inspections and operation. The owner shall remove the abandoned structure within 90 days of receipt of a declaration of abandonment from the Planning Board notifying the owner of such abandonment. A declaration of abandonment shall only be issued following a public hearing, noticed per Town regulations, with notice to abutters and the last known owner/operator of the tower. If the abandoned tower is not removed within 90 days the Town may execute the security and have the tower removed. If there are two or more users of a single tower, this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower.



808	INSPECTIONS, ENFORCEMENT


The owner of the telecommunications facility shall provide for quarterly structural and safety inspections to be conducted by a licensed professional Engineer experienced in the evaluation of telecommunications structures. The results of these inspections shall document compliance with applicable FCC requirements, and shall be submitted on an annual basis to the Town's Code Enforcement Officer. If deficiencies are noted during an inspection, the owner must notify the Code Enforcement Officer within 5 days of completion of the inspection. Enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be in accordance with New Hampshire RSA 676.
 




ARTICLE IX - IMPACT FEES



Purpose: This ordinance is enacted pursuant to RSA 674:21, and in order to:

-	Promote the public health, safety and welfare and prosperity;
-	Ensure that adequate and appropriate facilities are available to individuals who may come to be located in the Town of Enfield;
-	Prevent scattered or premature development of land as would involve danger or injury to health, safety, or prosperity by reason of the lack of water supply, drainage, transportation, schools, fire protection , or other public services, or necessitate  the  excessive  expenditure  of  public  funds  for  the  supply  of  such
services;
-	Provide for the harmonious development of the municipality and its environs;
-	Ensure the proper arrangement and coordination of streets; and,
-	Ensure streets of sufficient width to accommodate existing and prospective traffic.



901	DEFINITIONS


Impact Fee means a fee or assessment imposed upon development, including subdivision, building construction or other land-use change, in order to help meet the needs occasioned by the development for the construction or improvement of capital facilities owned or operated by the municipality, including and limited to water treatment and distribution facilities; wastewater treatment and disposal facilities; sanitary sewers; storm water, drainage and flood control facilities; public road systems and rights-of-way; municipal office facilities; public school facilities; the municipality’s proportional share of capital facilities of a cooperative or regional school district of which the municipality is a member; public safety facilities; solid waste collection, transfer, recycling, processing and disposal facilities; public libraries; and public recreation facilities, not including public open space.



902	AUTHORITY TO ASSESS IMPACT FEES


The Planning Board is hereby authorized to assess impact fees, as herein defined, and in accordance with the standards herein set forth. The Planning Board shall have the authority to adopt regulations to implement the provisions of this ordinance.



903	ASSESSMENT METHODOLOGY


The amount of any impact fee shall be a proportional share of municipal capital improvement costs which is reasonably related to the capital needs created by the development, and to the benefits accruing to the development from the capital improvements financed by the fee.
 




Upgrading of existing facilities and infrastructures, the need for which is not created by new development, shall not be paid for by impact fees.



904	ADMINISTRATION OF IMPACT FEES


Each in fact impact fee shall be accounted for separately, shall be segregated from the Town’s general fund, may be spent upon order of the governing body, and shall be used solely for the capital improvements for which it was collected, or to recoup the cost of capital improvements made in anticipation of the needs for which fees are collected to meet.

All impact fees shall be assessed prior to, or as a condition for, the issuance of a building permit or other appropriate permission to proceed with development.

Between the date of assessment and collection, the Planning Board may require developers to post security, in the form of a cash bond, letter of credit or performance bond so as to guaranty future payment of assessed impact fees.

Impact fees shall be collected as a condition for the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy; provided however, in projects where off-site improvements are to be constructed simultaneously with a project’s development, and where the Town has appropriated the necessary funds to cover such portions of the work for which it will be responsible, the Town may advance the time of collection of the impact fee to the issuance of a building permit.

The Planning Board and the assessed party may establish an alternate, mutually acceptable schedule of payment of impact fees.



905	RETURN OF IMPACT FEE


If the full impact fee assessed under this ordinance is not encumbered or otherwise legally bound to be spent for the purpose for which it was collected within six years, the fee shall be refunded to the assessed party, with any accrued interest.

Whenever the calculation of the impact fee has been predicated upon some portion of capital improvement costs being borne by the Town, a refund shall be made upon the failure of the Town Meeting to appropriate the Town’s share of the capital improvement costs within six (6) years from the date of payment thereof.



906	APPLICABILITY
This ordinance shall not be deemed to affect the existing authority of the Planning Board over subdivisions and site plans, including, but not limited to the authority to declare a development to be premature or scattered in accordance with the regulations of the Board and in accordance with RSA 674:36, II (a).
 



 
 



 
 



 
 




APPENDIX A- LAND USE DEFINITIONS

(Definitions for Zoning, Subdivision and Site Plan Review)

Abutter: Shall mean the owner, or owners, of record of a parcel of land which is contiguous at any point to the parcel being subdivided, or which lies directly across a public right-of-way or stream from the parcel being subdivided.  In the case of all subdivisions and site plan reviews, boundary line adjustments and noticed Zoning Board of Adjustment hearings the term shall also include the owner or owners of record of a parcel of land which is two hundred (200) feet from any point on the boundaries of the parcel being subdivided.

Accessory Dwelling Unit: A single apartment of no more than 800 square feet, containing no more than two bedrooms and one bathroom, as defined in RSA 674:71-
73. The accessory dwelling unit and main dwelling are exempt from district acreage density requirements and must remain under one ownership.

Accessory Building: Any structure, incidental and subordinate to the principal structure, whether portable, movable or fixed, having a roof and exterior walls, built and primarily intended to form a structure for the shelter of people animals or property. Any such structure, even if attached to a principal building by an enclosed passageway, shall be considered an accessory building.
Accessory Use: A use incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the premises. Adjoining Lots: Adjacent or abutting lots which have a common boundary line. Agriculture: Any area of land, including structures thereon, that is used for agricultural
purposes including forestry. This includes the raising of cows, horses, pigs, poultry and
other livestock; horticulture and or chards; logging of a forest, woodland or plantation; selling of products grown or raised directly on such land; and the building, altering or maintaining of wood roads, agricultural roads, skidways, landings, fences, drainage systems and farm ponds.

Annexation: Shall mean the combining of two adjacent lots both of which have the same owner. It shall be subject to the provisions of these Regulations and to the application requirements of Boundary Line Adjustments.

Applicant: Person or persons submitting an application for development.

Application: the form and all accompanying documents and exhibits required of an applicant by an approving authority for development review process.

Approval: Recognition of the approving authority, in most cases the Planning Board, certified by written endorsement on the plan/plat and/or Notice of Decision, that the final
 



submission meets the requirements of appropriate regulations and satisfies, in the judgment of the approving authority, all criteria of good planning and design.

Approval, Conditional: Means recognition by the Planning Board, certified by written endorsement on the plat, that the plat is not finally approved nor ready for filing with the Registry of Deeds until such time as certain conditions, set forth by the Board, are met. This is not to be confused with a plat that has been approved subject to certain conditions that would be met as part of the implementation of the plan.

Aquifer: A permeable formation that stores and transmits groundwater in sufficient quantity to supply wells.

Auction: The sale, by a licensed auctioneer, of excess items of a family estate or beneficiaries, to customers coming to the residence to view and purchase the items.

Auto Service Stations: Any area of land, including structures thereon, that is used for the supply of gasoline or oil or other fuel for motor vehicles and which may include facilities for cleaning, repairing or servicing such motor vehicles.

Basal Area: Sum of the cross-sectional areas [at 4.5 feet high] of all trees on an acre.

Bed and Breakfast: A single-family, owner-occupied dwelling, with meal service, limited to breakfast, for 12 or fewer in-house transient guests in a maximum of 6 bedrooms with rental period a maximum of two weeks.

Board: Shall mean the Planning Board of the Town of Enfield, New Hampshire.

Boundary Line Adjustment: Shall mean the altering, whether by adding, moving, or removing, of lines between two (2) adjacent lots, tracts, or parcels of land without increasing the number of parcels or lots. It shall be subject to the application requirements of Minor Subdivisions.

Building: Shall mean any structure, whether portable, movable or fixed, having a roof and enclosed in whole or in part by exterior walls, either above or below the ground, and built to form the shelter of persons, animals or property of any kind. Where the context allows, the word "building" shall be construed as followed by the words "or part thereof."

Building Development: Shall mean the process of changing the character of the land from its existing condition to a more usable condition by the construction or placement of a building thereon.

Building Site: Shall mean that portion of a lot, tract or parcel of land upon which a single building is placed or which is intended for such placement.
 



Buffer: An area of land located contiguous to a designated sensitive area providing a transition area compatible with the sensitive area being protected, which also serves to protect the sensitive area from changes in use of adjacent contiguous land.

Church: A place of public worship.

Clear Cutting: Any tree harvest that leaves less than 40 square feet of residual basal area per acre on a minimum area of three acres.

Cluster Development: A residential subdivision of a parcel of land tract where, instead of subdividing the entire tract into house lots of conventional size, a similar number of family dwelling units may be clustered on lots of reduced dimensions. The remaining land in the tract which has not been built upon is reserved in perpetuity for open space.

Commercial: Shall mean, but not be limited to the following types of businesses: Retail and wholesale trades, offices, laboratories, banks and financial facilities, institutions (see definition), service-related business, motels hotels and inns, automotive and machine shop sales, service and repair, restaurants, entertainment and recreation facilities, clinics and other similar uses.

Commercial Recreational Facilities: Structures such as auditorium, theater, bowling alley, indoor tennis court, swimming pools, handball courts or uses such as skiing, boating, golf courses, etc.

Common Area: Any and all portions other than the individually owned lots.

Common Open Space: Common land area within the Cluster Development which shall not be built upon and shall remain in its natural state. Common Open Space area must comprise a minimum of 50 percent of the net developable land and must be accessible to all residential lot owners in the subdivision. The Planning Board may require a percentage of the common open area to be set up for active recreation use, for example, softball fields, basketball and tennis courts, children play area, etc. Common Open Space may not include commercial recreational facilities.

Community Wastewater System: A non-municipal wastewater supply system that serves an average of at least twenty-five (25) individuals daily year round or that has at least fifteen (l5) service connections.

Community Water Supply: A water supply that serves an average of at least twenty- five (25) individuals daily year round or that has at least fifteen (15) service connections.

Condominium: Shall mean multi-family, group or clustered housing, wherein housing units are individually owned, but wherein open space and group facilities are held in common ownership. Condominiums shall be considered a subdivision of land as outlined in RSA 356-B and as defined in RSA 672:14, and reviewed accordingly.
 



Contiguous Lots: Shall mean adjacent or abutting lots which have a common boundary line.

Contractor's Yard: Carpenter shop, plumbing, electrical, roofing, contracting or other similar service establishments.

Development:  Shall be defined as the process of realizing one or more of the possibilities inherent in something such as, but not necessarily limited to, a tract of land, site, building or buildings, installation or any combination of these. The process of achieving said realization need not necessarily involve physical change to the land, site, buildings, installation or any combination of these.

Disability Glare: The eye’s Line-of-Sight contact with a direct light source, which causes a partial blindness.

Diversion: Shall mean a channel, with or without a supporting ride on the lower side, constructed across or at the bottom of a slope.

Drainage way: Shall mean surficial gullies, ditches, or incised watercourses (natural or manmade) necessary to convey surface water (after runoff) along its down slope path.

Driveway: Any improved or unimproved area serving as an area of access, entrance, exit, or approach from any street to any parcel of land, regardless of public or private ownership. . Driveways serving three or more parcels shall be constructed to Enfield Street Design Standards

Duplex: A structure having dual utilization; for example, a two-family (two-dwelling) building.

Dwelling: A privately or publicly owned building containing a dwelling unit or dwelling units.

Dwelling Unit: One or more rooms arranged for the regular or periodic use of one or more individuals living as a single housekeeping unit, with cooking, living, sanitary, and sleeping facilities.

Dwelling, One-Family: A detached or free-standing dwelling designed for residential use by one family only.

Dwelling, Two-Family: A dwelling designed for residential use by not more than two families living separately from each other in individual attached dwelling units.

Dwelling, Multi-Family: A dwelling designed for residential use by three or more families living separately from each other in individual attached dwelling units.
 



Easement: The right of a person or party to use the land of another for a specified purpose and also the land area subject to such right.
Engineer: A professional engineer licensed by the State of New Hampshire.  Erosion: The wearing away of the land surface by the action of wind, water or gravity. Essential Services: The erection, construction or major alteration by public utility
companies of underground or overhead gas, electrical, sewer, steam, or water transmission or distribution systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduit cables, and similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith, and including buildings reasonably necessary for the furnishing of such services by public utility companies.

Estates: An estate consists of at least fifty (50) acres and a maximum of three (3) accessory dwellings such as guesthouses and servants’ quarters.

Fair: A gathering of buyers and sellers at a particular place and time for trade.

Farm: Any land, buildings, or structures on or in which agriculture and farming activities are carried out or conducted and shall include the residence or residences of owners, occupants, or employees located on such land. Structures shall include all farm outbuildings used in the care of livestock, and in the production and storage of fruit, vegetables, or nursery stock; in the production of maple syrup; greenhouses for the production of annual or perennial plants; and any other structures used in operations named in paragraph II of section 21:34-a of the NH RSA.

Family: Any number of persons related by blood or marriage, or not more than three persons not related by blood or marriage, living together as a single housekeeping unit.

Final Plat: Shall mean the final drawing or drawings on which the applicant’s plan is indicated, prepared as required under the provisions of these regulations.

Flood Limit: Shall mean the land-water boundary of a watercourse flowing at its 100- year frequency as defined by a responsible public agency such as the US Army Corps of Engineers, or the US Department of Agriculture Natural Resource Conservation Service (NRCS).

Flood Prone Area: Shall mean the area of land lower in elevation than the land-water boundary along a watercourse flowing at its 100-year frequency or those soils classified by the National Cooperative Soil Survey as “soils subject to flooding.”

Foot-candle: A unit of measure for luminance. A unit of luminance on a surface that is everywhere one foot from a uniform point source of light of one candle and equal to one lumen per square foot.
 



Frontage: The width of a lot measured along its common boundary with the street line. Full cut off type fixture: A luminaire or light fixture that; by design of the housing, does not allow any light dispersion or direct glare to shine above 90 degree, horizontal plane from the base of the fixture.

Gross Buildable land: Gross Buildable Land equals tract size, minus the buffer area(s) and Unbuildable Land.

Height: Height shall be measured from the natural surface of the ground on the side of a structure facing the street, road, or right-of-way.

Home Occupation: Non-residential use of a portion of a dwelling unit with no structural changes to the building and land.

Horizontal Luminance: The measurement of brightness from a light source, usually measured in foot-candles or lumens, which is taken through a light meter’s sensor at a horizontal position.

Industrial: Shall mean places of manufacturing, assembly, packaging, testing, development, fabricating, or the warehousing of goods.

Institution: Includes hospitals, churches, retirement and elderly facilities, schools, etc.

Junkyard: A place used for storing and keeping, or storing and selling, trading, or otherwise transferring old or scrap metals, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber products, glass, plastic, construction waste, or other materials, in quantities beyond that which an average family would retain; or multiple non-registered motor vehicles, including but not limited to the types of junkyards found in RSA 236:112.

Kennel: The boarding, breeding, raising, grooming, or training of two or more dogs, cats, or other household pets of any age not owned by the owner or occupant of the premises for commercial gain.

Light Trespass: Light from an artificial light source that is intruding into an area where it is not wanted or does not belong.

Lot: A parcel of land designated on a plot to be filed with the Register of Deeds by its owner or owners as a separate plot of land. For purposes of the Ordinance, a lot shall have boundaries identical with those recorded with the Register of Deeds.

Lot Line: Shall mean the property line dividing a lot from a street right-of-way, a body of water or adjacent property.

Lot Line Adjustment: Means adjustments to the boundary between adjoining properties, where no new lots are created.
 



Lot of Record: A lot which is recorded in the Grafton County Registry of Deeds or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.

Lot size: Shall mean the total horizontal land area within the boundaries, of a lot, exclusive of any land designated for street purposes.

Manufactured Housing: As defined in RSA 674:31, this housing shall mean any structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is 8 body feet or more in width and 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is 320 square feet or more, and/or which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to required utilities, which include plumbing, heating and electric heating systems contained therein. For mobile homes built prior to June 15, 1976, a label certifying compliance to the Standard for Mobile Homes, NFPA 501, ANSI 119.1, in effect at the time of manufacture is required. For the purpose of these provisions, a mobile home shall be considered a manufactured home.

Marshes: Shall mean treeless wetlands dominated by soft-stemmed herbaceous  plants. The surface of a marsh is frequently covered by water year around. Marshes can vary from a wet meadow type to those areas with several feet of water.

Master Plan: Shall mean the comprehensive plan or plan of development for the municipality as defined in RSA 674:1 and 2.

Mixed-Use: Any combination of permitted uses in the affected district.

Motel: A building or group of buildings which contain four or more apartments or living accommodations, for ten or more persons, with or without kitchens, and which constitutes primarily a temporary abode for persons who have their residence elsewhere. This shall include hotel.

Municipal Wastewater System: A wastewater collection, treatment, and disposal system that serves an average of at least twenty-five (25) individuals daily year round or that has at least fifteen (15) service connections and that is owned and operated by a municipal or regional government.

Municipal Water Supply: A water supply that serves an average of at least twenty-five
(25) individuals daily year round or that has at least fifteen (15) service connections and that is owned and operated by a municipal or regional government.

Net Buildable Land: Net Buildable Land equals Gross Buildable Land minus Required Open Space.
 



Net Developable Land: The area of a subdivision remaining after exclusion of those features or areas which the Zoning Ordinance and local, state or federal regulations exclude from land development calculation requirements road right-of way area.

Non-Conforming Lot: Any lot which does not conform to the area, frontage, or depth requirements of the districts in which it is located.

Non-Conforming Structure: Any structure which does not, in whole or in part, conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located.

Non-Conforming Use: The use of any building, structure, or land contrary to the use provisions of this Ordinance for the district in which the building, structure or land is located.

Non-residential: Shall mean any use not directly associated with the use of a dwelling unit.

Offices, Professional: A place where licensed professionals (i.e., doctors, lawyers, engineers) practice their professions.

Official Map: Shall mean the adopted street or base map of the municipality as defined in RSA 674:9-11.

Open Space: Land preserved in an undeveloped and largely natural state.

Owner: Shall mean the owner of record as listed in the Town of Enfield Property Files or proved with more current written documentation.

Parapet: That portion of a building wall that rises above the roof level.

Parking Space: A conveniently accessible off-street space for exclusive use as a parking area for one motor vehicle, with a minimum size of ten (10) by twenty (20) feet.

Perimeter Buffer Zone: Perimeter Buffer Zone equals the sum of the areas in the one hundred [100] foot zone between the individual building lots and tract boundary. Section
G.	refers.

Performance Bond: Shall mean cash, surety bond, escrow deposit or irrevocable letter of credit as approved by the Planning Board to secure regulated improvements of subdivided property.

Plat: Shall mean a drawing or drawings on which the applicant’s plan is indicated.

Preliminary Layout or Design Review: Shall mean the preliminary drawing or drawings prepared as required and submitted to the Board prior to preparing the final plat.
 




Poorly Drained: Shall mean an area where water is removed so slowly that the soil remains wet for a large part of the time. A poorly drained soil has a water table near the ground surface that keeps the soil wet for six or more months of the year.

Produce Stand: Sale of flowers, garden supplies, or agricultural produce designed to serve highway customers.

Public Hearing: Means a meeting, notice of which must be given per RSA 675:7 and 676:4,I (d), at which the public is allowed to offer testimony.

Public Meeting: Means the regular business meeting of the Planning Board as required per RSA 673:10. Notice must be posted at least 24 hours in advance and the meeting must be open to the public, although participation by the public is at the discretion of the Board.

Public Waters: [Per NH Env-Wt-101.]

Qualified Soil Scientist: A person qualified in soil classification who is recommended or approved by the State, under the provisions of RSA 310-A.

Recreational Facilities: Recreational activities which shall include such facilities as tennis courts, swimming pool, golf courses, playfields, ski trails and similar uses.

Regulations: Except where otherwise indicated, shall refer to and be interpreted to mean the Town of Enfield Site Plan or Subdivision Regulations.

Re-subdivision: Shall mean the altering, whether by adding, moving, or removing, of lines between three (3) or more adjacent lots, tracts, or parcels of land without increasing the number of parcels or lots. It shall be subject to the application requirements of Major Subdivision.

Required Open Space: Required Open Space equals fifty percent [50%] of Gross Buildable Land.

Residential: Shall mean a building or buildings of one or more dwelling units.

Riding Stable: A building in which horses are sheltered and fed.

Right-of-Way: A street, road, highway dedicated or intended to be dedicated for public travel or an approved private way offering the principal means of access to abutting properties. All plot plans must show the existing road and the right-of-way boundaries.

Riparian Zone: Flood plains, banks, and associated areas that border free-flowing or standing water.
 



Seasonal High-Water Line (Table): The highest part of the soil or highest level at which the water stands for a significant period of time during the wet season.

Sediment: Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin, by air, water, or gravity as a product of erosion.

Seeps: A spot where groundwater oozes slowly to the surface forming a small pool. Soil at these sites remains saturated for some portion or all of the growing season, and often stays wet through-out the winter.

Setback: The distance between a building or structure and the nearest property line, wetland, or sewage disposal system.  Setbacks are to be measured from the drip line and include, but are not limited to, decks, roof overhangs, fireplaces, and any bump- outs of the structure.

Sign: A name, identification, image, description, display or illustration which is affixed to, painted or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure or parcel of land, and which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, facility, service, event, attraction, person, institution, organization, or business and which is visible from any street, right-of-way, sidewalk, alley, park or other public property. Customary displays of merchandise or objects and material placed behind a store window are not signs or parts of signs.

Sign Area: The sign area means the entire area within a circle, triangle or parallelogram enclosing the extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem or any other figure of similar character, together with any frame or other material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the background against which it is placed; excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which such sign is placed. Where a sign has two or more faces, the area of all faces shall be included in determining area of the sign, except where two such faces are placed back to back and are at no point more than two (2) feet from one another, the area of the sign shall be taken either as the area of one face - if the two faces are of equal area, or the area of the larger face - if the two faces are of unequal area.

Sign, Directory: A sign listing the names of the occupants or businesses of a building, shopping center or mall.

Sign, Free Standing: A sign placed on the grounds of the property and not attached to a building.

Sign, Portable: A portable sign shall mean any sign that is designed to be transported, including but not limited to the following:

1.	Signs with wheels removed.
2.	Signs with chassis skid or support constructed without wheels.
 



3.	Signs designed to be transported by trailer or wheels.
4.	Signs converted to A- or T-frame signs.
5.	Signs attached temporarily to the ground, a structure or other sign.
6.	Signs mounted on a vehicle for advertising purposes, parked and visible from the public right-of-way, except signs identifying the related business when the vehicle is being used in the normal day-to-day operation of that business.
7.	Menu and sandwich boards.

Sign, Projecting: A sign attached perpendicularly or at an angle to a building wall.

Site: Shall mean the place where anything is, or is to be, fixed, placed or located.

Site Plan: Shall be all documentation, including the plat, drawings, descriptive materials and any other pertinent information showing how the proposed development will achieve conformity with the requirements in these regulations.

Sky glow: Light from a luminaire that is emitted above the horizontal plane that passes through the lowest part of the luminaire.

Slope: The steepness of the land surface under consideration expressed in terms of percent. This is the number of feet fall or rise per 100 feet of horizontal distance.

Soil Type: As defined and classified by U.S.D.A. Soil Conservation Service.

Solar array, net metered  – a ground or roof mounted array whose generated electricity is used to offset a rate payer’s on-site  electrical usage.

Solar array, community net metered - a ground or roof mounted array whose generated electricity is used to offset that of a community of meters as defined in the NH Public Utilities Commission group net metering rule  RSA 362-A:9 XIV.

Special Exception: An exception is a use which would not be appropriate generally or without restriction throughout a particular zone. A use may be permitted in a particular zone as an exception only if specific provision for such exception is made in this Zoning Ordinance. (See Article V, Section 504.)

Special Flood Hazard Area: [Per FEMA.]

Steep Slope Area: Includes all areas of the Town of Enfield with slopes in excess of twenty-five percent. The slope of the natural terrain, as determined by the SCS soil survey, shall be determinative of whether or not land is in a Steep Slope Area.

Street: A state highway, town road, avenue, lane and/or any other way used or in existence for vehicular travel including driveways which serves three or more adjacent lots or sites. The word street shall include the entire right-of-way.
 



Street, Arterial: Shall mean a street or highway used primarily for heavy and/or through traffic.

Street, Collector: Shall mean a street, which serves primarily to carry traffic from local streets to arterial streets and to public and other centers of traffic.

Street, Frontage: Shall mean the measured distance along a town-maintained, state maintained or private street between the points of intersection of the side lot lines with the road.

Street, Local: A Street used primarily to give access to abutting properties.

Street, Private: Shall mean a street which meets all specifications of these regulations but is not owned by the Town, State or Federal Government.

Structure: Any temporary or permanently constructed, erected or placed material or combination of materials in or upon the ground, including, but not limited to buildings, manufactured homes, radio towers, sheds and storage bins, storage tanks, portable carports, swimming pools, tennis courts, parking lots, signs. Fences, culverts, driveways, roads, mailboxes, bobhouses not exceeding sixty-four (64) square feet, stonewalls, walks, landscaping, subsurface waste disposal facilities and essential services are structures, but are exempt from dimensional and buffer zone requirements.

Subdivider: Shall mean the owner of record of the land to be subdivided, including any subsequent owner(s) of record making any subdivision of such land or any part thereof, or the agent of any such owner, and including, but not limited to, a developer.

Subdivision: As defined in RSA 672:14.

Subdivision, Major: Subdivision, Major: Shall mean the division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into three (3) or more lots, sites, tracts, or other divisions of land.

Subdivision, Minor: Subdivision, Minor: Shall mean the division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two (2) lots, sites, or other dwelling units, and which requires no new roads, public utilities, or other municipal improvements. A parcel of land which has been subjected to minor subdivision shall not be eligible for further minor subdivision for a period of five (5) years from the date of the most recent minor subdivision approval.

Subdivision, Technical or Annexation: [Per subdivision regs]

Surface Waters: Water bodies including but not limited to lakes, perennial and intermittent streams, rivers, reservoirs, etc.
Surveyor: Shall mean a surveyor licensed by the State of New Hampshire to provide surveying services.

Stream: [Per NH Env-Wt-101.]
 




Town: Shall mean the Town of Enfield, New Hampshire.

Unbuildable Land: Unbuildable Land is the sum of wetlands, steep slopes, drainage facilities, and floodways.

Uniformity Ratio: (U. Ratio) Describes the average level of illumination in relation to the lowest level of illumination for a given area. Example: U. Ratio =4:1 for the given area, the lowest level of illumination (1) should be no less than 25% or “4 time less” than the average (4) level of illumination.

Uplighting: Any light source that distributes illumination above a 90-degree horizontal plane.

Variance: A variation from the terms of this Ordinance. (See Article V, Section 505.

Vernal pools: An ephemeral body of water that fills in the spring, holds water for at least 10 days, and dries up by fall in some or all years. They have no defined inlet or outlet, or contain fish.

Waste, Disposal System: Shall mean an assembly of components which will contain, transport, and/or alter products of discard or products incidental to a process. It protects the environmental ecological system from fumes, odors, litter, health hazards and possible damages.

Water Frontage: Shall mean the average of the total straight-line distance between the points of intersection of the waterfront property with the shoreline and the measured distances along the shoreline.

Waterfront Property: Shall mean a lot or parcel of land, which abuts a body of water.

Wetland: A wetland is an area that is inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support and that under normal conditions does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. The definition of a wetland will remain consistent with “New Hampshire Code of Administrative Rules Chapter Env- Wt 100-800” (Part Env-Wt 301 Delineation and Classification of Wetlands).

Yard Sale: The sale of excess items by a family or families from its residence to customers coming to the residence to view and purchase the items. It shall include garage, lawn, attic, tag and porch sale, and similar expression intending to convey such type of sales
 








PLANNING BOARD APPROVAL


Amended by Town Meeting:	March 12, 2019

Chair:	Dan Kiley	 	


Vice Chair:	David Fracht  	

Board Members:

John Kluge	 	


Erik Russell	 	


Kurt Gotthardt	 	


Tim Taylor	 	


Rita Seto	 	


Paula Rowe, Alt	 	


Jim Bonner, Alt	 	
 




FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE


This Ordinance, adopted, pursuant to the authority of RSA 674:16, shall be known as the Town of Enfield Floodplain Development Ordinance. The regulations in this ordinance shall overlay and supplement the regulations in the Town of Enfield Zoning Ordinance, and shall be considered part of the Zoning Ordinance for purposes of administration and appeals under state law.  If any provision of this ordinance or regulation, the provision imposing the greater restriction or more stringent standard shall be controlling.

If any provision of this ordinance differs or appears to conflict with any provision of the Zoning Ordinance or other ordinance or regulation, the provision imposing the greater restriction or more stringent standard shall prevail.



ITEM I - DEFINITION OF TERMS


The following definitions shall apply only to this Floodplain Development Ordinance, and shall not be affected by the provisions of any other ordinance of the Town of Enfield.

AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD is the land in the flood plain within the Town of Enfield subject to a 1 percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area is designated as Zone(s) A or AE on the Flood Insurance Rate Map.

BASE FLOOD means the flood having a one-percent possibility of being equaled or exceeding in any given year.

BASEMENT means any area of a building having its floor subgrade on all sides. BUILDING see structure.
DEVELOPMENT means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.

FEMA	means the Federal Emergency Management Agency.






FLOOD OR FLOODING means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
 




(1)	the overflow of inland or tidal waters;
(2)	the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.

FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) means a official map incorporated with this ordinance, on which FEMA has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the Town of Enfield.

FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e. mudflow) and/or flood- related erosion hazards.

FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD-PRONE AREA means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding).

FLOOD PROOFING means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation facilities, structures and their contents.

FLOOD WAY  see regulatory floodway.

FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT, USE means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking and port facilities that are necessary for the loading/unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building /repairs facilities but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.

HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of structure.

HISTORIC STRUCTURE means any structure that is:

(a)	Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

(b)	Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as registered historic district;
 



(c)	Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:

1)	By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or
2)	Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.

(d)	Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the interior

LOWEST FLOOR means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided, that such an enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this Ordinance.

MANUFACTURED HOME means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes the term ‘‘manufactured home’’ includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on site for greater than 180 consecutive days. This includes manufactured homes located in a manufactured home park or subdivision.

MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

MEAN SEA LEVEL means the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.

NEW CONSTRUCTION means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.  For floodplain management purposes, new construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

100 YEAR FLOOD see base flood.
 



RECREATIONAL VEHICLE means a vehicle which is (a) built on a single chassis;
(b)	400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; (c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.

REGULATORY FLOODWAY means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA see “Area of Special Flood Hazard.” STRUCTURE means for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed
building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as
well as a manufactured home.

START OF CONSTRUCTION includes substantial improvements, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on site, such as the pouring of slab or footing, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure.

SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE meaning damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a structure in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure. The market value of the structure should equal:

(1)	The appraised value prior to the start of the initial repair or improvements,

OR
 



(2)	In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring.

For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of actual repair work performed. The term does not however, include any project for improvement of a structure required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions or any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure.

VIOLATION means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community’s flood plain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44CFR § 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.

WATER SURFACE ELEVATION means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains.



ITEM II


All proposed development in any special flood hazard areas shall require a permit.



ITEM III


The Building Inspector shall review all building permit applications for new construction or substantial improvements to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding.  If a proposed building site is located in a special flood hazard area, all new construction or substantial improvements shall

(i)	Be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
(ii)	Be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
(iii)	Be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages;
(iv)	Be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities that are designed
 



and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.


ITEM IV


Where new or replacement water and sewer systems (including on-site systems) are proposed in a special flood hazard area the applicant shall provide the Building Inspector with assurance that these systems will be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters, and on-site waste disposal systems will be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during periods of flooding.



ITEM V


For all new or substantially improved structures located in Zones A or AE the applicant shall furnish the following information to the Building Inspector:

(a)	The as-built elevation (in relation to NGVD) of the lowest floor (including basement) and include whether or not such structures contain a basement;

(b)	If the structure has been floodproofed, the as-built elevation (in relation to NGVD) to which the structure was floodproofed;

(c)	Any certification of floodproofing.

The Building Inspector shall maintain for public inspection, and shall furnish such information upon request.



ITEM VI


The Building Inspector shall not grant a building permit until the applicant certifies that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies for which approval is required by federal or state law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334.



ITEM VII


1.	In riverine situations, prior to the alteration or relocation of a watercourse the applicant for such authorization shall notify the Wetlands Bureau of the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services and submit copies of such notification to the Building Inspector, in addition to the copies required by RSA
 



482-A: 3. Further, the applicant shall be required to submit copies of said notification to those adjacent communities as determined by the Building Inspector, including notice of all scheduled hearings before the Wetlands Bureau.

2.	The applicant shall submit to the Building Inspector, certification provided by a registered professional engineer, assuring that the flood carrying capacity of an altered or relocated watercourse can and will be maintained.

3.	Along watercourses with a designated Regulatory Floodway no encroachments, including fill new construction, substantial improvements, and other development are allowed within the floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practices that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the base flood discharge.

4.	Until a Regulatory Floodway is designated along watercourses, no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zone AE on the FIRM, unless it is demonstrated by the applicant that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community.

5.	The Building Inspector shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any floodway data available from Federal, State, or other sources as criteria for requiring that all development located in Zone A meet the following floodway requirement:

"No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development are allowed within the floodway that would result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the base flood discharge."



ITEM VIII


1.	In special flood hazard areas the Building Inspector shall determine the 100- year flood elevation in the following order of precedence according to the data available:

a.	In zones A and AE, refer to the elevation data provided in the community's Flood Insurance Study and accompanying FIRM.
 



b.	In Zones A the Building Inspector shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any 100 year flood elevation data available from any federal, state or other source including data submitted for development proposals submitted to the community (i.e. subdivisions, site approvals).

2.	The Building Inspector’s 100-year flood elevation determination will be used as criteria for requiring zone A and AE:

a.	All new construction or substantial improvement of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the 100 year flood elevation;

b.	That all new construction or substantial improvements of non- residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the 100 year flood level; or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:

(i)	Be floodproofed so that below the 100 year flood elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
(ii)	Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy;
(iii)	Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions for this section;

c.	All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within special flood hazard areas shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood level; and be securely anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.  Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over the top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces:

d.	Recreational Vehicles placed on sites within Zone A and AE shall either:

(i)	Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days,
(ii)	Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or
(iii)	Meet all the standards of Section 60.3 (b) (1) of the elevation and anchoring requirements for “manufactured homes” in Paragraph (c) (6) of Section 60.3.
 



e.	For all new construction and substantial improvements, fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding are permitted provided they meet the following requirements:

(i)	The enclosed area is unfinished or flood resistant, usable solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage;
(ii)	The area is not a basement;
(iii)	Shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater.

f.	Proposed structures to be located on slopes in special flood hazard areas zones AH and AO shall include adequate drainage paths to guide floodwaters around and away from the proposed structures.



ITEM IX- VARIANCES AND APPEALS


1.	Any order, requirement, decision or determination of the building inspector made under this ordinance may be appealed to the Zoning Board of Adjustment as set forth in RSA 676:5.

2.	If the applicant, upon appeal, requests a variance as authorized by RSA 674:33, I(b), the applicant shall have the burden of showing in addition to the usual variance standards under state law:

(i)	That the variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense;
(ii)	That if the requested variance is for activity within a designated regulatory floodway, no increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge will result;
(iii)	That the variance is the minimum necessary considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
 



3.	The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall notify the applicant in writing that:

(i)	The issuance of a variance to construct below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage and,
(ii)	Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions.

4.	The community shall:

(i)	Maintain a record of all variance actions, including the justification for their issuance, and
(ii)	Report such variances issued in its annual or biennial report submitted to FEMA’s Federal Insurance Administrator.




ENFIELD FLOOD PLAIN DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE

Adopted:	March 9, 1993
Amended:	March 8, 1994
March 17, 2007
