Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 7-26-1988 as Ord. No. O88-3]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to § C-28 of the Charter, the legislation of the Town of Hudson
of a general and permanent nature, adopted by the Town Council of the
Town of Hudson, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and
sections by General Code Publishers Corp. and consisting of Chapters 1 to
334, inclusive, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted,
ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Town of Hudson," hereinafter
known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior legislation.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent legislation enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such legislation as is hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or continued
in force.
§ 1-3. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and the Code shall be in full force and effect
on and after July 26, 1988.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Town Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the public
until final action is taken on this ordinance; and if this ordinance shall be
adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Town of Hudson
by impressing thereon the seal of the town, as provided by law, and such
certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk, to be made
available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while the
said Code is in effect.
§ 1-5. Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of legislation provided for in § 1-2 of this ordinance shall not
affect the following classes of ordinances, resolutions, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any legislation adopted subsequent to October 27, 1987.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Town of Hudson prior to the effective date of
this ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement
of such right or liability.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5
1:3
§ 1-6. Changes in previously adopted legislation.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Town of Hudson
or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Town of Hudson.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Town of Hudson.
F. Any ordinance or resolution of the Town of Hudson providing for the
laying out, opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening,
establishing grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or
vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or
other public place within the Town of Hudson, or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution of the Town of Hudson appropriating
money or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of
money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the Town
of Hudson or other instruments or evidence of the town's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances or resolutions authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or
transfer of property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
J. The dedication of property.
K. Any ordinances or resolutions relating to salaries or employee health or
retirement benefits.
L. Any legislation relating to the control of motor vehicles and traffic
within the Town of Hudson.
M. The currently existing sewer legislation of the Town of Hudson,
including Ord. Nos. 77A (adopted 4-12-1982) and 77 (adopted
9-23-1985), as well as any amendments thereto.
N. The currently existing taxicabs and taxicab drivers legislation of the
Town of Hudson, including Ord. No. 26 (adopted 7-24-1964), as well as
any amendments thereto.
O. The Town of Hudson Welfare Guidelines adopted 3-25-1986.
P. The Town of Hudson Conflict of Interest Ordinance adopted 3-11-1980.
A. In compiling and preparing the legislation for adoption and revision as
part of the Code, pursuant to § C-28 of the Charter, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in said legislation. It is
the intention of the Board of Selectmen that all such changes be
§ 1-5 HUDSON CODE § 1-6
1:4
§ 1-7. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, Article or part of this ordinance
or of any legislation included in this Code initially or through
supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the
remainder thereof, but shall be confined in its operation to the clause,
sentence, paragraph, section, Article or part thereof directly involved in the
controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 1-8. Code book to be kept up-to-date.3
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the Town Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing
the Code of the Town of Hudson required to be filed in the office of the Clerk
for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances and
resolutions adopted by the Board of Selectmen subsequent to the enactment
of this ordinance in such form as to indicate the intention of said Board of
Selectmen to be a part of said Code shall, when finally enacted or adopted,
be included therein by temporary attachment of a copy of such changes or
ordinances or resolutions until such change or ordinances or resolutions are
printed as supplements to said Code books, at which time such supplements
shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-9. Sale of Code book; supplementation.4
Copies of the Code book containing the Code of the Town of Hudson may be
purchased from the Clerk of the Town of Hudson upon the payment of a fee
to be set by resolution of the Board of Selectmen, which may also arrange
by resolution for procedures for the periodic supplementation thereof.
adopted as part of the Code as if the legislation so changed had
previously been formally amended to read as such.1
B. In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance.
(Chapter and section-number references are to the legislation as it has
been renumbered and appear in the Code.)2
1. Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
subsection has been revised to replace "Town Council" with "Board of Selectmen."
2. Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 1-6B, the following sections were added or amended: §§ 245-3,
245-6, 245-10, 245-13, 245-15A, 245-16, 245-17, 259-1, 264-3, 264-4D and E, 264-6,
264-7, 264-8, 264-9, 284-1, 284-4, 284-5, 284-9, 284-10 and 284-11. A complete
description of each change is included in Ord. No. O88-3, adopted 7-26-1988, which is on
file in the town offices.
3. Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
section has been revised to replace "Town Council" with "Board of Selectmen."
4. Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
section has been revised to replace "Town Council" with "Board of Selectmen."
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-10
1:5
§ 1-10. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Town of Hudson, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published, in the manner required, notice of the introduction and adoption
of this ordinance in the official newspaper of the town. A copy of the
Code of the Town of Hudson shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk
for inspection by the public at all times during regular office hours. The
enactment and application of this ordinance, coupled with the availability of
a copy of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and
considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for
all purposes.
§ 1-11. Tampering with Code; penalties for offenses.
Any person who, without authorization from the Town Clerk, changes or
amends, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of
the Town of Hudson or who alters or tampers with such Code in any
manner whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the Town of Hudson
to be misrepresented thereby or who violates any other provision of this
ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more
than $100.
§ 1-12. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this ordinance are hereby made part of Chapter 1 of the
Code of the Town of Hudson to be entitled "General Provisions, Article I,
Adoption of Code," and the sections of this ordinance shall be numbered
§§ 1-1 to 1-12, inclusive.
§ 1-10 HUDSON CODE § 1-12
1:6
Chapter 5
(RESERVED)
Chapter 11
AMBULANCE SERVICE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 58.
Chapter 15
(RESERVED)
Chapter 20
ANNUAL REPORTS
Chapter 26
BALLOT VOTING
§ 1-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-12
1:7

ARTICLE I
Official Ballot Voting
[Article 2, voted in the affirmative 3-12-1996 by the Annual Town
Meeting, reads as follows: "Shall we adopt the provisions of RSA
40:13 to allow official ballot voting on all issues before the Town of
Hudson, NH?"]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-12
1:9

ARTICLE II
Adoption and Amendment of Ordinances and Codes
[Article 40, voted in the affirmative 3-9-2004 by the Annual Town
Meeting, reads as follows: "To see if the Town will vote to adopt
the provisions of RSA 41:14-b which allows establishment and
amendment of Town ordinances and codes by the Selectmen after
holding two public meetings. However, if a petition of 50 registered
voters is presented before the Selectmen's vote, then the
establishment or amendment must be inserted as an article in
the warrant at Town Meeting. RSA 41:14-b does not apply to the
establishment or amendment of zoning ordinances, historic district
ordinances or building codes. Once adopted, RSA 41:14-b remains
in effect until rescinded at Town Meeting."]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-12
1:11

ARTICLE III
Tallies on Warrant Articles
[Article 17, voted in the affirmative 3-11-2008 by the Annual Town
Meeting, read as follows: "Shall the Town of Hudson, pursuant to
NH RSA 32:5(V-a) and NH RSA 40:13(V-a), require that all votes by
the Board of Selectmen and by the Budget Committee, concerning
items appearing in the budget or concerning any warrant article, be
recorded votes and the numerical tally of any such vote be printed
in the Town Warrant next to the affected warrant article?"]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-12
1:13
Chapter 37
(RESERVED)
Chapter 41
(RESERVED)
Chapter 44
DONATIONS, DISPOSITION OF
§ 44-1. Retaining of donations.
All donations, grants, gifts, forfeitures and fees from any source whatsoever
received by any town body shall be retained and accounted for the purpose
so designated until:
§ 44-2. Finance Director to report to Board of Selectmen.6
The Finance Director shall report to the Board of Selectmen, on a quarterly
basis, the status of all donations received by the town, designated by
a specific account number, together with any expenditure against those
donations and any funds remaining for the purposes intended.
Chapter 46
(RESERVED)
Chapter 48
ELECTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Meetings and minutes — See Ch. 69.
A. Such funds have been expended; or
B. A majority vote of the Board of Selectmen determines that the need for
which such donations were made no longer exists or that the need itself
is contradictory to established town policy, in which case the funds shall
be returned to the donor. This chapter shall not pertain to normal, user,
permitting and/or statutory fees.5
5. Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
subsection has been revised to replace "Town Council" with "Board of Selectmen."
6. Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
section has been revised to replace "Town Council" with "Board of Selectmen."
§ 1-12 HUDSON CODE § 44-2
1:14
ARTICLE I
Abolition of Caucuses
[Article 12, voted in the affirmative 3-11-1941 by the Annual Town
Meeting, reads as follows: "To see if the representatives of the
two major political parties in meeting here assembled by mutual
consent will agree to dispense with the party Caucuses held prior to
Town Meeting and use the following system which is in compliance
with the State Primary Laws: Any qualified voter in the Town
desiring to be a candidate for any Town office may do so providing
he presents to the Town Clerk a petition containing the names of
50 legal voters and in accordance with Chap. 23 Sec. 89 of the
P.L. of New Hampshire. This method of election shall be in effect
until rescinded by the Town at some future annual Town Meeting
dependent upon an article in the Town warrant."]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-2
1:15

ARTICLE II
Secret Ballots
[Article 31, voted in the affirmative 3-14-1950 by the Annual Town
Meeting, read in the warrant as follows: "To see if the Town will
vote to elect the Trustees of the Trust Funds, the Budget Committee,
the Trustees of the Public Library and the Trustees of various
cemeteries on the same secret written ballot as is used for electing
a selectman, the Town Clerk, Town Treasurer, Tax Collector and
Public Works Director.7 Candidates shall file with the town clerk in
the same manner as for Selectman; this article to take effect at the
annual town meeting in 1951 and at all subsequent Town Meetings
until rescinded by a vote of the Town at an annual Town Meeting."
Prior to the vote, Article 31 was amended to add the phrase
"Members at large" before the phrase "Budget Committee," to add
the word "and" after the phrase "Budget Committee" and to delete
the phrases "and the Trustees of the various cemeteries" and "Town
Clerk."]
7. Editor’s Note: In this reference statement, the term "Road Agent" was changed to “Public
Works Director” 10-9-2018.
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-2
1:17
Chapter 53
ETHICS, CODE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Indemnification — See Ch. 64. Information from employees — See Ch. 65.
§ 53-1. Declaration of policy.
The proper operation of democratic government requires that public
officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the
people; that government decisions and policy be made through the proper
channels of the governmental structure; that public office not be used for
personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its
government. In recognition of these goals, a Code of Ethics for all town
officials and employees is adopted in accordance with RSA 31:39A.
§ 53-1.1. Election of Code of Ethics Committee. [Added 5-26-1992
by Ord. No. O92-06; amended 3-16-1996 by ATM Art. 41]
A. The town will re-establish the Code of Ethics Committee from a body
appointed by the Board of Selectmen to that of an elected body. The
Code of Ethics Committee will consist of five (5) members at large, with
staggered three-year terms after the initial terms are completed. The
initial terms will be voted at the annual 1997 town elections and
temporarily establish the positions:
(1) Member at large [one (1) year]: 1997 to 1998.
(2) Member at large [one (1) year]: 1997 to 1998.
(3) Member at large [two (2) years]: 1997 to 1999.
(4) Member at large [two (2) years]: 1997 to 1999.
(5) Member at large [three (3) years]: 1997 to 2000.
B. Should a vacancy in the Committee arise, the remaining members of the
Code of Ethics Committee will elect a town citizen to serve out the
remainder of the term year. At the following annual town elections, a
member at large will be voted to serve out the remainder of the term.
C. No member of the Code of Ethics Committee shall hold any other town
elective or appointive office, board membership, commission
membership or trusteeship. No member of the Code of Ethics
Committee shall be employed full- or part-time by the Town of Hudson.
§ 44-2 HUDSON CODE § 53-2
1:18
§ 53-2. Purpose. [Amended 5-26-1992 by Ord. No. O92-06]
The purpose of this code is to establish guidelines for ethical standards
of conduct for all officials and employees by setting forth those acts or
actions that are incompatible with the best interests of the town and by
directing disclosure by such officials and employees of private financial or
other interests in matters affecting the town.
§ 53-2.1. Investigatory power. [Added 5-26-1992 by Ord. No.
O92-06]
The Code of Ethics Committee may require of any member of town
government to appear before it and give such information as it may require
in relation to this office, its function and performance. The Code of Ethics
Committee shall give at least 48 hours' written notice of the general scope
of the inquiry which is to be made to any person it shall require to appear
before it under this section. The Code of Ethics Committee, for this purpose,
may administer oaths and require the production of evidence.
§ 53-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD — Any board, committee or commission, permanent or special,
established by the Selectmen or New Hampshire law.[Amended
5-26-1992 by Ord. No. O92-06]
COMPENSATION — Any money, gift, thing of value or economic/pecuniary
benefit conferred on or received by any person in return for services
rendered or to be rendered by himself or another.
FAMILY — Includes his or her spouse, parents, grandparents, children,
grandchildren, brothers, sisters or similar step relations and the parents,
grandparents, children, grandchildren, brothers, sisters or similar step
relations of the member's spouse.
INTEREST —
Any legal or equitable interest, whether or not subject to an
encumbrance or a condition, which is owned or held, in whole or in
part, jointly or severally, directly or indirectly, at any time during the
calendar year.
A.
Any interest in any stock or similar security, preorganization certificate
or subscription, investment contract, voting trust certificate, limited or
general partnership or joint venture, business trust or certificate of
interest or participation in a joint profit-sharing agreement or in an
oil, water, gas or other mineral royalty or lease or any other equity
or beneficial interest, however evidenced, which entitles the owner
or holder thereof to receive or direct any part of the profits from or
to exercise any part of the control over a business entity, as well as
B.
§ 53-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-3
1:19
MEMBER OF TOWN GOVERNMENT (Also referred to as "member") —
Any elected or appointed official, board member or town employee, whether
full- or part-time, permanent or temporary, including those employed by the
town and paid by federal or state assistance programs and including but
not limited to all town employees, Selectmen, Budget Committee members,
Cable Television Committee members, Checklist Supervisors, Code of
Ethics Committee members, Conservation Commission members, Greater
Nashua Regional Planning Commission members, Library Trustees, Lower
Merrimack River Advisory Committee members, Planning Board members,
Recreation Committee members, Sewer Utility Committee members, the
Town Clerk/Tax Collector, the Town Moderator, the Treasurer, the Trustees
of the Trust Funds, Zoning Board of Adjustment members and members
of any other town boards, including those yet to be established.[Amended
5-26-1992 by Ord. No. O92-06; 3-18-1995]
RESPONDENT — A member of town government named in a petition
submitted to the Code of Ethics Committee as an inquiry or alleging a
violation of the Code of Ethics.[Added 3-18-1995]
§ 53-4. Prohibited conduct.
any interest which, conditionally or unconditionally, with or without
consideration, is convertible thereto.
Any interest in a note, bond, debenture or any other evidence of
creditor interest.
C.
D. Ownership of land within 200 feet of any land being discussed.
E. Acting as an agent or holding fiduciary interest.
Any present or past [within the previous twelve-month period]
employer/employee relationship. [Amended 3-18-1995]
F.
A. It is in violation of this chapter for any member to:
(1) In his or her official capacity, introduce, discuss, deliberate,
approve or vote upon any matter in which he or she or any member
of his or her family has an interest known to said member.
(2) Knowingly enter into any discussion, testimony or deliberation
without first, publicly and for the record, stating all dealings,
interests, relationships and possible conflicts that may exist
between said member and his or her family, the principals and the
issue under deliberation, as may be known by the member.
(3) Knowingly participate in the conduct of business of the town
without disclosing all conflict of interest questions.
(4) Knowingly use town property or labor for personal use.
(5) Knowingly use town property or labor to influence the political
cause of any candidate for public office or any political party.
§ 53-3 HUDSON CODE § 53-4
1:20
Nothing in the foregoing sentence shall prevent political
candidates or parties from holding public meetings on town-owned
property in town-owned buildings or prevent a member from
exercising and carrying out the responsibilities and obligations of
his or her office or position of employment. [Amended 3-18-1995]
(6) Use any information acquired through or by virtue of his or her
official position for his or her pecuniary benefit or for the pecuniary
benefit of any other person or business. The foregoing does not
apply to information available to the general public.
(7) Otherwise than as provided by law for the proper discharge of his
or her official duties, directly or indirectly request or receive any
compensation from anyone other than the town in relation to any
particular matter in which the town is a party or has a direct and
substantial interest.
(8) Otherwise than as provided by law for the proper discharge of his
official duties, directly or indirectly promise or offer such
compensation as referred to in this chapter.
(9) Knowingly accept a gift with a value in excess of $25, or allow
acceptance of such a gift by a family member from any individual,
group or corporation knowingly dealing with an area of town
government in which the member has an interest or jurisdiction.
The foregoing does not apply to gifts from family members.
(10) Knowingly give false information concerning dealings, interests,
relationships and possible conflicts to the various supervisors,
boards, commissions and committees and the Selectmen.
[Amended 5-26-1992 by Ord. No. O92-06]
(11) Knowingly fail to cooperate with the Code of Ethics Committee or
other investigating authority in the investigation of any complaint
alleging a violation of the tenets of this chapter.
B. No elected or appointed officer or employee, whose salary is paid in
whole or in part from the town treasury shall appear in his official
capacity on behalf of a private interest before any town board.
Selectmen, however, may appear without compensation on behalf of
constituents or in the performance of public or civic obligations.
[Amended 5-26-1992 by Ord. No. O92-06]
C. No elected or appointed official or employee whose salary is paid in
whole or in part from the town treasury shall represent private
interests, other than his or her own, in any action or proceedings
against the interest of the town in any litigation to which the town is a
party.
D. No town official or employee shall claim to act on behalf of the
Selectmen, boards or departments without prior authorization from
said body or department. [Amended 5-26-1992 by Ord. No. O92-06]
§ 53-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-4
1:21
§ 53-5. Exclusions.
§ 53-6. Procedures for inquiries and alleged violations.
E. No elected or appointed official shall voluntarily participate with any
person(s) initiating claims or lawsuits against the Town of Hudson or
any of its departments. The foregoing does not apply to personal or
family-related lawsuits.
A. The prohibition against gifts or favors shall not apply to an occasional
nonpecuniary gift, insignificant in value, or an award publicly presented
in recognition of public service or any gift which would have been
offered or given to him or her if he or she was not a member.
B. It shall not be a violation for elected members to accept donations for
the express purpose of financing a political campaign, provided that
such contributions are reported in accordance with all local, state and
federal laws pertaining to such donations or services and/or financial
value.
C. The mere purchase of goods or nonprofessional services (services from
other than attorneys, engineers, architects and surveyors) from a
person or business in the ordinary course of that person's or business's
retail or service business shall not prevent a member from introducing,
discussing, approving or voting upon a matter which relates to that
person or business.
D. Those actions taken as part of the legislative process are exempt from
the provisions stated herein. Legislative actions concerning the
granting of specific contract awards and/or actions designed to benefit
one identified or identifiable individual or specific group of individuals
are not exempt.
A. Any person or group may petition the Code of Ethics Committee to
make a ruling on a situation which may or may not constitute a
violation.
B. A petition must be in writing, signed and dated and include the name
and address of each petitioner. Business owners submitting a petition
must also include the name and address of the business. The petition
must be filed with the Town Clerk, who shall promptly forward a copy to
the Code of Ethics Committee. The original petition shall remain on file
in the Town Clerk's office. [Amended 3-18-1995]
(1) The person submitting the petition to the Town Clerk must
complete a Petitioner Information Form. This person shall be
notified of the date the Code of Ethics Committee will address the
petition and shall be requested to attend this meeting.
C. After appropriate investigation, the Code of Ethics Committee shall,
within 30 days of the petition having been taken up by the Committee,
make a finding on the inquiry or alleged violation. If necessary, the
§ 53-4 HUDSON CODE § 53-6
1:22
§ 53-7. Financial interest disclosure form.
Code of Ethics Committee may vote to extend its investigatory period
up to a maximum of 90 days from when the matter is first presented to
the Committee as an agenda item.
D. Pursuant to RSA 31:39a, knowingly violating this chapter shall be
grounds for disciplinary action if founded by a majority vote of the Code
of Ethics Committee. [Amended 5-26-1992 by Ord. No. O92-06]
E. Findings as to employees shall be forwarded to the respondent and
Selectmen for appropriate action in accordance with applicable
personnel policies and procedures and union contract requirements.
Findings shall include supporting arguments. [Amended 5-26-1992
by O92-06; 3-18-1995]
F. Findings as to elected and appointed members (excluding town
employees) shall be forwarded to the respondent and Selectmen with a
recommendation for removal or censure, if appropriate. Findings shall
include supporting arguments. The Selectmen shall have authority to
order removal of or censure said elected or appointed members.
[Amended 5-26-1992 by Ord. No. O92-06; 3-18-1995]
G. The Selectmen shall have 45 days from the date a finding is submitted
to the appropriate office to act on the Code of Ethics Committee
decision. [Amended 5-26-1992 by Ord. No. O92-06]
H. If the Selectmen determine, by a majority vote, that removal is
warranted, the elected or appointed member will be given the
opportunity to resign. If said member chooses not to resign, a petition
to remove shall be filed with the Superior Court. [Amended 5-26-1992
by Ord. No. O92-06]
I. Any member alleged to have violated this chapter is entitled to a public
hearing, with notice posted in two public places seven days prior
thereto. When appearing before the Code of Ethics Committee, said
member may call witnesses on his or her behalf and may retain
representation by legal counsel at his or her own expense if he or she so
chooses.
J. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit any person from
petitioning the Superior Court to remove a member of government on
the ground that the violation in question warrants removal. [Added
5-26-1992 by Ord. No. O92-06]
K. A respondent may request that the Code of Ethics Committee make a
ruling on any petition that is withdrawn or invalidated. If such a request
is made, the Code of Ethics Committee shall complete an investigation
pursuant to the procedures described herein. [Added 3-18-1995]
A. In accordance with RSA 31:39A, any appointed or elected official, the
Town Administrator, Assessor, Finance Director, Fire Chief, Police
§ 53-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-7
1:23
§ 53-7.1. Enforcement of FIDF requirements. [Added 5-26-1992 by
Ord. No. O92-06]
The Code of Ethics Committee shall be responsible for verifying that forms
have been filed with the Town Clerk and, in accordance with the procedures
outlined in this chapter, shall schedule hearings for individuals alleged to
have violated this chapter.
§ 53-7.2. Disposition of FIDF. [Added 5-26-1992 by Ord. No. O92-06]
Ninety days following the termination of office of an elected or appointed
official, and provided that no petition has been filed citing possible conflict
of interest, the Town Clerk shall return the respective FIDF to the originator
and inform the Code of Ethics Committee of this matter.
§ 53-8. Distribution of Code of Ethics. [Amended 5-26-1992 by Ord.
No. O92-06]
Each member and employee elected, appointed or engaged shall be
furnished a copy of this Code of Ethics before entering upon the duties of
office or employment. Failure to be furnished a copy of this chapter shall
not be grounds for relief from observing the requirements of this chapter.
Chief, Town Engineer, Town Planner, Zoning Administrator, Public
Works Director, Sewer Foreman, Library Director and any other town
employee with authorization to sign purchase orders shall complete
a financial interest disclosure form (FIDF) within 30days of assuming
office. [Amended 3-18-1995; 10-9-2018]
B. Completed forms shall be filed with the Town Clerk. Members are
required to update the form on file as changes occur. [Amended
3-18-1995]
C. Failure to disclose information as required on the FIDF shall be a
violation of this chapter.
D. Forms shall be available for public inspection in the Town Clerk's office.
The Town Clerk shall record and verify who is requesting the
information, the date of the request and for what purpose the
information is required.
E. 8The Town Clerk shall provide a monthly status report to the Code of
Ethics Committee identifying each member and the dates the forms and
updates are submitted. [Added 3-18-1995]
8. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, which provided that forms must be completed within
ninety (90) days after adoption of this Code of Ethics, was repealed 5-26-1992 by Ord. No.
O92-06.
§ 53-7 HUDSON CODE § 53-9
1:24
§ 53-9. Exemption period. [Added 5-26-1992 by Ord. No. O92-06;
3-18-1995]
Any member elected, appointed or engaged before July 1, 1995, shall be
exempt from the provisions of these amendments for a period of 31 days.
Chapter 55
(RESERVED)
Chapter 58
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 210.
Chapter 61
HIGHWAY SAFETY COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 284.
§ 61-1. Committee established; members. [Amended 10-9-2018]
A Highway Safety Committee is hereby established. Said Committee shall
consist of the Public Works Director, Police Chief, Fire Chief, the Chairman
of the Planning Board or his/her designee and the Town Engineer.
§ 61-2. Purpose.
The purpose of the Committee is to:
A. Make recommendations to the Board of Selectmen for the
establishment of highway safety programs in accordance with RSA
238:6.
B. Review and make recommendations concerning the town's present and
future needs for traffic control signs and signalization.
C. Review specific requests for traffic control signs and signalization and
make recommendations.
D. Advise, upon request, any town board, committee or commission
regarding matters pertaining to highway safety.
§ 53-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 61-2
1:25
Chapter 64
INDEMNIFICATION
§ 64-1. Adoption of statutes.
The Town of Hudson hereby adopts the provisions of RSA 31:105,
"Indemnification for Damages."
§ 64-2. Persons to be indemnified.9
The town shall, after this date, indemnify and save harmless for loss or
damage from personal financial loss and expense, including reasonable
legal fees and costs, if any, arising out of any claim, demand, suit or
judgment by reason of negligence or other act resulting in accidental injury
to a person or accidental damage to or destruction of property the following
persons: all elected or appointed officials and officers of the town including
but not limited to members of Board of Selectmen, members of the town's
administrative, judicial and advisory boards, commissions and committees,
including those boards provided under Town Charter Article X and all
other appointive officers provided under Town Charter Article V, and all
employees of the town, provided that the indemnified person was acting in
the scope of his office or employment at the time of the accident resulting in
the injury, damage or destruction and the accident occurred after April 12,
1988.
§ 64-3. Coverage by other insurance.
The adoption of this chapter, however, shall not relieve any insurer from
its duty of indemnifying and saving harmless from loss the above-named
persons under any insurance policy which the town maintains, and the town
shall indemnify and save harmless from loss the above-named persons only
to the extent not covered by such insurance.
Chapter 65
INFORMATION FROM EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 53.
E. Ensure full and effective coordination of all issues pertaining to the
establishment of roadways (statutory responsibility of the Planning
Board) and highway safety.
9. Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
section has been revised to change "Town Council" to "Board of Selectmen," and
"Executive Administrator" has been deleted. Said Res. No. R92-71 also repealed the
Charter of the Town of Hudson.
§ 61-2 HUDSON CODE § 64-3
1:26
§ 65-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCURATE — Will have been checked and double-checked before being
presented.
COMPLETE — All information known by the presenter to be available, and
not just what he wants to present.
CURRENT — Most recent information available on the subject.
§ 65-2. Information guidelines.10
All data and/or information provided to the Board of Selectmen by the town
employees, whether voluntarily or requested, will be current, accurate and
complete.
Chapter 65A
(RESERVED)
Chapter 66
(RESERVED)
Chapter 67
LAND USE CHANGE TAX FUND
Chapter 68
(RESERVED)
Chapter 69
MEETINGS AND MINUTES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Elections — See Ch. 48. Publication of ordinances — See Ch. 80.
10.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
section has been revised to replace "Council" with "Board of Selectmen."
§ 64-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 65-2
1:27

ARTICLE I
Additions to Checklist
[Article 10, voted in the affirmative 3-8-1974 by the Annual Town
Meeting, reads as follows: "To see if the Town will vote to adopt
the provisions of RSA 55:9a, 55:9b and 55:9c, authorizing the Town
Clerk to accept applications for additions of names to the Checklist
during regular business hours."]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 65-2
1:29

ARTICLE II
Rules of Order
[Adopted 1-8-1990 by Res. No. R90-611]
§ 69-1. Rules adopted.
The Board of Selectmen of the Town of Hudson adopt Robert's Rules of
Order and the Rules of the Selectmen of Hudson (amended as deemed
necessary by the Selectmen), thereby establishing this legislative body's
operating procedure.
11.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
article has been revised to replace "Council" with "Selectmen."
§ 69-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-1
1:31

ARTICLE III
Selectmen Meeting Minutes
[Adopted 4-27-1992 by Res. No. R92-5912]
§ 69-2. Minutes to be kept; contents.
Minutes of Selectmen meetings shall be kept, citing action taken by the
Selectmen as follows:
A. A description of items being voted on.
B. Maker of the motion.
C. Amendments or stipulations.
D. Vote (voice or roll call).
E. Names of Selectmen for or against.13
12.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
article has been revised to replace "Council" with "Selectmen."
13.Editor's Note: Former §§ 69-3, Availability of tapes, and 69-4, Time limit for retention of
tapes, which immediately followed this section, were repealed 12-11-2007.
§ 69-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-2
1:33
Chapter 75
NEGOTIATING TEAM FOR LABOR CONTRACTS
§ 75-1. Membership of Negotiating Team.
The Negotiating Team for all labor contracts shall consist of the following:
§ 75-2. Selection of Selectmen liaison.
The Selectmen liaison shall be chosen by the Chairman and ratified by the
Selectmen.
§ 75-3. (Reserved)14
Chapter 78
OATHS OF OFFICE
§ 78-1. Designation of board, commission and committee members
as Town officers.
Members of each committee, board or commission, created or authorized
by vote of Town Meeting shall be considered Town officers and shall be
required to take the oath of office as prescribed by RSA 42:1.
§ 78-2. Members required to take oath.
The following committee members shall be required to take the oath of
office: Conservation Commission, Nashua Regional Planning Commission,
Planning Board, Recreation Committee, Zoning Board of Adjustment, Sewer
Utility Committee, Water Utility Committee, Board of Selectmen and Budget
Committee.
Chapter 80
ORDINANCES, PUBLICATION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Meetings and minutes — See Ch. 69.
A. One Selectman as liaison.
B. The Town Administrator or his/her designee.
C. One department head/supervisor to act as liaison.
D. A professional negotiator who will be the spokesperson for the team.
14.Editor's Note: Former § 75-3, When effective, was deleted at the request of the town.
§ 69-2 HUDSON CODE § 78-2
1:34
§ 80-1. Publication of Selectmen ordinances. [Amended 8-4-1992]
In regard to ordinances/regulations to be adopted by the Board of
Selectmen, the publication procedure set forth below shall be followed:
§ 80-2. Vote on form of publication of land use ordinances.
All land use ordinances, or amendments thereof, shall also require the
Board of Selectmen to vote on whether to publish in a local newspaper
by title only, abstract only or full text before such land use ordinances,
or amendments thereof, are placed on the ballot of the biennial or special
election.
Chapter 84
PERSONNEL PLAN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Indemnification -- See Ch. 64
Chapter 88
PLANNING BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Regional Planning Commission — See Ch.
116.
Zoning Board of Adjustment — See Ch. 143.
Site plan review — See Ch. 275.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 289.
Zoning — See Ch. 334.
A. Notice that the Selectmen are considering such an ordinance/
regulation shall be published in the local newspaper prior to the
Selectmen's meeting at which the ordinance/regulation will be
considered.
B. When the ordinance/regulation is considered, the Selectmen shall allow
comments from the public.
C. Upon adoption, the full text shall be published in a local newspaper and
be filed with the Town Clerk for incorporation into the Code.
§ 78-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-2
1:35

ARTICLE I
Establishment
[Article 23, voted in the affirmative 3-14-1959 by the Annual Town
Meeting, reads as follows: "To see if the Town will vote to authorize
the Selectmen to appoint a Town Planning Board of five members,
under the provisions of Chapter 55 of the Public Laws of New
Hampshire."]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-2
1:37

ARTICLE II
Nonresidential Site Plans
[Article 33, voted in the affirmative 3-2-1976 by the Annual Town
Meeting, reads as follows: "To see if the Town will vote to adopt
provisions of R.S.A. 36:19-a empowering the Planning Board to
review and approve, or disapprove, site plans for the development
of tracts for non-residential uses whether or not such development
includes a subdivision or resubdivision of the site."]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-2
1:39
Chapter 98
PURCHASING AND CONTRACTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Costs for visits — See Ch. 141.
§ 80-2 HUDSON CODE § 80-2
1:40
ARTICLE I
General Purchasing Regulations
[Adopted under Article 5.14 of the Charter of the Town of Hudson,15
continued by motion of the Board of Selectmen 7-1-1992; amended
2-23-1993; 3-3-1999; 10-28-2003 by the Board of Selectmen.]
§ 98-1. Policy stated.
It shall be the policy of the Town of Hudson, New Hampshire, as adopted by
the Board of Selectmen that:
§ 98-2. Purchasing agent.
The Finance Director of the Town shall serve as the Board of Selectmen's
designee as Purchasing Agent.
A. The Administrative Code shall establish purchasing and contract
procedures, including the assignment of all responsibilities for such
purchases, to the Board or Selectman or its designee, or such
purchasing agent as established by the legislative body, and the
combination purchasing of similar articles by different departments.
B. The Board of Selectman (BOS) shall establish from time to time dollar
limits for purchases and contracts, which must be by competitive bid,
and shall establish the bidding procedures. No competitive bids shall be
required when purchasing through the State of New Hampshire bid
prices.
C. Requirements for bids may be waived in specific instances by a majority
vote of the BOS in attendance at a duly advertised meeting. The BOS
shall establish dollar amounts for purchases or contracts, beyond which
no purchase shall be made or contracts entered into without the
affirmative vote of a majority of the BOS in attendance at a duly
advertised meeting. Once the BOS has voted to make a purchase or
enter into a contract, the Chairman shall carry out the vote of the BOS
and enter into such transaction on behalf of the Town.
D. The purchase of, or the contract for the provision of, all materials,
supplies, and contractual services utilized by any agency of the Town of
Hudson shall be pursued in accordance with the provisions of this
article and other such rules and regulations, as may be promulgated by
the Finance Director with the approval of the Board of Selectmen.
E. In no instance shall such rules and regulations promulgated by the
Finance Director, with the approval of the BOS, contradict any
provision of this article. The provisions of these rules do not apply to the
acquisition or disposition of real property or improvements, nor does it
apply to appurtenant structures valued over $10,000.
15.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, repealed
the Hudson Town Charter.
§ 98-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-3
1:41
§ 98-3. Powers and duties of the purchasing agent.
The Finance Director shall direct the operation of the Town's purchasing
system as follows:
A. With the approval of the BOS, the Finance Director shall establish, and
amend when necessary, all rules and regulations allowed by this article
and necessary to the effective operation of the purchasing system.
B. The Finance Director shall approve and/or negotiate all purchases and
contracts made by the Town. All such approvals or negotiations are
subject to the review and/or approval of the BOS unless otherwise
provided for in this article.
C. The Finance Director shall prescribe and maintain such forms as he/she
shall find reasonable and necessary to fulfill the purpose of this article.
D. The Finance Director shall prepare and adopt a standard purchasing
nomenclature for using agencies and suppliers.
E. When deemed necessary or desirable, the Finance Director shall
combine requirements of using agencies to effect delivery, unit cost or
other procurement factors that are in the best interests of the Town.
F. When deemed necessary or desirable, the Finance Director, with the
approval of the BOS, shall have the authority to join with other units of
government in cooperative purchasing plans to effect delivery, unit cost
or other procurement factors that are in the best interests of the Town.
G. With the approval of the BOS, the Finance Director shall implement the
conditions and terms under which services, materials, and supplies may
be acquired from federal, state, school, and other government agencies
or associated organizations and to negotiate the prices of such
purchases.
H. The Finance Director shall maintain such stores of materials and
supplies as he/she deems necessary to support the individual and/or
aggregate requirements of the using agencies. The distribution of items
from such stores shall be executed only upon the approval of the
Finance Director according to rules and regulations promulgated by the
Finance Director.
I. With the approval of the BOS and in cooperation with using agencies,
the Finance Director may declare any operating equipment, materials
and supplies surplus. After reasonable public notice, the Finance
Director, with the approval of the BOS, may dispose of any item
declared to be surplus in a manner that encourages the most desirable
financial arrangement for the Town and provides for equal opportunity
for participation by the public.
§ 98-3 HUDSON CODE § 98-4
1:42
§ 98-4. Conflict of interest.
Any purchase order or contract within the purview of this article in which
the Finance Director, or any officer or employee of the Town, is financially
interested directly or indirectly shall be void; except that, before the
execution of a purchase order or contact, the BOS shall have the authority
to waive compliance with this provision when it finds such action to be in
the best interest of the Town.
§ 98-5. Selectmen action required for purchases and contracts over
$25,000.
§ 98-6. Rules and regulations for purchases and contacts under
$25,000.
A. A majority vote of the Board of Selectmen in attendance at a duly
advertised meeting is required to approve any purchases or contracts of
$25,000 or more. In support of the consideration of such action, the
Finance Director must provide the following information:
(1) The department or project budget to which the purchase or
contract would be charged;
(2) Confirmation that the budget impact of the proposed purchase or
contract does not give rise to the Town authorizing an
appropriation not budgeted at the annual budget, unless voted by a
majority of the BOS after a public hearing, conducted by the BOS,
held to discuss an appropriation transfer, and/or that no money
shall be drawn from the Treasury of the Town, nor shall any
obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred except
pursuant to a budget appropriation.
(3) Confirmation that advertising and competitive bidding procedures
were followed as provided for in Subsection A(4) below.
(4) A recommendation for award of purchase or contract to the lowest
bidder in accordance with the best interest of the Town.
B. The BOS may reject any or all bids on the recommendation of the
Finance Director or for other stated cause. Upon approval by the BOS
for a purchase or contact of $25,000 or more, the Chairman is
authorized to execute such contractual instruments as may be required
to complete the transaction.
A. For purchases and contracts less than $25,000, the Finance Director
shall establish rules and regulations that assure the following:
(1) Competition;
(2) Equal opportunity as required by applicable federal, state, and
Town laws;
(3) Contractual protection of the Town;
§ 98-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-6
1:43
§ 98-7. Bidding procedures.
For all planned purchases and contracts of goods and services estimated to
total $10,000 or more, the following shall be required.
(4) Award of purchases and contacts to the lowest bidder in
accordance with the best interest of the Town; and
(5) Compliance with the provisions of § 98-5A(2).
B. Approval requirements. The Board of Selectmen shall from time to time
establish the approval requirements for all purchases and contracts
less than $25,000.
A. A description in the form of specifications, proposed scope of services,
or other such documentation shall be developed that allows prospective
bidders to make a responsive bid in accordance with the best interests
of the Town. Such specifications, proposed scope of services or other
such documentation shall be reviewed for compliance with all relevant
Town policies and procedures by the Finance Director, and by the Town
Administrator for all purchases and contracts estimated to total
$25,000 or more.
B. Solicitation of bids. Bids shall be solicited as follows:
(1) At least four qualified bidders shall receive direct solicitations in
writing to bid on the basis of documentation as described in
§ 98-7A. If fewer than four qualified bidders are solicited to bid, the
reasons shall be documented and placed in the files of the Town.
Such solicitations shall be mailed at least 14 days prior to the bid
opening date as described below.
(2) The Town's desire to receive bids shall be published in at least one
general circulation news publication that serves the Nashua
Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area. Such advertisement shall
briefly describe the service, material, supply, or equipment to be
purchased, the method of obtaining the complete description of the
desired service, material, supply, or equipment, the form in which
the bid is to be delivered to the Town, the time, date and location of
receipt of the bid, and the time, date, and location for opening and
announcement of bids. Such advertisement shall appear at least 14
calendar days before the planned date of receipt of bids.
C. Determination of successful bidder. For any purchase or contact of
$25,000 or more, the Finance Director shall submit a recommendation
to the Board of Selectmen, as described in § 98-5, no more than 30 days
after the opening and/or announcement of bids. For purchases of
$10,000 but less than $25,000, the Finance Director shall submit a
recommendation for approval by a majority of the BOS.
D. Disqualified bidders. The Town of Hudson BOS shall review and
consider the past course of dealings that the municipality has had, if
§ 98-6 HUDSON CODE § 98-7
1:44
§ 98-8. Contracting authority.
any, with a prospective bidder, respondent, contractor, or employee in
evaluating a response to any Town solicitation for bids, proposals, work,
or employment.
A. Subject to other provisions of this article and consistent with other
applicable provisions of the laws of the state of New Hampshire and the
Town of Hudson, the BOS is authorized to execute such contractual
instruments as may be required to complete the purchase of any
operating equipment, material, supply, service, or improvement to real
property on behalf of all agencies of the Town of Hudson.
B. The BOS may assign contracting authority, i.e., signature privilege, to
the Chairman of the Planning Board for Land Use Fees called "Agency
Fees," listed as 1260, 1270, and other land use fees that may be agreed
to by the Planning Board and with the signature of the developer to pay
for 100% of any improvement, without Town matching funds, connected
with any Planning Board approved development. All purchases of goods
and/or services must comply with all of the policies and regulations of
the Town of Hudson and this Purchasing Policy. No expenditure of
Agency Fee monies that would hold the Town of Hudson liable for
reimbursement or matching funds, and therefore impact the tax rate for
the Town of Hudson, may be made without the express authorization of
the Hoard of Selectmen in compliance with this Purchasing Policy.
C. Each land use board may accept and use gifts, grants, or contributions
for the exercise of its functions, in accordance with the purchasing
policy procedures established herein.
§ 98-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-8
1:45

ARTICLE II
(Reserved)16
§ 98-9. through § 98-12. (Reserved)
16.Editor's Note: Former Article II, American-Made Products Policy, adopted 2-13-1990 by
Res. No. R90-5A, as amended, was deleted at the town's request with Supplement No. 9.
§ 98-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-9
1:47

ARTICLE III
Sand, Gravel, Stone and Bituminous Products
[Adopted 4-23-1991 by Res. No. R91-26]
§ 98-10. Contract for purchases; procedure.
After the effective date of this article, all purchases of sand, gravel, stone
and bituminous products shall be contracted for at the beginning of each
year for a one-year period only via the sealed bid procedure known as a
"purchase agreement," which shall be drafted by the Town Legal Officer.
This article shall become effective 30 days after passage, as follows:
§ 98-11. Exceptions.
Only in rare and unusual cases shall this article be violated (i.e., violent
acts of nature, which would result in an immediate safety health hazard to
residents).
A. Year No. 1 shall begin 30 days after passage and continue through June
30, 1992.
B. Year No. 2 shall begin on July 1, 1992, and continue through June 30,
1993.
C. All future years shall begin on July 1 and end on June 30 of the following
year.
D. At least five bidders shall be sent invitations for sealed bids. If fewer
than three bids are received, a permanent record of that bid process
shall be filed in the Administrative Office of Hudson, with a copy to each
Selectman.17
E. Sealed bid procedure shall follow all current and future rules of
procurement now in force in the state statutes.
F. All awards shall be made after review and approval of the Board of
Selectmen, by resolution, duly adopted.18
17.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
subsection has been revised to change "Councillor" to "Selectman."
18.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
subsection has been revised to change "Council" to "Board of Selectmen."
§ 98-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-11
1:49
Chapter 104
REAL ESTATE, SALE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tax Collector — See Ch. 137.
Chapter 108
RECORDS RETENTION
Chapter 112
RECREATION COMMITTEEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 259.
Chapter 116
REGIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Board — See Ch. 88. Zoning Board of Adjustment — See Ch. 143.
Chapter 126
ROADS, APPLICATION PROCEDURE FOR DEDICATION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Driveways — See Ch. 193.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 284.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 289.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 317.
Inventory of streets — See Ch. A340.
§ 126-1. Application for acceptance.19
Any person, partnership, association or corporation or any official,
department or board of the Town of Hudson, including the Town Engineer
or the Board of Selectmen's designee and the Planning Board, with a
direct interest in the town's acceptance of a road or who will be directly
affected by the town's acceptance of a road may apply to Hudson Board of
Selectmen for the acceptance of a road within the Town of Hudson that has
19.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
section has been revised to replace "Town Council" with "Board of Selectmen."
§ 98-11 HUDSON CODE § 126-1
1:50
been dedicated to public use. The application procedure is set forth in this
chapter.
§ 126-2. Filing of request.20
The applicant shall file in triplicate a written request to the Hudson Board
of Selectmen signed by the applicant or an agent of the application for the
acceptance of a road dedicated to public use as a town road with the Town
Engineer or the Board of Selectmen's designee, c/o Town Hall, 12 School
Street, Hudson, New Hampshire 03051.
§ 126-3. Written request to include.
The written request shall state:
§ 126-4. Information and fee to be submitted with request.
The applicant shall submit with the written request the following:
A. The name, address and phone number of the applicant and the
applicant's agent.
B. A description of the road, including the following:
(1) The name of the road.
(2) The location of the road by reference to existing roads and/or other
landmarks.
(3) The approximate length of the road.
(4) A reference to the plan on which the road was dedicated to public
use, including the HCRD Plan Number or a reference to the deed or
other instrument by which the road was dedicated to public use
and HCRD Book and Page Number.
C. A statement setting forth the applicant's direct interest in the
acceptance of the road.
D. A statement whether there is an outstanding bond or other security on
the road or affecting the road, the amount of any outstanding bond and
the date the bond is to expire. An example of a bond or other security
"affecting the road" is a subdivision bond to secure the completion of
subdivision improvements where the dedicated road is a road within
the subdivision.
A. A fee of $50 to cover administrative costs, unless the applicant is a town
official, department or board acting in their official capacities.
B. Proof to be submitted in triplicate that the road was dedicated to public
use such as a plan on file with the Hillsborough County Registry of
20.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
section has been revised to replace "Town Council" with "Board of Selectmen."
§ 126-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-4
1:51
§ 126-5. Information to comprise application.
The written request described in §§ 126-2 and 126-3 above and any
documents submitted under § 126-4 shall comprise the application for
acceptance of a dedicated road (hereafter "application").
§ 126-6. Town Engineer or Board of Selectmen's designee to review
application; additional requirements.
The Town Engineer or the Board of Selectmen's designee shall review the
application for completeness and accuracy, including the completeness and
accuracy of the statement on an outstanding bond or other security. To
ascertain the proper road location, he may require the applicant to file a
plan of survey prepared by a licensed engineer or surveyor. To ascertain
road construction standards, he may require the applicant to file a report
prepared by a licensed engineer, on the standards and specifications of the
road construction.
§ 126-7. Reasons for nonacceptance.
The Town Engineer or the Board of Selectmen's designee shall not accept
the filing of an application if:
§ 126-8. Notification of nonacceptance.
If the Town Engineer or the Board of Selectmen's designee does not accept
the filing of an application under § 126-7, he shall notify the applicant in
writing noting the reasons therefor. If the applicant corrects all deficiencies,
the Town Engineer or the Board of Selectmen's designee shall accept the
filing of the application.
§ 126-9. Town Engineer or Board of Selectmen's designee to inquire
concerning objections.
After accepting the filing of the application, the Town Engineer or the Board
of Selectmen's designee shall inquire of the Fire Chief and the Police Chief
whether they have any objections, reservations or pertinent comments on
Deeds (HCRD) or a deed or other written conveyance on file with the
Hillsborough County Registry of Deeds dedicating the road to public
use.
C. Any other pertinent documentation, to be submitted in triplicate, that
the applicant decides to submit in support of the application (optional).
A. The application is incomplete or inaccurate;
B. The application is not filed in triplicate; or
C. The applicant does not pay the fifty-dollar administrative fee. (Town
officials, departments or boards acting in their official capacity do not
have to pay the fifty-dollar administrative fee.)
§ 126-4 HUDSON CODE § 126-9
1:52
town acceptance of the road. The Fire Chief and Police Chief shall report in
writing to the Town Engineer within 30 days of the inquiry.
§ 126-10. Inspection of road. [Amended 10-9-2018]
After receipt and review of the reports of the Fire Chief and Police Chief, the
Town Engineer, Public Works Director or the Board of Selectmen's designee
shall make an on-site inspection of the road. He shall prepare a written
report on his inspection (hereafter "the Town Engineer's or the Board of
Selectmen's designee's report"). This report shall state the standards and
specifications which the road meets and the present condition of the road.
It shall also include a statement on whether there is an outstanding bond on
or affecting the road, the bond amount and expiration date of the bond.
§ 126-11. Jurisdiction of Planning Board.
§ 126-12. Referral to Planning Board.
If the road is subject to the jurisdiction of the Planning Board, the Town
Engineer or the Board of Selectmen's designee shall refer the application,
the reports from the Police Chief and Fire Chief and the Town Engineer's
or the Board of Selectmen's designee's report to the Planning Board. The
Planning Board shall reply in writing to the Town Engineer or the Board
of Selectmen's designee with its recommendation within 30 days of the
referral.
§ 126-13. Determination of jurisdiction and recommendation.
If the Town Engineer or the Board of Selectmen's designee determines
the road is not within the Planning Board's jurisdiction and therefore no
Planning Board recommendation is required, he shall note this fact in the
Town Engineer's or the Board of Selectmen's designee's report.
A. The Town Engineer or the Board of Selectmen's designee shall
ascertain whether the road is subject to the jurisdiction of the Planning
Board. If the road is within the Planning Board's jurisdiction, the
Planning Board shall have a right to make a recommendation on
whether the Board of Selectmen should approve town acceptance of the
road.21
B. A road is within the Planning Board's jurisdiction if:
(1) There is an outstanding bond or other security on or affecting the
road by the Planning Board's direction; and/or
(2) The road is part of a project which is pending before the Planning
Board.
21.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
subsection has been revised to replace "Town Council" with "Board of Selectmen."
§ 126-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-14
1:53
§ 126-14. Town Engineer's or Board of Selectmen's designee's
report.22
After receipt and review of the recommendation from the Planning Board,
if required, or if no Planning Board referral is required, when preparing
the Town Engineer's or the Board of Selectmen's designee's report, the
Town Engineer or the Board of Selectmen's designee shall affix to the
Town Engineer's or the Board of Selectmen's designee's report his
recommendation on whether the Board of Selectmen should accept the
dedication of the road and the reasons therefor. The application, the reports
of the Police Chief and Fire Chief, the recommendation of the Planning
Board, if required, and the Town Engineer's or the Board of Selectmen's
designee's report, with his recommendation, shall constitute the file.
§ 126-15. Copy to be forwarded to Board of Selectmen.23
After preparing his recommendation and assuring the file is complete, the
Town Engineer or the Board of Selectmen's designee shall forward one copy
of the complete file to Board of Selectmen for its action.
§ 126-16. Submission of applications by Planning Board.24
A. In lieu of the above procedure, the Hudson Planning Board may submit
applications for acceptance of town roads, subject to its jurisdiction
under § 126-11, directly to the Board of Selectmen. The application
shall consist of:
(1) The approved subdivision plan(s) showing the road(s).
(2) A certification from the Planning Board that:
(a) The Planning Board has approved the subdivision;
(b) The road(s) has received engineering inspection approval after
completion of the road(s);
(c) The amount of the bond or the security posted on the
subdivision and/or road(s) and the expiration date of the bond
or other security; and
(d) The Planning Board recommends acceptance of the road(s).
B. Upon receipt of the application, the Board of Selectmen shall act upon it
in accordance with § 126-17.
22.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
section has been revised to replace "Council" with "Board of Selectmen."
23.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
section has been revised to replace "Town Council" with "Board of Selectmen."
24.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
section has been revised to replace "Town Council" with "Board of Selectmen."
§ 126-14 HUDSON CODE § 126-17
1:54
§ 126-17. Acceptance by Board of Selectmen.
Within 30 days after receipt of the complete file from the Town Engineer
or the Board of Selectmen's designee or the application from the Planning
Board, the Board of Selectmen shall either approve acceptance of the road
or disapprove acceptance of the road. If the Board of Selectmen accepts the
road, the Clerk shall forward to the town's codifier a true copy of the vote
accepting the road for inclusion as a town-accepted road in Chapter A340
of the Code of the Town of Hudson, Inventory of Streets. If the Board of
Selectmen does not accept the road, the motion shall state the reason(s) for
disapproval.
§ 126-18. Application for acceptance by town officials, departments
or boards.
No town official, department or board shall be required to apply for
acceptance of a dedicated road by the town on behalf of any person,
partnership, association or corporation even though the official, department
or board in its official capacities has a direct interest in or will be affected
by the town's acceptance of the road.
§ 126-19. Forwarded copy to be complete.25
The Town Engineer or the Board of Selectmen's designee shall use best
efforts to assure that the complete file is forwarded to the Board of
Selectmen for its action in accordance with § 126-15 within 90 days after
the filing of the application is accepted.
§ 126-20. Town Engineer or Board of Selectmen's designee to
delegate duties.
The Town Engineer or the Board of Selectmen's designee may delegate
any of the duties assigned under this chapter, including the preparation of
the report and recommendation, to another qualified staff member or to a
qualified consultant hired by the town. The Town Engineer or the Board of
Selectmen's designee, however, is responsible to assure all delegated duties
are properly performed.
§ 126-21. Road to conform to specifications. [Added 12-12-1989 by
Res. No. R89-102]
The Town Engineer shall certify that the road being considered for
acceptance meets all present town specifications or shall submit an
engineering estimate as to the cost to bring the road in question up to said
specifications.
25.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
section has been revised to replace "Town Council" with "Board of Selectmen."
§ 126-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-22
1:55
§ 126-22. Recoupment. [Added 12-12-1989 by Res. No. R89-102]
The legal officer shall certify that all avenues of recoupment are being
pursued or have been exhausted.
Chapter 132
SITE PLANS, ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW
Chapter 137
TAX COLLECTOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 306.
§ 126-22 HUDSON CODE § 126-22
1:56
ARTICLE I
Deputy Tax Collector
[Article 8, voted in the affirmative 3-9-1973 by the Annual Town
Meeting, reads as follows: "To see if the Town will vote to authorize
the tax collector to appoint a deputy in accordance with RSA 41:38,
as it pertains to the appointment of deputy tax collectors."]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-22
1:57

ARTICLE II
Waiver of Interest Due on Taxes
[Adopted 2-13-1990 as Res. No. R90-8A]
§ 137-1. Duty to waive interest.
The Tax Collector shall waive interest due that amounts to less than five
dollars ($5.) on all taxes.
§ 137-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-1
1:59
Chapter 140
(RESERVED)
Chapter 141
VISITS, COSTS FOR
§ 141-1. Reimbursement required.
Any person or organization who or which requests special services which
generate costs to the Town of Hudson beyond that which is provided to any
visitor to or passing through this town shall, through its sponsoring person
or organization, agree to reimburse the town for all such expenses incurred.
§ 141-2. Department head to submit invoices.
To this end, each department head shall submit to the Town Finance Officer,
within five working days from the departure of such person or organization
from the town, a detailed invoice of all such charges incurred which will be
billed to the responsible party by the Town's Finance Officer.
§ 141-3. Exceptions.
Exempt from the above shall be demonstrations, including but not limited
to parades sponsored by nonprofit organizations, elected state or federal
governmental officials who have not filed for reelection and any other
person or organization deemed to be exempt by a two-thirds vote of those
members present and voting of the legislative branch of the Hudson Town
government.
Chapter 142
MUNICIPAL UTILITY COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 270. Water utility — See Ch. 274.
§ 142-1. Authority.
A. NH RSA 38:4 authorizes the Town to establish ownership of a water
system through the Annual or a Special Town Meeting; and
B. NH RSA Chapter 149-I authorizes the Town to construct and maintain a
wastewater treatment system for the handling and treatment of
sewage; and
§ 137-1 HUDSON CODE § 142-1
1:60
§ 142-2. Committee established; duties.
The Town of Hudson Board of Selectmen does hereby establish a Municipal
Utility Committee, and said Committee shall have the following duties and
responsibilities:
§ 142-3. Membership.
The Board of Selectmen shall appoint Committee members, as follows:
C. RSA 38:26(I) authorizes the Board of Selectmen to adopt such
ordinances and bylaws relating to the water system or structures as
required for proper maintenance and operation. NH RSA 149-I:24 and
NH RSA 149-I:6 authorize the Board of Selectmen to adopt bylaws and
ordinances as required for the proper operation and maintenance of the
sewage system.
A. Oversee the preparation of bylaws, policies, and procedures for the
water utility and sewer utility.
B. Make recommendations for and provide overview regarding an annual
budget and provide overview of income and expenditures for the water
utility and the sewer utility. The budget, records of income and
expenditures shall be maintained separate from those of other Town
operations.
C. Make recommendations for a capital improvement plan and provide
overview regarding a capital reserve for the water utility and the sewer
utility.
D. Provide overview and make recommendations regarding the ongoing
administration and operations of the water utility and the sewer utility.
E. Final authority for actions by the Municipal Utility Committee will
remain with the Board of Selectmen.
F. Carry out all other duties delegated to the Municipal Utility Committee
by Hudson Town Code Chapter 270, Sewers.
A. The Municipal Utility Committee shall consist of seven members, who
shall reside in the Town.
(1) Two shall:
(a) Reside in the Town and reside in a dwelling unit which is
serviced by the sewer system established by the Town; or
(b) Reside in the Town and own real estate which is either so
serviced by the sewer system or so situated in a sewer district;
and
(2) Two shall:
§ 142-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-3
1:61
§ 142-4. Meetings.
The Municipal Utility Committee shall hold meetings at least once monthly
and shall post notice of meetings in accordance with the public meeting
notification policy of the Town, and the Right to Know Law, RSA Chapter
91-A.
Chapter 143
ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Board — See Ch. 88.
Regional Planning Commission — See Ch.
116.
Zoning — See Ch. 334.
§ 143-1. History.
Adopted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment of the Town of Hudson
12-14-1978; amended in its entirety 06-23-1988, and amended again in its
entirety on 06-23-2011. Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.
Amended in its entirety on 10-12-17.
§ 143-2. Authority.
These bylaws of the Hudson Zoning Board of Adjustment, hereinafter
referenced simply as the "Board," are adopted under the authority of NH-
(a) Reside in the Town and reside in a dwelling unit served by the
water utility; or
(b) Reside in the Town and own real estate which is served by the
water utility; and
(3) Three shall reside in the Town and may reside in a dwelling or an
area not serviced by municipal sewer or water.
(4) Additionally, the Committee may have an alternate member, who
shall meet the qualification of Subsection A(1)(a) or (b) above.
B. Terms of office shall be for three years and until their successors are
appointed. The first Committee membership shall have three positions
appointed for three years, three positions appointed for two years and
two positions appointed for one year in order to ensure that
appointments are always staggered.
C. Committee members may be reappointed as approved by the Board of
Selectmen. Terms shall begin in May of each year unless a resignation
occurs.
§ 142-3 HUDSON CODE § 143-2
1:62
RSA (New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated) 676:I. In the event of a
difference between these bylaws and the applicable NH-RSAs, the NHRSAs
take precedence over these bylaws.
§ 143-3. Purpose.
The purpose of these bylaws is to ensure an orderly procedure in the
execution of the duties of the Board.
§ 143-4. Amendments.
These bylaws may be amended by a majority vote of the voting members at
a regular meeting of the Board, provided such amendments are read at two
successive public meetings.
§ 143-5. Officers.
§ 143-6. Members and alternates.
A. A Chairman shall be elected annually by a majority vote of the Board at
the first meeting in the month of January. The Chairman shall preside
over all meetings and hearings, appoint such committees as directed by
the Board and shall affix his/her signature in the name of the Board.
B. A Vice-Chairman shall be elected annually by a majority vote of the
Board at the first meeting in the month of January. The Vice-Chairman
shall preside in the absence of the Chairman and shall have the full
powers of the Chairman on matters which come before the Board
during the absence of the Chairman.
C. A Clerk shall be elected annually by a majority vote of the Board at the
first meeting in the month of January. The Clerk shall maintain a record
of all meetings, transactions and decisions of the Board, and perform
such other duties as the Board may direct by resolution.
D. All officers shall serve for one year and shall be eligible for re-election.
A. Five regular members shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen,
attend all meetings, and sit as voting members.
B. Five alternate members shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen,
attend all meetings to familiarize themselves with the workings of the
Board and stand ready to serve whenever a regular member of the
Board is unable to fulfill his/her responsibilities.
C. A Selectman liaison may be appointed by the Board of Selectman to act
as a liaison between the two boards and should attend all meetings but
shall have no voting powers nor the ability to sit in place of any regular
member not in attendance.
D. At meetings of the Board, alternates who are not activated to fill the
seat of an absent or recused member or who have not been appointed
§ 143-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-6
1:63
§ 143-7. Meetings.
by the Chairman to temporarily fill the unexpired term of a vacancy
may participate with the Board in a limited capacity. During a public
hearing, alternates may sit at the table with the regular members and
may view documents, listen to testimony, ask questions and interact
with other Board members, the applicant, abutters and the public.
Alternates shall not be allowed to make or second motions. Once the
Board moves into deliberations, alternates shall remove themselves
from any further deliberations with the Board. During work sessions or
portions of meetings that do not include a public hearing, alternates
may fully participate, exclusive of any motions or votes that may be
made. At all times, the Chairman shall fully inform the public of the
status of any alternate present and identify the members who shall be
voting on the application.
E. All members and alternates must reside in the community and are
expected to attend each meeting of the Board to exercise their duties
and responsibilities. Any member unable to attend a meeting shall
notify the Chairman as soon as possible. Members, including the
Chairman and all officers, shall participate in the decision-making
process and vote to approve or disapprove all motions under
consideration.
A. Regular meetings (for appeals and hearings) shall be held at Hudson
Town Hall, at 7:00 p.m. on the fourth Thursday of each month in
accordance with RSA 676:5 through 676:7 and RSA 91-A:2. The
Chairman may schedule additional overflow meetings, or reschedule
meetings after consultation with the Zoning Administrator (or
designee).
B. Other meetings may be held on the call of the Chairman, or a majority
vote of the Board in accordance with RSA 91-A:2II.
C. All Board members shall be given notice of meetings by mail or email
one week prior to the meeting date.
D. Quorum. A quorum for all meetings of the Board shall be three
members, including alternates sitting in place of members.
(1) The Chairman shall make every effort to ensure that all five
members, and one or two alternates, are present for the
consideration of any appeal or application.
(2) If any regular Board member is absent from any meeting or
hearing, or disqualifies himself from sitting on a particular case,
the Chairman shall designate one of the alternate members to sit in
place of the absent or disqualified member, and such alternate shall
be in all respects a full member of the Board while so sitting.
(3) Alternates shall generally be activated on a rotating basis from
those present at a particular meeting. When an alternate is needed,
§ 143-6 HUDSON CODE § 143-7
1:64
the Chairman shall select the alternate who has not been activated
for the longest time.
(4) If there are fewer than five members (including alternates) present,
the Chairman shall give the option to proceed or not to the
applicant. Should the applicant choose to proceed with less than
five members present that shall not solely constitute grounds for a
rehearing should the application fail.
E. Disqualifications.
(1) If any member finds it necessary to disqualify himself from sitting
in a particular case, as provided in RSA 673:14, he shall notify the
Chairman as soon as possible so that an alternate may be requested
to sit in his place. When there is uncertainty as to whether a
member should be disqualified to act on a particular application,
that member or another member of the Board may request the
Board to vote on the question of disqualification. Any such request
shall be made before the public hearing gets underway. The vote
shall be advisory and nonbinding.
(2) Determining the threshold of disqualification can be difficult. To
assist a member in determining whether or not he should step
down (recuse himself), Board members should review the questions
which are asked of potential jurors to determine qualification (RSA
500-A:12). A potential juror may be asked whether he or she:
(a) Expects to gain or lose upon the disposition of the case;
(b) Is related to either party;
(c) Has advised or assisted either party;
(d) Has directly or indirectly given an opinion or formed an
opinion;
(e) Is employed by or employs any party in the case;
(f) Is prejudiced to any degree regarding the case; or
(g) Employs any of the counsel appearing in the case in any action
then pending in the court.
(3) Either the Chairman or the member disqualifying himself/herself
before the beginning of the public hearing on the case shall
announce the disqualification. The disqualified shall step away
from the table during the public hearing and during all deliberation
on the case as he/she so chooses.
F. Order of Business. The order of business for regular meetings shall be
as follows:
(1) Call to order by the Chairman.
§ 143-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-7
1:65
§ 143-8. Application process.
(2) Roll call by the Clerk.
(3) Unfinished Business (Continued or Deferred Hearings).
(4) New Hearing(s).
(5) Requests for Rehearing.
(6) Approval of Minutes from Previous Meeting(s).
(7) New Business.
(8) Communications and Items of Interest to the Board, Other
Business.
(9) Adjournment
(Note: Although this is the usual order of business, the Board may wish to
hold the hearings immediately after the roll call in order to accommodate
the public, based on a positive vote of the Board.)
A. Applications
(1) Each application for a hearing before the Board shall be made on
forms provided by the Board and shall be presented to the Zoning
Administrator (or designee), who shall record the date and time of
receipt.
(a) Application deadline for meeting is 12:00 noon, 12 business
days (Monday through Friday, including holidays) prior to the
scheduled meeting date.
(b) Only complete and accurate applications will be submitted for
agenda action; incomplete or inaccurate applications will not
be submitted for agenda action.
(2) Appeals from an administrative decision taken under RSA 676:5
shall be filed within 30 days of the decision or when such decision
becomes known or reasonably could have been known by the
petitioner as determined by the Board.
(3) All forms and revisions prescribed shall be adopted by resolution of
the Board and shall become part of these rules of procedure
B. Public notice.
(1) Public notice of hearings on each application shall be given in a
general newspaper and shall be posted at Town Hall, the Town
Public Library and the Post Office not less than five (5) days before
the date fixed for the hearing. Notice shall include the name of the
applicant, description of property, to include Tax Map
identification, action desired by the applicant, provisions of the
§ 143-7 HUDSON CODE § 143-8
1:66
Zoning Ordinance concerned, the type of appeal being made, and
the date, time and place of the hearing.
(2) Personal notice shall be made by certified mail to the applicant and
all direct abutters and regular mail for indirect abutters within 200
feet not less than five (5) days before the date of the hearing.
(3) The applicant shall pay for all required notice costs in advance.
C. Public hearing. The conduct of public hearings shall be governed by the
following rules:
(1) The Chairman shall call the hearing in session by instructing the
Clerk to report on the first case.
(2) The Zoning Administrator shall report why the case has been
brought before the Board.
(3) Members and alternates of the Board, and any party to the case,
may ask questions at any point during testimony once recognized
by the Chairman.
(4) Each person who appears shall be required to state his/her name
and address for the record and indicate whether he/she is a party to
the case or an agent or counsel of a party to the case.
(5) The applicant shall be called to present his appeal.
(6) Those appearing in favor of the appeal shall be allowed to speak.
(7) Those in opposition or neutral to the appeal shall be allowed to
speak.
(8) The applicant and those in favor shall be allowed to speak in
rebuttal.
(9) Those in opposition to the appeal shall be allowed to speak in
rebuttal.
(10) Any person who wants the Board to compel the attendance of a
witness shall present his request in writing to the Chairman in
accordance with RSA 673:15.
(11) The Board of adjustment will hear with interest any evidence that
pertains to the facts of the case or how the facts relate to the
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and state zoning law.
(12) The Chairman shall present a summary setting forth the facts of
the case and the claims made for each side (see Findings of Facts
form in Appendix C). Opportunity shall be given for correction from
the floor.
§ 143-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-8
1:67
§ 143-9. Decision process.
§ 143-10. Deferment and Withdrawal.
(13) The public hearing on the Case shall be declared closed and the
Case will be declared to be before the Board. The Board will
deliberate and make its decision.
(14) All subsequent cases shall then be heard in the order they were
presented.
A. Before deliberations begin, the Chairman shall allow non-sitting
alternates, the Selectmen's Liaison, if present, and the Zoning
Administrator or his/her replacement to ask questions and give input, if
they so desire.
B. Once this phase is completed, the Chairman shall declare the matter
before the Board and the sitting members present who are voting will
raise any further questions they may have and then deliberate all
concerns in order to reach a decision on the request.
C. The Board shall vote on each of the applications for which testimony
was given, after adequate deliberations.
D. The Chairman shall announce all decisions after the vote has been
taken.
A. After public notice has been given, each application presented to the
Board for consideration may be deferred or withdrawn only by action of
the Board, following receipt of written notice to the Zoning
Administrator or to the Board, itself, by the applicant. A sitting member
must make a motion to defer until the next regular meeting or a date
specific, that motion must be seconded and voted on by the sitting
members of the case in question, and abutter notice shall be presumed
to have been accomplished by the decision of the Board's vote.
B. In the event that a deferred applicant is not ready when the case comes
back before the Board, the Board may initiate withdrawal of the
application, with or without prejudice, where "with prejudice" means
that any new application (unless substantially changed) cannot be filed
for a period of one year. Filing fees shall not be returned for withdrawn
cases that have been reviewed and processed by staff with public notice
of a scheduled hearing having been posted.
C. Moreover, once an application has been withdrawn, any reapplication
shall be considered a new application and the applicant shall be
required to pay all applicable fees for consideration. In the event of a
Board-initiated deferment, because members felt it necessary for more
information or other reason, a sitting member must make a motion to
defer until the next regular meeting or a date specific, that motion must
be seconded and voted on by the voting members of the case in
question, and abutter notice shall be presumed to have been
§ 143-8 HUDSON CODE § 143-10
1:68
§ 143-11. Reconsideration by Board.
The Board may reconsider a decision to grant or deny an application or
grant or deny a motion for rehearing, provided such reconsideration is
within the appeal period of the original decision as per RSA 676:3
§ 143-12. Motions for Rehearing.
If the Board grants a motion for rehearing, the new public hearing shall
be held within 30 days of the decision to grant the rehearing, provided
all notice fees are paid and an updated abutters list is submitted by the
party requesting the rehearing. Notification of the rehearing shall follow the
procedures set forth in RSA 677:2.
§ 143-13. Records.
§ 143-14. Waivers.
Any portion of these rules of procedure may be waived in such cases
where, in the opinion of the Board, strict conformity would pose a practical
difficulty to the applicant and a waiver would not be contrary to the spirit
and intent of the rules. A majority of the Board present shall vote any
waiver.
§ 143-15. Joint Meetings and Hearings.
accomplished by the decision of the Board's vote, but in some rare
instances the Board may require that notification fees be paid again for
deferred cases in order to ensure that abutters are properly notified.
In the event of the Board's acceptance of a request for deferment by
the applicant at the meeting, the request shall be handled in the same
manner as a Board-initiated deferment. In the event that the applicant
is not ready when the case comes back before the Board, the Board
may initiate withdrawal of the application, with or without prejudice, as
described above.
A. The records of the Board shall be kept by the Zoning Administrator and
made available for public inspection at Hudson Town Hall in
accordance with RSA 673:17.
B. Final written decisions will be placed on file and available for public
inspection within five business days after the decision is made (RSA
676:3)
C. Minutes of all meetings, including names of Board members, persons
appearing before the Board, and a brief description of the subject
matter, shall be open to public inspection within five business days of
the public meeting (RSA 91-A:2 II).
A. RSA 676:2 provides that the Board of Adjustment may hold joint
meetings or hearings with other "land use boards," including the
§ 143-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-15
1:69
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 154
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 210.
§ 154-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards and
regulations applicable to burglary, robbery and fire alarm systems and users
as defined in this chapter.
§ 154-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM INSTALLATION — The design, installation, repair, alteration and
maintenance of systems causing an alarm to be sounded in the event
of a burglary, holdup, medical emergency, fire or the occurrence of any
predetermined hostile situation.
Planning Board, the Historic District Commission, the Building Code
Board of Appeals, and the Inspector of Buildings, and that each board
shall have discretion as to whether or not to hold a joint meeting with
any other land use board.
B. Joint business meetings with any other land use board may be held at
any time when called jointly by the Chairmen of the two boards.
C. A public hearing on any appeal to the Board of Adjustment will be held
jointly with another board only under the following conditions:
(1) The joint public hearing must be a formal public hearing on appeals
to both boards regarding the same subject matter; and
(2) If the other board is the Planning Board, RSA 676:2 requires that
the Planning Board Chairman shall chair the joint hearing. If the
other board is not the Planning Board, then the Board of
Adjustment Chairman shall chair the joint hearing; and
(3) The provisions covering the conduct of public hearings, set forth in
these rules, together with such additional provisions as may be
required by the other board, shall be followed; and
(4) The other board shall concur with the above.
§ 143-15 HUDSON CODE § 154-2
1:70
ALARM SYSTEM — A signal device or the assembly of equipment and
devices arranged to signal a hazard or intrusion requiring urgent attention
and to which the Police, Ambulance or Fire Department is expected to
respond. In this chapter, the term "alarm system" shall include the terms
"tape dialer," "digital communicator," "direct connect alarm," "local alarm"
and "masterbox alarm," as those terms are hereinafter defined.
ALARM USER — Any person on whose premises an alarm is maintained
within the Town of Hudson, except for alarm systems on motor vehicles or
proprietary alarm systems.
ANSWERING SERVICE — A telephone answering service which provides
the service of receiving emergency signals from alarm systems and
thereafter immediately relaying the message by live voice to the
appropriate authority.
CENTRAL STATION — Any facility which is privately owned or that owns,
leases or sells alarm systems, whose facility is staffed by employees who
receive, record and validate alarm signals and relay the information of such
signals to the Police or Fire Department by any means.
CHIEF OF DEPARTMENT — Either the Fire Chief or the Chief of the Police
Department, whichever is appropriate.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of the Police Department or his designee.
DIGITAL COMMUNICATORS — An alarm system which automatically
selects a telephone line, electronically dials a preset telephone number and
communicates its message with a machine at the alarm receiving center.
DIRECT CONNECT — Any alarm system which is directly connected by
telephone lines or other hardware to the alarm processing unit within the
police monitoring facility or the fire alarm office.
FALSE ALARM — The activation of any alarm system to which the Police
or Fire Department responds, which is not the result of a robbery, burglary,
attempted robbery, attempted burglary, smoke or fire. This definition shall
not apply to alarms caused by electrical storms, floods or other violent
events of nature.
FIRE ALARM OFFICE — The entity within the Hudson Fire Department
where all alarms transmitted to the Hudson Fire Department are processed.
FALSE ALARM REDUCTION SEMINAR — Quarterly, the Hudson Police
Department and the Hudson Fire Department will host a false alarm
reduction seminar. Attendance in this seminar is voluntary and attendance
in this seminar will allow an alarm user to have one false alarm fee waived.
Only one waiver will be allowed in a twelve-month period.[Added
3-9-2004]
FIRE CHIEF — The Chief of the Fire Department or his designee.
LOCAL ALARM — Any alarm system not connected to any monitoring
facility and which, when activated, causes the activation of an audible and/
or visual signaling device at the premises within which the alarm system is
installed.
§ 154-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-2
1:71
MANUAL ALARM — Any alarm in which the activation of the alarm is
initiated by the direct action of the user, his agents or employees and is
installed to elicit a Police or Fire Department emergency response.
MASTERBOX ALARM — The transmission of a fire alarm signal to the fire
alarm office over a special municipally owned and maintained wire system,
herein referred to as the "Municipal Alarm System."
PERSON — Any natural person, corporation, unincorporated association or
other legal entity.26
PROPRIETARY SYSTEM — All alarm systems sounding and/or recording
alarm and supervisory signals at a control center located within the
protected premises, the control of which is under the supervision of the
proprietor of the protected premises or his employees or agents. If a
"proprietary alarm system" includes a signal line connected directly or
indirectly to the police communications center, or the fire alarm office, a
central station or answering service, it thereby becomes an alarm system as
defined by this chapter.
TAPE DIALER — An alarm system which automatically selects a telephone
line, dials a prerecorded telephone number and reproduces a prerecorded
voice message.
TOWN — The Town of Hudson, New Hampshire.
VERIFICATION — An independent method of determining that a signal
from a burglary/intrusion alarm system reflects a need for immediate police
response and investigation. The verification process must be conducted by
the central station monitoring personnel and must take no longer than five
minutes from the time the alarm signal has been accepted by the central
station monitoring person until a decision is made to whether to call for a
police dispatch.[Added 3-9-2004]
§ 154-3. Permit required. [Amended 3-9-2004]
Upon application, the Chief of Department is hereby authorized to issue
a permit to any owner or lessee of property located within the Town of
Hudson to maintain, modify or install any alarm system that reports to the
fire alarm office. Upon application, the Chief' of Police is hereby authorized
to issue a permit to any owner or lessee of property located within the Town
of Hudson to maintain, modify or install any alarm system that reports to a
central station.
A. The alarm user applying for the permit shall state on the application his
name, address and telephone number and, in the case of a corporation
or legal entity, the name(s), address(es) and telephone number(s) of the
person(s) responsible for the upkeep, maintenance and operation of the
alarm system and any other information that may be deemed necessary.
26.Editor's Note: The definition of "police alarm monitoring facility," which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 3-9-2004.
§ 154-2 HUDSON CODE § 154-3
1:72
§ 154-4. Permit fees.
§ 154-5. Maintenance or operation without permit; violations and
penalties.
(1) Upon application, the Chief of Police shall determine whether the
application conforms to the requirements of this chapter and
whether the facts stated therein are true and accurate. He may
have the system inspected for reliability and workmanship.
(2) Fire Department monitored systems: Upon application, the Fire
Chief shall determine whether the application conforms to the
requirements of this chapter and whether the facts stated therein
are true and accurate. He shall have the system inspected for
workmanship, functionability and compliance with the National
Electric Code, the National Fire Codes and any other codes or
regulations that may be applicable.
A. A residential permit shall apply to all private dwellings, individual
apartments or condominium units occupied primarily by the applicant,
for which the applicant shall pay to the Town a permit fee of $60. This
permit shall expire three years after the date of issuance. A new permit
will then be applied for. The fee for a permit renewal is $15. [Amended
3-9-2004; 2-24-2015 by Ord. No. 15-02]
B. A commercial permit shall apply to all businesses, corporations or
unincorporated associations, for which the applicant shall pay the Town
a permit fee in accordance with Resolution No. R89-50, July 1, 1989.
This permit shall expire three years after the date of issuance. A new
permit will then be applied for. The fee for a permit renewal is $15.
[Amended 3-9-2004]
C. A separate permit shall be required for each and every alarm system
owned or leased by a business, corporation, unincorporated association
or other legal entities which exist at separate locations.
D. All federal, state, county and local government agencies that operate
alarm systems shall be exempt from all permit fees but shall comply
with all other requirements of this chapter.
E. All persons 65 years of age or older who are the principal occupants of
the private residence listed on the application shall be exempt from all
permit fees but shall comply with all other requirements of this chapter.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, alarm user or alarm contractor to
maintain, operate or install an alarm system, as defined by the terms of
this chapter, without first obtaining a permit.
B. Any person, alarm user or alarm contractor who maintains, operates or
installs or causes a system to be maintained, operated or installed
without a permit shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction, shall
be fined not less than $50.
§ 154-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-6
1:73
§ 154-6. Denial, suspension or revocation of permit.
A. Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter may
constitute grounds for the revocation of a permit.
B. After the Police or Fire Department has received two false alarms in a
six-month period, commencing with the effective date of this chapter,
from any alarm user, the Chief of the Department shall notify the user,
in writing, of such fact and require that the user submit a written
report, within 10 days of such notice, describing the corrective
measures taken to eliminate the cause or causes of such alarms. If the
user fails to submit such a report within 10 days, the Chief of the
Department may suspend the alarm user's permit.
C. If the alarm user submits a report, as required by Subsection B, and the
Chief of the Department judges the report unsatisfactory or the alarm
user has failed to show by his report that he has taken or will take
reasonable steps to eliminate false alarms, then the Chief of the
Department may issue a written notice of his intent to revoke or
suspend the alarm user's permit.
D. Any alarm user aggrieved by a decision to impose a service charge or
revoke or suspend a permit may, within five days, appeal for a hearing
before an Appeals Board. The Appeals Board shall consist of the Chief
of the Department and two members who shall be appointed by the
Board of Selectmen. One member shall have an expert knowledge of
alarm systems, and one shall be a member of the general public.27
E. Such a hearing shall be informal and shall not be subject to the rules of
evidence or formal courtroom procedure. The aggrieved shall have the
right to present evidence, cross-examine witnesses and be represented
by counsel.
F. After the hearing, the Appeals Board may issue an order of revocation,
withdraw the notice of revocation or suspend the permit until such time
as the cause (or causes) of the false alarms has (or have) been
eliminated to the satisfaction of the Appeals Board.
G. An alarm user whose permit has been revoked is not precluded under
this chapter from applying for a new permit. The Chief of the
Department, however, shall not be required to issue a new permit
unless he is satisfied that the user's system has been properly serviced
and its deficiencies corrected. The Chief of the Department may also
impose reasonable restrictions and conditions upon the user before
issuing a new permit (These restrictions and/or conditions shall appear
on the permit and shall provide for automatic revocation on the
occurrence of two false alarms in the remaining permit year.)
27.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
subsection has been revised to replace "Town Administrator" with "Board of Selectmen,"
and the words "and confirmed by the Town Council" have been deleted.
§ 154-6 HUDSON CODE § 154-6
1:74
§ 154-7. Permit to be kept on premises; surrender on demand.
§ 154-8. Operation after revocation; violations and penalties.
Any alarm user who, after having a permit revoked and after exhausting his
right to a hearing, fails to disconnect his alarm system shall be guilty of a
violation and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $100.
§ 154-9. False alarms.
H. In the event that any building or occupancy is required by any Town
board or code to have a fire alarm system connected to fire alarm
headquarters for any of the above reasons, the building or occupancy
shall be deemed unsafe for occupancy and shall be evacuated until such
time as the premises is reconnected to fire alarm headquarters or an
approved twenty-four-hour watchman service is provided.
A. All alarm users to whom a permit has been issued shall keep the permit
within the protected premises for which the permit was issued.
B. Any alarm permit issued under this chapter shall be made available for
inspection, suspension or revocation on demand of any fire or police
officer.
A. Any owner or lessee of property having an alarm system and any user of
alarm services or equipment designed and installed with the intent of
eliciting a police, fire or ambulance response shall pay the Town of
Hudson a service charge of $50 for each false alarm in excess of two in
a twelve-month period, commencing with the effective date of this
chapter. [Amended 3-9-2004]
B. There shall be a service charge of $100 for each false alarm in excess of
four in any twelve-month period. [Amended 3-9-2004]
C. Any central station, answering service or proprietary system that, in
any manner, notifies the Police or Fire Department of an alarm signal
from an alarm system of any alarm user who does not possess an alarm
user's permit or whose permit has been suspended, revoked or denied
shall be charged $25 for each notification.
D. The central station receiving an alarm signal must attempt to verify
each intrusion/burglary alarm before notifying the police department.
The central station must place a call to the alarm location in an attempt
to determine if the alarm is false or real. If the central station
determines that the alarm is false they must call the Police Department
immediately to cancel the alarm response. The Police Department will
not respond to the alarm until it has been determined that the central
station has attempted to verify the alarm. Failure to verify the alarm
will result in a $50 fee assessed to the central station company. Panic,
duress and hold-up alarms do not require verification. [Added
3-9-2004]
§ 154-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-9
1:75
§ 154-10. Appeal of penalties.
§ 154-11. Liability of Town.
All departments of the Town which receive automatic alarms shall take
every reasonable precaution to assure that the alarm signals received by
them are given appropriate attention and are acted on with dispatch.
Neither the Town of Hudson nor any of its employees shall be liable for any
defects in the operation of any alarm system or for the failure or neglect
of any person in connection with the installation or operation of said alarm
systems or their components or the transmission or relaying of such signals.
In the event that the Police or Fire Department finds it necessary, after
exhausting all other provisions of this chapter, to disconnect any alarm,
device or system, the Town of Hudson shall incur no liability for such action.
§ 154-12. Records.
The records kept pursuant to this chapter shall not be public records.
§ 154-13. Repealer.
All ordinances or regulations or parts of ordinances or regulations which
are inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed.
§ 154-14. Severability.
In the event that any section or provision of this chapter is determined by a
court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or otherwise void or
unenforceable, that provision shall automatically be severed from the body
of this chapter, with the intent that the constitutional or otherwise lawful
portions of the chapter shall remain in full effect.
E. Attendance in the false alarm reduction seminar will allow an alarm
user to have one false alarm fee waived. Only one waiver will be allowed
in the twelve-month period. [Added 3-9-2004]
A. Any alarm user, owner or lessee who possesses an alarm user's permit
may appeal false alarm service charges, in writing, to the Appeals
Board as established in § 154-6 within 10 days after the receipt of the
notification of penalty. Central stations that have been assessed fees for
not verifying burglary/intrusion alarms may appeal those fees in the
same manner. [Amended 3-9-2004]
B. The Appeals Board may waive assessment of the service charge when,
in its judgment, reasonable attempts are being taken to discover and
eliminate the cause of the false alarm.
§ 154-9 HUDSON CODE § 154-14
1:76
Chapter 158
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 259. Motor vehicle racetracks — See Ch. 264.
§ 154-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-14
1:77

ARTICLE I
Public Places
[Adopted 9-7-1977 as Ord. No. 73]
§ 158-1. Drinking restricted.
No person shall drink any alcoholic beverage or alcoholic liquor, as defined
in RSA 175:1, within the limits of or upon any public highway, public
sidewalks, municipal parking lots, the Town of Hudson Common or any
other town property, except as covered in prior ordinances, within the limits
of the Town of Hudson, New Hampshire.
§ 158-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates the provisions of this Article shall be fined not
more than $100) and not less than 25 for the first offense and each offense
thereafter.
§ 158-3. Exceptions.
Written exceptions, issued by the Board of Selectmen and the Police
Department, shall be available upon request.
§ 158-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-3
1:79

ARTICLE II
Ballfields and Racetracks
[Adopted 3-31-1982 as Ord. No. 105]
§ 158-4. Restrictions.
Unless otherwise permitted on a case-by-case basis, it shall be unlawful
within the Town of Hudson at or on ballfields and racetracks and their
associated parking areas, whether public or private, for any person to sell,
use or possess any type of alcoholic beverage.
§ 158-5. Violation and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be fined not more
than $100 but not less than $25 for each offense.
§ 158-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-5
1:81
Chapter 164
APPLIANCES, WOOD AND COAL-BURNING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 58.
Building construction — See Ch. 178.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 210.
§ 164-1. Installations.
All wood- and coal-burning appliances installed after the adoption of this
chapter shall not be placed in service until the following conditions shall be
met:
§ 164-2. Permits.
A permit shall be required for each wood- or coal-burning appliance
installation. The permit shall be obtained from the Fire Department prior to
initial use.
§ 164-3. Inspection.
Prior to initial use, each wood- or coal-burning appliance shall be inspected
by the Fire Department.
§ 164-4. Fees.
A fee, as established by the Fire Department, shall be charged for each
permit issued for the installation of wood- and coal-burning appliances.
§ 164-5. Repealer.
Upon the adoption of this chapter, Article No. 45, adopted at the March 15,
1980, Town Meeting, is repealed.
A. The appliance shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's
specifications.
B. The appliance shall be installed in accordance with Hudson Fire
Department regulations.
C. The appliance shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 211, 2000
Edition; the adopted State Fire Code for solid-fuel-burning appliances.
[Amended 3-9-2004]
§ 158-5 HUDSON CODE § 164-6
1:82
§ 164-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this chapter shall
be deemed guilty of a violation and shall be fined not more than $25 as may
be determined by the District Court.
§ 164-7. Adoption of Amendments by Board of Selectmen. [Added
3-9-2004]
The Board of Selectmen, after consultation with the Fire Chief, is hereby
authorized to adopt updates and revisions to this Appliances, Wood- and
Coal-Burning, Ordinance that refer to or make insertions and deletions
from, or exceptions to, national codes or code provisions in the State
Fire Code, as may be amended from time to time. No amendment to
the Appliances, Wood- and Coal-Burning, Ordinance, except as may be
necessary to effect the substitution of revised national codes or code
provisions or provisions previously adopted, shall be adopted using the
simplified procedure of this paragraph. The Board of Selectmen shall hold a
public hearing on the proposed update or revision, with notice as provided
in RSA 675:7. Such notice shall include information stating where the
proposed Appliances, Wood- and Coal-Burning, Ordinance amendment and
the new or amended national code or code provisions are available for
public inspection. Following such hearing, the update or revision shall
become final upon approval by the Selectmen and recording with the Town
Clerk.
Chapter 178
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Wood- and coal-burning appliances — See Ch.
164.
Building, planning and zoning civil
penalties — See Ch. 181.
Fire prevention standards — See Ch. 210, Art.
II.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 218.
Site plan review — See Ch. 275.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 289.
Zoning — See Ch. 334.
§ 164-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-7
1:83

ARTICLE I
Life Safety Standards
[Article 19, voted in the affirmative 3-8-1977 by the Annual Town
Meeting, reads as follows: "To see if the Town will vote to adopt the
"LIFE SAFETY CODE 101 – 1976" and subsequent amendments as
approved and adopted by The Office of Fire Marshall excluding its
application to single and duplex residential units.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 164-7
1:85

ARTICLE II
Adoption of Residential Building Code
[Adopted 3-9-2004 ATM, Art. 1228
§ 178-1. Adoption of Residential Code and enforcement of State
Building Code.
A. Adoption of 2003 International Residential Code for One- and Two-
Family Dwellings. That a certain document, three copies of which are
on file in the Community Development Department of the Town of
Hudson, New Hampshire, being marked and designated as the 2003
International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings,
including Appendix Chapters A, B, C, E, F, G, H, J, and L, as published by
the International Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the
Residential Building Code for the Town of Hudson, New Hampshire, for
regulating and governing the construction, alteration, movement,
enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, location, removal and
demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple
single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories in
height with separate means of egress as herein provided, and each and
all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
Residential Building Code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a
part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Subsection B of
this article.
B. The following sections are hereby revised:
C. Enforcement of State Building Code. Pursuant to RSA 674:51(I), the
Town of Hudson hereby declares it will enforce the State Building Code.
For structures other than one- and two-family dwellings and multiple
single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories in
height, the Town of Hudson will enforce the current provisions of the
State Building Code as promulgated pursuant to RSA 155-A:1, as may
be amended from time to time.
28.Editor's Note: This article replaced former Art. II, Building, Electrical, Plumbing and
Architectural Standards, adopted 3-14-1978 ATM, Amendment No. 13; amended 9-17-1999
by Res. No. R90-33A.
§ 178-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 178-1
1:87
Chapter 181
BUILDING, PLANNING AND ZONING CIVIL PENALTIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Board — See Ch. 88.
Zoning Board of Adjustment — See Ch. 143.
Building construction — See Ch. 178.
Site plan review — See Ch. 275.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 289.
Zoning — See Ch. 334.
§ 181-1. Civil fine.
Any violation of the Town of Hudson ordinances adopted pursuant to RSA
672-677 or statutory precedents to said sections shall, after the effective
date of this chapter,29 pursuant to the authority set forth in RSA 676:17I(a),
be henceforth punishable by a civil fine of not more than $100 for each
day that such violation is found by a court to continue after the conviction
date or after the date on which the violator receives written notice from the
municipality that he is in violation of any ordinance or regulation adopted
under said title, whichever date is earlier.
§ 181-2. Recovery of costs and fees.30
The Board of Selectmen for the Town of Hudson does hereby resolve to
indicate that it is its desire to implement, to the fullest extent possible, the
following authority provided to the municipality pursuant to RSA 676:17,
as amended, indicating that in any legal action brought by the Town of
Hudson to enforce, by way of injunctive relief as provided by RSA 676:15
or otherwise, any local ordinance, code or regulation adopted under the
authority of the above-cited sections (RSA 672-677) or to enforce any
Planning Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment or Building Code Board of
Appeals decision made pursuant to said sections, or to seek the payment
of any fine levied under the regulation adopted above, the municipality
may recover its costs and reasonable attorney's fees actually expended in
pursuing the legal action if it is found to be a prevailing party in the action.
For the purposes of said section, recoverable costs shall include all out-ofpocket
expenses actually incurred, including but not limited to inspection
fees, expert fees and investigatory expenses.
29.Editor's Note: This chapter became effective upon its adoption on 5-13-1986.
30.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
section has been revised to replace "Council" with "Board of Selectmen."
§ 178-1 HUDSON CODE § 181-3
1:88
§ 181-3. Restitution.31
The Board of Selectmen for the Town of Hudson resolves to implement
that portion of RSA 676:17 which indicates that if any violation of local
ordinance, code or regulation or any violation of a Planning Board, Zoning
Board of Adjustment or Building Code Board of Appeals decision results in
the expenditure of public funds by a municipality which are not reimbursed
under Paragraph II of RSA 676:17, the court in its discretion may order,
as an additional civil penalty, that a violator make restitution to the
municipality for such funds so expended. It is the desire of the Board of
Selectmen that the within action constitute the exercise of the election
permitted to the local governing body by RSA 676:17 as well as identifying
the resolve of the Board of Selectmen to implement any and all sections
of RSA 676:17 which provide to the municipalities in the State of New
Hampshire authority to enforce local codes and ordinances identified
therein.
Chapter 185
DANCE HALLS AND ENTERTAINMENT PLACES OF
ASSEMBLY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 154.
Building construction — See Ch. 178.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 210.
Sanitary production and distribution of
food — See Ch. 221.
Zoning — See Ch. 334.
§ 185-1. Purpose; statutory authority.
This chapter is enacted by the legislative body of the Town of Hudson for the
protection and preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the general
public as authorized pursuant to RSA § 31:39 and RSA § 105:9.
§ 185-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DANCE HALL — Any location which permits or permits to occur the
gathering of people for dancing, regardless of whether conducted as an
isolated or occasional event. This definition shall not be limited to any
particular type of structure, or any particular part of any structure, and
shall include any building or any part thereof where dancing occurs, and
the fact that other activities are carried on in the same place shall not alter
the classification of the location as defined herein. Expressly excluded from
31.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
section has been revised to replace "Council" with "Board of Selectmen."
§ 181-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-2
1:89
this definition are public or private schools licensed by the State of New
Hampshire or operated by the Hudson School District, private residences,
charitable and nonprofit groups and organizations, and religious
organizations.
ENTERTAINMENT PLACE OF ASSEMBLY — Any room, space or area which
is suitable for the occupancy or assembly of One Hundred or more persons
for entertainment purposes. For the purposes of this definition, any such
room, space or area shall include any occupied connecting rooms, spaces or
areas on the same level or in the same story or in a story or stories above or
below, which entrance is common to the rooms, space or area.
PERSON — Any natural person, corporation, unincorporated association or
other legal entity.
§ 185-3. License required.
No person shall operate a dance hall or entertainment place of assembly
within the Town of Hudson unless a license to do so, according to such
restrictions and conditions as may be required, has been first obtained from
the Chief of Police.
§ 185-4. Application for license.
A. Application for a license to operate a dance hall or entertainment place
of assembly shall be made to the Chief of Police, subject to the written
approval of the Board of Selectmen, upon a form to be determined by
the Board of Selectmen.
B. The application shall include:
(1) The name, trade name, home address, home telephone number,
business address and business telephone number of the applicant;
(2) The location of the dance hall or entertainment place of assembly
and its square footage;
(3) A description of the activity(s) which will be engaged in at the
dance hall or entertainment place of assembly;
(4) A description of the physical layout of the dance hall or
entertainment place of assembly;
(5) A statement that the Building Inspector and/or Health Officer has
caused an investigation of the dance hall or entertainment place of
assembly in order to ascertain whether there exists sufficient and
appropriate means of ingress and egress, lighting, and bathroom
facilities, or other risks to the health, safety, and welfare of the
general public, along with a recommendation on the application;
(6) A statement that the Chief of Police has caused an investigation of
the dance hall or entertainment place of assembly in order to
ascertain any traffic-related problems, public disturbances, or
§ 185-2 HUDSON CODE § 185-4
1:90
§ 185-5. Validity; ownership of license.
§ 185-6. Fees, annual or daily; proration.
§ 185-7. Police attendance.
When it is determined, after investigation by the Chief of Police, that
in order to avoid traffic-related problems, public disturbance, or public
nuisances, or otherwise to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the
general public, any person licensed under this chapter shall be required to
hire an off-duty police officer or officers during those hours as the Chief
of Police may deem appropriate. The Chief of Police may require police
attendance, release prior police attendance requirements, or instate or
reinstate police attendance requirements as the situation may require.
§ 185-8. Restrictions.
Any person licensed to operate or conduct a dance hail or entertainment
place of assembly shall be subject to the following restrictions:
public nuisances, or other risks to the health, safety, and welfare
of the general public, along with a recommendation on the
application; and
(7) Proof of compliance with all applicable ordinances, rules and
regulations, including, but not limited to, all health, building,
zoning, fire, police or other rules and regulations.
A. Each license to operate a dance hall or entertainment place of assembly
shall only be valid for a single location.
B. Licenses issued hereunder shall remain the property of the Town of
Hudson and shall be returned to the Chief of Police during any period of
revocation.
A. A person licensed under this chapter shall pay the fee prescribed as
follows:
(1) An annual fee based on the gross square feet of the area occupied
by the dance hall or entertainment place of assembly as follows:
$50 for the first 1,500 square feet or fraction thereof, plus an
additional $2 for each 100 square feet or fraction thereof over
1,500 square feet, except that the maximum fee for any license
shall be $1,000; or
(2) A daily fee of $15 per day.
B. Applicants whose initial license for a dance hall or entertainment place
of assembly is received by the Chief of Police after May 1 of the year,
shall be subject to annual license fees as follows:
§ 185-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-8
1:91
§ 185-9. Denial of license; revocation; hearing.
§ 185-10. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. No dance hall or entertainment place of assembly shall be permitted to
operate during the hours between 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
B. No person licensed to operate a dance hall or entertainment place of
assembly shall allow any person attending the dance hall or
entertainment place of assembly to enter any room designated for the
use of the opposite sex.
A. The Chief of Police may deny or revoke a license under this chapter for
cause, including but not limited to the following:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the
application for license;
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement in the operation or
conduct of the dance hall or entertainment place of assembly;
(3) Any violation of a restriction or condition placed on the license;
(4) Any violation of any applicable rule or regulation contained in this
chapter or elsewhere, including, but not limited to, all health,
building, zoning, fire, police or other rules and regulations; or
(5) The operation and conduct of the dance hall or entertainment place
of assembly creates a public disturbance, public nuisances, or
otherwise endangers the health, safety, and welfare of the general
public.
B. Upon receipt of notification of denial or revocation of a license to
operate or conduct a dance hall or entertainment place of assembly, the
applicant or licensee may request, in writing, a hearing before the
Board of Selectmen in accordance with the following provisions:
(1) The request must be made within 10 days of the notice of
revocation;
(2) A hearing shall be scheduled at the earliest possible date;
(3) Following the hearing, the Board of Selectmen may deny, revoke, or
issue a license subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be
appropriate within a reasonable time thereafter.
C. Where it appears that there is an imminent danger to the health, safety,
or welfare of the general public, a license to operate or conduct a dance
hall or entertainment place of assembly may be revoked immediately
without notice, and prior to a hearing.
A. The Chief of Police shall have and exercise the power to issue citations
for violations of any provision of this chapter and the authority to enter
§ 185-8 HUDSON CODE § 185-10
1:92
§ 185-11. Separability.
If any part of this chapter shall be deemed to be unenforceable or
unconstitutional, then all other parts shall remain in full force.
Chapter 188
DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 205.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 259.
Traps — See Ch. 314.
Zoning — See Ch. 334.
§ 188-1. Dogs to be controlled by owners. [Amended 9-27-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-03]
any location which is licensed and operating as a dance hall or
entertainment place of assembly.
B. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
civil fines and penalties not to exceed $1,000 for each offense. Each act
of violation and every day upon which such violation occurs shall
constitute a separate offense. In any proceeding to enforce the
provisions of this chapter, the Town of Hudson shall be entitled to an
award of its costs and attorney's fees incurred as a result thereof.
A. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AT-LARGE — Not under the control of the owner or keeper by a leash.
Electronic devices are not considered a form of physical restraint.
LEASH — A chain, rope, or strap, not to exceed six feet, attached to the
collar or harness of a dog and used to lead it or hold it in check by a
physically able, competent person.
DOG — Shall include any animal of the canine species whether licensed
or unlicensed, including any animal which is considered to be a wolfhybrid
as defined in RSA 466-A.
OWNER — Shall include any person or persons, firm, association or
corporation owning, keeping or harboring a dog. The owner identified
on any current dog license shall be prima facie evidence of the
ownership of the dog.
KEEPER — Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation who
or which has temporary control or responsibility for a dog with the
permission of the owner.
§ 185-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 188-1
1:93
VICIOUS DOG — A dog that, without provocation, attacks or bites a
person or other domestic animal.
B. At-large prohibited.
(1) Prohibition. Except as exempted below, no person or keeper shall
permit a dog owned or kept by him/her to be at-large as defined by
this section or to trespass upon the property of another, private or
public, to include Town-owned or school district property.
(2) Exemptions. A dog shall not be deemed at-large if it is:
(a) On the premises of the dog's owner;
(b) On the premises of the person under whose control the dog is
supervised;
(c) On the premises of another person as long as that person has
given permission for the dog to be at-large;
(d) In any designated off-leash dog area regulated by the Town of
Hudson. Designated off-leash areas shall be any Town property
posted under the authority of the Board of Selectmen as an offleash
area.
(e) A working service dog for a disabled person (see ADA).
(f) Assisting a police officer who is engaged in law enforcement
duties, to include training and exhibitions.
(3) No defense. Failure of a keeper to comply with this provision shall
not relieve the owner of responsibility for compliance.
(4) Penalties.
(a) First offense: $25.
(b) Second offense: $50.
(c) Third offense: court action to be taken.
C. Dog waste.
(1) Duty to dispose. It shall be the duty of each person who owns,
possesses or controls a dog to immediately remove any feces left by
his/her dog on any sidewalk, street or other public area. It shall
further be the duty of each person who owns, possesses or controls
a dog to immediately remove any feces left by his/her dog on any
private property neither owned or occupied by said person, unless
said private property owner or occupant agrees otherwise.
Disposal of such feces shall be in a manner consistent with all
applicable laws.
(2) Duty to possess means of removal/disposal. No person who owns,
possesses or controls such dog shall appear with such dog on any
§ 188-1 HUDSON CODE § 188-1
1:94
§ 188-2. Picking up dogs at large; notice to owner.
All dogs which are found running at large will be picked up by the Animal
Control Officer and held for a period of seven days. If the dog has an
identification tag or license, the owner will be notified immediately and will
have seven days in which to claim the dog.
sidewalk, street, park or other public area without the means of
removal of any feces left by such dog. Disposal of such feces shall
be in a manner consistent with all applicable laws.
(3) Exemption. Compliance with this regulation is not required by any
handicapped person who, by reason of his/her handicap, is
physically unable to comply with this subsection.
(4) Penalties.
(a) First offense: $25.
(b) Second offense: $50.
(c) Third offense: court action to be taken.
D. Conduct in off leash areas.
(1) Voice control and observation on public property. Every person who
allows a dog to be off-leash in a designated area under Subsection
A(2)(d) above shall maintain voice control over the dog and shall
keep the dog under observation at all times. The following also
shall apply:
(a) Dogs must wear current license tags and rabies vaccination
tags.
(b) Children 10 years or younger are not allowed in the off-leash
area.
(c) All handlers must be 18 or older.
(d) Children 11 through 17 must be accompanied and supervised
by an adult.
(e) No female dogs in season (heat) are allowed in the off-leash
area.
(f) No prong or choke collars on dogs in the off-leash area.
(g) No animals other than dogs are permitted in the off-leash area.
(h) No more than two dogs to any one handler at a time in the offleash
area.
(i) No vicious dogs allowed in the off-leash area.
§ 188-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 188-3
1:95
§ 188-3. Disposal of unclaimed dogs.
At the expiration of the seven-day holding period, any unclaimed dog shall
be disposed of at the discretion of the Animal Control Officer.
§ 188-4. Fines and fees.
All violations and/or services performed by the Animal Control Officer shall
be subject to the following fines and fees, payable to the Town of Hudson:
§ 188-5. Failure to pay fines and fees.
Failure to pay any of the fines or fees in § 188-4 will result in the issuance
of a summons, and the owner will be required to appear in Nashua District
Court and be subject to such fines and/or other measures as the Court shall
deem appropriate.
Chapter 193
A. Running at large.
(1) For unlicensed dogs, the fine shall be $10 for the first offense and
$25 for all others (plus boarding charges).32
(2) For licensed dogs, if the Animal Control Officer has been notified,
the fine shall be $5 (includes boarding fee and pickup charge).33
(3) If the Animal Control Officer has not been notified, the fine for
licensed dogs shall be the same as for unlicensed dogs.
B. Unwanted animals. [Amended 10-14-2003]
(1) For dogs, the fee shall be $120.
(2) For cats, the fee shall be $60.
(3) Added to the fee shall be a $20 pickup fee if not delivered by the
owner.
C. Investigation of bites.
(1) The fee for inspection of an owner's property to determine proper
facility for the required ten-day confinement, if the dog has had
rabies shot, shall be $5.
(2) The fee for confinement by the Animal Control Officer for the
required ten-day period.34
32.Editor's Note: The specific fees set forth in this subsection were removed at the request of
the town. For current fees, see Ch. 205, Fees.
33.Editor's Note: The specific fees set forth in this subsection were removed at the request of
the town. For current fees, see Ch. 205, Fees.
34.Editor's Note: The specific fees set forth in this subsection were removed at the request of
the town. For current fees, see Ch. 205, Fees. Former Subsection D, Sale of animals, was
repealed 10-14-2003.
§ 188-3 HUDSON CODE § 188-5
1:96
DRIVEWAYS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Excavation of soil — See Ch. 200.
Site plan review — See Ch. 275.
Administrative requirements and
definitions — See Ch. 276.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 289.
Zoning — See Ch. 334.
§ 193-1. Title; definitions.
The official title of this chapter is the "TOWN OF HUDSON DRIVEWAY and
Other ACCESS Regulation," hereinafter referenced as "this chapter."
Words in all capital letters are those with special definitions as noted in
§ 276-2 of the LAND USE REGULATIONS.
§ 193-2. Authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to RSA 236:13.
§ 193-3. Purposes.
The purposes of this chapter are to:
§ 193-4. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful to construct or alter a DRIVEWAY in any way that
substantially affects the size or grade of any entrance, exit or approach
within or adjacent to the limits of the RIGHT-OF-WAY of any HIGHWAY
that does not conform to the terms and specifications of a written PERMIT
issued in accordance with this chapter. It shall also be unlawful to excavate
or disturb the shoulders, ditches, embankments or the surface improved for
travel of HIGHWAY for any purpose whatsoever, including the placement of
A. Ensure the public safety through the orderly control of traffic
movement onto and from HIGHWAYs, exits, streets and roadways.
B. Provide a uniform practice and procedure relative to the design and
construction of DRIVEWAY entrances.
C. Ensure the existence of necessary drainage facilities required to
provide a safe and controlled approach to a HIGHWAY in all seasons of
the year.
D. Prevent the existence of unsafe conditions resulting from improper
placements of any DRIVEWAY, wall, barrier, structure or any other
object or combination thereof within or adjacent to any RIGHT-OF-WAY
accepted by or dedicated to the Town.
§ 188-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-4
1:97
any wall, barrier, structure or any other object without a written PERMIT
issued in accordance with this chapter.
§ 193-5. When effective.
This chapter (and amendments thereto) becomes effective immediately
upon adoption by the PLANNING BOARD.
§ 193-6. Exemptions.
Only the following categories are exempt from the provisions of this
chapter:
§ 193-7. Definitions.
See § 276-2.
§ 193-8. Designation of administrator.
The PLANNING BOARD shall designate the person to administer the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 193-9. (Reserved)
§ 193-10. Design criteria.
The Town Engineer may promulgate engineering criteria to be incorporated
in all applications, provided that the following minimum design criteria are
incorporated:
A. (Reserved)
B. Minor structures constructed for primary use as a mailbox, provided
that the PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR has no objection to any aspect of
such placement either before, during or after placement of the
structure. [Amended 10-9-2018]
C. Any work associated with the construction or reconstruction of any
HIGHWAY that is lawfully performed in accordance with the provisions
of RSA 233 or RSA 234.
D. Construction that is proposed and lawfully approved by the PLANNING
BOARD as part of Chapter 200, EXCAVATION of Soil.
A. Location description of the DRIVEWAY so selected to most adequately
protect the safety of the traveling public.
B. Description of any drainage structures, traffic control devices and
channelization islands to be installed by the owner.
C. Establishment of grades, i.e., profiles and/or cross sections, that
adequately protect and promote HIGHWAY drainage and PERMIT a
safe and controlled approach to the HIGHWAY in all seasons of the year.
§ 193-4 HUDSON CODE § 193-10
1:98
§ 193-11. Application fee.
A fee as specified in § 276-6 shall be required at the time of application for
each PERMIT requested.
§ 193-12. Responsibility to enforce.
The PLANNING BOARD shall be responsible for the enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 193-13. Cease-and-desist action against violations.
The CIVIL ENGINEER shall order the OWNER of any property to cease
and desist any action which, in the opinion of the CIVIL ENGINEER, is a
violation of this chapter. Any order to cease and desist shall be in writing,
sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. Said order shall contain
a description of the violation and a deadline by which the OWNER is
expected to take corrective or remedial action. A copy of this chapter
shall be attached to said order. Following the expiration of the deadline,
without correction of the violation, the CIVIL ENGINEER shall report to
the PLANNING BOARD (copy to the violator). The PLANNING BOARD may
refer such violation to counsel for purposes of enforcement through the
appropriate court.
D. Other terms and specifications necessary for the safety of the traveling
public.
E. Provision of a Safe Stopping Distance equal to or greater than that
recommended in the current AASHTO specifications published by
AASHTO at the time of the PERMIT application.
F. Maximum DRIVEWAY width of 50 feet, except that a DRIVEWAY may be
flared beyond a width of 50 feet, at and near its junction with the
HIGHWAY, to accommodate the turning radius of vehicles expected to
use the particular DRIVEWAY.
G. Only one DRIVEWAY per parcel having adequate frontage, as required
by Chapter 334, Zoning, is allowed, except in the case of two-unit
residential buildings (duplexes), one DRIVEWAY per unit shall be
allowed.
H. DRIVEWAYS are not permitted in side or rear setback areas, unless a
shared ACCESS is required by the PLANNING BOARD.
I. With the exception of Subsection G, above, shared DRIVEWAYS are not
allowed unless approved by the PLANNING BOARD.
J. All driveway surface material within the RIGHT-OF-WAY shall be
BITUMINOUS CONCRETE or other surface material approved by the
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR and specified on the DRIVEWAY PERMIT.
[Amended 10-9-2018]
§ 193-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-14
1:99
§ 193-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
violation, if a natural person, and a misdemeanor, if any other person, and,
in addition, shall be liable for the costs of restoration of the HIGHWAY to a
condition satisfactory to the Hudson PLANNING BOARD.
§ 193-15. Waivers; appeals process. [Amended 10-9-2018]
Any provision of this chapter or any decision of the CIVIL ENGINEER may
be appealed only in writing to the PLANNING BOARD, which shall act
within 30 days. Prior to making a decision on the appeal, the PLANNING
BOARD shall afford the CIVIL ENGINEER, the Town Engineer and the
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR a reasonable opportunity to comment on the
matter or to advise the PLANNING BOARD.
Chapter 194
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 158.
§ 194-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA — All equipment, products and materials of any
kind which are used, intended for use or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing,
analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body
a controlled substance in violation of RSA 318-B. It includes, but is not
limited to:
A. Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in the planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant
which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance
can be derived.
B. Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing
controlled substances.
C. Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use in
increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled
substance.
§ 193-14 HUDSON CODE § 194-1
1:100
D. Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in
identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of
controlled substances.
E. Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use in
weighing or measuring controlled substances.
F. Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine, hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use or designed for
use in cutting controlled substances.
G. Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for use in
removing twigs and seeds from or in otherwise cleaning or refining
marijuana.
H. Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended
for use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances.
I. Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for
use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled
substances.
J. Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed for use
in storing or concealing controlled substances.
K. Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for use
or designed for use in paraterally injecting controlled substances into
the human body.
L. Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling
or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil into
the human body, such as:
(1) Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes, with
or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or
punctured metal bowls.
(2) Water pipes.
(3) Carburetion tubes and devices.
(4) Smoking and carburetion masks.
(5) Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning materials, such
as a marijuana cigarette, that have become too small or too short to
be held in the hand.
(6) Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials.
(7) Chamber pipes.
(8) Carburetor pipes.
(9) Electric pipes.
§ 194-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-1
1:101
§ 194-2. Determination as to whether object is paraphernalia.
In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court of other
authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors,
the following:
(10) Air-driven pipes.
(11) Chillums.
(12) Bongs.
(13) Ice pipes or chillers.
A. Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use.
B. Prior convictions, if any, of an owner or of anyone in control of the
object under any state or federal law relating to any controlled
substances.
C. The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of
RSA 318-B.
D. The proximity of the object to controlled substances.
E. The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object.
F. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of the owner or of
anyone in control of the object to deliver it to persons whom he knows,
or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a
violation of RSA 318-B. The innocence of an owner or of anyone in
control of the object as to a direct violation of RSA 318-B should not
prevent a finding that the object is intended for use or designed for use
as drug paraphernalia.
G. Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its
use.
H. Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict
its use.
I. National and local advertising concerning its use.
J. The manner in which the object is displayed for sale.
K. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object(s) to
the total sales of the business enterprise.
L. The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community.
M. Expert testimony concerning its use.
§ 194-1 HUDSON CODE § 194-3
1:102
§ 194-3. Violations and penalties.
§ 194-4. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity shall not affect other provisions
or applications of the chapter which can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are
severable.
§ 194-5. When effective.
This chapter will take effect upon passage and publication of public notice
as required by RSA 47:18.
Chapter 196
A. Possession of drug paraphernalia. It is unlawful for any person to use or
to possess with intent to use drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate,
cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce,
process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal,
inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a
controlled substance in violation of RSA 318-B. Any person violating
this subsection shall be guilty of a violation and shall be subject to a fine
of $100, no portion of which may be suspended.
B. Manufacture or delivery of drug paraphernalia. It is unlawful for any
person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver or manufacture with
intent to deliver drug paraphernalia knowing, or under circumstances
where one reasonably should know, that it will be used to plant,
propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert,
produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain,
conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human
body a controlled substance in violation of RSA 318-B. Any person
violating this subsection shall be guilty of a violation and shall be
subject to a fine of $100, no portion of which may be suspended.
C. Delivery of drug paraphernalia to a minor. Any person 18 years of age
or over who violates Subsection B of this section by delivering drug
paraphernalia to a person under 18 years of age who is at least three
years his junior shall be guilty of a special violation and shall be subject
to a fine of $100, no portion of which may be suspended.
D. Advertisement of drug paraphernalia. It is unlawful for any person to
place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill or other publication any
advertisement knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably
should know, that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part,
is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug
paraphernalia. Any person violating this subsection shall be guilty of a
violation and shall be subject to a fine of $100, no portion of which may
be suspended.
§ 194-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 194-5
1:103
ELECTIONEERING ACTIVITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ballot voting — See Ch. 26. Elections — See Ch. 48.
§ 194-5 HUDSON CODE § 194-5
1:104
ARTICLE I
Display and Distribution of Campaign Materials
[Adopted 8-25-1998 by Ord. No. O98-04]
§ 196-1. Prohibited activities.
Persons as candidates for elected office, or as representing or working for
a candidate for office, or promoting a petition, resolution, referendum or
measure on the ballot, may not solicit votes, display, exhibit, or distribute
any campaign or electioneering materials within 75 feet of the polling
place building. The Moderator shall exercise his powers under state law
relative to the conduct of elections, distribution of campaign materials, and
electioneering within the polling place.
§ 196-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-1
1:105
Chapter 197
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 233.
Chapter 200
EXCAVATION OF SOIL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Driveways — See Ch. 193.
Site plan review — See Ch. 275.
Administrative requirements and
definitions — See Ch. 276.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 289.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 290.
Zoning — See Ch. 334.
§ 200-1. Authority.
Pursuant to the authority vested in the Hudson PLANNING BOARD under
RSA 155-E, the following regulations concerning the disturbance of soils are
hereby adopted.
§ 200-2. Definitions.
Words in all capital letters are those with special definitions as noted in
§ 276-2 of the LAND USE REGULATIONS.
§ 200-3. Permit required; exemptions.
A. No OWNER shall excavate or allow any EXCAVATION of EARTH on his/
her/its premises without first obtaining an EXCAVATION permit.
B. Exemptions to this PERMIT requirement are:
(1) EXCAVATION for eventual residential occupancy or use that is
incidental to the lawful construction or alteration of a building or
structure or the lawful construction or alteration of a parking LOT
or way, including a DRIVEWAY, on a portion of the premises where
removal occurs.
(2) EXCAVATION of eventual nonresidential occupancy or use that is in
conformance with SITE PLANS approved and signed pursuant to
Section XVI of the Hudson SUBDIVISION Regulations.35
35.Editor's Note: For current site plan review regulations, see Ch. 275.
§ 196-1 HUDSON CODE § 200-3
1:106
(3) EXCAVATION for SUBDIVISION roadway construction that is in
accordance with an approved SUBDIVISION PLAN on record in the
Hillsborough County Registry of Deeds.
(4) EXCAVATION that is incidental to agricultural or silvicultural
activities, normal landscaping or minor topographical adjustment.
(5) EXCAVATION from an area contiguous to or from contiguous land
in common ownership with stationary manufacturing and
processing plants which were operating on January 1, 1979,
provided that such EXCAVATION was then permitted, or exempted
from permit, by the Board of Selectmen pursuant to the Hudson
Zoning Ordinance, Article I, Section 6.0(c).36
(6) EXCAVATION performed exclusively for the lawful construction,
reconstruction or maintenance of a Class I, II, III, IV or V
HIGHWAY, as defined in RSA 230, by the TOWN OF HUDSON or
the State of New Hampshire, or a contracted agent of either
government unit, which has jurisdiction for said HIGHWAY,
provided that any PIT AGREEMENT entered in conjunction with
said EXCAVATION shall be filed with and accepted by the
PLANNING BOARD prior to the start of EXCAVATION; such
EXCAVATION, however, shall not be exempt from the provisions of
§ 200-5 and § 200-13.
(7) EXCAVATION of less than 500 cubic yards of EARTH, provided that:
(a) Following EXCAVATION, restoration of the area shall be in
accordance with § 200-7A(4).
(b) All excavating, handling, processing and storage facilities are
removed from the site.
(c) The site is cleared of all stumps, and logs and boulders not
specifically left in place or added as landscaping features.
(d) The site is regraded to the approximate level of the adjoining
land.
(e) The site is seeded in accordance with § 200-7A(6).
(f) The duration of the EXCAVATION process, including land
restoration, is less than 90 days.
(8) EXCAVATION that is incidental to work performed by a public
utility or its subcontractor under its authority granted by the State
of New Hampshire to install, remove, maintain, repair or modify
residential or commercial service.
36.Editor's Note: For current zoning provisions, see Ch. 334.
§ 200-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-4
1:107
§ 200-4. Application for permit.
Any OWNER shall apply to the PLANNING BOARD prior to EXCAVATION
of his/her/its land and send a copy of the application to the Conservation
Commission. The application form shall be supplied by the PLANNING
BOARD at the Community Development Department offices at Town Hall.
Said application form can also be obtained/downloaded online, via the
Town's Community Development Department website: www.hudsonnh.gov/.
In addition to submitting a written EXCAVATION of Soil application form to
the PLANNING BOARD, electronic filing, in pdf format, is required.
§ 200-5. Excavations for which permits shall not be granted.
The PLANNING BOARD shall not grant a permit:
§ 200-6. Conditions with which work must comply.
Following are the general conditions with which all EXCAVATION work
must comply, following issuance of a permit:
A. Where an EXCAVATION is proposed below road level within 50 feet of
any HIGHWAY right-of-way, unless such EXCAVATION is for purpose of
said HIGHWAY.
B. (Reserved)
C. (Reserved)
D. When the issuance of the PERMIT would be unduly hazardous or
injurious to the public welfare.
E. Where existing visual barriers in the areas specified in RSA 155-E:3(III)
would be removed, except to provide ACCESS to the EXCAVATION.
F. Where the EXCAVATION would substantially damage a known aquifer,
so designated by the United States Geological Survey.
G. Where EXCAVATION is planned beneath or adjacent to inland surface
waters in such manner that a PERMIT is required from the New
Hampshire Water Supply and Pollution Control Commission, the New
Hampshire Water Resources Board, the New Hampshire Wetlands
Board or other state, county or federal agencies with jurisdiction over
the premises, except that the PLANNING BOARD may approve the
application only after all such other necessary permits have been
obtained.
H. Where the project cannot comply with the restoration provisions of
§ 200-7.
A. All original topsoil shall be stockpiled on the site and spread on the final
slopes. No original topsoil, including LOAM, may be removed from the
site, unless written permission therefor is given by the PLANNING
BOARD.
§ 200-4 HUDSON CODE § 200-6
1:108
§ 200-7. Restoration.
Within 12 months after the expiration date in the PERMIT as defined in
§ 276-9C or the completion of the EXCAVATION, whichever occurs first,
the OWNER of the excavated land shall restore the area affected by the
EXCAVATION to meet each of the following minimum conditions:
B. Interim, i.e., daily, slopes shall not be left steeper than 3:1, unless
written permission is obtained from the Town Engineer, who may
require specific soils data to be obtained at the expense of the owner.
C. Hours of excavating or removal shall be limited, such that no work shall
take place prior to 7:00 a.m., after 7:00 p.m. or on Sundays or holidays.
A. Except for exposed rock ledge, said area shall be covered with
vegetation suitable to prevent erosion and with soils suitable to sustain
such vegetation, thus:
(1) No area shall be left in such a condition that erosion of the area
after completion of the work may result in water pollution by silt or
other deleterious substances.
(2) The area shall be left in such shape and condition that material
shall not wash to block or obstruct drainageways.
(3) Unless the area is intended to serve as an approved pond, the area
shall be left as free draining as practicable.
(4) Unless otherwise allowed in writing by the PLANNING BOARD, all
disturbed areas shall be spread with the original topsoil or
strippings, if any, to a minimum four-inch depth.
(5) Unless waived in writing or otherwise stipulated by the PLANNING
BOARD, areas from which trees have been removed shall be
planted with two-year-old plants or plants furnished under a
standard nursery order. Type of plants selected shall be included in
the "large tree" category as listed in Trees and Shrubs in New
Hampshire — A Guidebook for Natural Beauty Projects. (Extension
Bulletin No. 163, revised, published May 1980 by the Cooperative
Extension Service of the University of New Hampshire, Durham,
New Hampshire, a copy of which is on file in the office of the Town
Engineer.) Seedlings without center buds and seedlings with
pruned roots shall not be accepted. Seedlings shall be set out under
review of the Town Engineer in accordance with accepted
horticultural practice at eight-foot spacing in both directions, all as
approved by the Town Engineer.
(6) Areas from which low brush or grass has been removed shall be (at
the option of the owner) planted with red pine seedlings or covered
with material capable of supporting vegetation and seeded as
described and specified in Parts 1, 2 and 3 of Section 644 (Grass
Seed) of the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
§ 200-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-7
1:109
§ 200-8. Amendment of permit.
When the scope of a project for which an EXCAVATION PERMIT has been
issued is proposed to be altered so as to affect either the size or location
of the EXCAVATION, the rate of removal or the PLAN for restoration,
the OWNER shall submit an application for amendment of his/her/its
EXCAVATION permit, which application shall be subject to approval in the
same manner as provided for an original EXCAVATION permit.
§ 200-9. Hearings on applications.
Hearings on applications are as noted in § 276-5 of the LAND USE
REGULATIONS.
§ 200-10. Issuance of permit; prerequisites.
If the PLANNING BOARD determines the application is not prohibited by
§ 200-5 above and approves it after the public hearing, the Board shall grant
an EXCAVATION PERMIT to the APPLICANT only after:
Construction by the New Hampshire Department of Public Works
and HIGHWAYS, 1974, et seq.
(7) Unless written permission is obtained from the PLANNING BOARD
to preserve fire or other access roads (paved or unpaved) to
excavated areas, such roads shall be obliterated.
B. Debris resulting from the EXCAVATION shall be buried or removed.
C. All slopes shall be graded to natural repose for the type of soil of which
they are composed. Further, the area shall be restored in such shape
that it shall be blended to be in keeping with the surrounding terrain.
D. The elimination of any standing bodies of water created in the
EXCAVATION project as may constitute a hazard to health and safety,
unless the PLANNING BOARD specifies different restoration.
E. Exemptions. EXCAVATION for the purpose of installing or creating
pools, patios, and landscaping features or recreational areas shall be
finished to the conditions specified on the permit.
A. Town receipt of an EXCAVATION PERMIT fee as shown in § 276-6.
B. Unless waived by the PLANNING BOARD, receipt by the office of the
Town Engineer of a bond or other Surety as specified in § 276-4 in an
amount computed by the Town Engineer and approved by the
PLANNING BOARD as being reasonably sufficient to guarantee
PERMIT compliance.
C. Unless waived by the PLANNING BOARD, receipt by the PLANNING
BOARD of a letter from Town Counsel certifying all documents as to
form. Town Counsel fees shall be paid by the Owner.
§ 200-7 HUDSON CODE § 200-11
1:110
§ 200-11. Posting, transferability, expiration dating and conditions
on permits.
§ 200-12. Rehearings.
§ 200-13. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
A. A copy of the PERMIT shall be prominently posted at the EXCAVATION
site or the principal ACCESS thereto.
B. A PERMIT shall not be assignable or transferable without the prior
written consent of the PLANNING BOARD.
C. A PERMIT shall specify the date upon which it expires.
D. The PLANNING BOARD may include in a PERMIT such reasonable
conditions as are consistent with the purpose of RSA 155-E, including
the provision of visual barriers to the EXCAVATION.
A. If the PLANNING BOARD disapproves or approves an application for an
EXCAVATION PERMIT or an application for an amended permit, any
interested person affected by such decision may appeal to the
PLANNING BOARD for a rehearing on such decision or any matter
determined thereby. The motion for rehearing shall fully specify every
ground upon which it is alleged that the decision or order complained of
is unlawful or unreasonable, and said appeal shall be filed within 10
days of the date of the decision appealed from. The PLANNING BOARD
shall either grant or deny the request for rehearing within 10 days, and
if the request is granted, a rehearing shall be scheduled within 30 days.
B. Any person affected by the PLANNING BOARD's decision on a motion
for rehearing to the PLANNING BOARD may appeal in conformity with
the procedures specified in RSA 677:4 through 677:14.
A. The PLANNING BOARD or the Town Engineer may suspend or revoke
the PERMIT of any person who has violated any provision of his/her/its
PERMIT or this chapter or made a material misstatement or deliberate
falsehood in the application upon which his/her/its PERMIT was
granted. Such suspension or revocation shall be subject to a motion for
rehearing thereon and appeal in accordance with § 200-12.
B. The PLANNING BOARD or a person affected thereby may seek an order
from the Superior Court that the violator cease and desist from
violation of any provision of his/her/its PERMIT or this chapter and take
such action as may be necessary to be in compliance with his/her/its
PERMIT and this chapter. If the Superior Court issues such an order,
the PLANNING BOARD or the person affected, as the case may be, shall
have judgment for all costs and attorney fees in seeking such an order.
C. To ascertain if there is compliance with this chapter, a PERMIT issued
hereunder or an order issued hereunder, the PLANNING BOARD or its
duly authorized agent may enter upon any land on which there is reason
§ 200-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-13
1:111
§ 200-14. Fees.
Fees associated with EXCAVATION PERMIT Applications are specified in
§ 276-6D.
Chapter 202
EXPLOSIVES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 58. Fire prevention — See Ch. 210.
to believe an EXCAVATION is being conducted or has been conducted
since January 1, 1979.
D. Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, a PERMIT issued
hereunder or a valid order issued hereunder shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, if a natural person, or guilty of a felony, if any other
person.
§ 200-13 HUDSON CODE § 200-14
1:112
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 202-1. Applicability.
§ 202-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORIZED, APPROVED or APPROVAL — Authorized, approved or
approval by the Fire Chief.
BLAST AREA — The area of a blast within the influence of flyrock gasses
and concussion.[Amended 3-14-2000 by ballot by the ATM, Art. No.
34]
A. This chapter shall apply to the transportation, storage, possession and
use of explosive materials in the Town of Hudson. [Amended
3-14-2000 by ballot by the ATM, Art. No. 34]
B. This chapter shall not apply to:
(1) Explosive materials while in the course of transportation via
railroad, water, highway or air when explosive materials are
moving under the jurisdiction of and in conformity with regulations
adopted by any federal or state department or agency.
(2) The laboratories of schools and similar institutions when confined
to the purpose of instruction or research or to explosive materials
in the forms prescribed by the official United States Pharmacopeia
or the National Formulary and used in medicines and medicinal
agents.
(3) The normal and emergency conditions of any government,
including all departments, agencies and divisions thereof, provided
that they are acting in their official capacity and in the proper
performance of their duties or functions.
(4) Explosive materials for delivery to any government or any
department, agency or division thereof.
(5) Pyrotechnics commonly known as "fireworks," including signaling
devices such as flares and fuses.
(6) Small arms ammunition and components thereof, which are subject
to the Gun Control Act of 1968 (Title 18, Chapter 44, of the United
States Code) and regulations promulgated thereunder.
(7) Gasoline, fertilizers and propellants used in propellant-activated
power devices or tools. [Amended 3-14-2000 by ballot by the
ATM, Art. No. 34]
§ 202-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-2
1:113
BLASTER — That qualified person in charge of and responsible for the
loading and firing of a blast.
BLASTING AGENT — An explosive material which meets prescribed criteria
for insensitivity to initiation in conformity with Title 27 of the Code of
Federal Regulations, Section 55.11 (for storage), and Title 49 of the Code of
Federal Regulations (for transportation).
BLAST SITE — The area where explosive material is handled during
loading, including the perimeter of blast holes and for a distance of 50 feet
in all directions from loaded holes or holes to be loaded.
DETONATING CORD — A flexible cord containing a center core of highvelocity
explosive and used to initiate other explosives.[Amended
3-14-2000 by ballot by the ATM, Art. No. 34]
DETONATOR — Any device containing any initiating or primary explosive
that is used for initiating detonation. The term includes, but is not limited
to, electric blasting caps of instantaneous and delay types, blasting caps
for use with safety fuses, detonating cord delay connectors and nonelectric
instantaneous and delay blasting caps which use detonating cord or other
replacement for electric lag wires.
EXPLOSIVE — Any chemical compound mixture or device, the primary or
common purpose of which is to function by explosion.
EXPLOSIVE MATERIALS — These include explosives, blasting agents and
detonators. The term includes, but is not limited to, dynamite and other high
explosives, safety fuses, detonating cord and igniters. Title 49 of the Code
of Federal Regulations, Parts 1 through 999, subdivide these materials into:
HIGH EXPLOSIVES — Explosives which are characterized by a very high
rate of reaction, high pressure development and the presence of a
detonation wave in the explosive.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, association, firm,
partnership, society or joint-stock company.
PYROTECHNICS — Any combustible or explosive compositions or
manufactured articles designed and prepared for the purpose of producing
audible or visible effects. "Pyrotechnics" are commonly referred to as
"fireworks."
SAFETY FUSE — A flexible cord containing an internal burning medium by
which fire or flame is conveyed at a continuous and uniform rate from the
point of ignition to the point of use, usually a fuse detonator.
A. Class A explosives: detonating or otherwise maximum hazard.
B. Class B explosives: flammable hazard.
C. Class C explosives: minimum hazard.
D. Blasting agents: See definition.
§ 202-2 HUDSON CODE § 202-3
1:114
§ 202-3. Word usage.
Words used in the singular shall include the plural and in the plural shall
include the singular. Words used in the masculine gender shall include the
feminine gender and vice versa.
§ 202-4. Forms and procedures.
The Fire Chief shall issue forms necessary or useful for carrying out the
purposes of this chapter.37 He may also establish procedures necessary or
useful for carrying out the purposes of this chapter which are consistent
with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 202-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter commits a separate
violation of this chapter for each provision violated and shall be subject to a
civil fine of not more than $500 for each separate violation.
37.Editor's Note: Said forms are on file in the town offices and may be examined there during
regular business hours.
§ 202-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-5
1:115

ARTICLE II
Licenses and Permits
§ 202-6. Applicability of Article.
Safety and security are primary considerations in the manufacture,
transportation, storage, sale, possession and use of explosive materials. An
appropriate and thorough system of licensing or permitting is designed
to promote these considerations by assuring that these products come
only into the hands of qualified persons who require them in their own
occupation.
§ 202-7. Exceptions.
This Article shall not apply to hand-loading of small arms ammunition for
personal use and not for resale.
§ 202-8. Manufacture of explosives.
§ 202-9. Dealers of explosives.
§ 202-10. Blaster's license required.
§ 202-11. Permit required.
A. The license and permit requirements of this Article shall apply to all
explosive materials.
B. This Article is intended to supplement existing federal and state laws
and regulations.
A. The manufacture of explosive materials within the Town of Hudson shall
be limited to those having an appropriate state and/or federal license.
B. The manufacture of explosive materials within the Town of Hudson shall
be prohibited when such manufacture presents an undue hazard to life
and property.
A. Persons intending to act as dealers in explosive materials must possess
an appropriate federal license from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and
Firearms.
B. Explosive materials shall not be sold, given, delivered or transferred to
any person not in possession of a valid license or permit.
A. No person may load or fire explosive materials unless such person or
his supervisor is a licensed blaster in conformance with the rules and
regulations promulgated under RSA 158:9 of the State of New
Hampshire.
B. Proof of said license shall be provided upon request to the Fire Chief.
§ 202-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-11
1:117
§ 202-12. Permit applications; fees; preblasting conference;
renewal.
A. No person shall use explosive materials within the Town of Hudson
without first obtaining the proper permit which authorizes him to use
such materials.
B. The authorized agent or person conducting an operation or activity
requiring the use of explosive materials shall obtain a permit to use
explosive materials and shall be responsible for the results and any
other consequences of any loading and firing of explosive material and
shall permit the loading and firing to be performed or supervised only
by a licensed blaster.
A. Application for a permit or its renewal shall be made to the Fire Chief
on forms provided by him and shall contain such information as may be
required.
B. Applications submitted shall have attached proof of the following:
(1) State of New Hampshire license to use, purchase and transport
explosive materials.
(2) State of New Hampshire certificate of competency to conduct
blasting operations.
(3) Certificate of insurance showing minimum coverage of $1,000,000
bodily injury and $500,000 property damage by a carrier
authorized by the State of New Hampshire Insurance
Commissioner to do business in New Hampshire. The insurance
certificate shall state that the insurance company is authorized to
do business in the State of New Hampshire. [Amended 3-14-2000
by ballot by the ATM, Art. No. 34]
(4) The blaster's license of the person in charge of or supervising the
use of explosives.
(5) Written permission from the owner of the land on which the use of
explosives will occur for the Fire Chief to inspect the land during
the period of the permit and until 20 days after the expiration of the
permit.
C. Applications must be received by the Fire Chief at least 10 and not more
than 30 business days prior to the estimated start date of blasting
operations. [Amended 3-14-2000 by ballot by the ATM, Art. No.
34]
D. A fee shall be assessed for each permit. Checks shall be made payable
to the Hudson Fire Department-Prevention and must be received by the
Fire Department prior to permit approval and issuance. Permit fee rates
have been established by the Board of Selectmen.38 [Amended
3-14-2000 by ballot by the ATM, Art. No. 34]
§ 202-11 HUDSON CODE § 202-12
1:118
§ 202-13. Permit restrictions.
§ 202-14. Denial, revocation or suspension of permit.
E. Preblasting conferences may be scheduled by the Fire Chief prior to
approval of permit application. Conference attendees may include but
not be limited to representatives of the blaster, other town officials and/
or citizens likely to be affected by blasting operations.
F. If an application for renewal is filed with the issuing authority before
expiration of the old permit, the renewal will become effective when the
old permit expires. No renewal permit shall be issued more than 30
days before the expiration date of the current permit.
G. If an application for renewal is filed after the expiration of the old
permit, it shall be considered as an application for a new permit.
A. No permit shall be assigned or transferred.
B. Approved permits shall be dated and be valid for no more than one year
from date of issue.
C. The permit expiration date shall be no later than the expiration date of
the blaster's insurance certificate.
D. The permit shall bear the name and address of the person who applied
for the permit, the name and address of the person(s) with a blaster's
license who will supervise the use of explosives and the signature of the
approving authority.
A. A permit for use of explosive materials may be denied, revoked or
suspended for any of the following reasons:
(1) Noncompliance with any order of the issuing authority.
(2) If it is determined that any applicant or permit holder was or is
under the influence of any drug (prescription or nonprescription) or
alcohol that may have impaired their judgment or ability to
transport, store, possess or use any explosive material under the
jurisdiction of the Town of Hudson in a safe and prudent manner,
while operating under such permit, their permit to operate in the
town shall be suspended immediately. The Fire Chief or his
designee shall contact the Hudson Police Department and the State
of New Hampshire Department of Safety if they feel that any
applicant or permit holder has or is suspected of violating this or
any part of this chapter because they may have been or were
impaired by any drugs (prescription or nonprescription) or alcohol.
No permit to operate shall be reissued until the matter is fully
investigated and the Fire Chief's office provided with the findings
38.Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Fees.
§ 202-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-14
1:119
§ 202-15. Licenses and permits available for public inspection;
protection of permits.
of any investigations into the matter. [Amended 3-14-2000 by
ballot by the ATM, Art. No. 34]
(3) Proof that the permit holder or applicant suffers from a mental or
physical defect that would interfere with the safe handling of
explosive materials.
(4) Violation by the applicant or permit holder of any provision of any
law or regulation relating to explosive materials or proof that false
information was willfully given or a misrepresentation was willfully
made to obtain the permit.
(5) Determination by the issuing authority that blasting operations
pose a hazard to the health or property of any person or have or will
cause an unnecessary nuisance to any person.
(6) For other good cause.
B. Notification; hearing. [Amended 3-14-2000 by ballot by the ATM,
Art. No. 34]
(1) In any case where the Fire Chief determines that it may be
appropriate to deny a permit, he shall promptly notify the
applicant. Said notice will set forth specific basis for the denial and
state that, upon written request, a hearing before the Chief will be
held within 10 days after the date of receiving the request.
Following said hearing, the Chief will make a final determination as
to whether to grant or deny the applicant a permit.
(2) In any case where the Fire Chief determines that it may be
appropriate to revoke a permit from a current permit holder, he
shall promptly notify the applicant that the applicant's current
permit is temporarily suspended pending a hearing. Said notice will
set forth specific basis for the suspension and anticipated
revocation and state that, upon written request, a hearing before
the Chief will be held within 10 days after the date of receiving the
request. Following said hearing, the Chief will make a final
determination as to whether to revoke the permit.
C. Within 15 days after such hearing, the Fire Chief shall state his findings
and conclusions, in writing, and transmit a copy to the applicant or
former permit holder.
D. Upon notice of the revocation or suspension of any permit, the former
permit holder shall immediately surrender to the issuing authority the
permit and all copies thereof.
A. Licenses (or copies thereof) to deal in explosive materials shall be kept
available for inspection at each place of operation.
§ 202-14 HUDSON CODE § 202-15
1:120
§ 202-16. Recordkeeping and reporting.
B. A permit to blast (or copies thereof) shall be kept available for
inspection at each place of operation.
C. Permit holders shall take every reasonable precaution to protect their
permits from loss, theft, defacement, destruction or unauthorized
duplication, and any such occurrence shall be reported immediately to
the Fire Chief.
A. A holder of a permit to use explosive materials shall make a record of all
operations within the Town of Hudson. Such record shall be made
available to the Fire Chief upon request and shall be retained for five
years.
B. All persons holding a blaster's permit shall make daily records for each
blast that at a minimum contains the information required by the
current version of the Hudson Fire Department's Records
Requirements for Blasting. These records shall be retained for five
years. [Amended 3-14-2000 by ballot by the ATM, Art. No. 34]
C. The Fire Chief shall be notified promptly by any permit holder of a
change in business address or phone number and home address, if
applicable.
D. The theft or loss of explosive materials shall be reported immediately to
the Fire Chief and to the Hudson Police Department.
E. Records made and kept pursuant to regulations promulgated by any
federal or state agency need not be duplicated to satisfy the
requirements of this section.
§ 202-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-16
1:121

ARTICLE III
Use of Explosive Materials
§ 202-17. General regulations.
§ 202-18. Notification. [Amended 3-14-2000 by ballot by the ATM,
Art. No. 34]
A. The conduct of all blasting operations shall be governed by the New
Hampshire Code of Administrative Rules, Chapter Saf-C 1600,
Explosives. [Amended 3-14-2000 by ballot by the ATM, Art. No.
34]
B. In the case of conflicting rules or regulations, the most stringent rule or
regulation shall apply.
C. While explosive materials are being handled or used, smoking shall not
be permitted, and no one near the explosive material shall possess
matches, open flame or fire- or flame-producing devices, except that the
blaster may possess a device for the specific purpose of igniting the
safety fuse.
D. No one shall handle explosive materials while under the influence of
alcohol, narcotics or other substances that may impair one's judgment.
[Amended 3-14-2000 by ballot by the ATM, Art. No. 34]
E. For all blasts, the blaster shall exercise precautions to prevent injury to
persons and damage to property and to prevent earth vibrations and
atmospheric sounds from exceeding regulatory limits. [Amended
3-14-2000 by ballot by the ATM, Art. No. 34]
F. When conducting blasting operations, the holder of the permit shall use
reasonable precautions, including but not limited to warning signals,
flags, barricades or mats as may be required or appropriate to
maximize safety.
G. Blasting operations shall be conducted during daylight hours only,
except by permission of the Fire Chief.
H. No explosive materials shall be intentionally abandoned in any location
for any reason, nor left in such a manner that they may easily be
obtained by children or other unauthorized persons. All unused
explosive materials shall be returned to proper storage facilities.
I. Explosive materials shall be loaded and used in a manner that is
consistent with any recommendations or instructions of the
manufacturer for that explosive material.
J. Transportation, storage and possession of explosive materials in the
Town of Hudson shall be governed by the New Hampshire Code of
Administrative Rules, Chapter Saf-C 1600, Explosives. [Added
3-14-2000 by ballot by the ATM, Art. No. 34]
§ 202-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-18
1:123
§ 202-19. Preblast surveys. [Amended 3-14-2000 by ballot by the
ATM, Art. No. 34]
Prior to conducting any blasting operations, the applicant or their agent
shall conduct a preblast structural inspection condition survey of all existing
structures and conditions on the site, adjacent to the site or in the vicinity
of the site at no cost to the property owner or the Town of Hudson. This
survey shall extend to such structures or conditions as may be affected
by the applicant's blasting operations. As a minimum, preblast structural
inspection condition surveys shall be performed on all structures, including
homes, foundations, driveways, roadbeds, swimming pools, wells and
mobile homes within 500 feet of the anticipated blasting area. The applicant
as well as the owner of the property being surveyed shall sign all such
surveys once completed If an owner refuses to allow for or sign a preblast
survey form for whatever reason the applicant shall note this on the form.
The applicant shall make at least three attempts to notify the owner of
the need for such surveys; the last such attempt shall include written
notification and the name and contact number of a person that they may
contact.
A. Notification of intent to conduct blasting operations shall be published
in a local daily newspaper on at least three consecutive days prior to the
start of blasting. Said notification shall also be published in the local
weekly newspaper at least once prior to the start date of blasting.
Notification shall include the area of operations and the name of the
company responsible for operations.
B. Persons intending to conduct blasting operations within the Town of
Hudson shall submit written notification of such intent to the Chief of
the Police Department. Said notification shall be made no less than 24
hours prior to the estimated start date of blasting and shall be
submitted on forms provided by the Police Department.
C. The blaster shall notify the Hudson Fire Department dispatcher no less
than 30 minutes prior to each blast. The blaster shall provide:
(1) The name of the company conducting the blasting;
(2) The address of the blasting;
(3) The time of the blasting; and
(4) The amount of explosive material to be used.
A. The preblast structural inspection condition survey shall consist of a
written description of the interior and exterior condition of each of the
structures examined. Descriptions shall locate any existing cracks,
damage or other defects and shall include such information so as to
make it possible to determine the effect, if any, of the blasting
operations on the defect. Where significant cracks or damage exist, or
for defects too complicated to describe in words, photographs shall be
taken. A good quality videotape survey with appropriate audio
§ 202-18 HUDSON CODE § 202-19
1:124
§ 202-20. Blasting operations.
§ 202-21. Warning required.
§ 202-22. Supervision of operations.
description of locations, conditions and defects can be used in lieu of a
written form. Prior to the start of work, a copy of the preblast condition
survey shall be submitted to the Fire Chief or his designee and the
homeowner or occupant.
B. The individual person conducting the survey shall give written notice to
the owner of the property concerned and tenants of the property. The
notice shall state the dates on which the surveys are to be conducted.
Copies of all notices shall also be provided to the Fire Chief or his
designee.
A. During the time that holes are loaded or are being loaded with
explosives, blasting agents or detonators, the blast site shall be barred
to all but those authorized personnel engaged in the drilling and
loading operations or otherwise authorized to enter that site. The blast
site shall be guarded or barricaded and posted.
B. After loading for a blast is completed, and before firing, all excess
explosive materials shall be removed from the area and returned to
proper facilities.
C. As soon as practical after all blastholes are connected, prior to
connecting to a source of initiation, such as a blasting machine, and
until the shot has been fired and subjected to post-blast examination,
the blast area shall be guarded or barricaded and posted or flagged
against unauthorized entry.
A. No blast shall be fired until the blaster in charge has made certain that
all surplus explosive materials are in a safe place, all persons and
equipment are at a safe distance or under sufficient cover and that an
adequate warning signal has been given.
B. The blaster shall inform the Fire Chief of the method by which a signal
is sounded and the type of signal prior to starting blasting operations.
A. Loading and firing shall be performed or supervised only by a person
possessing an appropriate blaster's permit. (See Article II.)
B. The Fire Chief or his designee may, at his discretion, monitor at or near
the blast site any blasting operations conducted within the Town of
Hudson.
C. If, making the required thirty-minute prior notification (§ 202-18D), the
blaster is informed that the blast will be monitored, the blaster shall
delay initiation of the shot until such time as the Fire Department
representative is in position to monitor the blast.
§ 202-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-23
1:125
§ 202-23. Seismographic monitoring.
A. The Fire Chief may, at his discretion, require that seismographic
monitoring be conducted by the blaster for any or all blasts initiated.
B. The location of seismographic equipment for tests may be determined
by the Fire Chief in coordination with the blaster.
C. The seismographic instrumentation shall, at a minimum, meet the
specifications as outlined by the Hudson Fire Department. The Chief
has the option of requiring that the original seismographic strip chart,
digital seismographic data and calibration data be provided.39 [Added
3-14-2000 by ballot by the ATM, Art. No. 3440]
D. All seismographic test results shall be made available, in writing, to the
Fire Chief upon request. The Chief has the option of requiring that the
original seismographic strip be provided.
39.Editor's Note: Said specifications are located at the end of this chapter.
40.Editor's Note: Said article also provided for the relettering of former Subsection C as
Subsection D.
§ 202-23 HUDSON CODE § 202-23
1:126
ARTICLE IV
Complaints
§ 202-24. Categories of complaints.
§ 202-25. Nuisances.
§ 202-26. Damage complaints.
A. The Fire Chief shall have the responsibility of coordinating all activities
relative to complaints received concerning blasting operations within
the Town of Hudson.
B. Complaints received may be grouped into two categories:
(1) Complaints of an informational nature or of a nuisance nature
relative to blasts.
(2) Complaints wherein possible damage is claimed as a result of
blasting operations.
A. Complaints of an informational nature or reporting a nuisance factor
relating to blasting operations shall be handled by the Fire Chief. The
Chief shall contact, in a timely manner, the complainant and attempt to
resolve the complaint. In the event that the complainant is not satisfied
after contact by the Chief, the Chief shall require the blaster or the
blasting company to contact the complainant directly.
B. If, in the determination of the Fire Chief, sufficient complaints have
been received in reference to a specific blasting operation, the Chief
may direct such actions as may reduce the possible nuisance factor.
Such actions may include but not be limited to reductions in the
amounts of explosive materials used, change in the time of the blast
initiation and monitoring of blasts by noise level or earth vibration
equipment to determine the extent of or existence of the nuisance
factor.
A. Complaints received by the Fire Department which allege damage to
property as a result of blasting operations shall be coordinated
promptly by the Fire Chief.
B. The complainant shall be contacted directly by the Fire Chief to
ascertain pertinent information relative to the alleged damage.
C. The complainant shall also receive written instructions outlining the
procedures to follow in order to seek compensation for possible
damage.
D. The Fire Chief may elect to inspect the alleged damage and shall be
authorized to document and/or photograph such evidence as he deems
necessary.
§ 202-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-26
1:127
E. If, in the determination of the Fire Chief, the blaster, the blasting
company or their insurance representatives are not dealing with the
complainant in a satisfactory manner, the Chief may exercise any option
provided by the Code, including ordering suspension of blasting
operations until such time as a satisfactory resolution is attained.
§ 202-26 HUDSON CODE § 202-26
1:128
Chapter 205
FEES
§ 205-1. Board of Selectmen fees.
Board of Selectmen's fees are set as follows:
§ 205-2. Building fees. [Amended 5-14-2002; 10-25-2005; 2-24-2015
by Ord. No. 15-02]
Building fees are set as follows:
A. Truck (by ordinance), per vehicle: $25.
B. Hawker/Peddler (by ordinance):
(1) Day: $5.
(2) Week: $25.
(3) Year: $100.
C. Motor vehicle race track (by ordinance): $100.
D. Motor vehicle junkyard license (by state statute): $25.
E. DVDs. [Added 4-24-2001; amended 12-11-2007]
(1) DVD duplication costs: $15 per program.
(2) Retention of DVDs. DVDs will be held for a period of six months and
then will be destroyed. (However, DVDs of the Annual Town
Meeting and School District Meeting will be held longer.)
A. Building permit application fee: $30.
B. Residential construction: $0.40 per square foot.
(1) Garage area: $0.40 per square foot.
(2) Remodel and repair: $0.15 per square foot.
(3) Pools:
(a) Inground: $75.
(b) Aboveground: $50.
(4) Temporary mobile home: $100.
(5) Permit extension: $50.
(6) Removal stop-work order: $75.
C. Accessory residential (detached garages and sheds):
§ 202-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-2
1:129
(1) Zero to 200 square feet: $40.
(2) Two hundred one to 499 square feet: $60.
(3) Five hundred square feet and over: $60, plus $0.10/square foot
over 500 square feet.
D. Commercial construction:
(1) New: $0.40 per square foot.
(2) Remodel/Repair: $0.20 per square foot.
(3) Minimum charge on commercial permits: $150.
(4) Permit extension (one year): $50.
(5) Removal stop-work order: $75.
E. Industrial construction: $0.40 per square foot.
(1) Remodel and repair: $10 per $1,000 of cost of construction.
(2) Minimum charge: $200.
(3) Permit extension (one year): $50.
(4) Removal stop-work order $75.
F. Electrical permits:
(1) Residential: $75.
(2) Commercial:
Size of Facility
(square feet) Fee
0 to 2,000 $200
2,000 to 3,000 $225
3,000 to 4,000 $250
4,000 $275
(3) Industrial: $275.
(4) Illuminated signs: $100.
(5) Meter socket: $75.
G. Reinspections:
(1) Residential: $75.
(2) Commercial: $100.
(3) Industrial: $125.
§ 205-2 HUDSON CODE § 205-2
1:130
(4) Additional inspection fees are for reinspection of violations. If a
stop-work order is imposed and the violations are not corrected
within two weeks, the fee to remove the stop-work order will be
$75.
H. Sign permits:
(1) Residential: $75.
(2) Commercial: $150.
(3) Industrial: $150.
(4) Temporary: $75.
I. Plumbing permits:
(1) Residential: $75.
(a) New construction: $100.
(b) Renovation: $75.
(c) Deduct meter: $60.
(2) Commercial:
Size of Facility
(square feet) Fee
0 to 2,000 $200
2,000 to 3,000 $225
3,000 to 4,000 $250
4,000 $275
(a) Deduct meter: $75.
(3) Industrial: $275.
J. Demolition permits:
(1) Residential: $50.
(2) Commercial: $100.
(3) Industrial: $175.
K. Mechanical permits.
(1) Residential: $75.
(2) Commercial: $100.
(3) Industrial: $100.
§ 205-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-2
1:131
§ 205-3. Finance Department fees.
Finance Department fees are set as follows:
§ 205-4. Fire Department fees. [Amended 2-24-2015 by Ord. No.
15-02]
Fire Department fees are set as follows:
L. Certificate of occupancy:
(1) Residential: $100.
(2) Commercial: $200.
(3) Industrial: $250.
M. Working without a permit: $250.
N. Roof, commercial/industrial: $250.
O. Structures designed and certified to LEED standards shall be eligible
for the following reduction in their building permit fee:
(1) LEED standard certification: 5%.
(2) LEED silver certification: 10%.
(3) LEED gold certification: 15%.
(4) LEED platinum certification: 20%.
A. Voter checklist.
(1) Paper: $25.
(2) Diskette: $7.
B. Copy machine fees:
(1) First page: $1.
(2) Each additional page thereafter: $0.25.
A. Gas and oil burner installation: $30.
B. Blasting (annual): $175.
C. Place of assembly:
(1) Fifty persons: $15.
(2) Fifty to 299 persons: $20.
(3) Three hundred plus: $30.
(4) Temporary: $30.
§ 205-2 HUDSON CODE § 205-4
1:132
D. Solid fuel burning equipment (permit to install): $60.
E. Smoke detector certificate: $50.
F. Public fireworks display: $50.
G. Underground tank installation:
(1) Residential: $30.
(a) Tank removal (below grade): $30.
(2) Commercial/Industrial, 500 gallons or more: $30.
H. Underground tank removal: $60.
I. Aboveground tank installation (commercial/industrial): $75.
J. LP tank installation (less than 300 gallons): $40.
K. Day-care license, state code compliance: $30.
L. Reinspection for noncompliance or failure: $15.
M. Kerosene heaters (state permit): $2.
N. Fire alarm system (all except residential): $60 (plus $0.50 per device).
O. Incident reports: $15. For more than 10 pages, the fee shall be $1 per
page.
P. Photographs: $3.
Q. VCR tape copy: $15.
R. Explosive permits:
(1) Short-term permit, per day: $25.
(2) Renewal of a previously issued permit, per day: $50.
(3) Issuance of an initial permit: $100.
(4) Reissuance of a previously revoked permit: $250.
(5) Renewal of a permit which has been applied for after the expiration
date of the original permit: $100.
S. Fire prevention systems.
(1) Sprinkler application fee (nonrefundable): $30.
(2) NFPA 13D system (per riser): $40.
(3) NFPA 13R system (per riser): $70.
(4) NFPA 13 system (per riser):
§ 205-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-4
1:133
§ 205-5. Ambulance fees. [Amended 5-14-2002; 7-25-2006;
10-27-2009; 3-23-2010; 12-16-2014]
Ambulance fees are set as follows:
§ 205-6. Health fees.
Health fees are set as follows:
(a) Up to 10,000 square feet of protected area: $110.
(b) From 10,001 square feet to 25,000 square feet: $225.
(c) From 25,001 square feet to 52,000 square feet: $300.
(d) Up to six sprinkler heads: $30.
(e) Seven to 20 sprinkler heads: $55.
(5) Standpipe system (not part of combined sprinkler/standpipe
system):
(a) Up to three floors (per riser): $70.
(b) Beyond three add, per floor: $55.
A. BLS nonemergency: $610.08.
B. BLS emergency: $610.08.
C. ALS 1 nonemergency: $1,021.76.
D. ALS 1 emergency: $1,021.76.
E. ALS 2 emergency: $1,522.14.
F. Specialty care transport: $1,695.14.
G. Mileage: $10.74.
H. Treatment/No transport: $250.
A. Health permit (day-care centers/foster homes): $50. [Amended
10-25-2005]
B. Health permit for outdoor gatherings and hawker/peddlers (not
inspected by the State Health Department): $25.
C. Septic plan review, including new plan review, test pit, replace-in-kind,
field inspection and bed bottom inspection: $100. [Added 5-14-2002;
amended 10-25-2005]
(1) If a stop-work order is imposed and the violation(s) is not corrected
within two weeks, the fee to remove the stop-work order will be
$75.
§ 205-4 HUDSON CODE § 205-7
1:134
§ 205-7. Planning Department fees.
Planning Department fees are set as follows:
A. Application for subdivision plan review.
(1) Review fees.
(a) One hundred seventy dollars per lot, plus:
[1] Consultant review fee: Linear feet of roadway (including
cul-de-sac); length of roadway: $1.25 per foot or $800,
whichever is greater. This is an estimate for the cost of
consultant review. The fee is expected to cover the
amount. A complex project may require additional funds. A
simple project may result in a refund. [Amended
7-9-2002]
[2] Legal fees. The applicant shall be charged attorney costs
billed to the Town for the Town Attorney's review of any
application plan set documents.
(b) Lot line relocation: $340 for the first two lots, plus $170 per
each additional lot.
(c) Conceptual review only: $100.
(d) Zoning Board of Appeals input only: $100.
(e) GIS fee (flat fee): [Added 8-9-2005]
[1] For two to seven lots: number of lots times $60, plus $25
(minimum $145).
[2] For eight lots or more: minimum $650.
(2) Postage. Current certified mail postage rate per abutter to the
proposed site plan and current first class postage rate per property
owner within 200 feet of the proposed site plan. [Amended
7-9-2002]
(3) Advertising (public notice) for all subdivisions: $40.
(4) Recording fees.
(a) The applicant shall pay the costs of recording the final plan
layout prior to final subdivision recording, in accordance with
fees established by the county.
[1] Recording of plan: $24 per sheet, plus a surcharge of $2
per plan.
[2] Easements/agreements (if applicable): $10 for the first
sheet; $4 for each sheet thereafter, plus a surcharge of $2
per document, plus first class return postage rate.
§ 205-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-7
1:135
(b) Please note: Recording fees shall be computed when plans are
finalized for recording. Recording fees must be paid by the
applicant prior to recording.
(c) The applicant shall be responsible for all fees incurred by the
Town for processing and review of the applicant's application
plan and related materials. All such fees must be paid prior to
recording.
(5) Cost allocation procedure amount contribution and other impact
fee payments: to be determined by vote of the Planning Board and
paid by the applicant prior to issuance of building permit.
(6) Subdivision plan review application schedule of fees was approved
by the Planning Board June 26, 1996. On August 14, 1996, the
Planning Board made fees schedule effective September 1, 1996.
B. Application for site plan review.
(1) Review fees.
(a) Fees established.
Site Plan Use Fee
Multifamily
3 to 50 units $105 per unit
Each additional unit over 50 $78.50 per unit
Commercial/semipublic/ civic/
recreational
First 100,000 square feet of
building area
$157 per 1,000 square
feet
Each 1,000 square feet
thereafter
$78.50 per 1,000 square
feet
Industrial
First 100,000 square feet of
building area
$105 per 1,000 square
feet
Each 1,000 square feet
thereafter
$78.50 per 1,000 square
feet
No buildings $30 per 1,000 square
feet of proposed
developed area
(b) Plus consultant review fee: total acres of disturbed area, acres:
$600 per acre or $1,000, whichever is greater. This is an
estimate for the cost of consultant review. The fee is expected
to cover the amount. A complex project may require additional
funds. A simple project may result in a refund. [Amended
7-9-2002]
§ 205-7 HUDSON CODE § 205-7
1:136
§ 205-8. Police Department fees.
Police Department fees are set as follows:
(c) Legal fees. The applicant shall be charged attorney costs billed
to the Town for Town's attorney review of any application plan
set documents.
(d) Conceptual review only: $100.
(e) Zoning Board of Appeals input only: $100.
(f) GIS fee (flat fee): $550. [Added 8-9-2005]
(2) Postage. Current certified mail postage rate per abutter to
proposed site plan and current first class postage rate per property
owner within 200 feet of proposed site plan. [Amended 7-9-2002]
(3) Advertising (public notice) for all site plans: $40.
(4) Recording fees.
(a) The applicant shall pay the costs of recording the final site plan
layout prior to final site plan approval, in accordance with fees
established by the county.
[1] Recording of plan: $24 per sheet, plus a surcharge of $2
per plan.
[2] Easements/agreements (if applicable): $10 for the first
sheet; $4 for each sheet thereafter, plus a surcharge of $2
per document, plus first class return postage rate.
(b) Please note: Recording fees shall be computed when plans are
finalized for recording. Recording fees must be paid by the
applicant prior to recording.
(c) The applicant shall be responsible for all fees incurred by the
Town for processing and review of the applicant's application
plan and related materials. All such fees must be paid prior to
recording.
(5) Cost allocation procedure amount contribution and other impact
fee payments: to be determined by vote of the Planning Board and
paid by the applicant prior to issuance of building permit.
(6) Site plan review application schedule of fees approved by the
Planning Board August 14, 1996, effective September 1, 1996.
A. Accident/Crime scene photos:
(1) 3 by 5 film developing: $4 each.
(2) 8 by 10 film developing: $10 each.
§ 205-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-8
1:137
§ 205-9. Animal control fees. [Amended 10-14-2003; 3-8-2010;
8-14-2012]
Animal control fees governed by state statute are not listed in this section
but are set in accordance with RSA 466.
(3) Digital color printout: $3 each.
(4) Black and white digital print: $2 each.
B. Reports (includes incidents, arrests, investigations, accidents): $10 (up
to 10 pages); domestic violence incident: $10 for plaintiff, no charge for
victim.
C. Reports/Major investigations (over 10 pages): $1 per page.
D. Pistol/Revolver permit: $10.
E. Games of chance permit: $25.
F. License to sell pistol/revolver: $10.
G. Solicitor's license (by ordinance): $10.
H. Written requests to research traffic studies, criminal statistics: $25
each.
I. Letter of conduct/record check: $5.
J. Fees for parking violations (paid directly to the Town): $20. [Amended
3-27-2007]
K. Dictaphone cassette recordings: $25.
L. Video recordings: $50.
M. Police cruiser present at details (by request): $15 per hour. [Amended
12-14-2004]
N. Daily log:
(1) Twenty-four-hour period, up to five pages: $5.
(2) Over five pages: $1 per page.
O. Copies of statistics as compiled monthly/yearly: $5 each.
P. Dispatch screen (accident under $1,000 or other call): $5.
A. Transport animal: $10.
B. Board per day: $15.
C. Ten-day quarantine: $150 (additional charges for longer quarantine.)
D. Dogs at large:
§ 205-8 HUDSON CODE § 205-9
1:138
§ 205-10. Public works fees.
Public works fees are set as follows:
(1) First offense: $25.
(2) Second offense: $50.
(3) Third offense: Court action to be taken.
E. Waste removal:
(1) First offense: $25.
(2) Second offense: $50.
(3) Third offense: Court action to be taken.
F. Unwanted animals:
(1) Each dog: $120
(2) Each cat: $60.
(3) Pick-up fee: $20.
A. Sewer permit (residential): Establish fee for field inspection of sanitary
sewer connection to ensure conformity with Town and state regulations
and standards. Field inspections are presently conducted by the Sewer
and Drains Division.
(1) Present fee (administrative costs): $25.
(2) Recommended additional fee (field inspection costs): $25.
B. Sewer permit (commercial, business and industrial): Establish fee for
field inspection of sanitary sewer service connection to ensure
conformity with Town and state regulations and standards. The majority
of field inspections are presently conducted by construction project
inspector and/or Sewer and Drains Division at no cost to the applicant.
(Note: When field inspection is conducted by an outside inspector, the
inspection fee is charged. The initial fee of $1,000 (escrow account)
required with sewer permit submittal was established to cover design
review and field inspection costs. Presently, no field inspection fee is
charged to the applicant if the inspection is performed by Town forces.
(1) Present fee:
(a) Administrative costs only: $25.
(b) Outside design review/field inspection: $1,000.
(2) Recommended fee:
(a) Administrative costs only: $25.
§ 205-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-10
1:139
§ 205-11. Recreation Department fees. [Amended 11-28-2000;
4-9-2002; 6-10-2003; 5-10-2005; 12-11-2007; 3-23-2010; 4-23-2013;
6-10-2014 by Ord. No. 14-03; 1-13-2015 by Ord. No. 15-01]
(b) Outside or Town performed design review/field inspection:
$1,000.
C. Street opening permit: Establish fee for administrative costs and field
inspection costs. Field inspections will ensure conformity with Town
regulations and standards. Field inspections are presently conducted
by the Street Division at no cost to the applicant. Chapter 284 of the
Hudson Town Code deals with street openings.
(1) Recommended fees:
(a) Administrative costs: $25.
(b) Field inspection costs: $50.
(2) Drive permit: $50.
(3) Blueprint copies: $3.
A. Recreation Department fees are set as follows:
(1) Summer Recreation Program:
(a) Fee: $300.
(b) Out-of-towners: $400.
(c) Second family member: $175.
(d) Third and subsequent child(ren), each: $150.
(e) Ten-day pass booklet: $150.
(f) Cookout: $5.
(g) Roller skating: $6.
(h) Field trips: to be determined.
(i) New Hampshire state trips: $5.
(j) Before-/After-hours care: $5.
(2) Softball:
(a) Men's softball: $80.
(b) Men's softball (grandfathered out-of-towners): $125.
(c) Women's softball: $60.
(d) Women's softball (grandfathered out-of-towners): $100.
§ 205-10 HUDSON CODE § 205-11
1:140
§ 205-12. Town Clerk/Tax Collector fees.
(3) Jette Field (user deposit): $100.
(4) Basketball:
(a) Teen: $50.
(b) Grades 3 through 8: $50.
(c) Instructional (Grades 1 and 2): $40.
(d) Travel (3 through 8): $75.
(e) Over 35: $80.
(5) Sponsor fee (adult basketball and softball): $175.
(6) Soccer (K-8): $50.
(7) Soccer (Little Sweepers): $40.
(8) Teen dances: $5.
(9) Tennis lessons: $50.
(10) Invitational basketball tournament: $250.
(11) Late fee (basketball, lacrosse and soccer): $15.
(12) Jette Field, light usage (per hour): $30.
(13) Lacrosse: $125.
(14) Lacrosse (Fiddle Stix): $40.
(15) Senior Center annual membership: $10.
(16) Community Center rental: $60 per hour.
B. The Recreation Director may waive the registration fee, or a portion
thereof, for any Hudson resident, provided that the number and dollar
value of any waivers granted, and the rationale, shall be provided to the
Board of Selectmen and the Recreation Committee. This may be
accomplished by the monthly report.
A. Town Clerk/Tax Collector fees are set as follows:
(1) Duplicate tax bill: $1.
(2) Town of Hudson Code Book: $200.
(3) License to purchase scrap metals, precious metals and precious
stones (set by ordinance): $50.
B. All other fees for Town Clerk/Tax Collector's office are regulated by the
state.
§ 205-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-13
1:141
§ 205-13. Zoning fees. [Amended 10-25-2005; 12-22-2009;
8-14-2018]
§ 205-14. Water Utility fees. [Amended 5-14-2002]
A. Zoning fees are set as follows:
(1) Zoning Board of Adjustment applications (variances, special
exceptions, appeal of an administration decision, equitable waiver
of dimensional requirement); includes advertising for newspaper
public notice and recording of decisions: $130.
(2) Postage (paid by applicant). Current certified mail postage rate per
abutter to the property and current first-class postage rate per
property owner within 200 feet of the property.
B. If the application is required to be reviewed at more than one Zoning
Board of Adjustment meeting, additional postage and advertising
charges will be assessed. For guidelines apropos to specific
circumstances regarding applicability of fee reassessment, please refer
to the approved Zoning Board of Adjustment bylaws.
A. Water utility fees are set as follows:
(1) Backflow device test fee: $36.
B. Water supply development fee: $1,545.
C. Water distribution development fee: $659.
D. Residential water connection fees:
(1) Application processing and inspection by the Town: $100.
(2) Meter installation and inspections by Pennichuck: [Amended
10-11-2011]
Size of Meter
(inches) Fee
5/8 $400
3/4 $500
1 $550
1 1/2 $800
2 $1,050
3 $1,050
> 3 Cost to be determined at time of
application (plus parts)
(3) New customer water system access fee: chart on file with Town
Engineer.
§ 205-13 HUDSON CODE § 205-14
1:142
§ 205-15. Assessing Department fees.
Assessing Department fees are set as follows:
E. Nonresidential water connection fees.
(1) Application processing and inspection by the Town: $100.
(2) Inspection fee: $4/linear foot of installed pipe.
(3) Meter installation and inspections by Pennichuck: [Amended
10-11-2011]
Size of Meter
(inches) Fee
5/8 $400
3/4 $500
1 $550
1 1/2 $800
2 $1,050
3 $1,050
> 3 Cost to be determined at time of
application (plus parts)
(4) The new customer water system access fee for any use connecting
to the water main constructed on the easterly side of NH Route
102, a/k/a "Derry Road," northerly of Hudson Tax Map 105, Lot 7,
and continuing westerly along West Road to the Londonderry Town
Line shall be $15,000, plus the supply fee portion of the new
customer water system access fee as set forth in the chart on file
with the Town Engineer. For all other uses, the new customer water
system access fees shall be as set forth in the chart on file with the
Town Engineer. [Amended 6-10-2014 by Ord. No. 14-04]
F. Water utility temporary meter fees. [Added 8-11-2015 by Ord. No.
15-03]
(1) One-time temporary water meter installation and removal fee:
$200.
(2) Backflow preventer device rental, per day: $3.
A. Fax fee, per property record card for each card faxed: $2.
B. Tax warrant.
(1) Paper: $25.
(2) Diskette: $7.
§ 205-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-16
1:143
§ 205-16. Community Center fees. [Added 2-12-2002; amended
10-24-2006]
§ 205-17. GIS mapping fees. [Added 5-14-2002; amended 8-9-2005]
GIS mapping fees shall be as follows:
Item Digital Paper
AutoCAD drawings $100/tile $25/tile
Orthographic photos $100/tile $25/tile
GIS information $100/tile $25/tile
Complete set of AutoCAD
drawings
$8,000 N/A
Complete set of ortho photos $8,000 N/A
Complete set of GIS data $8,000 N/A
A. Fees.
Group Fee
Boy Scouts No fee
Seniors No fee
WIC No fee
Hannah Dustin Quilters $150
Junior Women's Club $150
Lions Club $150
Nottingham West Lions
Club
$150
Antique Show $400
Karate $400
Wrestling $400
All other groups $400
B. Each lessor shall be required to submit a certified check or money order
in the amount of $250 as a cleaning/damage deposit.
C. Each lessor shall provide a certificate of liability insurance to the Town
of Hudson in the amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence and $3,000,000
cumulative.
D. Rentals for nonprofit, charitable organizations in Hudson, such as the
Lions Clubs, Junior Women's Club and the Quilters, shall be $150, and
they must abide by all other terms of the agreement, including set-up
and take-down and cleaning the Hall.
E. The Board of Selectmen, at its discretion, may waive the rental fee.
§ 205-16 HUDSON CODE § 205-17
1:144
Chapter 210
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 58.
Alarm systems — See Ch. 154.
Wood- and coal-burning appliances — See Ch.
164.
Building construction — See Ch. 178.
Explosives — See Ch. 202.
Fires at landfill — See Ch. 245.
§ 205-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-17
1:145

ARTICLE I
Permits for Outside Burning
[Adopted 3-4-1975 by the ATM, Art. 10]
§ 210-1. Permit required.
Any person, firm or corporation must obtain a permit from the Fire Chief,
or his designee, before kindling or causing to be kindled any and all outside
fires, regardless of the time of day, year or weather conditions.
§ 210-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-9-2004]
Violators will be subject to the penalties described under Revised Statutes
Annotated Chapter 227-L, namely, for kindling a fire without a permit, shall
be guilty of a violation, plus payment of any expenses incurred by the Town
in extinguishing any fire resulting from any such action.
§ 210-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-2
1:147

ARTICLE II
Minimum Requirements
[Adopted 3-9-1999 by the ATM, Art. 3841]
§ 210-2.1. Scope.
§ 210-2.2. Adoption of Fire Prevention Code. [Amended 3-9-2004]
A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the Town
Clerk of the Town of Hudson, being marked and designated as "The NFPA
Fire Prevention Code, 2000 edition," as published by the National Fire
Protection Association, is hereby adopted as part of the Fire Prevention
Code of the Town of Hudson, in the State of New Hampshire. The NFPA Fire
Prevention Code, 2000 edition, is adopted in its entirety with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 210-2.4 of this
article.
§ 210-2.3. Repealer.
Article II of Chapter 210, entitled "Minimum Requirements," adopted on
November 28, 1989, as Ord. No. O89-21, is hereby repealed.
§ 210-2.4. Amendments to code. [Amended 3-9-2004]
The NFPA 1 Fire Prevention Code, 2000 Edition, is amended as follows:
A. This article establishes the minimum regulations governing the
safeguarding of life and property from the hazards of fire and
explosions arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous
substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to
life or property in the use or occupancy of buildings or premises.
B. These regulations shall be known as the "Fire Prevention Code."
A. The following sections of NFPA 1 Fire Prevention Code, 2000 edition,
shall be excluded from adoption:
(1) Section 1-8 Board of Appeals.
(2) Section 1-17 Certificates of Fitness.
(3) Section 16-1 Fireworks Displays.
(4) Section 16-4 Fireworks Manufacturing.
(5) Section 16-8 Explosives.
41.Editor's Note: Article 38 of the 3-9-1999 ATM also repealed former Art. II, Minimum
Requirements, adopted 11-28-1989 by Ord. No. O89-21.
§ 210-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-2.5
1:149
§ 210-2.5. Establishment of limits. [Amended 3-9-2004]
The limits referred to in NFPA 495, Explosives Materials Code, 1996 edition,
in which the storage of explosives, ammunition and blasting agents are
prohibited are established as the legal and recorded geographical
boundaries of the Town of Hudson, New Hampshire.
§ 210-2.6. Effect on impending proceedings.
Nothing in this article or in the Fire Prevention Code hereby adopted shall
be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court or
any rights acquired or liability incurred or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in
§ 210-2.3 of this article; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any
character be lost, impaired or affected by this article.
§ 210-2.5 HUDSON CODE § 210-2.6
1:150
ARTICLE III
Authorization to Issue Fire Burning Permits
[Article 30, voted in the affirmative 3-12-1977 by the Annual Town
Meeting, reads as follows: "To see if the Town will authorize the Fire
Chief to issue fire burning permits at any time conditions warrant
and that are not in conflict with NHRSA 224."]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-2.6
1:151

ARTICLE IV
Permits for Class B and C Fireworks
[Adopted 3-9-1999 by the ATM, Art. 3842]
§ 210-3. (Reserved)
§ 210-4. Issuance of permits. [Amended 3-9-2004]
The Police Chief and the Fire Chief shall not authorize the issuance of
permits for the possession, use and display of Class B fireworks and Class
C fireworks, as defined in RSA 160-B:1, except as allowed by Article II,
§ 210-2.4A, of the Fire Prevention Code of the Town of Hudson.
§ 210-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-9-2004]
Any person who purchases, possesses, sells, uses or displays Class B
fireworks or Class C fireworks without having obtained a permit issued by
the Fire Chief shall be subject to the penalties as prescribed in RSA 160-B
and RSA 160-C.
42.Editor's Note: Article 38 of the 3-9-1999 ATM also superseded former Art. IV, Permits for
Class B and Class C Fireworks, adopted 5-9-1989 by Ord. No. O89-5.
§ 210-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-5
1:153

ARTICLE V
Fire Protective Signaling Systems
[Adopted 3-9-1999 by the ATM, Art. 3843]
§ 210-6. Purpose.
The purpose and intent of this Fire Protective Signaling System Ordinance
is to safeguard life, property and the public welfare from the hazards of fire
by providing continuity and establishing standardization in fire protective
signaling system installations and the manner in which such systems are
connected to the Fire Department.
§ 210-7. Scope.
This article establishes the requirements for the installation of fire
protective signaling systems and their connection to the municipal fire
alarm system.
§ 210-8. Definitions. [Amended 3-9-2004]
Terms shall be as defined in NFPA 72 National Fire Alarm Code, 1999
edition.
§ 210-9. Requirements.
A. Buildings and/or premises which, under the provisions of Town or State
of New Hampshire Codes and other ordinances adopted by the Town of
Hudson, are required to install protective systems, equipment or
apparatus and fire protective signaling systems shall install and
connect such systems as specified in this article except for detached
one- and two-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories
in height with a separate means of egress. [Amended 3-9-2004]
B. Any required fire protective system, equipment or apparatus shall be
interfaced with an approved fire protective signaling system, and said
fire protective signaling system shall be installed consistent with this
article.
C. All required fire protective signaling systems shall connect to the
municipal fire alarm system through a master box. All proposed fire
protective systems, equipment or apparatus shall be approved by the
Fire Department prior to installation thereof.
D. The Fire Chief shall have the authority to waive the provisions of this
article in favor of another alarm system or method of monitoring the
fire protective signaling system to the extent that such action will
provide a degree of safety substantially equivalent to that provided
under the provisions from which the waiver is granted. Said waiver may
43.Editor's Note: Article 38 of the 3-9-1999 ATM also superseded former Art. V, Fire
Protective Signaling Systems, adopted 11-28-1989 by Ord. No. O89-22.
§ 210-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-9
1:155
§ 210-10. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all new structures, structures undergoing
substantial renovations and changes in use or number of units.
§ 210-11. Severability.
If any section, clause, portion or phrase of this article shall be held invalid
or unconstitutional by any court of competent authority, such holding shall
not affect, impair or invalidate any other section, clause, provision, portion
or phrase of the chapter.
§ 210-12. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby
repealed.
§ 210-13. Conflicting provisions.
In instances where any two codes conflict, the most stringent version or
code shall apply.
be granted in the event that connection to the municipal fire alarm
system is not feasible.
§ 210-9 HUDSON CODE § 210-13
1:156
ARTICLE VI
Sprinkler Systems
[Adopted 3-9-1999 by the ATM, Art. 3844 ]
§ 210-14. Scope.
This article establishes the requirement for and regulations governing the
installation and maintenance of sprinkler systems for the safeguarding
of life and property from the hazards of fire and explosion in specified
occupancies.
§ 210-15. Adoption of standards. [Amended 3-9-2004]
Certain documents, one copy of which is on file in the office of the Town
Clerk of the Town of Hudson, being marked as designated "NFPA 13,
Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems," 1999 edition
(hereinafter referred to as NFPA 13, 1999 edition), and "NFPA 13R,
Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in Residential
Occupancies up to Four Stories in Height," 1999 edition (hereinafter
referred to as NFPA 13R, 1999 edition), are hereby adopted as the standard
for installation of sprinkler systems in the Town of Hudson, New Hampshire.
The standards are adopted for the control of fire in specified buildings
and structures as herein provided; and each and all regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said standards are hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part hereof, as is fully set out in this article, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 210-17
of this article.
§ 210-16. Repealer.
Any and all other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are
hereby repealed.
§ 210-17. Additions, insertions and changes.
NFPA 13, 1996 edition, and NFPA 13R, 1996 edition, are adopted in their
entirety, except that such additions, insertions or changes as may be
specified in § 210-18, Applicability, shall be incorporated in the standard for
the Town of Hudson.
§ 210-18. Applicability.
A. The standards prescribed in NFPA 13, 1999 edition, and NFPA 13R,
1999 edition, for design, installation, acceptance tests and maintenance
of residential sprinkler systems shall apply to and be installed in the
following occupancies and/or structures: [Amended 3-9-2004]
44.Editor's Note: Article 38 of the 3-9-1999 ATM also superseded former Art. VI, Sprinkler
Systems, adopted 11-28-1989 by Ord. No. O89-24.
§ 210-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-18
1:157
§ 210-19. Conformance to standards; approvals.
§ 210-20. Effect on impending proceedings.
Nothing in this article hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit
or proceeding impending in any court or any rights acquired or liability
incurred or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing under any
act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in § 210-16 of this article, nor
shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or
affected by this article.
(1) New multifamily structures of three or more units, regardless of
the form of ownership or marketing (i.e. rental, owned,
condominium, townhouse, etc.,), up to and including four stories in
height that are not required by any other Town adopted code or
standard shall be provided with an approved sprinkler system in
accordance with NFPA 13R, 1999 edition.
(2) New multiunit (more than one) nonresidential structures that are
not required by any other Town adopted code or standard shall be
provided with an approved sprinkler system in accordance with
NFPA-13, 1999 edition.
(3) Existing structures undergoing such alteration or expansion that it
increases the number of individual residential units to three or
more shall be provided with an approved sprinkler system in
accordance with NFPA-13R, 1999 edition. Existing structures
undergoing such alteration or expansion that it changes its original
use and/or increases the number of nonresidential units to more
than one shall be provided with an approved sprinkler system in
accordance with NFPA 13, 1999 edition.
B. This article shall not apply to new or existing multiunit nonresidential
structures that are not located on a public or private municipal water
system as follows:
(1) Any building which is less than 10,000 square feet in total
aggregate floor area unless an approved automatic sprinkler
system is otherwise required by the Town Building Code, State Fire
Code or any other applicable code, ordinance, etc., of the Town of
Hudson.
A. Sprinkler systems shall be designed, installed, tested and maintained in
accordance with the standards set forth in NFPA 13, 1999 edition, and
NFPA-13R, 1999 edition. [Amended 3-9-2004]
B. All proposed sprinkler systems as designed shall be approved by the
Fire Department prior to installation thereof.
C. This article or any part thereof shall not supersede any other more
stringent law, ordinance, code, regulation, etc.
§ 210-18 HUDSON CODE § 210-20
1:158
ARTICLE VII
State Fire Code
[The 1996 New Hampshire State Fire Code, and all subsequent
amendments, was adopted 3-10-1998 by the Annual Town Meeting,
Art. 43. A copy of said code is on file in the municipal offices and
may be viewed there during business hours.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-20
1:159

ARTICLE VIII
Adoption of Amendments
[Adopted 3-9-2004 ATM, Art. 39]
§ 210-21. Adoption of amendments by Board of Selectmen.
The Board of Selectmen, after consultation with the Fire Chief, is hereby
authorized to adopt updates and revisions to this Fire Prevention Code that
refer to or make insertions and deletions from, or exceptions to, national
codes or code provisions in the State Fire Code, as may be amended
from time to time. No amendment to the Fire Prevention Code, except as
may be necessary to effect the substitution of revised national codes or
code provisions or provisions previously adopted, shall be adopted using
the simplified procedure of this paragraph. The Board of Selectmen shall
hold a public hearing on the proposed update or revision, with notice as
provided in RSA 675:7. Such notice shall include information stating where
the proposed Fire Prevention Code amendment and the new or amended
national code or code provisions are available for public inspection.
Following such hearing, the update or revision shall become final upon
approval by the Selectmen and recording with the Town Clerk.
§ 210-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-21
1:161

ARTICLE IX
Hazardous Condition Measures
[Adopted 1-9-2007 by Ord. No. 06-03]
§ 210-22. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING — Any structure, framework or housing, public or private,
including single-family dwellings and multiunit dwellings and including
tanks, receptacles and containers for the storage of commodities or other
materials.
HAZARDOUS CONDITION — Any building, premises, combustible,
flammable, chemical liquid or material, electrical wiring and equipment,
place or thing which, because of its nature, location, occupancy, condition,
or use, constitutes an unreasonable danger of loss, damage or injury to
persons or property by fire or explosion of any origin.
OFFICER — Such officer or officers as the Fire Chief shall nominate or
designate to execute the powers and perform the duties which the Fire
Chief is authorized to delegate under this article.
OWNER — A person with legal title to or a freehold interest in property,
including any trustee or a board of trustees of property. A lessee or
mortgagee of property is not considered an owner.
PREMISES — Any lot or parcel of land, excluding the buildings upon it, and
includes parking lots, tourist camps, trailer camps, airports, race tracks,
junkyards, wharves, piers, and other places or enclosures, however owned
or occupied.
§ 210-23. Inspection of premises; order to abate.
A. The Fire Chief or the Fire Chief's authorized officers, upon complaint or
whenever the Fire Chief or such authorized officers shall deem it
necessary, may inspect all buildings and premises within their
jurisdiction and, if consent for such inspection is denied or
unobtainable, may obtain an administrative inspection warrant under
RSA 595-B.
B. Whenever any of said officers shall find any hazardous condition that
such officer deems to be hazardous to life or property, the officer shall,
by written order, order the hazardous condition to be removed or
remedied. If such order requires a structural change or alteration, it
shall be approved by the Fire Chief before it is effective. Such order
shall be complied with by the owner of such premises or buildings
within the time limit specified in such order; provided, however, that
any such owner who is aggrieved by any such order may, within seven
days after the service of such order as hereinafter provided, file a
petition with the Town of Hudson Board of Selectmen, praying for a
review of such order. It shall be the duty of such Board of Selectmen to
§ 210-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-23
1:163
§ 210-24. Violations and penalties.
§ 210-25. Recovery of costs and fees.
In any legal action brought by the Town of Hudson, NH to enforce this
article by way of injunctive relief or otherwise, the Town may recover its
costs and reasonable attorney fees actually expended in pursuing the legal
action if it is found to be a prevailing party in the action. For the purposes
of this section, recoverable costs shall include all out-of-pocket expenses
actually incurred, including but not limited to inspection fees, expert fees
and investigatory expenses and legal fees incurred by the Town of Hudson,
NH.
hear the same at the first convenient day, and to make such order in the
premises as right and justice may require.
C. Service of orders issued under Subsection B shall be made by the
appropriate law enforcement authority if the residence of the owner is
within the Town, and by an officer authorized to serve legal process, if
without the Town. An attested copy of such order shall also be
contemporaneously served upon the tenant or occupant of the property,
if any, in like manner. If the owner is not a resident of this Town or state
and his residence is unknown, the Fire Chief may institute proceedings
in equity in the Superior Court to enforce its order, and service thereof
shall be made upon the tenant or occupant of the property, if any, and in
such further manner as the court may order. In such case the court shall
render such final decree on the Fire Chief's order as justice may
require.
A. If any owner fails to comply with the lawful order of the Fire Chief or
such authorized officers, or with the order as modified on appeal and
provided within the time fixed, such owner shall be guilty of a violation.
Each day of noncompliance shall constitute a separate offense.
B. Any violation of this article shall henceforth be punishable by a civil fine
of not more than $1,000 for each day that such violation is found by a
court to continue after the conviction date or after the date on which
the violator receives written notice from the Town that he/she is in
violation of this article, whichever date is earlier.
§ 210-23 HUDSON CODE § 210-25
1:164
Chapter 218
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 178.
Excavation of soil — See Ch. 200.
Site plan review — See Ch. 275.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 289.
Zoning — See Ch. 334.
§ 218-1. Purpose; establishment; applicability. [Amended 11-7-1989
by Ord. No. O88-2; 3-13-2007 ATM, Art. 8]
§ 218-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
A. Purpose. Certain areas of the Town of Hudson, New Hampshire are
subject to periodic flooding, causing serious damages to properties
within these areas. Relief is available in the form of flood insurance as
authorized by the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968. Therefore, the
Town of Hudson, New Hampshire has chosen to become a participating
community in the National Flood Insurance Program, and agrees to
comply with the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Act of
1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended) as detailed in this Floodplain
Management Ordinance.
B. Establishment. This chapter, adopted pursuant to the authority of RSA
674:16, shall be known as Chapter 218, Flood Damage Prevention, of
the Town of Hudson Zoning Ordinance. The regulations in this chapter
shall overlay and supplement the regulations in the Town of Hudson
Zoning Ordinance, and shall be considered part of the Zoning
Ordinance for purposes of administration and appeals under state law.
If any provision of this chapter differs or appears to conflict with any
provision of the Zoning Ordinance or other ordinance or regulation, the
provision imposing the greater restriction or more stringent standard
shall be controlling.
C. The following regulations in this chapter shall apply to all lands
designated as special flood hazard areas by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) in its Flood Insurance Study for the
County of Hillsborough, N.H., dated September 25, 2009, together with
the associated Flood Insurance Rate Maps dated September 25, 2009,
including the revised map panels 33011C0514E and 3011C0652E dated
April 18, 2011, which are declared to be a part of this chapter and are
hereby incorporated by reference. [Amended 8-25-2009; 3-22-2011]
§ 210-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-2
1:165
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
the Town of Hudson subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding
in any given year. The area is designated as Zones A and AE on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map.45[Amended 3-13-2007 ATM, Art. 8]
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.46
BUILDING — See "structure."[Added 3-13-2007 ATM, Art. 8]
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.[Amended 3-13-2007 ATM, Art. 8]
FEMA — The Federal Emergency Management Agency.47[Added
3-16-1996 by ATM Art. 38]
FIRM — See "Flood Insurance Rate Map."48
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where
the boundaries of the flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and related erosion
areas having special hazards have been designated as Zones A, M and/or E.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map incorporated
with this chapter, on which FEMA has delineated both the special flood
hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the Town of
Hudson.[Amended 3-13-2007 ATM, Art. 8]
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water
surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of
mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.[Amended
3-13-2007 ATM, Art. 8]
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
45.Editor's Note: The definition of "area of shallow flooding," which immediately preceded
this definition, was repealed 3-13-2007 ATM, Art. 8.
46.Editor's Note: The definitions of "breakaway wall" and "coastal high-hazard area," which
immediately followed this definition, were repealed 3-13-2007 ATM, Art. 8.
47.Editor's Note: The definition of "FHBM," which immediately followed this definition, was
repealed 3-13-2007 ATM, Art. 8.
48.Editor's Note: The definitions of "Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (floodway)" and
"flood elevation study," which immediately followed this definition, were repealed
3-13-2007 ATM, Art. 8.
§ 218-2 HUDSON CODE § 218-2
1:166
FLOODPLAIN or FLOODPRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source. (See the definition of "flooding.")
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — See "regulatory floodway."
FUNCTIONAL DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are
necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers and
shipbuilding and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term
storage or related manufacturing facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE[Added 3-16-1996 by ATM Art. 38] -- Any
structure that is: —
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including
the basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's "lowest floor," provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminary
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 218-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-2
1:167
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
For floodplain management purposes the term "manufactured home"
includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on
site for greater than 180 consecutive days. This includes manufactured
homes located in a manufactured home park or subdivision.[Amended
3-13-2007 ATM, Art. 8]
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other
datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood
Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — For the purposes of determining insurance rates,
structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the
effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 21, 1974, whichever is
later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For
floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for
which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of
a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes
any subsequent improvement to such structures.[Added 3-16-1996 by
ATM Art. 38]
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — See "base flood."
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE[Added 3-18-1995 by Amendment No. 1] -- A
vehicle which is: —
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than a designated height.[Amended 3-13-2007 ATM, Art. 8]
RIVERINE — Relating to, formed by or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — See "area of special flood
hazard."[Amended 3-13-2007 ATM, Art. 8]
A. Built on a single chassis.
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection.
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck.
C.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal
use.
D.
§ 218-2 HUDSON CODE § 218-2
1:168
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and
means the date the building permit was issued, provided that the actual
start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The "actual start"
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure
on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation;
or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. "Permanent
construction" does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading
and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways;
nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations
or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on
the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
STRUCTURE — For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed
building or a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as
well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.[Added 3-16-1996 by ATM Art. 38]
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any combination of repairs,
reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a structure in which the
cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure.
The market value of the structure should equal: (a) the appraised value
prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or (b) in the case
of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. For
the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to
occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the structure. This term includes structures
that have incurred substantial damage, regardless of actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure required to comply with existing health,
sanitary, or safety code specification which are solely necessary to assure
safe living conditions or any alteration of an historic structure, provided
that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation
as an historic structure.[Amended 3-13-2007 ATM, Art. 8]
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), (e)(5) is presumed to be
in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.49[Added
3-16-1996 by ATM Art. 38; amended 3-13-2007 ATM, Art. 8]
49.Editor's Note: The definition of "V Zone," which immediately followed this definition, was
repealed 3-13-2007 ATM, Art. 8.
§ 218-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-2
1:169
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION — The height, in relation to the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified),
of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the
floodplains.[Amended 3-13-2007 ATM, Art. 8]
§ 218-3. Permit required.
All proposed development in any special flood hazard areas shall require a
floodplain permit, to be issued by the Town Engineer.
§ 218-4. Duties of Town Engineer.
A. The Town Engineer shall maintain for public inspection, and furnish
upon request, any certification of floodproofing and the as-built
elevation, in relation to NGVD, of the lowest floor, including the
basement, of all new or substantially improved structures, and include
whether or not such structures contain a basement, or, if the structure
has been floodproofed, the as-built elevation, in relation to NGVD, to
which the structure was floodproofed. This information must be
furnished by the applicant. [Amended 3-13-2007 ATM, Art. 8]
B. The Town Engineer shall review proposed developments to assure that
all necessary permits have been received from those governmental
agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law,
including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1334. It shall be the responsibility of
the applicant to certify these assurances to the Town Engineer.
C. (Reserved)50
D. In special flood hazard areas, the Town Engineer shall determine the
one-hundred-year flood elevation in the following order of precedence
according to the data available: [Amended 3-18-1995 by Amdt. No.
1; 3-13-2007 ATM, Art. 8]
(1) In Zones A and AE, refer to the elevation data provided in the
community's Flood Insurance Study and accompanying FIRM.
(2) In A Zones, the Building Inspector shall obtain, review, and
reasonably utilize any one-hundred-year flood elevation data
available from any federal, state or other source, including data
submitted for development proposals submitted to the community
(i.e., subdivisions, site approvals).
(3) All recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A and AE
shall either be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, be
fully licensed and ready for highway use or meet all standards of
Section 60.3(b)(1) of the National Flood Insurance Program
50.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, regarding development along watercourses that have
not had a regulatory floodway designated, was repealed 3-13-2007 ATM, Art. 8. See now
§ 218-7C.
§ 218-2 HUDSON CODE § 218-4
1:170
Regulations and the elevation and anchoring requirements for
manufactured homes in Paragraph (c) (6) of Section 60.3.
E. The Town Engineer's one-hundred-year-flood elevation determination
will be used as criteria for requiring in Zones A and AE that: [Amended
3-13-2007 ATM, Art. 8]
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures have the lowest floor, including the basement, elevated
to or above the one-hundred-year flood level.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated to or above the one-hundred-year flood level; or
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:
(a) Be floodproofed so that below the one-hundred-year flood
elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water;
(b) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy; and
(c) Be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions
of this section.
(3) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within special flood hazard areas shall be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is
at or above the base flood level; and be securely anchored to resist
flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may
include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to
ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state
and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(4) For all new construction and substantial improvements, fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding
are permitted, provided that the enclosed areas meet the following
requirements:
(a) The enclosed area is unfinished or flood-resistant, usable solely
for parking of vehicles, building access or storage.
(b) The area is not a basement.
(c) The area shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional
engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
§ 218-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-4
1:171
§ 218-5. Duties of Building Inspector. [Amended 3-13-2007 ATM,
Art. 8]
The Building Inspector shall review all building permit applications for new
construction or substantial improvements to determine whether proposed
building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building
site is in a special flood hazard area, all new construction and substantial
improvements shall:
§ 218-6. Drainage and sanitary facilities.
Where new and replacement water and sewer system, including on-site
systems, are proposed in floodprone areas, the applicant shall provide the
Town Engineer with assurance that new and replacement sanitary sewage
systems will be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters, and onsite
waste disposal systems will be located to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during periods of flooding.
§ 218-7. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
[1] A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding shall be provided.
[2] The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
[3] Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
B. Be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage.
C. Be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages
and be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and
air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are
designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
A. In riverine situations, prior to the alteration or relocation of a
watercourse the applicant for such authorization shall notify the
Wetlands Bureau of the New Hampshire Department of Environmental
Services and submit copies of such notification to the Building
Inspector, in addition to the copies required by RSA 482-A:3. Further,
the applicant shall be required to submit copies of said notification to
those adjacent communities as determined by the Building Inspector,
including notice of all scheduled hearings before the Wetland Bureau
§ 218-4 HUDSON CODE § 218-7
1:172
§ 218-8. Administration; appeal procedure; variances.
(add here notice for local wetlands hearings if the community has
a local wetlands ordinance). Further, the applicant shall demonstrate
compliance with the Wetland Conservation Ordinance, Article IX of the
Hudson Zoning Ordinance. [Amended 3-13-2007 ATM, Art. 8]
B. Within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse, the
applicant shall submit to the Town Engineer certification provided by a
licensed professional engineer assuring that the flood-carrying capacity
of the watercourse has been maintained.
C. Along watercourses with a designated regulatory floodway no
encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development, are allowed within the floodway
unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practices
that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in
flood levels within the community during the base flood discharge.
[Amended 3-13-2007 ATM, Art. 8]
D. Until a regulatory floodway is designated along watercourses, no new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development
(including fill) shall be permitted within Zone AE on the FIRM, unless it
is demonstrated by the applicant that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation
of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community.
[Added 3-13-2007 ATM, Art. 8]
E. The Building Inspector shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any
floodway data available from federal, state, or other sources as criteria
for requiring that all development located in Zone A meet the following
floodway requirement: No encroachments within the floodway that
would result in any increase in flood levels within the community during
the base flood discharge, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development, are allowed. [Added
3-13-2007 ATM, Art. 8]
A. The Town Engineer, with the approval of the Director of Public Works
and Development, shall prepare appropriate forms for application and
issuance of the floodplain permit; the application forms may include
reasonable application and review fees.
B. The Town Engineer is the enforcing agent in the administration of this
chapter.
C. Appeal board; conditions for variances.
(1) Appeal board. A Joint Committee of the Zoning Board of Adjustment
and the Building Board of Appeals (JCZBA/BBA) as respectively
established by the Hudson Zoning Ordinance and the Hudson
§ 218-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-8
1:173
Building Code51 will hear and decide appeals and requests for
variances from the requirements of this chapter. The JCZBA/BBA
will hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an
error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the
Town Engineer or the Building Inspector in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter. Those aggrieved by the decision
of the JCZBA/BBA or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to
the Superior Court. In passing upon such applications, the JCZBA/
BBA shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors,
standards specified elsewhere within this chapter and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity of a waterfront location, where applicable;
(f) The availability of alternate locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive
Plan and floodplain management program for that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems and streets and bridges.
(2) Upon consideration of the factors listed above, and the purposes of
this chapter, the JCZBA/BBA may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes
of this chapter. The Town Engineer shall maintain the records of all
51.Editor's Note: See Ch. 334, Zoning, and Ch. 178, Building Construction, respectively.
§ 218-8 HUDSON CODE § 218-8
1:174
appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Insurance
Administration upon its request.
D. Conditions for variances.
(1) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic
Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder
of this section. Variances shall not be issued within any designated
floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood
discharge would result. Variances shall only be issued upon a
determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. Variances shall only
be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause.
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant.
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public as identified in Subsection C(1)
above or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(2) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
E. Any order, requirements, decision or determination of the Building
Inspector made under this chapter may be appealed to the Zoning
Board of Adjustment as set forth in RSA 676:5. [Added 3-13-2007
ATM, Art. 8]
(1) If the applicant, upon appeal, requests a variance as authorized by
RSA 674:33I(b), the applicant shall have the burden of showing, in
addition to the usual variance standards under state law, that:
(a) The variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public
expense.
(b) If the requested variance is for activity within a designated
regulatory floodway, no increase in flood levels during the base
flood discharge will result.
(c) The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood
hazard, to afford relief.
(2) Notification.
§ 218-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 218-8
1:175
Chapter 221
FOOD, SANITARY PRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION OF
Chapter 226
GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Landfill facility — See Ch. 245.
Recycling — See Ch. 266.
Sewers — See Ch. 270.
Chapter 232
HAWKERS, PEDDLERS, VENDORS AND SOLICITORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 259,
§ 259-6.
(a) The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall notify the applicant in
writing that:
[1] The issuance of a variance to construct below the base
flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of
insurance coverage; and
[2] Such construction below the base flood level increases
risks to life and property.
(b) Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all
variance actions.
(3) The community shall:
(a) Maintain a record of all variance actions, including the
justification for their issuance; and
(b) Report such variances issued in its annual or biennial report
submitted to FEMA's Federal Insurance Administrator.
§ 218-8 HUDSON CODE § 218-8
1:176
ARTICLE I
Hawkers, Peddlers and Vendors
[Adopted 8-2-1949 by Ord. No. 9; amended in its entirety
12-16-1985]
§ 232-1. License required.
No person shall engage in the business of a hawker, peddler or itinerant
vendor within the Town of Hudson unless licensed to do so.
§ 232-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HAWKER and PEDDLER — Includes any person, either principal or agent,
who goes from town to town, or from place to place in the same town,
selling or bartering or carrying for sale or barter or exposing therefor any
goods, wares or merchandise.
ITINERANT VENDORS — All persons, both principals and agents, who
engage in a temporary or transient business in this state, either in one
locality or traveling from place to place, selling goods, wares and
merchandise from stock or by sample for future delivery, and who, for
the purpose of carrying on such business, hire or occupy any building or
structure for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise
or sample.
§ 232-3. Application for license.
A. Application for peddler's license shall be made by the Town of Hudson
upon a form to be determined by the Board of Selectmen.52
B. The application shall include:
(1) The name, home and business address of the applicant, and the
name and address of the owner, if other than the applicant.
(2) A description of the type of food, beverage or merchandise to be
sold and, in the case of products of a farm or orchard, whether
produced or grown by the applicant.
(3) A valid New Hampshire hawkers and peddlers or itinerant vendors
license must be presented at time of application.
(4) A description of any stand or motor vehicle to be used in the
operation of the business, including the license and registration
number of any motor vehicle used in the operation of the business.
52.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
subsection has been revised to replace "Executive Administrator" with "Board of
Selectmen."
§ 232-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-3
1:177
§ 232-4. Fees.53
License fees shall be for each day or for each week or for each year,
whichever is less.
§ 232-5. Exemptions from fees.
License fees relating to hawkers and peddlers shall not apply to persons
selling the product of his own farm or the one he tills. In addition to the
above exceptions, individuals, veterans and organizations who have a taxexempt
status (must have documented proof) will not be required to pay
license fees.
§ 232-6. Revocation of licenses.
In addition to any penalty imposed, such license may be revoked for any
violation of this article or state statute pertaining to the conduct of such
business.
(5) A license from the Town Health Officer for any peddler who will sell
any food or beverages.
(6) A description of the proposed location of the business, together
with a certificate from the Zoning Administrator that the location is
consistent with Chapter 334, Zoning.
(7) Written permission from the owner of the property.
(8) Hours of operation, which shall be not prior to 8:00 a.m. nor after
dark. Canteen-type trucks and mobile vending units shall be
permitted to operate no earlier than 5:00 a.m. [Amended
4-17-1990 by Ord. No. O90-5]
C. The Zoning Administrator shall review the permit for conformance with
site plan regulations. If the site plan does not indicate a location for that
activity, it will be denied unless the Zoning Administrator determines
that it falls within the grandfather status. [Added 3-11-1997]
D. The application shall include a state and federal record check provided
to the Town of Hudson. The fee associated with said record check is
determined by New Hampshire State Police, and this expense is the
responsibility of the applicant. [Added 5-24-2011 by Ord. No. 11-02]
(1) The Town of Hudson will follow the guidelines established by RSA
31:102-b, titled "Background Checks for Certain Vendors."
(2) If the applicant has already provided a record check to another
city/town in the State of New Hampshire, a copy of said record
check to the Town of Hudson shall suffice.
53.Editor's Note: The specific fees set forth in this section were removed at the request of the
Town. For current fees, see Ch. 205, Fees.
§ 232-3 HUDSON CODE § 232-7
1:178
§ 232-7. Conduct.
A peddler shall not:
§ 232-8. Fraud; sale of merchandise not listed in application.
Any licensed peddler who shall be guilty of any fraud, cheating or
misrepresentation, whether through himself or through an employee, while
acting as a peddler in the Town, or who shall sell any goods or merchandise
or wares other than those specified in his application for a license shall be
deemed guilty of a violation of this article.
§ 232-9. Violations and penalties.
A violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.
Each day of operation or each transaction or sale shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 232-10. Expiration of licenses.
All annual licenses issued under this article shall expire December 31 of
each year.
A. Sell food or beverages for immediate consumption, unless he has
available for public use a litter receptacle which would be available for
patrons' use.
B. Leave any location without first ensuring that he pick up, remove,
dispose of all trash or refuse remaining from sales made by him.
C. Solicit or conduct business with persons in motor vehicles.
D. Sell any other goods other than that which he or she is licensed to sell.
E. Sell food or beverages without a valid and current Health Department
permit.
F. Set up, maintain or permit the use of any table, crate, carton, rack, sign
or any other device or increase the selling or display capacity of his
stand or motor vehicle, where such items have not been described in
the application.
§ 232-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-10
1:179

ARTICLE II
Solicitors
[Adopted 8-26-1991 by Ord. No. O90-17]
§ 232-11. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SOLICITATION ACTIVITIES — The practices of solicitors as listed in
Subsections A and B of the definition of "solicitor."
SOLICITOR — Any person, whether a resident of the Town of Hudson or
not, including an employee or agent of another, traveling either by foot,
automobile, truck or some other type of conveyance, who engages in the
practice of going door to door, house to house or along any streets within
the Town of Hudson:
§ 232-12. License required; exemptions.
§ 232-13. Application for license.
The application for a solicitor's license shall contain all information relevant
and necessary to determine whether a particular license may be issued,
including but not limited to:
Selling or taking orders for or offering to sell or take orders for goods,
merchandise, wares or other items of value for further delivery or
services to be performed in the future, for commercial purposes; or
A.
Requesting the contribution of funds, property or anything of value or
the pledge of any type of future donation or selling or offering for sale
any type of property, including but not limited to goods, tickets, books
and pamphlets, for charitable or other noncommercial purposes. No
restrictions beyond the time limitation of 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. as set
forth in § 232-16 shall apply to political solicitation.
B.
A. It shall be unlawful for any solicitor to engage in solicitation activities in
the Town of Hudson without first obtaining a license from the Town
Police Department.
B. Minors under the age of 18 who participate in solicitation activities are
exempt from the licensing requirements.
A. Proof of the identity and permanent residence address of the applicant,
including social security number.
B. A brief description of the nature, character and quality of the goods or
merchandise to be sold and the purpose of the solicitation.
C. If the solicitor is employed by another, the name and business address
of such person, firm, association, organization, company or corporation.
§ 232-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-13
1:181
§ 232-14. Fees; duration of license.
§ 232-15. Identification badges.
§ 232-16. Regulations for conduct.
The following regulations apply to solicitors engaged in solicitation
activities in the Town of Hudson:
§ 232-17. Suspension or revocation of license.
D. The application shall include a state and federal record check provided
to the Town of Hudson. The fee associated with said record check is
determined by New Hampshire State Police, and this expense is the
responsibility of the applicant. [Added 5-24-2011 by Ord. No. 11-02]
(1) The Town of Hudson will follow the guidelines established by RSA
31:102-b, titled "Background Checks for Certain Vendors."
(2) If the applicant has already provided a record check to another
city/town in the State of New Hampshire, a copy of said record
check to the Town of Hudson shall suffice.
A. An applicant for a license under this article shall pay a license fee.54
B. A solicitation license shall be valid for a period of 90 days.
A. In addition to the license, the Town shall issue an identification badge to
every solicitor. Solicitors shall wear their badges in such a way that the
badges may be easily read while doing business. If a badge becomes
lost, damaged or obscured, the solicitor shall return it to the Town, if
possible, and receive another badge at a fee of $5.
B. If the solicitor has his/her own identification badge and it satisfies the
requirements of Subsection A above, the requirement of a Town badge
may be waived.
C. License and identification badges shall be used only by the person to
whom they were issued and may not be transferred to any other person.
A. Solicitors shall be allowed to conduct solicitation activities only
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
B. No person shall engage in business as a solicitor in defiance of any
notice exhibited by a residence or business indicating that solicitors are
not welcome or not invited.
A. Any license issued under this article may be suspended or revoked for
any of the following reasons:
54.Editor's Note: The specific fees set forth in this subsection were removed at the request of
the Town. For current fees, see Ch. 205, Fees.
§ 232-13 HUDSON CODE § 232-17
1:182
§ 232-18. Appeals.55
Persons who are denied licenses or whose licenses have been suspended
or revoked may appeal by filing a written notice of appeal with the Town.
The appeal must be filed within 10 days after receipt of the notice of denial,
suspension or revocation. The Board of Selectmen shall hear and determine
the appeal, and the decision of the Selectmen shall be final.
§ 232-19. License renewals.
Licenses may be renewed, provided that an application for renewal and
license fees are received by the Town no later than the expiration date of
the current license. Applications received after that date shall be processed
as new applications. The Town shall receive each application for renewal to
determine that the applicant is in full compliance with the provisions of this
article. If the Town finds that the application meets such requirements, the
Town shall issue a new license.
§ 232-20. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be punished by a
fine not to exceed $500.
(1) Fraud or misrepresentation in the application for a license.
(2) Fraud or misrepresentation in the course of conducting solicitation
activities.
(3) Conducting solicitation activities contrary to the conditions of the
license.
(4) Conducting solicitation activities in such a manner as to create a
public nuisance or constitute a danger to the public health, safety
or welfare.
B. Upon suspension or revocation, the Town shall deliver written notice to
the license holder stating the action taken and the reasons supporting
such action. The written notice shall be delivered to the license holder's
place of business or mailed to the license holder's last known address.
55.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
section has been revised to replace "Town Council" with "Board of Selectmen."
§ 232-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-20
1:183
Chapter 233
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency management — See Ch. 197.
§ 233-1. Authority.
This chapter is enacted under the authority of RSA 31:39, RSA 41:11, RSA
47:17, VII, and RSA 154.
§ 233-2. Repealer.
This chapter repeals Ord. No. O90-10 in its entirety, which was adopted by
the Hudson Town Council on October 15, 1991.56
§ 233-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the control and containment
of hazardous materials after accident or discharge. The purpose of the
chapter is not to impose upon the town or any of its officers and agents
any obligation to secure or remove any hazardous material from the town
once safe containment of the material is made; and nothing in the chapter is
intended to relieve any owner or person in possession of hazardous material
of any obligation imposed by state or federal law; and, specifically, nothing
in the chapter shall be deemed to permit the possession, storage or use of
hazardous materials, except in conformance with all state, federal or local
laws.
§ 233-4. Application.
This chapter shall apply to all incidents involving hazardous waste or
hazardous materials within the boundaries of the Town of Hudson, New
Hampshire, and to all persons who may possess such materials found within
the town, except as prevailing state or federal laws or regulations may take
precedence and control over any such incident or person. (See RSA 146-A,
RSA 147 and RSA 265:115-118 for examples of such prevailing state law at
the time this chapter is adopted.)
§ 233-5. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply:
56.Editor's Note: This ordinance was included in the Code as former Ch. 233, Hazardous
Materials.
§ 232-20 HUDSON CODE § 233-5
1:184
CLEANUP — The management, control, containment, recovery, removal
or neutralization of any released hazardous material for the purpose of
promoting or protecting public health or safety.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Those substances or materials in such
quantity and form which may pose an unreasonable risk to health and safety
or property, which may include but are not limited to explosives, radioactive
materials, etiologic agents, flammable liquids and solids, combustible
liquids or solids, poisons, oxidizing or corrosive materials and compressed
gases which are listed by the Materials Transportation Bureau of the United
States Department of Transportation in Title 49 of the Code of Federal
Regulations, and any amendment thereto.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, trust or other legal
entity.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — Any individual, partnership, corporation,
association, trust or other entity partially or solely responsible for the
release of any hazardous material within the town.
USER — Any person who manufactures or transports or owns, uses,
handles, stores or has the legal authority to control hazardous materials,
specifically including their officers, directors, employees and agents.
§ 233-6. Duty to report.
Any person who causes or has knowledge of any discharge or release
of hazardous materials from their safe container, in any manner which
poses an actual or potential threat to people, animals, wildlife, vegetation,
property or the environment, shall immediately report the incident to the
Hudson Fire Department.
§ 233-7. Cleanup.
The user or transporter of a hazardous material which is intentionally or
accidentally discharged or released within the town shall, in addition to
reporting the accident as required by § 233-6, take immediate action to
cause the discharge or release to be cleaned up in an environmentally safe
and scientifically sound manner and to restore the site and the surrounding
environment.
§ 233-8. Intentional discharge or release prohibited.
The intentional discharge or release of a hazardous material within the
Town of Hudson is strictly prohibited.
§ 233-9. Cost recovery.
A. Upon the completion of any cleanup in which town employees
participated, all costs incurred by the town, either within the town or
outside of the town pursuant to the provisions of the Mutual Aid
System, shall be itemized by each town department involved, including
the Fire Department. Such costs shall include but are not limited to the
§ 233-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-9
1:185
§ 233-10. Penalties.
§ 233-11. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit any other remedy the
town may have to collect from a responsible party the cost of control and
containment of hazardous materials incidents.
cost of cleaning, repair, restoration or replacement of any town material
or equipment used in the cleanup, the cost of any illness or injury
sustained by any employee who participated in the cleanup, the cost of
the police, fire, public safety and municipal personnel involved in the
emergency response and the costs of all contracted services utilized in
the cleanup.
B. The Fire Department shall, upon receipt of these itemizations, submit a
bill for the full cost of the cleanup to the responsible party or parties
within thirty (30) days after the equipment leaves the site of the
incident. The bill shall include a description of costs incurred. Bills for
less than the full amount of these costs shall be allowed, provided that
the responsible party is advised of the reason therefor and the
approximate date by which it can expect to receive a complete bill.
C. Each responsible party shall be jointly and severally liable to the town
for the costs of the cleanup. Such costs may be collected by any lawful
means, including but not limited to appropriate court proceedings. All
funds received from responsible parties shall be forwarded to the
Finance Officer for deposit in the Town Treasury.
D. Any and all costs recovered from a responsible party shall be separate
from and in addition to any penalty that may be assessed for any
violation of any provision of this chapter.
A. Any person who fails to report, as required by § 233-6, shall be assessed
a civil forfeiture not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.). Each
twenty-four-hour period that the incident is not reported shall
constitute a separate violation.
B. Any person who intentionally discharges or releases or causes another
to discharge or release any hazardous materials from their safe
container, in any manner which poses an actual or potential threat to
people, animals, wildlife, vegetation, property or the environment, shall
be assessed a civil forfeiture not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.).
C. Any person who fails to take the action required by § 233-7 shall be
assessed a civil forfeiture not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.).
Each twenty-four-hour period that a person fails to take action to cause
the discharge or release of a hazardous material to be cleaned up shall
constitute a separate violation.
§ 233-9 HUDSON CODE § 233-12
1:186
§ 233-12. Use of costs and penalties.
All costs and penalties collected under this chapter shall be placed in the
General Fund.
§ 233-13. Emergency operations.
The Fire Chief of the Town of Hudson or his designated representative(s)
shall take and be in control of any actions necessary to mitigate a hazardous
materials incident within the Town of Hudson, except where state or federal
agencies have jurisdiction by law.
§ 233-14. Enforcement.
The Fire Department of the Town of Hudson shall be responsible for
enforcing this chapter.
Chapter 245
LANDFILL FACILITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 226.
§ 233-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-14
1:187

ARTICLE I
General Use Restrictions
[Adopted 6-25-1962 as Ord. No. 23]
§ 245-1. Dump site. [Amended 6-19-1978 by Ord. No. 23A]
The only dump site permissible for use in the Town of Hudson is the one on
the West Road.
§ 245-2. Use by residents only; hours.57
The town dump is for the use of residents of the Town of Hudson exclusively
and can be used only during daylight hours.
§ 245-3. Dump picking.58 [Amended 7-26-1988 by Ord. No. O88-3]
Dump picking is prohibited, except by a permit from the Board of
Selectmen.
§ 245-4. Materials to originate in town. [Added 6-27-1967 by Ord.
No. 38]
The town dump may be used by any taxpayer of the Town of Hudson if
the material to be deposited at the dump comes from within the Town of
Hudson.
§ 245-5. Wastes to be enclosed during transport.
All trash and rubbish transported to the dump must be in closed containers,
enclosed within a vehicle or covered securely.
§ 245-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-26-1988 by Ord. No.
O88-3]
Any person violating any provision of this Article shall be punishable by a
fine of $50 for the first offense and $100 for each subsequent offense.
57.Editor's Note: See also § 245-15, Hours and days of operation.
58.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
section has been revised to replace "Executive Administrator" with "Board of Selectmen."
§ 245-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-6
1:189

ARTICLE II
Placement of Rubbish
[Adopted 11-1-1969 as Ord. No. 46]
§ 245-7. Dumping restricted to main area.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to dump rubbish in
any area around the dump, except in the main dumping area.
§ 245-8. Dumping on access roads.
No person, firm or corporation shall dump anything on or around access
roadways on upper or lower sides of the dump.
§ 245-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this Article
shall be subject to a fine of $25 for the first offense and of $50 each for
subsequent offenses.
§ 245-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-9
1:191

ARTICLE III
Commercial Haulers
[Adopted 7-30-1979 as Ord. No. 84]
§ 245-10. Stickers required; issuance of stickers.59 [Amended
7-26-1988 by Ord. No. O88-3]
Commercial haulers will not be admitted to the Hudson Landfill Facility,
unless there is displayed on the vehicle a sticker issued by the Board of
Selectmen. Commercial haulers' stickers will be issued to those commercial
haulers who comply with the provisions of §§ 245-17 and 245-18 of this
Article.
§ 245-11. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL HAULER — Any person, corporation, partnership or other
entity who charges a fee to haul materials for others to the landfill facility.
§ 245-12. Deposit fees. [Amended 3-26-1984]
§ 245-13. Entrance slip to be completed. [Amended 3-26-1984;
7-26-1988 by Ord. No. O88-3]
Each time a commercial vehicle enters the facility, the driver shall complete
a slip, to be provided by the attendant of the facility, which will indicate,
among other things, the source of materials and the capacity of the vehicle.
§ 245-14. Landfill tickets to be purchased. [Amended 3-26-1984]
Commercial haulers are required to purchase landfill tickets after the size
and capacity of the vehicle(s) has been determined.
§ 245-15. Hours and day of operation.60
A. Commercial haulers will be charged the following fees to deposit
materials at the Hudson Landfill Facility:
(1) Fifty cents per yard for loose, noncompacted material.
(2) Three dollars per yard for compacted material and stumps, brush
and landfill.
B. Rates shall be computed by figuring the size and capacity of each
commercial vehicle entering the facility.
59.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
section has been revised to replace "Executive Administrator" with "Board of Selectmen."
60.Editor's Note: See also § 245-2, Use by residents only; hours.
§ 245-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-15
1:193
§ 245-16. Administration. [Amended 7-26-1988 by Ord. No. O88-3]
The Attendant will have the authority to enforce the terms of this Article and
to deny access to the landfill facility by anyone who is abusing the facility
or violating the provisions of this Article. In addition, the Attendant, at his
discretion, may prohibit the dumping of any materials which in his opinion
originate from outside the Town of Hudson or would be detrimental to the
operation of the facility.
§ 245-17. § 245-17. Annual permit, fee and bond.62 [Amended
7-26-1988 by Ord. No. O88-3]
Commercial haulers will obtain an annual permit to use the landfill facility
from the Board of Selectmen. The annual permit fee will be $10 per
commercial hauler. In addition, the Board of Selectmen, at its discretion,
may require surety or cash bonds in such amounts as it may deem
appropriate, with said amounts not to exceed $1,000, to guarantee payment
of the fees herein established by commercial haulers.
§ 245-18. Manner of payment of fees.
All fees shall be paid by check drawn to the order of the Town of Hudson.
A. The Hudson Landfill Facility will be open to receive materials only
during hours as designated by the Board of Selectmen.61 [Amended
7-26-1988 by Ord. No. O88-3]
B. No commercial haulers will be permitted to deposit materials on
Saturdays or Sundays.
61.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
subsection has been revised to replace "Executive Administrator" with "Board of
Selectmen."
62.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
section has been revised to replace "Executive Administrator" with "Board of Selectmen."
§ 245-15 HUDSON CODE § 245-18
1:194
Chapter 248
LICENSES AND PERMITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 154.
Wood- and coal-burning appliances — See Ch.
164.
Driveways — See Ch. 193.
Excavation of soil — See Ch. 200.
Explosives — See Ch. 202.
Fire burning permits — See Ch. 210, Art. III.
Fireworks — See Ch. 210, Art. IV.
Hawkers, peddlers, vendors and
solicitors — See Ch. 232.
Outdoor gatherings and activities — See Ch.
253.
Motor vehicle racetrack licensing — See Ch.
264, Art. I.
§ 245-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-18
1:195

ARTICLE I
Land Use Licenses, Permits and Approvals
[Adopted 8-22-1989 by Ord. No. O88-4]
§ 248-1. Authorization.
This enactment of this article is authorized by RSA 31:39(L).
§ 248-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the orderly administration in
the granting of land use licenses, permits and other approvals, and the
orderly collection of fees associated with such licenses, permits and other
approvals.
§ 248-3. Definitions.
As used in this article (Chapter 248, Article I), the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
BUSINESS ENTITY — Includes a partnership, an unincorporated
association, a corporation, a trust or a joint venture that conducts a
business of any kind or any profession or trade whether or not the business,
profession or trade is for profit or not-for-profit.
PERSON — Includes one or more natural persons.
§ 248-4. Denial of licenses.
The appropriate officials, officers, departments, boards, commissions and
agencies of the Town of Hudson shall deny the issuance of any license,
permit or other approval of any kind to any person who, or to any business
entity which, as of the effective date of this article:
A. Owes the Town of Hudson fees or any other kind of money payment,
other than taxes, that are past due by more than 30 days;
B. Owes the Town of Hudson goods or services of any kind or performance
under an approval granted by a board, commission or other agency, as
determined by that board, commission or agency or its designee;
C. Owes the Town of Hudson reimbursement for fees the Town of Hudson
has paid to a third party or payment of fees the Town of Hudson is
obligated to pay a third party, which reimbursement or payment is past
due more than 30 days;
D. Is in clear violation, as determined by the enforcing agent or agency, of
any town ordinance or regulation if the violation adversely affects the
public health, safety and welfare; or
E. Has failed to comply with and/or complete the conditions, stipulations
or requirements attached to any license, permit or approval, as
determined by the approving or granting authority.
§ 248-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-5
1:197
§ 248-5. Denials for business entities.
A business entity shall also be subject to § 248-4 of this article and shall be
denied a license, permit or approval if:
§ 248-6. Additional denials.
A person shall also be subject to § 248-4 of this article and shall be denied
a license, permit or other approval if the person owns or controls a twentyfive-
percent or greater interest in a business entity which may be denied a
license, permit or approval under § 248-4.
§ 248-7. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply:
§ 248-8. Severability.
Each section and subparagraph of this article shall be construed as separate
from the whole chapter. If any sentence, clause or phrase of such sections
and paragraphs shall be invalid for any reason, the remainder of this article
shall continue in force.
A. A person who may be denied a license, permit or approval under
§ 248-4 is the chief executive officer or a principal official in the
business entity;
B. A person who may be denied a license, permit or approval under
§ 248-4 owns or controls a twenty-five-percent or greater interest in the
business entity; or
C. A business entity which may be denied a license, permit or approval
under § 248-4 has a legal or beneficial interest of 25% or more in the
business entity.
A. To appeals or applications for review of grievances filed with the
Personnel Advisory Board.
B. To any grievance procedure conducted pursuant to a collective
bargaining agreement to which the Town of Hudson is a party.
C. To deny licenses, permits or approvals to persons or business entities
owing fees or other money payments to the Town of Hudson in the
amount of $50 or less.
D. To deny licenses, permits or approvals where such denial is expressly
prohibited by law.
E. When it is determined by an enforcing agent or agency that the
granting or issuance of a permit, license or approval shall result in the
correction of a violation or payment of delinquent fees under § 248-4.
§ 248-5 HUDSON CODE § 248-8
1:198
ARTICLE II
Scrap Metals
[Adopted 12-30-1991 by Ord. No. O98-03]
§ 248-9. Purpose.
This article is adopted by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Hudson for
the purpose of regulating transactions in items which have been historically
shown to be subject to theft and illicit transfer. The function of the
regulations contained herein is to discourage such theft and illicit transfer
from occurring within the Town of Hudson and to mandate the keeping
of certain records which will assist victims of theft in recovering their
stolen property and which will assist law enforcement authorities in the
apprehension of perpetrators of theft.
§ 248-10. Licensing authority.
The Board of Selectmen's Office may license such persons as it deems
suitable to be purchasers of scrap metals within the town. All licenses so
granted shall contain a clause that the person thus licensed agrees to abide
by and be subject to all provisions of this article as it may be from time to
time amended.
§ 248-11. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PURCHASER OF SCRAP METALS — Any person, firm or corporation who or
which, in the ordinary course of business, accepts, solicits or receives scrap
metal in exchange for any form of consideration.
SCRAP METALS — The metals of copper, aluminum, iron, sheet metal and
steel and any items or objects fabricated entirely or in part thereof.
§ 248-12. License required; applications; fees; expiration or
revocation.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of
purchasing scrap metals as herein defined unless licensed therefor by
the Board of Selectmen's Office.
B. Applications for licenses shall be made to the Board of Selectmen and
filed with the Town Clerk upon blanks furnished by him for that
purpose. All applications shall be submitted by the Town Clerk to the
Chief of Police, who shall cause an investigation to be made of the
fitness of the applicant to engage in the business of purchasing scrap
metals. The Chief of Police shall then report his findings to the Board of
Selectmen.
C. When such license is acted upon by them, if granted, a fee shall be paid
by the applicant to the Town Clerk prior to the issuance of the license.63
§ 248-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-12
1:199
§ 248-13. Regulations for purchase.
D. Such license shall expire on the one-year anniversary of its issuance,
except that it may be sooner revoked by the Board of Selectmen for just
cause at any time after notice to the licensee and hearing on the
questions of revocation.
A. Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of
purchasing scrap metals shall keep and maintain a complete record of
each such purchase. This record, which must be kept on file for seven
years, shall include a full and accurate detailed description of the item
or items purchased together with the date and time of such purchase.
This record shall also include a full and accurate detailed description of
the item or items purchased together with the date and time of such
purchase. This record shall also include the full name and address of
the seller together with the license plate number of any vehicle used by
the seller in the delivery of such items.
B. Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of
purchasing scrap metal shall require every seller of such items to
produce identification in the form of a motor vehicle operator's license
or a social security card. The purchaser shall record the identifying
number from such license or card on the record to be kept of the
transaction as required by this article. No purchase shall be made from
any seller who is not 18 years of age or older, unless that seller is
accompanied by an individual over the age of 18 whose identification is
taken as otherwise required by these regulations.
C. Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of
purchasing scrap metals shall retain possession of all such items so
purchased for a fourteen-day period subsequent to the purchase
thereof; provided, however, that any such items may be disposed of by
the purchaser within this fourteen-day period with written permission
of the Chief of Police of the Town of Hudson.
D. Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of
purchasing scrap metals shall prepare and deliver to the Chief of Police
of the Town of Hudson, on the first business day of each week before the
hour of 10:00 a.m., a legible and correct list showing each purchase of
scrap metals in which he was involved during the previous business
week. This list shall include, at a minimum, an accurate description of
any items purchased and the names of the corresponding sellers. If
during any week a person, firm or corporation licensed to purchase
scrap metals has not purchased any such items, he shall make a report
of such fact to the Chief of Police on or before 10:00 a.m. as abovementioned.
E. Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of
purchasing scrap metals shall make all such items which have been
63.Editor's Note: For current fees, see Ch. 205, Fees.
§ 248-12 HUDSON CODE § 248-13
1:200
§ 248-14. Exceptions.
Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of purchasing
scrap metals may be exempted from the provisions of this article after
application for such exception is made to the Board of Selectmen's Office.
The Board of Selectmen shall determine whether the public interest is best
served by the granting of such an exception. In making such determination
the Board of Selectmen shall balance the public benefit to be realized by
application of this article against the hardship which application of this
article will cause to the applicant for exception.
§ 248-15. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which, not being licensed under
this article, engages in the business of purchasing scrap metals or, being
licensed, violates any of the provisions of this article shall be, upon
conviction, guilty of a violation. Each day that any such violation occurs
shall be a separate offense.
§ 248-16. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent herewith are
hereby repealed.
purchased and all records required to be kept by this article available
for inspection by any officer of the Hudson Police Department at any
time after reasonable notice.
§ 248-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-16
1:201

ARTICLE III
Vehicle Registration Permits
[Adopted 3-16-1996 by Ord. No. O96-03]
§ 248-17. Issuance prohibited if there are outstanding violations.
Pursuant to New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated, Motor Vehicles,
Certificates of Title and Registration, Chapter 261:148, Permit required, the
Tax Collector/Town Clerk shall not issue a permit for vehicle registration
unless the Town Clerk's records reveal no outstanding parking violations in
the State of New Hampshire.
§ 248-18. Guidelines for maintaining records.
The Tax Collector/Town Clerk, in conjunction with the Police Department
and the Finance Department, according to RSA: 231:130-a, shall adhere to
the following guidelines:
A. The Town Clerk shall maintain a record of all residents who have
outstanding parking violations incurred in municipalities which have
adopted the provisions of RSA: 231:130-a.
B. The Town Clerk shall notify the Clerk of any other municipality which
has adopted the provisions of any outstanding parking violations
incurred by residents of such municipality within the limits of the Town
of Hudson.
C. The Town Clerk shall notify the municipality of payment received of any
outstanding parking violations. The notifications shall be made within
10 days of the payment of the outstanding parking violations.
D. The Tax Collector/Town Clerk shall update and keep readily available to
residents of Hudson records of any unpaid parking violations. The
records shall be consulted at such time as residents apply for permits to
register motor vehicles pursuant to RSA: 261:148.
§ 248-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-18
1:203
Chapter 249
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 154.
Explosives — See Ch. 202.
Motor vehicle racetracks — See Ch. 264.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 289.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 317.
Zoning — See Ch. 334.
§ 249-1. Purpose.
Recognizing that people have a right to and should be ensured an
environment free from excessive sound and vibration capable of
jeopardizing their health or safety or welfare or of degrading their quality
of life, this chapter is enacted to protect, preserve and promote the health,
safety, welfare and quality of life for the citizens of Hudson, New
Hampshire, through the reduction, control and prevention of noise by
establishing maximum noise levels upon and between premises, prohibiting
certain noise-producing activities and providing for inspection, definition of
offenses and penalties.
§ 249-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACOUSTICAL TERMINOLOGY — Terminology which has been most
recently approved as American Standard Acoustical Terminology by the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI S1.1-1960/R 1976), which
terminology is incorporated herein by reference, except as may be
otherwise specified.
AMBIENT SOUND LEVEL — The hourly energy-equivalent noise level that
is produced by transportation vehicles, natural phenomena and distant
activity which is not related to an offending sound source.
BACKGROUND NOISE — The highest A-weighted sound-pressure level
which is exceeded 90% of the time period during which measurement is
taken.
BUSINESS USE — Includes the B-1 (Business – Neighborhood) and B-2
(Business – Highway) Zoning Districts, as identified on the Zoning Map
of the Town of Hudson, New Hampshire, and as defined in the Zoning
Ordinance of the Town of Hudson, New Hampshire (Chapter 334).
COMMERCIAL CONTRACTOR — A person or company who contracts,
either in writing or verbally, to arrange or supply materials, equipment, or
workers to perform tasks for the purpose of erecting/repairing structures,
or moving earthern materials.[Added 1-25-2005 by Ord. No. 05-01]
§ 248-18 HUDSON CODE § 249-2
1:204
COMMERCIAL POWER EQUIPMENT — All engine- or motor-powered
equipment intended for infrequent service work in inhabited areas, typically
requiring commercial or skilled operators. (Examples of "commercial power
equipment" are log chippers, paving rollers, etc.)
CONSTRUCTION — Any and all physical activity necessary or incidental
to the erection, placement, demolition, assembling, altering, cleaning,
repairing, installing or equipping of buildings and other structures, public
or private highways, roads, premises, parks, utility lines or other property
and shall include land clearing, grading, excavating, filling and paving.
CONSTRUCTION DEVICE — Any powered device or equipment designed
and intended for use in construction.
DAY — A period of 24 hours.
DAYTIME HOURS — The period between the hours of 7:00 a.m. (seven ante
meridian) and 6:00 p.m. (six post meridian) on weekdays, but excluding
holidays.
dBA — The A-weighted sound-pressure level in decibels, as measured by
a general purpose sound-level meter complying with the provisions of the
American National Standards Institute in Specifications for Sound Level
Meters (ANSI S1.4 1983), properly calibrated and operated in accordance
with this and other applicable standards and in accordance with
manufacturer's instructions.
dBC — The C-weighted sound-pressure level in decibels, as measured by
a general purpose sound-level meter complying with the provisions of the
American National Standards Institute in Specifications for Sound Level
Meters (ANSI S1.4 1983), properly calibrated and operated in accordance
with this and other applicable standards and in accordance with
manufacturer's instructions.
DECIBEL (abbreviated as "dB") — A logarithmic unit of measure used in
measuring magnitudes of sound.
DEMOLITION — Any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of
structures, utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces or similar
property.
DOMESTIC POWER EQUIPMENT — Power equipment intended for use in
residential areas by a homeowner. (Examples include but are not limited
to chain saws, log splitters, power saws, drills, grinders, lawn and garden
tools, etc.)
EMERGENCY — Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or
imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate
action.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE — As in RSA 259:28 of the New Hampshire General
Laws.
EMERGENCY WORK — Work made necessary to restore property to a safe
condition following an emergency or work required to protect persons or
property from exposure to imminent danger.
§ 249-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 249-2
1:205
Hz — The abbreviation for hertz, a measurement of frequency, equivalent to
cycles per second.
IMPULSE NOISE — A repeatedly applied sound of short duration (usually
less than one second) characterized by an abrupt onset and rapid decay and
occurring at the rate of less than one per second.
INDUSTRIAL USE — Includes the C (Industrial) Zoning District, as
identified on the Zoning Map of the Town of Hudson, New Hampshire, and
as defined in the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Hudson, New Hampshire
(Chapter 334).
INSTITUTIONAL USE — The same as "residential use."
Leq (1 HOUR) — The A-weighted energy equivalent sound level occurring
over a one-hour period.
MOTORCYCLE — As in RSA 259:63 of the New Hampshire General Laws.
MOTOR VEHICLE — As in RSA 259:60 of the New Hampshire General
Laws.
MUFFLER — A device for abating sounds such as those caused by escaping
or intaking gases.
NIGHTTIME HOURS — The hours between 6:00 p.m. (six post meridian)
and 7:00 a.m. (seven ante meridian) of the following day on weekdays,
together with all hours on Sunday, Saturday and legally observed holidays.
NOISE DESCRIPTORS — Numerical valuations of noise exposure which
account for sound level, time varying characteristics and A-weighting.
"Noise descriptors" used in this chapter are the energy equivalent sound
level (Leq) and the background sound level (L90).
NOISE LEVEL — The A-weighted sound-pressure level.
NOISE POLLUTION — The presence of that amount of acoustic energy for
that amount of time necessary to cause one or more of the following effects:
OCTAVE BAND SOUND LEVEL — That sound-pressure level measured in
ranges of frequencies, referred to by ANSI S1.6-1984 (American National
Standard Preferred Reference Quantities for Acoustical Measurements) as
octave bands, between 31.5 Hz and 16,000 Hz.
A. Temporary or permanent hearing loss in persons exposed.
Injury to or tendency to injure, on the basis of current information, the
public health or welfare.
B.
C. Nuisance.
Interference with the comfortable and reasonable enjoyment of life and
property, or interference with the conduct of business.
D.
Exceeding the limits or restrictions established herein or pursuant to
the granting of any permit by the Town governing body.
E.
§ 249-2 HUDSON CODE § 249-2
1:206
PERSON — An individual, partnership, association, firm, syndicate,
company, trust, corporation, department, bureau or agency or any other
entity recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
PREMISES — Any building, structure, land or portion thereof, including all
appurtenances, and includes yards, courts, inner yards and real properties
without buildings or improvements, owned or controlled by one or more
persons. The emitter's "premises" includes contiguous publicly dedicated
street and highway rights-of-way, all real rights-of-way and waters of the
State of New Hampshire.
PROPERTY LINE — That real or imaginary line along the ground surface
and its vertical extension which separates real property owned or controlled
by any person from contiguous real property owned or controlled by
another person and separates real property from a public right-of-way.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway,
sidewalk, alley, park, waterway, railroad or similar place owned or
controlled by a governmental entity.
PURE-TONE CONDITION — A situation in which the sound-pressure level
in any one octave band exceeds the sound-pressure level in both adjacent
octave bands by three dB or more.
RECREATIONAL USE — The same as "business use."
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — As in RSA 259:69 of the New Hampshire
General Laws.
RESIDENTIAL USE — Includes the A-1 (Residential -- One), A-1SF
(Residential -- One, Single-Family) and A-2 (Residential -- Two) Zoning
Districts, as identified on the Zoning Map of the Town of Hudson, New
Hampshire, and as defined in the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Hudson,
New Hampshire (Chapter 334).
RURAL USE — The same as "residential use."
SOUND — A transmission of energy through solid, liquid or gaseous media
in the form of vibrations which constitute alterations in pressure or position
of the particles in the medium and which evoke physiological sensations,
including but not limited to an auditory response when impinging on the
ear.
SOUND-LEVEL METER — Any instrument used to measure sound-pressure
level, conforming, as a minimum, to the specifications of American National
Standard (ANSI S1.4--1983) for Type 1 precision or Type 2 general purpose
sound-level meters.
SOUND-PRESSURE LEVEL (abbreviated as "Lp") — That value which is 20
times the logarithm to the base ten (log10) of the ratio of the root-meansquare
pressure to the reference sound pressure of 20 micronewtons per
square meter (20 x 10-6 newtons/meter2), expressed in decibels (dB).
TOWN — The Town of Hudson, New Hampshire, or town official(s) whom
the Board of Selectmen designates to enforce this chapter.64
§ 249-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 249-2
1:207
ZONING DISTRICTS — The zoning districts and land uses therein, as
established by the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Hudson, New
Hampshire (Chapter 334).
§ 249-3. Guidelines for determining sound levels.
For the purposes of determining sound levels as set forth in this chapter, the
following guidelines shall be applicable:
A. All persons conducting sound measurements to assess compliance with
this chapter shall be trained in the current techniques and principles of
sound measurement equipment and instrumentation.
B. Instruments used to measure sound level shall conform, as a minimum,
to the specifications of American National Standard ANSI S1-4--1983
for Type 1 precision or Type 2 general purpose sound-level meters.
C. The sound-level meter to be used for such measurements shall be
capable of measuring and displaying values of noise descriptors, as
defined in § 249-2 of this chapter, for established noise limits.
D. The following steps, as listed below, shall be followed when preparing to
take sound-level measurements:
(1) The instrument manufacturer's specific instructions for the
preparation and use of the instrument shall be followed.
(2) The sound-level meter shall be calibrated before and after each set
of measurements.
(3) When outdoor measurements are taken, a windscreen shall be
placed over the microphone of the sound-level meter in accordance
with the manufacturer's instructions.
(4) The sound-level meter shall be placed at an angle to the sound
source, as specified by the manufacturer's instructions, and at least
four feet above the ground. The meter shall be placed so as not to
be interfered with by individuals conducting the measurements or
by individuals not conducting the measurements.
(5) Measurements shall normally be made outside, as near occupied
dwellings as practical, except where the offending noise affects use
of outdoor areas, in which case noise measurements shall be made
at a receptor property line location between the affected outdoor
area and the noise source.
(6) Ambient background sound levels shall be measured with the
sound level meter set for slow A-weighting response.
64.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
definition has been revised to replace "Executive Administrator" and "Town Council" with
"Board of Selectmen."
§ 249-2 HUDSON CODE § 249-3
1:208
§ 249-4. Prohibited noise emissions and conditions.
No person or persons owning, leasing or controlling the operations of any
source or sources of noise shall willfully, negligently or through failure
to provide necessary equipment or facilities or through failure to take
necessary precautions make or permit the emission of noise levels or
conditions exceeding the following noise limits for the applicable land use:
(7) Impulsive noise shall be made with the sound-level meter set for
fast C-weighting response.
A. Noise Limit 1: General prohibition of noise emissions. No person or
persons owning, leasing or controlling the operation of any source or
sources of noise shall willfully, negligently or through failure to provide
necessary equipment or facilities or to take necessary precautions
permit the establishment of a condition or conditions constituting noise
pollution, as defined in § 249-2 of this chapter.
B. Noise Limit 2: Continuous sound-level limits. No person shall cause the
continuous sound level to exceed the following limits, as measured at
the applicable locations in accordance with the provisions of
§ 249-3D(5) of this chapter:
Continuous
Sound-Level Limits
leq (1 hour3)
Receptor Land
Use Category Daytime Nighttime
Residential/rural/
institutional1
55 50
Business/
recreational2
65 55
Industrial 75 75
NOTES:
1 Hospitals, schools, places of worship, libraries, public parklands, etc.
2 Public playgrounds, swimming pools, athletic fields, golf courses, etc.
3 Where the offending source of noise is nearly constant over a onehour
period, a measurement sampling period of less than one hour,
but no less than five minutes, is permitted. This measurement shall be
made with the sound-level meter set to slow A-weighting responses.
C. Noise Limit 3: Impulsive sound-level limits. No person shall cause an
impulsive sound level that exceeds the following limits, as measured at
the applicable locations in accordance with the provisions of
§ 249-3D(5) of this chapter:
§ 249-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 249-4
1:209
Impulsive
Sound-Level Limits
Lp (dBC fast)
Receptor Land
Use Category Daytime Nighttime
Residential/rural/
institutional1
67 62
Business/
recreational2
77 67
Industrial 87 87
NOTES:
1 Hospitals, schools, places of worship, libraries, public parklands, etc.
2 Public playgrounds, swimming pools, athletic fields, golf courses, etc.
D. Noise Limit 4: Background referenced sound level. No person shall
cause the background noise level, as defined in § 249-2 of this chapter,
to increase by more than 10 dBA in any receptor area at any time of
day.
E. Noise Level 5: Pure-tone conditions. No person shall produce a puretone
condition at the nearest receptor buildings or activity areas in
rural/residential/-institutional or business/recreational/industrial zoned
property.
F. Noise Level 6: High noise-level areas. In areas where the ambient
sound level is already as high as or higher than three dB below the
sound-level limits of Noise Limit 2, no person shall cause the noise level
in any area to increase by more than three dB. This limit is in lieu of
Noise Limit 2, but shall not supersede any other noise limit as defined in
this chapter.
G. Noise Limit 7: Snow-traveling vehicles, trail bikes and off-highway
recreational vehicles. Any person owning, leasing or controlling the
operation of such vehicles shall comply with the provisions of RSA
215-A:12.
H. Noise Limit 8: Motorboats and powered water vessels. Any person
owning, leasing or controlling the operation of such vehicles shall
comply with the provisions of RSA 270:37.
I. Noise Limit 9: Construction.
(1) Outdoor construction by commercial contractors shall only be
permitted Monday through Saturday between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Such construction shall not exceed the noise
limits set forth in Chapter 249-4B and C. Outdoor construction by
§ 249-4 HUDSON CODE § 249-4
1:210
§ 249-5. Exclusions and exemptions.
commercial contractors shall be prohibited on Sundays and all
national holidays. Government operations, including contracted
government operations, are exempt from this Subsection.
[Amended 11-28-1989 by Ord. No. O89-26; 1-25-2005 by Ord.
No. 05-01]
(2) All equipment used for construction shall have properly installed
and maintained silencing systems, as originally furnished by the
equipment manufacturer. Unmuffled exhaust or intake systems on
mobile or stationary equipment shall not be permitted.
J. Noise Limit 10: Prohibited noise-generating activities. The following
activities are prohibited:
(1) Vehicle horns. No person shall at any time unreasonably sound any
horn or other audible signal device of a motor vehicle, except
authorized emergency vehicles, unless such sounding is necessary
as a warning to prevent or avoid a vehicle accident.
(2) Truck idling. No person shall operate an engine or any standing
motor vehicle with a weight in excess of 10,000 pounds GVW (gross
vehicle weight) for a period in excess of 10 minutes when such
vehicle is parked on a residential premises or on a town road next
to or across from a residential premises.
(3) Exhaust discharge. No person shall discharge into the air the blowdown
of any steam vent or the exhaust of any stationary internalcombustion
engine or air compressor equipment, unless such
discharge is through a muffler capable of controlling the sound
level within the limits stated in § 249-4B of this chapter (Noise
Limit 2: Continuous noise levels).
A. Exclusions. Noise limits in this chapter shall not apply to noise emitted
by or related to any of the following:
(1) Natural phenomena.
(2) Any bell or chime from any school or church.
(3) Any siren, whistle or bell lawfully used by emergency vehicles.
(4) Any siren, whistle or bell or other sound-generating device used by
an alarm system in an emergency situation; provided, however, that
burglar alarms not terminating within 30 minutes after being
activated shall be unlawful.
(5) Farming equipment or farming activity.
(6) Any siren, whistle or bell required by law or regulation, which
operates at a sound level appropriate to the environment.
§ 249-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 249-5
1:211
§ 249-6. Inspections.
B. Exemptions. Noise limits of this chapter shall not apply to noise emitted
by or related to the following:
(1) Noise created by emergency vehicles in the lawful performance of
their duties or as a result of or relating to an emergency.
(2) Noise from domestic power equipment, such as but not limited to
power saws, chain saws, sanders, grinders, lawn and garden tools
or similar devices, operated between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
9:00 p.m. weekdays, and on Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. when not used for
commercial use. [Amended 5-8-1990 by Ord. No. O90-7]
(3) Noise from snow removal equipment.
(4) Noise created by any aircraft flight operations which are
specifically preempted by the Federal Aviation Administration.
(5) Noise created by any recreational activities which are permitted by
law or for which a license or permit has been granted by the Town,
including parades or sporting events. Nothing in this section shall
be construed as repealing any provision of Chapter 264 of this Code
(Racetracks, Motor Vehicle).
(6) Noise created by blasting performed under Ordinance No. O88-8,
provided that a permit for such blasting has been obtained from
local authorities. Nothing in this section shall be construed as
repealing any provision of Ordinance No. O88-8.65
A. For the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of this
chapter, the governing body of the Town of Hudson or its designated
representatives are hereby authorized to make inspections of all noise
sources and to take measurements and make tests whenever necessary
to determine the quantity and character of noise. In the event that any
person refuses or restricts entry and free access to any part of a
premises or refuses inspection, testing or noise measurement of any
activity, device, facility or process where inspection is sought, the
governing body or its designated representative may seek from the
appropriate court a warrant for the purpose of inspecting, testing or
measuring noise at a reasonable time without interference, restriction
or obstruction.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to allow or permit the
governing body of the Town of Hudson or its designated representative
free access to any premises when the governing body or its designated
representative is acting in compliance with a warrant for inspection or
with an order issued by the appropriate court.
65.Editor's Note: See Ch. 202, Explosives.
§ 249-5 HUDSON CODE § 249-6
1:212
§ 249-7. Violations and penalties.
§ 249-8. Conflicts with other laws.
This Noise Ordinance shall not relieve any person from complying with
other laws, statutes, codes, regulations or ordinances of the State of New
Hampshire or of the Town of Hudson, New Hampshire.
§ 249-9. Severability.
Each of the noise limits delineated in § 249-4 of this chapter shall be
construed as separate to the end that, if any noise limit or section, sentence,
clause or phrase thereof shall be held invalid for any reason, the remainder
of this chapter shall continue in full force.
Chapter 253
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of any
warrant or court order requiring inspection, testing or measurement of
noise sources.
D. No person shall hinder, obstruct, delay, resist, prevent in any way or
interfere or attempt to interfere with any authorized person while in the
performance of his/her duties in accordance with this chapter.
A. Any person owning, leasing or controlling the operation of any source
or sources of noise who willfully, negligently or through failure to
provide necessary equipment or facilities or through failure to take
necessary precautions exceeds the noise limits of § 249-4 of this
chapter is guilty of a violation of this chapter.
B. If the Town notifies a person of a violation of this chapter and orders the
person to cease a violation, in writing, each day such violation
continues after the written notice of violation is served constitutes a
separate violation. For the purposes of this section, the day of service of
a notice is the day the notice is received, if served in hand or by
certified mail, return receipt, or is the third day after the day of mailing,
if the notice is served by ordinary mail.
C. A person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be fined $100 for
the first offense, $200 for the second offense and $500 for each
subsequent offense if committed within one year of the first offense.
D. The Town or any person owning, leasing or residing in real property in
the Town of Hudson or conducting a business of any kind in the Town of
Hudson may file a complaint in the district court or other court with
competent jurisdiction against any person violating this chapter,
provided that the person filing the complaint presents evidence of a
violation of § 249-4 of this chapter using the guidelines set forth in
§ 249-3.
§ 249-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 249-9
1:213
OUTDOOR GATHERINGS AND ACTIVITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 249.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 259.
Motor vehicle racetracks — See Ch. 264.
Zoning — See Ch. 334.
Chapter 259
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recreation Committee — See Ch. 112.
Hawkers, peddlers, vendors and
solicitors — See Ch. 232.
Outdoor gatherings and activities — See Ch.
253.
§ 249-9 HUDSON CODE § 249-9
1:214
ARTICLE I
Melendy Pond
[Adopted 8-15-1961 by Ord. No. 22; amended in its entirety
7-26-1988 by Ord. No. O88-3]
§ 259-1. Activities restricted.
No person shall boat, bathe, swim, fish or carry on any activity of a
recreational or other nature in or on the waters of Melendy Pond and the
outlet brook above the waterworks intake.
§ 259-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-1
1:215

ARTICLE II
Car Stickers at Robinson Pond Recreation Area
[Article 11, voted in the affirmative 3-9-1971 by the Annual Town
Meeting, reads as follows: "To see if the Town will vote to adopt a
car sticker system for entrance into Robinson Pond Recreation
Area."]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-1
1:217

ARTICLE III
Robinson Pond Recreation Area Regulations
[Adopted 7-6-1971 by Ord. No. 61]
§ 259-2. Hours of operation.
The Robinson Pond Recreation Area will be open to residents of Hudson for
day use only. (Gates will be opened at 8:00 a.m. and closed 30 minutes after
sunset.)
§ 259-3. Tampering with structures, plants and features.
Removal of, or damage to, any structure, plant or natural feature within the
Robinson Pond Recreation Area is strictly prohibited.
§ 259-4. Motor vehicles.66
All motor vehicles shall use park roads and parking areas, and no speed
shall exceed six miles per hour.
§ 259-5. Conduct.
Acts endangering others, disorderly conduct, intoxication and obscene or
indecent acts are strictly prohibited.
§ 259-6. Soliciting.67
Soliciting will not be permitted within the park.
§ 259-7. Firearms.
Firearms shall not be used or displayed within the park.
§ 259-8. Exceptions.
Exceptions to this chapter must be validated, in writing, by the majority of
the Board of Selectmen.
§ 259-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any part of this article shall be subject to a fine of $25
for the first offense in the District Court and fined at the discretion of the
Court for subsequent offenses.
66.Editor's Note: For related provisions, see Ch. 317, Vehicles and Traffic.
67.Editor's Note: For related provisions, see Ch. 232, Hawkers, Peddlers, Vendors and
Solicitors.
§ 259-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-9
1:219

ARTICLE IV
Merrifield and Merrill Parks
[Adopted 10-11-1983 by Ord. No. 117]
§ 259-10. Hours of operation.
Merrifield Park, located off Burnham Road, and Merrill Park, located off
Maple Avenue, shall be open for public use from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
§ 259-11. Overnight parking.68
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to park or cause to be parked
any vehicle overnight at Merrifield and Merrill Parks. Illegally parked
vehicles shall be towed at the owner's expense.
§ 259-12. Signs marking parking regulations.
The areas designated above shall be marked by the posting of "park open
8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. - no overnight parking" signs at the entrance to the
parks.
§ 259-13. Violations and penalties.
The penalty for each violation of this article shall be a fine not to exceed
$100. Any person violating this article shall also pay any costs or expenses
incurred by the Town of Hudson in towing any vehicle from the two parks.
68.Editor's Note: For related provisions, see Ch. 317, Vehicles and Traffic.
§ 259-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-13
1:221

ARTICLE V
Town of Hudson Boat Launches
[Adopted 9-16-1986 by Ord. No. O86-9; amended in its entirety
6-22-1992 by Ord. No. O92-20]
§ 259-14. Diving, jumping or running off launch.
There shall be no diving, jumping or running off the Hudson boat launch
facilities.
§ 259-15. Recreational swimming.
There shall be no recreational swimming at the Town of Hudson boat launch
facilities.
§ 259-16. Diving or swimming to effect rescue.
The prohibition of diving or swimming at the Town of Hudson boat launches
shall not apply to individuals effecting a rescue of persons who require
assistance.
§ 259-17. Obstructions of corridors.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park, swim, picnic or obstruct in
any manner the boat launch corridors. The boat launch corridors is for the
exclusive use of the loading and unloading of powered or nonpowered water
vehicles. Activities that restrict such loading or unloading of said water
vehicles will be unlawful.
§ 259-18. Parking in corridors.69
No motor vehicles or trailers shall be allowed to park within the boat
launching corridors which are to be utilized only for loading and unloading
boats.
§ 259-19. Violations and penalties.
As provided in RSA 31:39III, the Town of Hudson hereby establishes that
a violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $100,
which shall be payable to the Town of Hudson.
§ 259-20. Open containers.
The provisions of the New Hampshire Open Container Law, RSA 265:81 and
RSA 265:81(a) shall apply to persons utilizing Town of Hudson boat launch
facilities.
69.Editor's Note: For related provisions, see Ch. 317, Vehicles and Traffic.
§ 259-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-20
1:223

ARTICLE VI
H.O. Smith School Playground and Tennis and Basketball Courts
[Adopted 6-8-1993 by Ord. No. O93-02; amended in its entirety
12-14-1993 by Ord. No. O93-07]
§ 259-21. Curfew imposed.
The Hudson Board of Selectmen adopts an ordinance which imposes a
curfew at the H.O. Smith School playground, tennis courts and basketball
courts of 9:00 p.m., Sunday through Thursday, and of 10:00 p.m., Friday and
Saturday.
§ 259-22. Use of tennis courts; nets to be taken down.
§ 259-23. Signs posted for miscellaneous regulations.
The Hudson Board of Selectmen directs that appropriate signs be placed
at the H.O. Smith School playground indicating the curfew limit and that
parking is prohibited on the School Street and Greeley Street basketball
courts.
§ 259-24. Use of rollerblades or in-line skates and skateboards
prohibited.
The Hudson Board of Selectmen directs that the use of rollerblades or inline
skates and skateboards is prohibited on the premises.
A. The Hudson Board of Selectmen directs that the tennis courts shall be
used exclusively for tennis between the dates of April 1 and October 31.
B. The Hudson Board of Selectmen directs that the tennis nets shall be
taken down and remain down between the dates of November 1 and
March 31.
§ 259-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-24
1:225

ARTICLE VII
Greeley Street Park
[Adopted 5-23-2000]
§ 259-25. Curfew imposed.
There shall be a curfew Sunday through Thursday, 9:00 p.m., and Friday
and Saturday, 10:00 p.m. This curfew is consistent with the curfew that is
currently posted at the basketball and tennis courts on School Street.70
70.Editor's Note: See Art. VI of this chapter.
§ 259-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-25
1:227

ARTICLE VIII
Skate Park Rules
[Adopted 5-8-2007 by Ord. No. 07-03]
§ 259-26. Hours of operation.
Hours of operation shall be 9:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. daily.
§ 259-27. Use of skate park.
The Hudson Skate Park shall be used exclusively for skateboarding and inline
skating from April 1 through November 30.
§ 259-28. Equipment.
All users are responsible for providing their own skateboard, skates and
equipment and ensuring that all are in good working order. All users are
required to wear a helmet at all times.
§ 259-29. Posted signage.
Appropriate signs shall be placed at the Skate Park, indicating the hours of
operation and all the rules that are to be followed by users.
§ 259-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-29
1:229

ARTICLE IX
Benson Park
[Adopted 7-6-2010 by Ord. No. 10-01]
§ 259-30. Hours of operation. [Amended 10-12-2010 by Ord. No.
10-02]
The hours of operation are as follows:
May 1 to August 31 5:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
September 1 to October 31 5:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
November 1 to February 29 5:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
March 1 to April 30 5:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
§ 259-31. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating this article shall be subject to a fine of $10 for the first
offense, $30 for the second offense, $50 for the third offense and fined at
the discretion of the District Court for subsequent offenses.
§ 259-32. Permitted parking. [Added 7-12-2016 by Ord. No. 16-03]
A. This section establishes up to five permit parking spaces on the top
parking area of Benson Park (near the Historic District).
B. The Benson Park Committee is authorized to issue parking permits with
the following conditions:
(1) Applicants must be a recognized volunteer for Benson Park and
show proof of a valid vehicle registration and driver's license.
(2) Permits shall be issued on an annual basis April 1 of each year
expiring March 31 of the next year. Permits are valid for one year.
(3) Permits shall be displayed on the driver's side of the dashboard of
the vehicle for which the permit is issued and shall be positioned so
as to be easily seen through the windshield of the vehicle.
(4) Permits shall be issued by the Benson Park Committee, which shall
maintain an electronic record of permits issued.
(5) Permits are not transferrable. Permits may be revoked by the
Benson Park Committee or the Board of Selectmen.
(6) Permits will be color coded and will change color every year.
(7) Vehicles not properly displaying a valid permit shall be subject to
fines and penalties pursuant to § 317-15 [restricted parking zone
(all)] and § 317-16 (removal).
(8) Permit parking spaces are first-come, first-serve for parking permit
holders.
§ 259-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-32
1:231
Chapter 261
PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hawkers, peddlers and vendors — See Ch.
232.
§ 261-1. Purpose; statutory authority.
§ 261-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PAWNBROKER — Any person, firm, partnership or corporation whose
business includes any transactions wherein there is the lending of money
secured by taking possession of jewelry, wearing apparel, household goods
or other personal property, with interest charged thereon, with the right to
sell the personal property if it is not redeemed. A person, firm, partnership
or corporation shall be deemed to be a pawnbroker whether the transaction
takes the form of a loan by the pawnbroker secured by the property or a sale
to the pawnbroker with the right to repurchase within a specified period of
time. Pawnbrokers are regulated according to New Hampshire RSA 398.
SECONDHAND DEALER — Any person, firm, partnership or corporation
whose business is the retail buying, selling, buy-back, exchanging, dealing
in or dealing with secondhand articles, including but not limited to jewelry,
watches, clocks, diamonds or other precious stones or gems, gold, silver,
platinum or other precious metals, musical instruments and equipment,
cameras, furs, fur coats or other kinds of wearing apparel, collectibles and
A. This chapter is adopted by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of
Hudson for the purpose of regulating transactions in items which have
been historically shown to be subject to theft and illicit transfer. The
function of the regulations contained herein is to discourage such theft
and illicit transfer from occurring within the Town of Hudson and to
mandate the keeping of certain records which will assist victims of theft
in recovering their stolen property and which will assist law
enforcement authorities in the apprehension of perpetrators of theft.
B. The intent of this chapter is to establish a system which fairly and
impartially regulates retail transactions of a pawn or secondhand
nature for the purpose of identifying stolen property unintentionally
received by the regulated parties and detection of regulated parties
intentionally transacting business in stolen property.
C. This chapter has been enacted pursuant to the authority granted to the
Town of Hudson by New Hampshire RSA 322 and RSA 398.
§ 259-32 HUDSON CODE § 261-2
1:232
antiques (excepting furniture and books), home and auto stereo equipment,
televisions, video cassette recorders and other electronic equipment, tools,
computers and computer equipment, firearms, auto accessories and office
and store fixtures and related equipment. Secondhand dealers are
regulated according to New Hampshire RSA 322.
§ 261-3. Exclusions.
Mail-order transactions and retail stores that exchange or provide cash or
credit for returned articles are excluded from this chapter. Flea markets
and yard sales are also excluded and are governed by the Town of Hudson
through a separate Town ordinance.
§ 261-4. Licensing requirements and procedures.
A. No person, firm, partnership or corporation shall operate, conduct or
engage in business as a secondhand dealer or pawnbroker unless such
person, firm, partnership or corporation obtains a license from the
Town of Hudson through the Board of Selectmen in accordance with
New Hampshire RSA 322:1 and 398:5.
B. Application; fee; investigation; approval or denial.
(1) Applications for licenses for a secondhand dealer or pawnbroker
shall be made, in writing, to the Hudson Police Department on
forms provided by the Hudson Police Department. An application
fee of $50 shall be submitted with the application to the Police
Department.
(2) The Chief of Police shall cause an investigation to be made of the
fitness of the applicant to engage in said business as a secondhand
dealer or pawnbroker. This investigation shall be completed within
14 days of the application being filed. Upon conclusion of this
investigation the Chief of Police shall report his findings and
forward a recommendation on the application to the Board of
Selectmen for disposition of the license.
(3) No such license shall be issued to any person, firm, partnership or
corporation who or which has been convicted of receiving stolen
property or who has repeatedly violated ordinances or statutes of
the State of New Hampshire or any other state or territory related
to a business license in the State of New Hampshire or any other
state or territory. Approval or denial of a license application will be
by a majority vote by the Board of Selectmen after a review of all
application materials.
C. Issuance; display; nontransferability; renewal.
(1) Upon approval a numbered license shall be issued and continue in
force until April 1 of each year, unless revoked prior to this date.
Said license may not be assigned or transferred.
§ 261-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 261-4
1:233
§ 261-5. Regulations governing employees.
§ 261-6. Prohibited transactions.
(2) It shall be the duty of the licensee to display the current license in a
conspicuous place within the business where it may be readily
observed by the public.
(3) The license shall be issued for a specific location and is not
transferable to any other person, firm, partnership or corporation.
(4) Once per year, on or before April 1, all persons, firms, partnerships
or corporations that operate, conduct or engage in business as a
secondhand dealer or pawnbroker will be responsible for renewing
their license information with the Hudson Police Department. This
renewal will be completed in writing on forms provided by the
Hudson Police Department. A renewal fee of $50 shall be submitted
yearly with the renewal application. Failure to comply with this
requirement may result in suspension or revocation of said license.
A. In accordance with § 261-4B, all secondhand dealers and pawnbrokers
must submit a list of personnel that will be employed by the business. In
addition to this requirement it shall be the responsibility of the business
owner to notify the Hudson Police Department whenever a new
employee is hired by the business. In the case of a new employee, the
same information will be requested as per the original application for
license.
B. Each applicant shall agree to conform to all rules and regulations
governing such businesses now in effect or as subsequently enacted.
A. No pawnbroker, nor any person employed by a pawnbroker, shall
directly or indirectly receive in pawn or as security for any loan,
transfer, service or undertaking or advantage any aforementioned
article from any minor in accordance with New Hampshire RSA 398:2.
B. No secondhand dealer or pawnbroker, nor any person employed by a
secondhand dealer or pawnbroker, shall directly or indirectly purchase
any aforementioned article from any person under the age of 16 years
old, knowing or having reason to believe him or her to be such, except
when said minor is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian, who
shall show proper identification and sign the transaction record in
person before said dealer in accordance with New Hampshire RSA
322:3.
C. No secondhand dealer or pawnbroker, nor any person employed by a
secondhand dealer or pawnbroker, shall receive in pawn, or as security
for any loan, transfer, service, undertaking, or advantage, any property
of value from any person in a visible state of intoxication from liquors,
drugs or otherwise or any article of clothing removed from the person,
at the place of business in accordance with New Hampshire RSA 398:2.
§ 261-4 HUDSON CODE § 261-7
1:234
§ 261-7. Records; inspections; resale; changes and alterations.
A. Every secondhand dealer or pawnbroker, upon the acquisition of any
aforementioned article, shall prepare transaction records (written in
the English language) upon forms provided by the Town of Hudson. This
form shall state the full name, identification number, date of birth,
address and other descriptive information of the seller, date of the
transaction, a full, accurate and detailed description (to include make,
model and serial number) of each article and the monetary amount
given for the article.
B. Identification of seller and items.
(1) Positive identification in the form of a photographic identification
shall be required for all transactions, and the type of identification
used shall be noted on the dealer's records. This record shall be
legibly signed by the seller in person. At no time will the
pawnbroker or secondhand dealer accept another person's
photographic identification for any acquisition.
(2) The secondhand dealer or pawnbroker shall attach a photocopy of
the identification shown to the transaction record. A photocopy of
the article, if required by the nature or size of the item, will also be
attached to this form. Jewelry, watches, diamonds or other precious
stones or gems, gold, silver, platinum or other precious metals or
items by virtue of their size shall be photocopied by use of a
document photocopier.
C. One copy of all transaction records shall be delivered to the Hudson
Police Department within 24 hours of the end of said dealer's business
day in which the transaction took place.
D. In the case of a pawnbroker, a ticket or coupon shall be given to the
pledgor by the pawnbroker in all cases where any aforementioned
article is received in pawn or otherwise for the security of any loan,
transfer, service, undertaking or advantage given to the pledgor. This
ticket or coupon shall state the name and address of said pawnbroker, a
description of the property or article received in pawn, the monetary
value loaned and the rate of interest established. At the time of making
the loan, an identification number shall be attached to the article and
this identification number shall be recorded on the ticket or coupon.
E. Every secondhand dealer and pawnbroker shall retain the original
copies of acquisition records in his possession, which, together with any
article which is kept, stored in or upon such premises, may be inspected
at any time by a duly authorized police officer during regular business
hours. All reasonable efforts will be made to avoid disrupting the
normal course of business.
F. All original transaction records shall be kept by said secondhand dealer
or pawnbroker for a minimum of five years for purposes of this chapter.
§ 261-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 261-7
1:235
§ 261-8. Removal of articles by police officers.
§ 261-9. Violations and penalties.
State and federal regulations may require longer retention (i.e.,
Department of Labor, Internal Revenue Service, etc.).
G. No article purchased shall be sold, encumbered by sales contract or
otherwise disposed of or altered in its appearance within 21 days of
purchase, except with the written permission of the Chief of Police, but
in no case within 24 hours after the time of purchase. Pawnbrokers
shall retain pledged nonperishable articles for at least four months
after date of deposit and perishable articles for one month after date of
deposit. [Amended 12-23-2002 by Ord. No. 02-04]
A. If the Hudson Police Department determines that an article is needed
for evidence in a criminal investigation, an authorized agent of the
Department shall seize that evidence pursuant to applicable criminal
procedures. The secondhand dealer or pawnbroker shall be issued a
receipt for the article.
B. Pursuant to New Hampshire RSA 595-A:6, the Hudson Police
Department, or an authorized agent of the Hudson Police Department,
shall keep seized articles under the court's direction as long as
necessary to permit the article to be used as evidence. At the conclusion
of all court proceedings or closure of the police investigation, the
Hudson Police Department shall notify, by regular mail at the last
known address, the original owner, the secondhand dealer or
pawnbroker and any other known person who may have a lawful
interest that the property will be released in 30 calendar days to the
original owner, if no other claim is placed on the property.
A. Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not less that
$25 nor more than $100 for each offense and/or subject to criminal
prosecution under existing New Hampshire laws.
B. Suspension or revocation.
(1) The Board of Selectmen may, independently or upon
recommendation from the Chief of Police, suspend or revoke said
license for any violation of this chapter or reasons they deem to be
in the best interest of the community, after a hearing. Offenses
which may result in the suspension or revocation of said license
include but are not limited to the following:
(a) Violation of any provision of this chapter; or
(b) Violation of any statute of the State of New Hampshire or any
other state or territory of the United States relating to the
licensed business.
§ 261-7 HUDSON CODE § 261-9
1:236
Chapter 264
RACETRACKS, MOTOR VEHICLE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 158.
Noise — See Ch. 249.
Outdoor gatherings and activities — See Ch.
253.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 317.
Zoning — See Ch. 334.
(2) Time limits of the suspension or revocation shall be left to the
discretion of the Board of Selectmen. Notice of the suspension or
revocation will be made in writing to the owner(s) of the business.
§ 261-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 261-9
1:237

ARTICLE I
Licensing; Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 3-26-1983 ATM, Art. 36; BOS 4-8-1983 by Ord. No. 115]
§ 264-1. Authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to the provisions of RSA 31:41-a.
§ 264-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the terms below are defined as follows:
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any self-propelled vehicle, except tractors, activated
by an internal-combustion engine and not operated exclusively on
stationary tracks.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation or other entity
proposing to or operating a motor vehicle racetrack.
§ 264-3. License to be obtained; fee.71 [Amended 7-26-1988 by Ord.
No. O88-3]
Annually, before April 1, any person proposing to operate a motor vehicle
racetrack within the Town of Hudson shall obtain a license from the Board
of Selectmen.
§ 264-4. Regulations.
At any motor vehicle racetrack operated within the Town of Hudson, the
following regulations shall apply:
A. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served, dispensed, distributed or
consumed at any time.
B. 72The dates and hours of operation shall be:
(1) Dates. Racing shall be conducted on Sundays and holidays only.
(2) The hours. The afternoon races shall be from 12:00 noon to 5:45
p.m., and evening races shall be from 4:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m.
[Amended 4-8-2014 by Ord. No. 14-02]
C. Night and evening races are only permitted during the summer season;
specifically, after the Hudson public schools (elementary) have closed in
June and prior to the date on which they open in September.
D. Every motor vehicle participating in any races sponsored by a motor
vehicle racetrack in Hudson will be equipped with mufflers or noise-
71.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
section has been revised to replace "Executive Administrator" with "Board of Selectmen."
The specific fees set forth in this section were removed at the request of the town. For
current fees, see Ch. 205, Fees.
72.Editor's Note: See also Art. II, Hours of Operation in June, of this chapter.
§ 264-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 264-4
1:239
§ 264-5. Restrictions in license.75
Any license issued by the Hudson Board of Selectmen pursuant to § 264-3
shall contain the following:
§ 264-6. Inspections.78 [Amended 7-26-1988 by Ord. No. O88-3]
The Hudson Board of Selectmen, Building Inspector and Health Officer are
authorized to make announced or unannounced inspections of the property
to ensure compliance with the requirements of this Article and any license
issued hereunder.
reduction devices, which shall be approved by the Board of
Selectmen.73 [Amended 7-26-1988 by Ord. No. O88-3]
E. Any person operating a motor vehicle racetrack shall permit town
officials, or their designated representatives, to conduct from time to
time, at said person's expense, such noise level tests or readings as may
be deemed appropriate and necessary by the Hudson Board of
Selectmen.74 [Amended 7-26-1988 by Ord. No. O88-3]
A. The proposed schedule of racing dates and hours of operation for which
the license is requested.
B. A requirement that the person operating the motor vehicle racetrack
shall make public announcements, during and at the conclusion of a
day's racing activities, requesting that spectators and participants
observe local speed limits,76 refrain from littering and excessive noise
and refrain from using streets when prohibited by local ordinance.77
C. A requirement that the person operating the motor vehicle racetrack
provide adequate trash receptacles on the premises, that said
receptacles be emptied on a regular basis and that the premises
constituting the racetrack be maintained in a neat and orderly fashion,
including the parking areas, and that all cleanup activities be
completed within 24 hours of the conclusion of any day's racing
activities.
D. A requirement that the racetrack be kept secure from unauthorized
entry when not being used.
73.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
subsection has been revised to replace "Executive Administrator" with "Board of
Selectmen."
74.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
subsection has been revised to replace "Executive Administrator" with "Board of
Selectmen."
75.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
section has been revised to replace "Executive Administrator" with "Board of Selectmen."
76.Editor's Note: For speed limit provisions, see Ch. 317, Vehicles and Traffic.
77.Editor's Note: For street use restrictions, see Ch. 317, Vehicles and Traffic.
78.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
section has been revised to replace "Executive Administrator" with "Board of Selectmen."
§ 264-4 HUDSON CODE § 264-7
1:240
§ 264-7. Insurance.79 [Amended 7-26-1988 by Ord. No. O88-3]
Any person operating a motor vehicle racetrack shall be required to provide
such insurance as may be deemed necessary and appropriate by the Hudson
Board of Selectmen. Certificates of said insurance shall be filed with the
Board of Selectmen prior to the commencement of any racing season or
meet.
§ 264-8. Violations and penalties.80 [Amended 7-26-1988 by Ord.
No. O88-3]
§ 264-9. Variances.81 [Amended 7-26-1988 by Ord. No. O88-3]
The Board of Selectmen is hereby authorized to vary the requirements set
forth in § 264-4B and C and the restrictions in § 264-5 if, in the opinion of
the Selectmen, a significant hardship exists for the person operating the
motor vehicle racetrack and no significant harm will result to the public
health, safety and welfare.
A. Any violation of the provisions of this Article or of a license issued by
the Board of Selectmen hereunder shall be punishable by a fine not to
exceed $100 for each day that said violation exists. Any fines collected
hereunder shall be paid into the general fund of the Town of Hudson.
B. In addition to or instead of monetary fines, the Board of Selectmen is
hereby authorized to revoke any permit issued hereunder where a
violation of this Article or of a license issued hereunder exists and the
same has not been corrected within five days of sending notice of the
violation to the person operating the motor vehicle racetrack.
79.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
section has been revised to replace "Executive Administrator" with "Board of Selectmen."
80.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
section has been revised to replace "Executive Administrator" with "Board of Selectmen."
81.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
section has been revised to replace "Executive Administrator" with "Board of Selectmen."
§ 264-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 264-9
1:241

ARTICLE II
Hours of Operation in June82
[Article 24, voted in the affirmative 3-15-1985 by the Annual Town
Meeting, reads as follows: "To see if the Town will vote that, because
of seasonal hot weather in the month of June that presents an
unnecessary and unhealthy hardship, due to an ordinance which
requires daytime racing only from noon to 5:45 p.m. until grammar
school closing, the Hudson Speedway be allowed to operate on the
first three Sundays of June between 3:00 p.m. and 8:30 p.m. in the
daylight hours."]
82.Editor's Note: See also § 264-4B and C.
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 264-9
1:243
Chapter 266
RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 226. Landfill facility — See Ch. 245.
§ 266-1. Purpose.
The Town of Hudson has recently undertaken a recycling program which
is a part of its solid waste management efforts. Undertaking this program
involves residents placing their recyclables at curbside, in designated
containers, together with their normal trash, for collection on the day
designated for that section of town where they live. It has been observed
that a person or persons have on occasion taken these recyclable items
placed in front of residences as part of the town's recycling program. Such
actions by that person or persons greatly inhibit the town's ability to move
forward with a successful recycling program.
§ 266-2. Collection by unauthorized persons.
From the time of placement of any recyclables at the curb of any resident,
it shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firms or corporations to collect,
remove or dispose of recyclables. Each such collection, removal or disposal
in violation hereof from one or more residences shall constitute a separate
and different offense.
§ 266-3. Violations and penalties.
A person, persons, firm or corporation convicted of violating any provisions
of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation, which is punishable as follows:
A. For a first conviction, by a fine of $25.
B. For a second conviction, by a fine of $50.
C. For a third, and all subsequent convictions, by a fine of not less than
$250 nor more than $500.
§ 264-9 HUDSON CODE § 266-3
1:244
Chapter 270
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Utility Committee — See Ch. 142.
Building construction — See Ch. 178.
Water utility — See Ch. 274.
Street excavations — See Ch. 284.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 289.
§ 270-1. Authority.
§ 270-2. Municipal Utility Committee; sewer fund.
A. RSA 149-I:24 authorizes a Town to adopt the provisions of Chapter
149-I and states that the Selectmen shall perform all the duties and
possesses all powers as have been conferred in Chapter 149-I upon
Mayors and Aldermen.
B. RSA 149-I:7 authorizes a Town to assess users of its public sewer and
sewage treatment system their just share of the expense, including debt
and interest incurred, of constructing a system and reconstructing a
sewer system.
C. RSA 149-I:8 authorizes a Town to defray the cost of construction and
payment of interest on any debt incurred, management, maintenance,
operation and repair of a sewer and sewage treatment system by
establishing a scale of sewer rents, pursuant to Ordinance No. 77A,
adopted on April 12, 1982.
A. Committee membership.
(1) The Town of Hudson Board of Selectmen, hereinafter referred to as
the "governing board," desires to establish a Municipal Utility
Committee, comprised of seven full members:
(a) Two shall:
[1] Reside in the Town and reside in a dwelling unit which is
serviced by the sewer system established by the Town; or
[2] Reside in Town and own real estate which is either so
serviced by the sewer system or so situated in a sewer
district; and
(b) Two shall:
[1] Reside in the Town and reside in a dwelling unit served by
the water utility; or
§ 266-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-2
1:245
§ 270-3. Sewer capital assessment (referred to as "hook-up fees").
§ 270-4. Sewer rents.
Sewer rents for use of and/or access to the system are established
commencing July 1, 1987, or fiscal year 1988. Sewer rents are to be paid
[2] Reside in the Town and own real estate which is served by
the water utility; and
(c) Three shall reside in the Town and may reside in a dwelling or
an area not serviced by municipal sewer or water.
(d) Additionally, the Committee may have an alternate member,
who shall meet the qualification of Subsection A(1)(a)[1] or [2]
above.
(2) The term of office of each member shall be for three years,
appointed on a staggered basis. The governing board shall
maintain a separate budget for the sewer utility and shall maintain
records of its income and expenditures separate from those of
other Town operations. For audit purposes, the sewer utility shall
be considered a separate department of the Town operations.
Fiscal responsibility and authority for the sewer system shall
remain with the governing board;
B. The governing board desires to establish a Sewer Capital Assessment
Reserve Fund Account, funded by an equitably apportioned assessment
to fund capital improvements to the Town's public sewer and sewerage
treatment system, with a goal to reduce, if possible, the need to borrow
or incur debt for such purposes;
C. The governing board desires to establish a separate sewer fund to pay
the debt for construction or reconstruction of and to fund the current
operating and maintenance costs of the Town's public sewer and
sewerage treatment system to be funded by equitably apportioned
rents; and
D. The governing board desires to establish sewer capital assessment
rates and sewer rents for subsequent fiscal years.
A. Sewer capital assessment is hereby established effective July 1, 1987,
as a one-time special assessment for the connection of a residence,
building or other structure, thereafter collectively referred to as a
"building or buildings to the Town's public sewer and sewerage
treatment system" (referred to Ordinance O-77A, 1982 Hudson Town
Meeting, Warrant Article 15 and hereafter referred to as a "system").
B. The assessment is fixed according to the formula set forth in Schedule A
(on file in the Town Clerk's office). This schedule shall be reviewed and
revised by the Municipal Utility Committee on a yearly basis, subject to
final review and approval by the governing board.
§ 270-2 HUDSON CODE § 270-4
1:246
by the owners of buildings and/or land using or connected with the system.
Sewer rents are fixed according to the formulas set forth in Schedules B and
C. These schedules shall be reviewed and revised by the Municipal Utility
Committee on a yearly basis, subject to final review and approval by the
Hudson governing board. The schedules shall be filed with the Town Clerk.
§ 270-5. Sewer Capital Assessment Reserve Fund Account.
§ 270-6. Sewer Fund Account.
§ 270-7. Billing and collection.
A. Pursuant to the authority of RSA 149-I:10, there is established a
separate and distinct nonlapsing fund known as the "Sewer Capital
Assessment Reserve Fund Account." This account shall be reserved to
fund construction and reconstruction, replacement, expansion or
improvement of the system or for any lawful purpose relating to the
sewer system. The Sewer Capital Assessment Reserve Fund Account
shall be for the exclusive use of the sewer system.
B. Deposit of sewer capital assessments. All sewer capital assessments,
paid to the Town, shall be deposited in the Sewer Capital Assessment
Reserve Fund Account and shall be used for the purposes reserved for
the fund, as designated in Subsection A.
A. In accordance with RSA 149-I:10, there is established a separate and
distinct nonlapsing fund known as the "Sewer Fund Account." This
account shall be reserved to fund management, operation, maintenance
and repair or reconstruction of the sewer system, including related
bond principal and interest. Any surplus in this fund existing at the end
of the fiscal year, as confirmed by the Town's independent audit, shall
be used consistent with the lawful purposes to which any surplus may
be put, subject to the approval of the governing board.
B. Deposit of sewer rents. In accordance with RSA 149-I:10, all sewer
rents paid to the Town shall be deposited in a separate Sewer Fund
Account and shall be used for the purposes reserved for the fund, as
designated in Subsection A above.
C. A separate Sewer Utility Checking Account shall be established for all
payments made by a Sewer Utility.
A. Sewer capital assessment. The Manager and/or Selectmen or their
designee shall bill and collect the sewer capital assessment in 12 equal
quarterly installments, over a three-year period. Each installment shall
be due upon issuance of a bill. If any installment remains unpaid for 30
days after the issuance of a bill, interest shall accrue as established in
Subsection C.
B. Sewer rents.
§ 270-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-7
1:247
§ 270-8. Liens; enforcement of collection.
§ 270-9. Agreements on sewer capital assessments.
(1) The Manager and/or Selectmen, or their designee, shall bill in the
same month all customer sewer rents on a quarterly basis, starting
in July 1, 1992, and every three months thereafter; except that, in
order to facilitate a changeover in the billing procedure, for the
fiscal year 1992-1993, billing shall be in the third month of each
quarter, and in fiscal year 1993-1994, billing shall be in the second
month of each quarter. Said billing shall be based upon water usage
information furnished by the agency distributing the water to the
Town, or some other method, described by the Municipal Utility
Committee. In an instance where sewer users have their own
source of water supply, an alternate method shall be used by the
Sewer Utility to calculate the bill. If any bill remains unpaid after
30 days of the date of issuance, interest shall accrue as established
in Subsection C.
(2) The Municipal Utility Committee shall draft for review and
approval by the governing board the information and format which
appears on the sewer utility bill. All sewer utility charges shall be
fully substantiated by the governing board before being submitted
to the Municipal Utility Committee for billing, as they are related to
the sewer utility budget.
C. Interest. Interest shall be assessed in accordance with RSA 76:13, or
successor statute as permitted by law.
A. As provided in RSA 149-I:11, the sewer capital assessment and sewer
rents shall create a lien on the real estate against which they are
assessed, and, to enforce collection of the liens, the Manager and/or
Selectmen or their designee are authorized to use all procedures
provided by law, including those set forth in RSA 38:22 and RSA 80, and
to issue a warrant, or other appropriate process, to the Tax Collector.
B. Upon the Town's approval of an application for a building to connect
with and discharge into the system, as provided in § 270-3 above, the
Manager and/or Selectmen or their designee shall cause to be recorded
with the Hillsborough County Registry of Deeds a notice of sewer
capital assessment, which notice shall be on a form prepared by the
Manager and/or Selectmen and shall include, as a minimum, the names
of the property owners, addresses of the property owners, names of the
applicants for the sewer system connection, address of the property,
amount of sewer capital assessment, or delinquent rents, and due date
for payment of same.
A. Prior agreements. Agreements concerning payment of sewer capital
assessments, charges or fees which the Town and property owners have
entered into prior to Town Selectmen's approval of this chapter shall
remain in full force and effect.
§ 270-7 HUDSON CODE § 270-9
1:248
§ 270-10. Abatement procedure.
§ 270-11. Budget, expense and income reports.
B. Future agreements. The Manager and/or Selectmen, after having
received the recommendation of the Municipal Utility Committee, may
enter into agreements on behalf of the Town with property owners
fixing payment of sewer capital assessments or sewer rents. Under such
agreements, the property owner shall be obligated to pay the
assessment or rent. The amount of the assessment or rent agreed upon
shall not be less than the amount set forth in Schedule A.
C. Future construction and connections. The Manager and/or Selectmen,
after receiving the recommendation of the Municipal Utility Committee,
may enter into agreements on behalf of the Town which permit the
future construction of sewer lines and sewer connections onto the
system.
A. The Municipal Utility Committee of the Town shall be responsible for
drafting a procedure for the abatement and/or other relief from a sewer
capital assessment and/or sewer rent. This procedure shall be reviewed
and approved by the governing board.
B. An approved abatement application form shall be prepared and
published for this procedure. No abatement shall be granted unless the
appropriate application is fully filled out, signed and filed with the
Sewer Utility Clerk. Forms shall be available at the office of the Sewer
Utility Clerk or other place as designated by the governing board.
C. Any property owner who claims entitlement to an abatement or other
relief shall file a completed application with the Sewer Utility Clerk,
designated for that purpose, within 30 days from the issuance of the
contested bill.
D. The contested bill does not need to be paid prior to filing an abatement
request.
E. In the event that an in-house error is made concerning a customer's
billing, the Sewer Utility Clerk shall initiate a request for abatement to
the Municipal Utility Committee.
F. Within 10 days of receipt of such application, the Sewer Utility Clerk
shall designate a file number indicating the type of abatement
requested and forward it to the Chairman of the Municipal Utility
Committee, together with a recommendation from the Finance
Department or the Sewer Utility Foreman regarding the merits of the
abatement request, with appropriate financial and/or technical data.
G. Within 45 days of receipt, the Municipal Utility Committee shall report
its findings and/or recommendation to the governing board for review
or approval of the abatement for processing.
§ 270-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-11
1:249
§ 270-12. Rate setting.
Each fiscal year, the Municipal Utility Committee shall recommend to the
governing board the sewer capital assessment rate and the sewer rent
rate. These recommendations must be forwarded to the governing board by
July 15 of the new fiscal year. The rate shall be set by July 21 of the new
fiscal year to accommodate proper billing. The rate set for sewer capital
assessments shall be listed in Schedule A and filed with the Town Clerk and
Sewer Utility Clerk. The Sewer Rent Schedule shall be listed in Schedules
B and C and filed with the Town Clerk and Sewer Utility Clerk.
§ 270-13. Policies and procedures; correspondence.
§ 270-14. Intermunicipal agreement with Nashua.
There is in force an intermunicipal agreement between the City of Nashua
and the Town of Hudson, executed January 4, 1979. This agreement defines
the relationship between Hudson and Nashua with respect to the treatment
of Hudson's wastewater at the Nashua Wastewater Treatment Facility and
the method of payment. This agreement is acknowledged as a part of this
chapter.
§ 270-15. Local limits.
A. The Municipal Utility Committee shall review and provide
recommendations concerning the sewer utility budget, pursuant to
§ 270-2, prior to the budget being presented to the Hudson Budget
Committee by the governing board. Appropriate financial data shall be
presented to the Committee for review, including the latest report of
expenses and income of the current fiscal year.
B. All sewer utility charges shall be fully substantiated by the Manager
and/or Selectmen before being submitted to the Municipal Utility
Committee. The governing board shall furnish to the Municipal Utility
Committee, each quarter, or as requested, the actual expenditures and
income versus the budgetary appropriations in the Sewer Utility
Account, including all Capital Assessment Reserve Fund data, together
with the total billing versus collections made and any other data the
Committee may require.
A. Policies and Procedures Manual. The Municipal Utility Committee shall
review the proposed Policies and Procedures Manual, and subsequent
amendments thereto, which is being prepared by the Sewer Utility
consultant and shall submit that manual for review and approval by the
governing board.
B. Correspondence. All correspondence affecting matters relating to the
system shall be forwarded to the Municipal Utility Committee for
review and recommendation prior to any action being taken by the
governing board.
§ 270-11 HUDSON CODE § 270-15
1:250
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described pollutants, substances or wastewater to any public
sewer:
(1) Toxic or poisonous substances.
(a) Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids,
liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any
sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans,
animals or the environment, create a public nuisance or create
any hazard to the POTW, including but not limited to the
following substances in excess of the stated concentrations:
[1] Arsenic: 0.16 mg/l.
[2] Boron: 17.48 mg/l.
[3] Cadmium: 0.33 mg/l.
[4] Chromium, total: 1.85 mg/l.
[5] Chromium, hexavalent: 1.85 mg/l.
[6] Copper: 7.53 mg/l.
[7] Lead: 1.20 mg/l.
[8] Mercury: 0.006 mg/l.
[9] Nickel: 25.57 mg/l.
[10] Selenium: 0.11 mg/l.
[11] Silver.
[a] Photoprocessors: 1.89 mg/l.
[b] Nonphotoprocessors: 0.05 mg/l.
[12] Zinc: 6.57 mg/l.
[13] Total cyanides: 0.19 mg/l.
[14] Sulfates: 810 mg/l.
[15] Hydrogen sulfide: 0.550 mg/l.
[16] Phenols: 0.83 mg/l.
[17] Total toxic organics: 5.0 mg/l.
[18] Carbon disulfide: 1.17 mg/l.
[19] Chloroform: 1.07 mg/l.
§ 270-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-15
1:251
(b) All concentrations for metallic substances are for total metal
unless otherwise indicated.
(2) Any wastewater, liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than
150° F. (65° C.), or any wastewater sufficiently hot to cause the
influent at the wastewater treatment facility to exceed 104° F. (40°
C.), or heat in lesser amounts which would inhibit biological
activity.
(3) Any wastewaters containing an increase in caustic alkalinity
calculated as CaCO (calcium carbonate) in excess of 75 milligrams
per liter (mg/l) or in volumes which may be excessive.
(4) Any wastewaters having a pH lower than 6.0 or higher than 10.5 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to the POTW, the treatment process or personnel at the
POTW.
(5) Any wastewaters containing fat, wax, grease or oil, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°
F. and 150° F.
(6) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other volatile,
flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas with closed-cup
flashpoints below 140° F. (60° C.) or boiling points below 150° F.
(65.5° C.), using the test method specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
(7) Other hazardous, toxic or reactive pollutants, including but not
limited to halogenated hydrocarbons, organic solvents and
organochlorine insecticides, pesticides, herbicides and fungicides.
(8) Any solid or viscous substances in such quantities or such size to be
capable of causing obstruction to the flow in the POTW or other
interference with the proper operation of the wastewater
treatment facility, such as but not limited to ashes, cinders, sand,
mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics,
wood, unground garbage, whole blood, manure, hair, fleshings,
entrails, paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or
ground by garbage grinders.
(9) Any garbage or solids that have not been properly shredded. The
installation and operation of any grinder equipped with a motor of
three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be
subject to the review and approval of the City Engineer.
(10) Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes or
concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not.
(11) Any waters or wastes containing heavy metals, solvents and similar
objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any such
material discharged to the public sewer exceeds the limits
§ 270-15 HUDSON CODE § 270-15
1:252
established by the Superintendent, the NHDES or the EPA for such
materials.
(12) Any waters or wastes containing taste- or odor-producing
substances in such concentrations which may be established by the
city as necessary, after treatment of the composite wastewater at
the city wastewater treatment facility, to meet the requirements of
the state, federal or other public agencies having jurisdiction for
such discharge to the receiving waters.
(13) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes in excessive amounts of such
half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established in
applicable state or federal regulations or by the Superintendent.
(14) Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids or other materials
which, either singly or by interaction with other materials, are
sufficient to create a public nuisance, a hazard to life, health or to
prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair.
(15) Any wastewaters containing an average concentration of
suspended solids in excess of 300 mg/l.
(16) Any wastewaters which impart color which cannot be removed by
the treatment process, such as but not limited to dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently impart color to
the wastewater treatment facility's effluent, thereby violating the
city's NPDES permit. Color (in combination with turbidity) shall not
cause the treatment plant effluent to reduce the depth of the
compensation point for photosynthetic activity by more than 10%
from the seasonably established norm for aquatic life.
(17) Any wastewater containing an average concentration BOD in
excess of 250 mg/l or material which causes unusual oxygen
demand, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements, or is
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other
pollutants, will cause interference with either the POTW or any
wastewater treatment or sludge process or which will constitute a
hazard to humans or animals or property.
(18) Any wastewaters containing materials in such concentration as to
constitute slugs, or are excessive as defined herein.
(19) Any wastewaters containing materials which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes
employed or are amenable to treatment only by such a limited
degree that the POTW effluent cannot meet the requirements of
other agencies having jurisdiction over the discharge to the
receiving waters.
(20) Any wastewater containing pollutants introduced by a nondomestic
source which would pass through the wastewater treatment facility
§ 270-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-15
1:253
or cause interference with the operation or performance of the
wastewater treatment facility. This shall apply to all nondomestic
sources introducing wastewater containing pollutants, whether or
not the source is subject to the categorical pretreatment standards
or any other national, state or local pretreatment requirements.
(21) Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or
wastes in the POTW, release obnoxious gases or form suspended
solids which interfere with the collection system or create a
condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes.
(22)Wastewater which has a concentration of any pollutant above the
screening levels. Such screening levels, generated on the basis of
standard conditions, shall be adjusted for the particular conditions
applicable to the specific discharge as needed. Fume toxicity
screening levels shall be adjusted when administered as limits to
account for the pH temperature, dilution, other toxic fumes and
ventilation present at the site of the particular discharge.
(23) Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the city.
(24) Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate,
deionized water, noncontact cooling water and unpolluted
industrial wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the
Superintendent.
(25) Any sludges, screenings or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes.
(26) Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the
Superintendent in an industrial user wastewater permit.
(27) Any wastewater causing the POTW's effluent to fail a toxicity test.
(28) Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents or other
substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW.
(29) Any substance the Superintendent may deem harmful to the
process, POTW or personnel.
(30) Any petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of
mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or passthrough.
(31) Any pollutants that will result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors
or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute
worker health and safety problems.
(32) Any household hazardous wastes, including but not limited to
paints, stains, thinners, pesticides, herbicides, antifreeze,
transmission fluid and brake fluids, motor oil and battery acid.
§ 270-15 HUDSON CODE § 270-15
1:254
§ 270-16. (Reserved)
§ 270-17. Sewer limitation allocation procedure.
B. All industrial waste shall be pretreated in accordance with federal and
state regulations and this chapter, or standards established by the
Superintendent, whichever is more stringent.
C. Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or
required for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained
continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner(s) at
his expense.
D. The Superintendent may, at his/her discretion, reallocate industrial
loadings, establish mass-based discharge limits, adjust present
discharge limits and establish new limits to meet the needs of the
wastewater facility or collection system.
E. Federal regulatory provisions applicable to this section are 40 CFR
403.5(a), General prohibitions, 40 CFR 403.5(b), Specific prohibitions,
and 40 CFR 403.5(c) and (d), regarding local limits development.
A. Basis for imposing new sewer allocation limitations.
(1) Pursuant to Hudson Town Code (HTC) § 270-14, the Town of
Hudson entered into an intermunicipal agreement with the City of
Nashua for the purpose of providing wastewater treatment services
to the Town of Hudson. The agreement provides the Town of
Hudson 2,000,000 gallons per day of secondary wastewater
treatment;
(2) The Town of Hudson is presently undertaking a study as part of its
Sewer Master Plan to evaluate methods to reduce infiltration and
inflow into the Town of Hudson's wastewater treatment system that
may result in an increase in available sewer capacity;
(3) The Town of Hudson wastewater treatment system is presently
distributed within an area described in the attached Exhibit A,
Town of Hudson Sewer Master Plan Amendment System Boundary
and Nonsewered Parcels. Before the Town of Hudson undertakes
an expansion of its wastewater treatment system beyond the
existing system boundary, the Town must first provide sewer to all
land uses within the presently serviced region and then the Town
can plan for possible expansion of the wastewater treatment
system to those areas outside of the presently serviced area as
described in Exhibit A; and
(4) In November of 1999 the Town of Hudson Board of Selectmen
adopted a Master Plan Amendment for the Town of Hudson Sewer
Master Plan. That Master Plan Amendment indicated that there
presently remain approximately 200,000 gallons of average daily
flow available within the per-day limit of 2,000,000 gallons
§ 270-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-17
1:255
established by the intermunicipal agreement with the City of
Nashua. Therefore, in order to protect the public health, safety and
welfare of the Town of Hudson and to fairly allocate the remaining
sewer capacity among the land uses permitted under the Hudson
Zoning Ordinance, the Board of Selectmen must implement new
procedures for making sewer allocations to new and existing land
uses within the Town of Hudson.
(5) Now, therefore, the Board of Selectmen adopts the following new
regulations with regards to the allocation of the remaining sewer
capacity presently available to the Town of Hudson under its
current agreement with the City of Nashua.
B. Method for allocation of remaining sewer capacity.
(1) In furtherance of the new policy of allocation, the Board of
Selectmen establishes the following standards to be implemented
for the allocation of municipal sewer capacity. Except as provided
in this subsection, the Board of Selectmen will not approve new
sewer allocations from the remaining sewer capacity for any use
located outside of the system boundary as described in Exhibit A;
provided, however, that the Selectmen may, in their sole discretion,
grant a request to deliver sewer outside the existing system
boundary described in Exhibit A for public facility uses, such as
schools and other governmental uses, for community facilities,
such as hospitals and public utilities, or for other residential,
commercial or industrial uses that in the opinion of the Board of
Selectmen are essential for the public health, safety and welfare of
the Town of Hudson.
(2) Residential uses: flow allocation.
(a) Allocation of sewer for residential uses will be done on a peracre
basis as described in the following allocation table for
residential uses.
(b) The allocation table herein will exclude lands that contain
slopes in excess of 25%, wetlands, noncontiguous dry land and
all lands dedicated to public or private rights-of-way.
(c) To determine the density for residential development, first
determine the total acreage of the development parcel,
subtract nonbuildable lands as described in Subsection B(2)(b)
above and then multiply the remaining acreage by the average
daily flow available for the parcel and then use the per-unit
flows for the type of unit desired to establish density.
§ 270-17 HUDSON CODE § 270-17
1:256
Flow Allocation Table for Residential Uses
Use
Per Unit Flow
ADF*
(gpd)**
Per Acre Maximum
Allowed Flow
(gpd)**
Single-family** 220 250
Duplex 200 300
Multifamily 125 500
Elderly housing 100 500
Town residence 200 600
Manufactured
housing
subdivision or
parks
120 200
NOTES:
* ADF average daily flow.
** GDP gallons per day
** Mobile homes will be treated for use purposes the same
as single-family if on a lot conforming to the density
requirements of the Hudson Zoning Ordinance.
(3) Retail and service/community facilities/industrial/agricultural uses.
(a) Allocation will be done on a per-acre basis.
(b) The allocation table herein will exclude lands that contain
slopes in excess of 25%, wetlands, noncontiguous dry land and
all lands dedicated to public or private rights-of-way.
(c) Available flow will be based on the actual estimated usage
developed from existing or similar uses; this flow will be
verified during the first year of occupancy.
(d) Retail service/community facilities/industrial/agricultural uses
will be allocated based upon the following table:
Flow Allocation Table for Retail and Service Community
Facilities/Industrial/Agricultural Uses
Use
Per Acre Maximum
Allowed Flow
(gpd)**
Community facilities 500
Agricultural uses 250
§ 270-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-17
1:257
Flow Allocation Table for Retail and Service Community
Facilities/Industrial/Agricultural Uses
Use
Per Acre Maximum
Allowed Flow
(gpd)**
Retail and service uses: eating
and drinking establishments,
hotel/motel and laundry facilities
2,000***
General retail and service uses 500
General industrial uses
(domestic wastewater only)
500
Industrial uses: process
manufacturers
2,000***
NOTES:
* ADF average daily flow.
** GPD gallons per day.
** This use allocation category will require detailed review
of water usage as part of the industrial discharge
agreement review process.
C. Exemptions to new allocation system.
(1) All land uses:
(a) Subdivisions or site plans for uses that were in conformity with
RSA 674:39 on August 17, 1999, will be exempt from the
allocation limitations embodied in this chapter. The subdivision
or site plan must have been approved by the Hudson Planning
Board and must have been recorded at the Hillsborough
County Registry of Deeds and must have commenced active
and substantial construction at the project site within one year
of the date of approval and must have completed substantial
improvements within four years of the date of approval and
recording at the Registry of Deeds; or still be within the fouryear
period of exemption pursuant to RSA 674:39 after
commencement of substantial improvements. In addition, the
subdivision or site plan must remain in full compliance with all
Planning Board terms and conditions of approval and not
require Planning Board approval for a substantially modified
subdivision or site plan; and
(b) The subdivision or site plan shall demonstrate compliance with
Hudson Town Code § 289-41 as of August 17, 1999,
Subdivision Regulations. The subdivision or site plan must still
be valid pursuant to HTC § 289-41 as of August 17, 1999, and,
the necessary steps pursuant to HTC § 289-41 must have been
§ 270-17 HUDSON CODE § 270-17
1:258
undertaken thereafter to have the plan recorded before the
one year expires. In addition, the subdivision or site plan must
remain in full compliance with all Planning Board terms and
conditions of approval and not require Planning Board
approval for a substantially modified subdivision or site plan.
(2) Industrial uses. Notwithstanding the foregoing Subsection C(1)(a)
and (b), industrial uses will be entitled to the following additional
exemption to the allocation policy. Existing industries that have
anticipated expansion and that have submitted industrial discharge
permit applications for such expansions of use and have submitted
a request for additional sewer allocation prior to December 31,
1999, will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis, by the Town
Engineer and Sewer Consultant, with a final decision on additional
allocation of sewer to be made by the Board of Selectmen.
(3) Periodic review. On an annual basis, the Town Sewer Consultant
and/or the Town Engineer shall determine whether or not
improvement in the inflow/infiltration problem has made available
additional sewer capacity. At such time, the Sewer Consultant and/
or the Town Engineer may make recommendations to the Board of
Selectmen to increase or modify the amount of sewer allocation to
be made available to residential and retail and service/community
facilities/industrial/agricultural uses as described in the charts
contained in Subsection B. In addition, the Town shall continue to
undertake efforts to negotiate for additional sewer capacity from
the City of Nashua.
D. Procedure for making new sewer allocations.
(1) All requests for new sewer allocations must submitted to the Town
Engineer. All requests will be reviewed by the Town Engineer and,
when necessary, by the Sewer Consultant. After review by the Town
Engineer, and Sewer Consultant where appropriate, the Hudson
Board of Selectmen will act upon allocation requests. Final action
on an allocation request can be:
(a) Denial (with reasons);
(b) Approval (with reduction of request);
(c) Flow approval (with stipulations); or
(d) Approval as applied for.
(2) Allocation expiration. All new sewer allocations issued by the Board
of Selectmen pursuant to this section will be void within 90 days
from issuance unless within that period of time a subdivision or site
plan application for the same use described in the sewer allocation
request has been accepted by the Planning Board as a completed
application pursuant to RSA 676:4. Furthermore, all new sewer
applications will expire for any approved subdivision or site plan if
§ 270-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-17
1:259
any subdivision or site plan becomes invalid pursuant to HTC
§ 289-41.
E. Existing buildable lots of record. Existing buildable lots of record as
provided under the Hudson Zoning Ordinance that are not in the Town
Residence Zone and which are less than one acre in size will be
allocated the following sewer flow allocations:
(1) Residential:
(a) Buildable land, less than one acre: 250 gpd.
(2) Commercial, industrial and other parcels:
(a) Buildable land, less than 1/2 acre: 500 gpd.
(b) Buildable land, less than one acre: 1,000 gpd.
F. Industrial discharge agreement review and repurchase. Each industrial
user that has an existing industrial discharge agreement will be subject
to an annual review of that industrial discharge agreement for the
purpose of identifying whether or not the industrial user is making use
of all allocated flow. The Town reserves the right to purchase unused
allocation so long as the Town makes the suitable payment back to the
industrial user of the previously paid capital assessment fee. The
decision by the Town to purchase sewer allocation provided under an
existing industrial discharge agreement must be based upon some
reasonable public health, safety and welfare judgment of the Town of
Hudson acting through the Town Engineer and the Sewer Consultant,
with all final decisions to be made by the Board of Selectmen.
G. Private improvements to sewer infiltration/inflow. Upon request by an
existing or new sewer user, the Board of Selectmen will consider
proposals for making capital improvements to part or all of the
wastewater treatment system to improve the inflow/infiltration
problems. Such proposals shall be in the form of detailed engineering
designs and drawings describing the construction of such
improvements. After review and consultation with the Sewer
Consultant and the Town Engineer, the Board of Selectmen may, in its
sole discretion, approve specific projects wholly funded and undertaken
by new or existing sewer users. Upon completion of those
improvements, the Board of Selectmen is authorized to allocate to the
project proponent such portion of any recovered sewer capacity as may
be mutually agreed to between the Board of Selectmen and the project
proponent, so long as the amount of recovered sewer capacity is
demonstrated to exist according to reasonable engineering principles
as confirmed by measurement by the Town Engineer or Sewer
Consultant.
§ 270-17 HUDSON CODE § 270-17
1:260
Chapter 274
WATER UTILITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water Utility Committee — See Ch. 142.
Fees — See Ch. 205, § 205-14.
Sewers — See Ch. 270.
Wastewater disposal — See Ch. 323.
Chapter 275
SITE PLAN REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Driveways — See Ch. 193.
Excavation of soil — See Ch. 200.
Administrative requirements and
definitions — See Ch. 276.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 289.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 290.
Zoning — See Ch. 334.
§ 270-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-17
1:261

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 275-1. Title; definitions.
The official title of this chapter is the "TOWN OF HUDSON PLANNING
BOARD SITE PLAN Review Regulation," hereinafter referenced as "this
chapter."
Words in all capital letters are those with special definitions as noted in
§ 276-2 of the LAND USE REGULATIONS.
§ 275-2. Authority.
This chapter is authorized and adopted pursuant but not limited to RSA
674:43 and 674:44.
§ 275-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for PLANNING BOARD review
and approval or disapproval of all SITE PLANS (and subsequent revisions
thereto) for all uses (or change of use) other than one- and two-family
residential, prior to the commencement of the use, the change of use or
the issuance of a building permit. This chapter is to assure that minimum
standards shall be attained, so as to provide for and protect the public
health, safety and general wellbeing.
§ 275-4. Approval required; jurisdiction.
No person, persons, partnership, proprietorship, company, trust or
corporation shall commence a new use, change a use or commence any site
DEVELOPMENT activity (other than one- or two-family residential activity)
without first securing SITE PLAN approval from the Hudson PLANNING
BOARD pursuant to this chapter. These regulations shall apply to the
DEVELOPMENT or change or expansion of use of tracts for nonresidential
uses or for multifamily dwelling units which are defined as any structures
containing more than two dwelling units, whether or not such
DEVELOPMENT includes a SUBDIVISION or RESUBDIVISION of the site.
For the purpose of these regulations, change of use occurs when the use of
any land or building is changed from one land use classification to another
or from one category to another category within a land use classification as
specified in the TOWN OF HUDSON Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 334 of the
Code of the Town of Hudson. (See § 334-6, the definition of "use, change
of.") No building permits shall be issued until SITE PLAN approval has been
obtained from the TOWN OF HUDSON PLANNING BOARD. No building
permits shall be issued until the approved SITE PLAN is recorded at the
Hillsborough County Registry of Deeds.
§ 275-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-5
1:263
§ 275-5. Effective date.
This chapter, and amendments thereto, shall become effective upon passage
(majority vote) by the PLANNING BOARD and upon filing in accordance
with RSA 675:6.
§ 275-6. General requirements.
In the review of any nonresidential SITE PLAN conducted under this
regulation, the PLANNING BOARD shall require that adequate provisions
be made by the OWNER or his/her/its authorized agent for the following:
A. The safe and attractive DEVELOPMENT of the site and to guard against
such conditions as would involve danger or injury to health or safety,
and no significant diminution in value of surrounding properties would
be suffered.
B. Traffic circulation and access, including adequacy of entrances and
exits, traffic flow, sight distances, curb cuts, turning lanes and traffic
signalization.
C. Pedestrian and bicycle safety and access.
D. Off-street parking and loading.
E. Emergency vehicle access, including fire lanes.
F. Stormwater drainage and groundwater recharge.
G. Water supply, wastewater disposal and solid waste disposal.
H. Elimination of undesirable and preventable elements of pollution, such
as noise, smoke, soot, particulates or any other discharge, into the
environment which might prove harmful to persons, structures or
adjacent properties.
I. Adequate provision for fire safety, prevention and control.
J. Harmonious and aesthetically pleasing DEVELOPMENT of the
municipality and its environs.
K. Suitably located travelways of sufficient width to accommodate existing
and prospective traffic and to afford adequate light, air and ACCESS for
fire-fighting apparatus and equipment to buildings, and be coordinated
so as to compose a convenient system.
L. Landscaping in keeping with the general character of the surrounding
area, showing trees, shrubbery and grass areas and other reasonable
landscape details.
M. Signage and exterior lighting.
N. Conformance with all existing codes.
O. (Reserved)
§ 275-5 HUDSON CODE § 275-6
1:264
P. Compliance with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.83
Q. The minimization of encroachment on neighboring land uses.
R. Green areas, open space, conservation easements, pedestrian
easements, slope easements and such other easements as may be
applicable.
S. The use of a shared DRIVEWAY for ACCESS to two or more proposed
SITE PLANS shall be allowed.
T. Installation of improvements.
(1) The PLANNING BOARD shall weigh the burden that proposed
DEVELOPMENT places on public facilities, infrastructure, sewers
and amenities and shall require the installation of public
improvements, both on-site and off-site, to compensate for this
burden. Improvements may include, but are not limited to:
(a) Granite curbing.
(b) Sidewalk and STREET trees.
(c) Improvements to existing roadways and drainage.
(d) Traffic control devices.
(e) Open space.
(f) Recreational space.
(g) Moneys granted in lieu of land for recreational space, which
shall be held by the Town in a nonlapsing fund for the future
purchase and DEVELOPMENT of recreational space/facilities
to serve this particular neighborhood/DEVELOPMENT.
(h) Improvements to nearby traffic corridors as warranted by the
Town's cost allocation procedure traffic study.
(2) All requested improvements, whether on-site or off, shall be
consistent with the standards enunciated by the New Hampshire
Supreme Court and this legislature.
U. The PLANNING BOARD shall require the APPLICANT to execute a
DEVELOPMENT agreement. This agreement shall detail the terms,
conditions and responsibilities of the APPLICANT and the Town in
conjunction with an approved plan.
V. Installation or placement of outside appurtenances: e.g., utility boxes,
storage containers trash receptacles and/or air-conditioning
equipment.
W. Exterior storage or display areas.
83.Editor's Note: See Ch. 334, Zoning.
§ 275-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-6
1:265
X. (Reserved)
§ 275-6 HUDSON CODE § 275-6
1:266
ARTICLE II
Application Procedures
§ 275-7. Forms and procedure required.
Form and procedure requirements shall be in accordance with § 276-3.
§ 275-8. Application submission.
All applications for SITE PLAN PERMITS shall comply with the provisions
of §§ 276-3 and 276-11 of the LAND USE REGULATIONS.
A. (Reserved)
B. (Reserved)
C. In addition to the general regulations, notations of, or showing
compliance with, the following shall be required of all SITE PLAN
APPLICATIONS:
(1) Parking Calculations and Requirements.
(2) Parking Calculations. The calculations for required off-street
spaces shall be computed in accord with the specifications listed
below. Any use not listed shall provide parking as required by the
PLANNING BOARD. The PLANNING BOARD may vary these
requirements if the APPLICANT can demonstrate that fewer spaces
than required below are consistent with the proposed use:
(a) Automotive fuel stations: one space for each fuel dispenser,
plus two spaces for each working bay, plus one space per
employee on the largest shift. Automotive fuel stations with
general retail shall provide, in addition to the foregoing
parking requirements, one parking space per 200 square feet
of gross leasable area established for the general retail use.
Automotive fuel stations with fast-food establishments shall
provide, in addition to the foregoing parking requirements, one
parking space per 100 square feet of gross leasable area
established for the fast-food use.
(b) Beauty parlors and barber shops: three spaces per operator.
(c) Eating and drinking establishments:
[1] Eating and drinking establishments (without a bar): one
space per 100 square feet of gross leasable area.
[2] Eating and drinking establishments (with a bar): one space
per 75 square feet of gross leasable area.
[3] Fast-food eating and drinking establishments (with and
without drive-through window service): one space per 100
square feet of gross leasable area.
§ 275-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-8
1:267
[4] All other eating and drinking establishments not indicated
above shall provide a minimum of one space per 100
square feet of gross leasable area.
[5] Eating and drinking establishments having drive-through
window service shall provide a minimum of 12 vehicle
stacking spaces or a number of stacking spaces
determined appropriate by the PLANNING BOARD for the
use served.
(d) Funeral homes: one for each 75 square feet of floor space in
slumber rooms, parlors and individual service rooms.
(e) Hospitals and nursing homes: one per five patients.
(f) Furniture sales showrooms: one per 100 square feet of
showroom area.
(g) Industrial: one for each 600 square feet of gross floor space or
0.75 space per employee of the combined employment of the
two largest successive shifts, whichever is larger.
(h) Laundromats: one space for each two washing machines.
(i) Medical office and/or clinics: one parking space per each 300
square feet of gross floor area in the building.
(j) Motel or hotel: one per guest sleeping room plus one per
employee of the largest shift.
(k) (Reserved)
(l) Private club or lodge: one per four members.
(m) Professional offices and business services: one for every 300
square feet of gross leasable area.
(n) Recreational areas: 3.5 parking spaces per tennis court and 20
spaces per ball field; other requirements as stipulated by the
PLANNING BOARD.
(o) Residential units: two per unit.
(p) Retail business and personal service establishments: one space
per 200 square feet of gross leasable areas.
(q) Stadium, theater or other place of public assembly: one space
per four seats.
(r) Wholesale establishments: one per employee plus one per
company (ungaraged) vehicle operating from the premises.
(s) Banks: one space per 250 square feet of gross leasable area
plus one space per employee plus a minimum of five stacking
spaces per drive-up window.
§ 275-8 HUDSON CODE § 275-8
1:268
(3) Statement of Parking Space Calculation: A note stating the number
of parking spaces provided is to be included on the plan.
(4) Parking space dimensions shall be 10 feet by 20 feet, except that
the PLANNING BOARD may vote to allow dimensions of nine feet
by 18 feet.
(5) Minimum aisle widths for various parking PLANS are as listed and
shown below. When any combination of PLANS is used facing the
same drive aisle, the greatest width requirements shall prevail:
(a) Ninety-degree (perpendicular) parking: 24 feet (either one-way
or two-way circulation).
(b) Sixty-degree (angle) parking: 18 feet (one-way circulation
only).
§ 275-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-8
1:269
(c) Forty-five-degree (angle) parking: 13 feet (one-way circulation
only).
(d) Thirty-degree (angle) parking: 11 feet (one-way circulation
only).
§ 275-8 HUDSON CODE § 275-8
1:270
(e) Zero-degree (parallel) parking: 12 feet (one-way circulation
only).
(6) Off-street loading spaces required for the acceptance or
distribution of materials or merchandise by vehicles shall be
provided as follows:
(a) Spaces required. Every nonresidential building or structure
having 5,000 square feet or less of gross floor area shall
provide at least one loading and/or unloading space. One
additional space shall be provided for every additional 10,000
feet of gross floor area.
(b) Dimensions. Each off-street loading space shall be at least 12
feet in width and at least 60 feet in length, exclusive of aisle
and maneuvering spaces, and shall have vertical clearance of
at least 14 feet. However, when it is demonstrated that a
particular loading space will be used by shorter trucks, the
minimum length may be reduced to 35 feet.
(c) Location. All required loading and/or unloading spaces shall be
located on the same LOT as the use served. No loading space
§ 275-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-8
1:271
for vehicles over 13,000 pounds (empty) shall be closer than
100 feet to any property in a residential zone, unless
completely enclosed by a fence, wall or screen.
(d) Required maneuvering area. Off-street loading space shall be
designed and constructed so that all maneuvering for loading
and/or unloading can take place entirely within the property
lines of the use. Off-street loading spaces shall not hinder the
free movement of pedestrians and vehicles over a sidewalk,
street, road, HIGHWAY or deeded rights-of-way.
(7) Landscaping requirements.
(a) A minimum of 10% of the interior of a parking LOT shall be set
aside for landscaping areas exclusive of paved pedestrian
surfaces.
(b) The landscaped area shall be calculated as 10% of the total
area and drive aisles.
(c) A minimum of one shade tree shall be planted per 1,600 square
feet of paved area, or one shade tree per every five parking
spaces, whichever is greater.
(d) One shrub per 200 square feet of paved area shall be planted
or 1.6 shrubs per every parking space.
(e) This section shall not apply to parking areas consisting of a
single access lane.
(8) Screening shall be provided for visual separation of incompatible
uses. Screening shall be required between parking or loading areas
and, if present, an abutting residential zone. Screening may also be
required between abutting nonresidential sites. Where screening is
required, it shall provide a reasonable effective visual buffer by:
(a) Use of existing vegetation and terrain where possible; or
(b) New plantings (type, size and spacing to be approved by the
PLANNING BOARD), grade separations, fences or similar
features.
(9) All parking spaces provided pursuant to this section shall be on the
same LOT as the use.
(10) Entrance design and construction shall conform with the
requirements of Chapter 193, DRIVEWAYS, except that SITE PLAN
approval shall constitute the issuance of a DRIVEWAY Permit.
(11) Handicap accessibility shall be provided in accordance with the
latest ADA Regulations. Appropriate handicap parking spaces and
other details associated with parking and pedestrian ACCESS must
be shown and detailed. The PLAN shall provide a note indicating
§ 275-8 HUDSON CODE § 275-8
1:272
§ 275-9. Final application acceptance.
Within 90 days of preliminary application acceptance (or any other date
mutually agreed upon by the PLANNING BOARD and APPLICANT), the
PLANNING BOARD shall grant final application acceptance, provided that
the following exhibits and information have been approved (or deemed
unnecessary) by the PLANNING BOARD:
that it complies to the best of the designer's knowledge with the
latest ADA requirements and shall include the latest revision date
for the ADA Regulations used.
A. A STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN* including and using the
following guidelines. NOTE: In preparing the STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT PLAN, please refer to and comply with the
requirements provided in Chapter 290, Stormwater Management and
Erosion Control, of these LAND USE REGULATIONS.
(1) No STORMWATER RUNOFF in excess of rates existing prior to new
construction shall be allowed to be discharged onto a public way or
into a drainage system unless there is sufficient capacity to handle
the additional runoff. All drainage shall be designed to achieve a
zero increase in runoff for both peak and volume where
practicable, except where the off-site drainage system has been
designed to accommodate the site drainage.
(2) The direction of runoff flow through the use of arrows.
(3) The location, elevation and size of all catch basins, dry wells,
drainage ditches, swales, retention basins and storm sewers. If
infiltration systems are proposed as part of a stormwater
management plan, test pit and percolation test data in the vicinity
of the proposed infiltration system(s) must be provided.
(4) Engineering calculations used to determine drainage requirements
shall be based upon minimum storm frequency design events as
follows:
(a) Ten-year storm event for closed drainage systems and local
roadside ditches.
(b) Twenty-five-year storm event for culverts, major ditches and
swales and detention ponds.
(c) Fifty-year storm event for bridges.
(5) Certification by a licensed professional engineer (see RSA 310-A).
(6) Any other specific study, calculation or investigation as requested
by the Town Engineer.
§ 275-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-9
1:273
[*NOTE: Generally speaking, the STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
PLAN is probably the single most important element of the entire
SITE PLAN. Yet, traditionally, it has been one of the most
neglected elements. The Hudson PLANNING BOARD recognizes
that only a professional engineer, licensed in accordance with
RSA 310-A, can certify the adequacy of proposed drainage plans.
APPLICANTs are expected to make the same recognition or to
discuss this matter with the PLANNING BOARD. The PLANNING
BOARD emphasizes that the criteria listed in § 275-9A(1) through
(6) are minimum requirements stated for these general
regulations. It is expected that the Town Engineer shall have
the latitude to more precisely define the criteria once a specific
proposal is before the PLANNING BOARD.]
B. If required by STAFF at the time of APPLICATION or at any time by the
BOARD, a traffic study.
C. If required by STAFF at the time of APPLICATION or at any time by the
BOARD, a noise study.
D. If required by STAFF at the time of APPLICATION or at any time by the
BOARD, a fiscal impact study accepted by the PLANNING BOARD.
E. A utility PLAN showing provisions for all existing and planned utilities,
on- or off-site, necessary for the DEVELOPMENT.
F. Copies of any proposed or existing easements, covenants, deed
restrictions or any other similar document pertinent to the SITE PLAN.
G. A copy of all applicable Town, state, county or federal approvals or
permits, such as but not limited to (as applicable):
(1) Chapter 270, Sewers.
(2) Floodplain permit.
(3) Special exception to the Wetlands Ordinance.84
(4) Septic system construction approval from the New Hampshire
Water Supply and Pollution Control Commission.
(5) Approval of the New Hampshire Wetland Bureau for the relocation,
filling, dredging or rechanneling of any natural or man-made
drainage area.
(6) Approval of the New Hampshire Department of Public Works and
Highways for any required DRIVEWAY PERMITS or curb cuts.
84.Editor's Note: For provisions relating to the Wetlands Conservation Districts, see Ch. 334,
Zoning, Art. III.
§ 275-9 HUDSON CODE § 275-9
1:274
§ 275-10. Escrow deposit.
An escrow deposit in accordance with § 276-12 may be required.
§ 275-11. Failure to submit final application; reapplication.
Unless otherwise acted upon, failure of the APPLICANT to submit the
final application (within the time frame identified in § 275-9) shall result
in an automatic vote to not accept the application for PLAN approval. The
PLANNING BOARD shall hereafter advise the APPLICANT of such action
in writing stating reason therefor. Any resubmitted application for PLAN
approval shall be subject to all SITE PLAN review regulations in force at the
time of the second or subsequent submission. Such resubmissions must first
receive preliminary application acceptance in accordance with § 275-8.
(7) New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated 149:8-a PERMIT
relative to the prevention of pollution from dredging, filling,
mining, transporting forest products or other constructions.85
H. (Reserved)
I. If required by the PLANNING BOARD, an environmental impact study
accepted by the BOARD.
85.Editor's Note: RSA 149, Water Pollution and Disposal of Wastes, was repealed in 1989. See
now RSA 485-A:17.
§ 275-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-11
1:275

ARTICLE III
Review and Approval
§ 275-12. Procedure; certification may be required.
The PLANNING BOARD shall begin formal consideration of the accepted
application (proposal), provided that:
A. No proposal may be denied or approved without a public hearing on the
application.
B. Formal consideration shall begin within 30 days after granting final
application acceptance.
C. The PLANNING BOARD shall vote to approve or deny the application
within 90 days of final application acceptance, except that:
(1) The PLANNING BOARD may apply to the Board of Selectmen for
an extension, not to exceed an additional 90 days, before acting to
approve or deny an application pursuant to RSA 676:4, I(e)(2).
(2) The PLANNING BOARD and the APPLICANT may mutually agree
to an extension to any specific date, thereby establishing a deadline
date other than that established by statute.
D. Any PLANNING BOARD vote to deny any application shall be in writing,
stating the reason(s) for the denial.
E. As part of the approval of any application, the PLANNING BOARD may
vote to require the posting of a bond or escrow agreement in such
amount and in such form as may be determined and approved by the
PLANNING BOARD as being reasonably necessary to ensure adherence
to and completion of all improvements required as conditions of
approval of such plan. Costs associated with the legal review of such
bond or escrow agreement shall be borne by the APPLICANT. The
PLANNING BOARD may stipulate, as a condition precedent to the
approval of the plat, the extent to which and the manner in which
streets shall be graded and improved and to which water, sewer and
other utility mains, piping, connections or other facilities shall be
installed. These regulations provide:
(1) For the conditional approval of the PLAT before such improvements
and installations have been constructed, but any approval shall not
be entered upon that plat; and
(2) That, in lieu of the completion of STREET work and utility
installations prior to the final approval of a plat, the PLANNING
BOARD may accept a bond or other security in an amount and with
surety and conditions satisfactory to it providing for and securing
to the municipality the actual construction and installation of such
improvements and utilities within a period specified by the
PLANNING BOARD and expressed in the bond or other security;
§ 275-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-12
1:277
§ 275-13. Effective and expiration dates of PLAN approval.
and, further, that the TOWN OF HUDSON is granted the power to
enforce such bonds or other securities by all appropriate legal and
equitable remedies.
F. Application requirements.
(1) Prior to recording a SITE PLAN at the Hillsborough County
Registry of Deeds, a copy of the PLAN shall be provided in
electronic form acceptable to the Town.
(a) The electronic drawing shall incorporate the following
information and layer configuration shall meet the
requirements of § 276-11.
A. A SITE PLAN is approved and becomes effective upon the final
PLANNING BOARD vote of approval. The approved SITE PLAN is valid
for two years from the date of PLANNING BOARD meeting final
approval, provided that: [Amended 8-14-2019]
(1) Active and substantial DEVELOPMENT or construction shall have
commenced on the site by the owner, in accordance with the
approved plan, within said two-year period.
(2) If no active and substantial DEVELOPMENT or construction occurs
as specified in Hudson Town Code § 275-13A(1) above, the SITE
PLAN approval becomes null and void and expires after two years
from the date of PLANNING BOARD meeting final approval.
B. A SITE PLAN submitted for approval or reapproval after having expired
as specified in Hudson Town Code § 275-13A(2) above shall be subject
to SITE PLAN regulations and zoning ordinances in effect at the time of
any subsequent submission.
§ 275-12 HUDSON CODE § 275-13
1:278
ARTICLE IV
Fees and Waivers
§ 275-14. Fees.
Fees associated with review of a SITE PLAN application or SITE PLAN, not
mentioned in foregoing sections of this chapter, are identified in § 276-6.
§ 275-15. Waivers.
Waivers may be granted as specified in § 276-7.
§ 275-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-15
1:279

ARTICLE V
Incomplete and Inactive SUBDIVISION or SITE PLAN Application
PLAN Sets
§ 275-16. Return of plan sets; refund.
All refunds and returns of PLANS shall be specified in § 276-8.
§ 275-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-16
1:281

ARTICLE VI
(Reserved)
§ 275-17. (Reserved)
§ 275-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-17
1:283

ARTICLE VII
Performance Sureties
§ 275-18. Requirements.
The requirements for sureties shall be in accordance with § 276-4.
§ 275-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-18
1:285

ARTICLE VIII
Period of Validity of Approved PLANS
§ 275-19. PLANS approved by PLANNING BOARD but not signed
and recorded at Hillsborough County Registry of Deeds.
PLANS approved by the PLANNING BOARD but not signed and recorded at
the Hillsborough County Registry of Deeds are valid as specified in § 276-9.
§ 275-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-19
1:287

ARTICLE IX
Utilities
§ 275-20. Installation requirements.
Installation of all utilities shall comply with § 276-13.
§ 275-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-20
1:289

ARTICLE X
Application Completeness
§ 275-21. Determination of application completion.
All applications shall be reviewed for completion pursuant to § 276-14.
§ 275-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-21
1:291

ARTICLE XI
Special Site Review Committee
§ 275-22. Establishment of committee.
In accordance with RSA 674:43, III, and a vote by means of Article 43 at
the 1999 TOWN OF HUDSON Annual Town Meeting, a Special Site Review
Committee is hereby established to review and act upon minor SITE PLANS
as defined in § 275-27.
§ 275-23. Membership.
The Special Site Review Committee shall consist of the TOWN PLANNER or
his or her authorized representative (authorized representatives to include
and to be limited to the Community Development Director and/or the
Building Inspector), one member of the PLANNING BOARD (appointed by
the Chairman of the PLANNING BOARD), and one member from the Board
of Selectmen (appointed by the Chairman of the Board of Selectmen). The
TOWN PLANNER shall serve as the Chairman of the Committee.
§ 275-24. Committee actions.
Submission of minor SITE PLAN applications shall comply with the
requirements listed in the SITE PLAN regulations and shall be in
accordance with the provisions set forth in RSA 674:43, III. Upon receipt of
a minor SITE PLAN application, the Committee shall notify the APPLICANT
and ABUTTERs (at the APPLICANT's expense) at least 10 days prior to the
date on which the Committee shall review the application. Notification shall
indicate that the PLAN shall be available for inspection in the Community
Development Department prior to the date on which the Committee shall
review the plan. No formal public hearing shall be held; however, any
ABUTTER may be heard on an application upon request. All provisions
of RSA 676:4 shall apply to actions by the Special SITE PLAN Review
Committee; provided that PLAN acceptance and public hearing shall occur
at the same meeting. Where necessary for proper evaluation of a minor
SITE PLAN, the Committee may require, at the APPLICANT's expense, that
the PLAN be reviewed for technical input by Town STAFF or consultants.
A. The Committee shall act to approve or disapprove within 45 days after
submission of a completed application unless the time for action shall
be extended, or waived by the APPLICANT, in accordance with RSA
676:4, I(f). On an as-needed basis, the Committee shall conduct one
meeting every month to review minor SITE PLAN applications, and this
meeting shall be scheduled on the Monday preceding the monthly
PLANNING BOARD workshop.
B. A decision of the Committee may be appealed to the full PLANNING
BOARD, so long as a notice of appeal is filed within 20 days of the
Committee's decision. Any one member of the Committee can require
that the application be sent to the PLANNING BOARD for SITE PLAN or
conceptual SITE PLAN review. Whereupon, after STAFF determines the
§ 275-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-24
1:293
§ 275-25. Minimum requirements.
In order to meet the minimum requirements for a minor SITE PLAN review,
the APPLICANT must have a valid, signed SITE PLAN. In addition, the
site must not have any code violation(s) within the previous 24 months.
The exception is if the minor SITE PLAN application seeks to correct
any outstanding violation(s) or any outstanding SITE PLAN compliance/
requirement issues.
§ 275-26. Certification.
Upon approval of a SITE PLAN by the Special Site Review Committee,
certification shall be executed when the application is filed in the
Community Development Department:
§ 275-27. Minor SITE PLANs.
Minor SITE PLANS shall include the following types of DEVELOPMENT:
SITE PLAN application is complete, a public hearing shall be scheduled
on the earliest available regular PLANNING BOARD meeting.
C. The PLANNING BOARD shall be notified of the Committee's decision at
the next scheduled PLANNING BOARD meeting after the decision is
rendered. A copy of the minor SITE PLAN shall be included as part of
the notification.
A. Five copies (24 inches by 36 inches), black- or blue-line, of the final
SITE PLAN for signing by the Chairman of the Special Site Review
Committee or his/her designee.
B. Where required, a performance bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or
escrow account in a form satisfactory to the Town Attorney and in an
amount established by the Committee.
C. All formal legal instruments where required in these regulations, such
as deeds, easements and irrevocable offers of dedication to the public of
all streets, utilities and parks, in a form approved by the Town Attorney.
A. Parking area additions of six spaces or less and which comply with all
zoning requirements and SITE PLAN regulations.
B. Building additions of no greater than 20% of the existing structure or
1,000 square feet, whichever is less, and which comply with all zoning
requirements and SITE PLAN regulations.
C. Outdoor seasonal sales at site-plan-approved business locations shall be
allowed twice annually for not more than three days each.
D. Outdoor display of merchandise shall be allowed as long as designated
parking spaces are not used for merchandise and vehicular/pedestrian
traffic is not impeded.
§ 275-24 HUDSON CODE § 275-27
1:294
§ 275-28. Nonqualified minor SITE PLANs.
Unless a SITE PLAN is specifically provided for in § 275-27, it shall not be
considered a minor SITE PLAN.
§ 275-29. Review of minor SITE PLANS by BOARD.
At the request of the APPLICANT, minor SITE PLAN applications may
be reviewed by the full BOARD, using the criteria specified in §§ 275-24
through 275-28.
E. Any other proposed building or site change which the Special Site
Review Committee reasonably determines is consistent with the intent
of this section.
Note: All stipulations/conditions included on the original approved
SITE PLAN shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 275-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-29
1:295
Chapter 276
ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS AND DEFINITIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Driveways — See Ch. 193.
Excavation of soil — See Ch. 200.
Site plan review — See Ch. 275.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 289.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 290.
Zoning — See Ch. 334.
§ 276-1. Title.
The official title of this chapter is the "Town of Hudson, NH, Land Use
General and Administrative Requirements and Definitions," hereinafter
references as "this chapter."
Words in all capital letters are those with special definitions as noted in
§ 276-2 of the LAND USE REGULATIONS.
§ 276-2. Definitions.
As used in Chapters 193 (DRIVEWAYS), 200 (EXCAVATION of Soil), 275
(SITE PLAN Review), 276 (Administrative Requirements and Definitions),
289 (SUBDIVISION of Land) and 290 (Stormwater Management) of the
Hudson, NH, Town Code, generally referenced as the "Town of Hudson,
NH, Land Use Regulations," the following words or phrases are selected to
clarify their common usage in the interpretation in those chapters.
Capitalized words in the LAND USE REGULATIONS indicate words defined
in this section.
The following definitions of words or phrases shall take precedence over
common dictionary definitions:
AASHTO — The American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials.
ABUTTER — The OWNER of record of a parcel of land which is contiguous,
at any point, to the parcel being subdivided and/or which has frontage on a
common road at any point within that portion defined by the perpendicular
extensions across the road, from the points of intersection between the
edge of the road RIGHT-OF-WAY and the property lines of the parcel being
subdivided, or any person or persons holding legal title of land within 120
feet of the exterior boundaries of a given LOT, except that for EXCAVATION
permits the distance is 200 feet of the exterior boundaries of a given LOT.
ACCESS — Permission or the right to enter, get near, or make use of a
parcel of land, or the physical land over which that permission or right
exists.
§ 275-29 HUDSON CODE § 276-2
1:296
ALL-SEASON SAFE SIGHT DISTANCE — A line which encounters no visual
obstruction between two points, measured from the driver's eye height
at 3.5 feet to the top of an approaching vehicle at 4.35 feet above the
pavement or travelway and so located as to represent the critical line of
sight between the operator of a vehicle using the ACCESS and the operator
of a vehicle approaching from either direction.
APPLICANT — The person, persons, corporation or other legal entity, or
their assigns, applying for a SITE PLAN, SUBDIVISION, EXCAVATION,
DRIVEWAY and/or STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERMIT
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE — A proven or accepted structural,
nonstructural, or vegetative measure, the application of which reduces
erosion, sediment, or peak storm discharge, or improves the quality of
stormwater runoff.
BITUMINOUS CONCRETE — The surface material commonly known as
blacktop, asphalt, macadam or tarmac, composed of evenly sized gravel in
a bituminous binder.
BMP — Best management practice.
BOARD or PLANNING BOARD — Unless otherwise specified, BOARD or
PLANNING BOARD means the Town of Hudson, NH, PLANNING BOARD as
appointed by the Town Selectmen.
CIVIL ENGINEER — The person presently serving in capacity of CIVIL
ENGINEER for the Town of Hudson, either in a permanent or temporary
capacity, acting under the guidance of the Town Engineer.
CERTIFIED SOIL SCIENTIST — A person qualified in soil classification and
mapping who is certified by the State of New Hampshire Board of Natural
Scientists.
CRITICAL AREAS — Disturbed areas of any size within 50 feet of a stream,
bog, water body, or poorly or very poorly drained soils; disturbed areas
exceeding 2,000 square feet in HIGHLY ERODIBLE SOILS; or disturbed
areas containing slope lengths exceeding 25 feet on slopes greater than
10%.
DEVELOPMENT — Any construction or land disturbance or grading
activities other than for agricultural and silvicultural practices.
DIG SAFE® — A not-for-profit clearinghouse that notifies participating
utility companies of your plans to dig. In turn, these utilities (or their
contract locating companies) respond to mark out the location of their
underground facilities. Dig Safe is a free service, funded entirely by its
member utility companies.
DISTURBED AREA — An area where the natural vegetation has been
removed exposing the underlying soil, or vegetation has been covered.
DRIVEWAY — Any improved or unimproved area serving as an area of
access, entrance, exit or approach from any HIGHWAY to any parcel of land,
regardless of public or private ownership.
§ 276-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 276-2
1:297
EARTH — "Soil" (Note: See below.) and bedrock.
ENGINEER or SURVEYOR — The designated, licensed and legally
recognized engineer or surveyor of the SUBDIVIDER as may be pertinent
to the actual services to be performed in accordance with the provisions of
RSA 310-A:1 through 310-A:27, as amended.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA — The federal agency
responsible for implementing the Clean Water Act, including the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) program.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice, or gravity.
ENGINEERING REVIEW — Review, comments, recommendations and other
work performed by an outside licensed engineering firm engaged by the
Town to perform such work.
EXCAVATION — The disturbance of SOIL or bedrock.
HIGHWAY — Any travelway, dedicated to or accepted by the Town, whether
improved or unimproved, within the TOWN OF HUDSON that is available as
public use for travel, regardless of whether or not its popular or legal name
contains the term "street," "highway," "road," "roadway," "route," "avenue,"
"boulevard" or other such nomenclature, which shall include any Class VI
roads within Hudson.
HIGHLY ERODIBLE SOILS — Any soil with an erodibility class (K factor)
greater than or equal to 0.43 in any layer as found in Table 3-1 of the
Stormwater Management and Erosion and SEDIMENT Control Handbook
for Urban and Developing Areas in New Hampshire.
LAND USE REGULATIONS — The Town of Hudson, NH, Land Use
Regulations, consisting of Chapters 193, 200, 275, 276 and 290 of the
Hudson Town Code.
LOAM — Defined in Paragraph 2.1 of Section 641 of the Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction of the State of New
Hampshire, Department of Public Works and Highways, 1974, et seq.
LOT — A single contiguous parcel of land.
MONUMENTATION — The installation of permanent markers that define
corners, boundaries, and rights-of-way when surveying land.
NHDOT — The New Hampshire Department of Transportation.
NHDES — The New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services.
CONFORMING — A parcel of land capable of being occupied by one
principal structure or use and its accessory structures or uses and as
shown and identified as such on a plat as defined in the Town Code.
A.
NONCONFORMING — A parcel of land not capable of being occupied
by one principal structure or use and its accessory structures or uses
and as shown and identified as such on a plat as defined in the Town
Code.
B.
§ 276-2 HUDSON CODE § 276-2
1:298
NOI — A notice of intent to apply for coverage under the EPA's General
PERMIT for Stormwater Discharges from Construction Activities.
NOT — A notice of termination to end such coverage. (See § 290-6H.)
NPDES — The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, an EPA
Clean Water Act PERMIT program.
OWNER — The person, persons, partnership, proprietorship, company,
trust, corporation or other legal entity who or which owns the rights to sell,
develop, subdivide, excavate or perform any other action subordinate to the
provisions of the Town of Hudson, NH, Land Use Regulations.
PIT AGREEMENT — The document identified in Section 106 of the Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction of the State of New
Hampshire, Department of Public Works and Highways, 1974, et seq.
PERMIT — A written permission given for a particular activity, such as
DRIVEWAY installation or modification, EXCAVATION or stormwater
management.
PERMIT/PLAN PROCESS — The PERMIT Process for SUBDIVISION and
SITE PLANS and Permits is generally composed of the following steps:
Permit application:
(1) Payment of fees.
(2) Requests for waivers.
(3) Submission of PLAN sets or drawings, as required.
(4) Submission of other documentation, as required.
A.
B. STAFF and legal review.
C. Public notice and notification of ABUTTERS, if required.
D. Scheduling of BOARD public hearing date.
Public hearing:
(1) Application acceptance or rejection.*
(2) APPLICANT presentation.
(3) Public input.
PLANNING BOARD discussion and action:
(a) Vote to approve or disapprove waivers, if required.
(b) Vote to approve or disapprove PLAN or PERMIT.
Continuation date set if the matter is deemed not ready for a
vote.
(c)
(4)
E.
F. Posting of sureties, if required.
§ 276-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 276-2
1:299
PLAN — A document, drawing or set of documents and/or drawings
required for a SITE PLAN, SUBDIVISION PLAN or other PERMIT approval
required by the LAND USE REGULATIONS.
PLAT — The map, drawing or chart on which the final PLAN of
SUBDIVISION is presented to the PLANNING BOARD, and which, if
approved, shall be filed or recorded with the Hillsborough County Register
of Deeds.
PRELIMINARY PLAN — The preliminary drawings indicating the proposed
layout of the SUBDIVISION to be submitted to the BOARD for its
consideration.
PROJECT AREA — The area within the SUBDIVISION or SITE PLAN
boundaries plus any areas with associated off-site improvements.
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR — The person presently serving in the capacity
of PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR for the Town of Hudson, either in a
permanent or temporary capacity.[Amended 10-9-2018]
RESERVE STRIP — Includes areas for which future public use is intended
for STREET connections and for STREET or pedestrianways giving ACCESS
to land dedicated for public use.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The area of land owned, used by or available to the Town
for HIGHWAY purposes, including any ancillary purposes thereto.
RSA — The NH Revised Statutes, Annotated.
SAFE STOPPING DISTANCE — The recommended distance for safe
stopping for the grade, average speed and other conditions as published by
AASHTO. The distance shall be measured on the surface of the roadway as
opposed to a visual line-of-sight distance.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, either mineral or organic, that is in
suspension, is transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by
erosion.
Appeals of rejected PLANS or permits may be made as allowed for
in applicable RSAs, which differ for the various types of PLANS and
permits.
* The BOARD shall provide information regarding reasons the
application was rejected, if that is the case.
G.
SITE PLAN — The DEVELOPMENT or change or expansion of use of
tracts for nonresidential uses or for multifamily dwelling units which
are defined as any structures containing more than two dwelling units,
whether or not such DEVELOPMENT includes a SUBDIVISION or
RESUBDIVISION of the site.
A.
SUBDIVISION PLAN — The division of an existing lot into two or
more new lots, or the combination of two or more lots and subsequent
redivision of those lots into new lots.
B.
§ 276-2 HUDSON CODE § 276-2
1:300
SOIL — "Overburden," as described in Basic Soils Engineering, by B.K.
Hough, Second Edition, 1969, a copy of which is on file in the office of the
Town Engineer.
STABILIZED — When the soil erosion rate approaches that of undisturbed
soils. Soils which are disturbed shall be considered protected when covered
with a healthy, mature growth of grass, or a good covering of straw mulch
or other equivalent (seedless) mulch (two tons/acre). Mulch is only a
temporary measure; ultimately, the site needs vegetation.
STAFF — The person holding the title of TOWN PLANNER for the Town of
Hudson, NH, and, under his or her supervision, any Town administrative,
clerical and legal personnel who are engaged by or are employees of the
Town.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION CONTROL PLAN (SWMP)
— A plan which outlines project features, proposed temporary and
permanent erosion control features, maintenance schedules and practices,
and the design basis used to establish temporary and permanent
stormwater design features.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) — A plan
required by the EPA that clearly describes appropriate pollution control
measures that include a description of all pollution control measures (i.e.,
BMPs) that will be implemented as part of the construction activity to
control pollutants in stormwater discharges and describes the interim and
permanent stabilization practices for the site.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — The water from precipitation that is not
absorbed, evaporated, or otherwise stored within the contributing drainage
area.
STREAM — Areas of flowing water occurring for sufficient time to develop
and maintain defined channels but which may not flow during dry portions
of the year; includes but is not limited to all perennial and intermittent
streams located on U.S. Geological Survey Maps.
STREET — Includes streets, avenues, drives, boulevards, roads, lanes,
alleys, HIGHWAYs, land viaducts and any other public way, exclusive of
DRIVEWAYS, serving not more than two contiguous LOTs. These streets
have been divided into two categories, as defined below:
MAJOR STREETS — Streets designed, or required, to carry large
volumes of traffic to, from, or through the Town. Arterial and collector
streets as listed in the Zoning Ordinance86 are considered to be major
streets.
COLLECTOR STREETS — Streets designed, or required, to collect
traffic from minor streets and distributing traffic to major streets.
(1)
A.
86.Editor's Note: See Ch. 334, Zoning.
§ 276-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 276-2
1:301
SUBDIVIDER — The registered OWNER or authorized agent of the
registered OWNER of a SUBDIVISION.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more
LOTs for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, rent, lease
or building development, or requiring the extension of municipal utilities,
or the creation of one or more new streets, or the extension of existing
streets; provided, however, that DEVELOPMENT for agricultural purposes
is expressly excluded. When appropriate to the context of this chapter, the
term "SUBDIVISION" shall relate either to the process of subdividing or to
the land or area subdivided.
SWPPP — Stormwater pollution prevention plan (see § 290-5).
TOWN ENGINEER — The professional engineer who holds the position
of Town Engineer for the Town of Hudson, or his or her designated
representative, either in a permanent or temporary capacity.
TOWN OF HUDSON, HUDSON or TOWN — The Town of Hudson, NH.
TOWN PLANNER — The person occupying the position of the Town of
Hudson, NH, Town Planner.
URBANIZED AREA (UA) — An area as defined by the EPA serving a
population of 10,000 or greater and a population density of 1,000 people
per square mile.
WAIVER — A permission granted by the BOARD to exempt an APPLICANT
from a specific requirement of the LAND USE REGULATIONS per § 276-7 of
the REGULATIONS. WAIVERS must be requested and approved. (WAIVERS
are different from variances. Variances apply to the Zoning Regulations,87
not the LAND USE REGULATIONS.)
YEAR or CALENDAR YEAR — Unless otherwise specified in these
REGULATIONS, each subsequent three-hundred-sixty-five-day period
following the approval of a PLAN or granting of a PERMIT.
COMMERCIAL STREETS — Streets designed, or required, to serve
industrial or mercantile concentrations and carry traffic to major
streets.
(2)
RESIDENTIAL STREETS — Streets designed, or required, to provide
vehicular ACCESS to abutting residential properties.
SERVICE STREETS — Streets designed, or required, to provide
vehicular ACCESS to abutting commercial or industrial properties.
(1)
ACCESS STREETS — Streets or minor ways designed, or required,
to provide vehicular ACCESS to off-street loading or off-street
parking facilities.
(2)
B.
87.Editor's Note: See Ch. 334, Zoning.
§ 276-2 HUDSON CODE § 276-3
1:302
§ 276-3. Application for Permit.
At least 21 calendar days prior to the date of the PLANNING BOARD
meeting at which the APPLICANT desires review of his/her/its application,
the APPLICANT shall file a properly completed application for SITE PLAN
approval (see Appendix No. 188) at the office of the TOWN PLANNER
during normal working hours. Upon planning STAFF determination that the
application is complete, the PLAN can be accepted for review by STAFF and
the PLANNING BOARD. The application PLAN set shall include the items in
§ 276-11 and the following items:
§ 276-4. Performance Sureties.
A. Application for all PLANS and Permits shall be made on forms provided
by the PLANNING BOARD at the Community Development Department
offices at Town Hall. Said form can also be obtained/downloaded online,
via the Town's Community Development Department website:
www.hudsonnh.gov/. In addition to submitting a written DRIVEWAY
application form to the PLANNING BOARD, electronic filing, in pdf
format, is required.
B. Any OWNER shall apply to the PLANNING BOARD prior to
EXCAVATION of his/her/its land and send a copy of the application to
the Conservation Commission. Said form can also be obtained/
downloaded online, via the Town's Community Development
Department website: www.hudsonnh.gov/. In addition to submitting a
written DRIVEWAY application form to the PLANNING BOARD,
electronic filing, in pdf format, is required.
C. In addition thereto, estimated fees as specified in § 276-6 of this
chapter are to be deposited with the Town prior to initiation of any
administration or review of the project by the PLANNING BOARD or
any of its representatives.
D. The PLANNING BOARD shall determine if any additional studies are
necessary (i.e., roadway, drainage, traffic or sanitary sewer).
A. Need statement. Certain SITE PLAN, SUBDIVISION, EXCAVATION,
DRIVEWAY and stormwater management projects, because of size,
scope, site and seasonal weather conditions, shall need to post a
performance surety. The APPLICANT shall file a performance surety to
guarantee completion of the project.
B. Surety types. The performance surety shall be either:
(1) In the form of the "Hampton Method Letter of Credit" (copy on file
in the Town Planner's office); or
(2) A cash bond on deposit with the Town in an interest-bearing
account.
88.Editor's Note: Appendix No. 1 is available and on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 276-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 276-4
1:303
§ 276-5. Hearings on Applications.
Prior to the PLANNING BOARD's approval of an application for a PERMIT
or an application for an amended permit, a public hearing shall be held
within 30 days on such application. A certified notice of said hearing shall
be sent to all ABUTTERs within 150 feet (200 feet for EXCAVATION permits)
of the parcel on which the activity for which the PERMIT requested is
proposed to occur; said notice shall specify the grounds for the hearing as
well as the date, time and place, and at least 14 days' notice of the time and
place of such hearing shall be published in a paper of general circulation.
A legal notice of the hearing shall also be posted in at least three public
places within the Town (Note: The 14 days shall not include the day of
publication nor the day of the hearing, but shall include any Saturdays,
Sundays or legal holidays within said period.) Within 20 days of said hearing
C. Such performance surety shall guarantee all improvements as proposed
by the APPLICANT and approved by the PLANNING BOARD.
D. SUBDIVISION performance sureties shall guarantee completion of
streets, curbing, sidewalks, utilities and other site-specific items as
determined by the PLANNING BOARD.
E. SITE PLAN performance sureties shall guarantee plan implementation
for any PLAN elements not completed at time of certificate of
occupancy application.
F. EXCAVATION, DRIVEWAY and stormwater management performance
sureties shall guarantee the completion of any PLAN elements not
completed by the date specified by the PLANNING BOARD in the plan.
The performance surety shall have a time period as specified by the
PLANNING BOARD.
G. Surety reductions or terminations. The subdivider/site developer shall
not be released from the terms of the performance surety until all
terms/conditions are met. Reductions based on partial completion or
other consideration may be considered by the PLANNING BOARD.
Surety reductions or terminations must be approved by the PLANNING
BOARD.
H. Maintenance level sureties for SUBDIVISIONs. Maintenance level
sureties shall be required for all SUBDIVISIONs where roadways are
constructed. The maintenance level surety shall have a time frame of
not less than two years following the final asphalt coat.
I. Before the final PLAT shall have been approved or disapproved, the
PLANNING BOARD may hold a public hearing on the PLAN where no
specific buildings are to be erected; otherwise, the PLANNING BOARD
shall hold a public hearing on the plan. Notice thereof shall be sent to
the subdivider, by registered mail, with return receipt requested,
stating the time and place of such hearing, but not less than five days
before the date fixed therefor.
§ 276-4 HUDSON CODE § 276-5
1:304
or any continuation thereof, the PLANNING BOARD shall render a decision
approving or disapproving the application, giving reasons for disapproval.
§ 276-6. Fees.
The following application and other fees are required for activities subject
to the Town of Hudson, NH, LAND USE REGULATIONS:
A. Table 1, Table 2 and Table 3 of this section shall list the required
categories of fees and their applicable payment due periods. The
current schedule of fees shall be maintained by the Hudson Town Clerk
and shall be posted by the Hudson Town Clerk (increased, decreased, or
eliminated) to reflect future changes to those schedules as directed by
the TOWN OF HUDSON Board of Selectmen without further action
required by the PLANNING BOARD, and a copy of that posting shall be
provided to APPLICANTS with their APPLICATION forms.
B. All fees are the responsibility of the APPLICANT.
C. SITE PLAN Application Fees and Due Dates are specified in Table 1 of
this chapter (insert the schedule from the Town Clerk's Office in Table
1).
D. EXCAVATION PERMIT Fees and Due Dates are specified in Table 2 of
this chapter.
E. The DRIVEWAY PERMIT Application Fee is specified in Table 3.
F. The fees for SUBDIVISIONS are contained in the SUBDIVISION
PERMIT APPLICATION.
Table 1
SITE PLAN and SUBDIVISION Application Fees
Payment
Description Amount Payment Due
Postage cost for
notification
Posted by Town Clerk Upon application
2-column by 4-inch
newspaper ad
Posted by Town Clerk Upon application
APPLICATION Fee(s) Posted by Town Clerk Upon application
Legal review $75* Upon award of
approval
* NOTES: Estimated fee subject to change depending on complexity
of legal review required; payable directly to counsel.
§ 276-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 276-6
1:305
§ 276-7. Waivers.
Table 2
EXCAVATION PERMIT Fees and Due Dates
Payment
Description Amount Payment Due
Postage cost for
notification
Posted by Town Clerk Upon application
2-column by 4-inch
newspaper ad
Posted by Town Clerk Upon application
EXCAVATION PERMIT
fee
Posted by Town Clerk Upon award of
application approval
EXCAVATION PERMIT
fee
Posted by Town Clerk Upon award of
amended application
approval
Legal review $75* Upon award of
approval
* NOTES: Estimated fee subject to change depending on complexity
of legal review required; payable directly to counsel.
Table 3
DRIVEWAY PERMIT Fee
The DRIVEWAY PERMIT APPLICATION fee is as posted by the Town
Clerk, and is payable at the time of the application.
ADD EFFECTIVE DATE
There shall be a separate fee listed for DRIVEWAY PERMITS issued
where permanent DRIVEWAY construction has begun prior to issuance
of a permit. This shall not apply to temporary driveways established
for lot grading, roadway construction, wetland mitigation and other
activities related to pre-construction subdivision and lot preparation.
A. Any or all requirements of this the Town of Hudson, NH, LAND USE
REGULATIONS may be waived at the sole discretion of the PLANNING
BOARD when it determines that:
(1) Said requirements are unnecessary for an application;
(2) Granting of the waiver shall not violate the purposes or general
standards of those regulations; and
(3) Granting of the waiver shall result in a general benefit to the Town
or surrounding properties, such as protection of natural features,
increased separation of incompatible uses or the accommodation of
future HIGHWAY projects.
§ 276-6 HUDSON CODE § 276-7
1:306
§ 276-8. Refunds and Plan/Application Return.
§ 276-9. Plan and Permit Validity.
B. Waiver requests shall be submitted on a form available from the
PLANNING BOARD. Waivers may be granted only by majority vote of
the PLANNING BOARD.
C. All waivers granted must be documented as a note on the SITE PLAN or
applicable permit.
D. Any waiver granted is for the specific SITE PLAN proposal or PERMIT
itself, based on the merits of the circumstances stated in support of the
waiver request. The PLANNING BOARD may consider any waiver
granted as being expired upon submission of a revised SITE PLAN or
revised PERMIT application.
A. SUBDIVISION or SITE PLAN application PLAN sets and PERMIT
applications submitted to the PLANNING BOARD but not acted on in
any fashion for a period of one year from submittal shall be returned to
the APPLICANT, provided that:
(1) The PLAN submittal or PERMIT application is incomplete and not
ready for application acceptance; and
(2) The developer/APPLICANT has not made progress at completing
application PLAN set or PERMIT application elements toward
PLANNING BOARD application acceptance readiness.
B. Any unused fees are to be returned to the APPLICANT.
C. Resubmittals must be complete and ready for application acceptance.
A. SUBDIVISION and SITE PLANS shall expire two years from the date of
PLANNING BOARD meeting final approval or as specified on the permit
if substantial development has not occurred unless the permit is
extended by majority vote of the BOARD. For an APPLICANT to gain an
exemption from all subsequent changes in the SUBDIVISION
regulations, SITE PLAN regulations and changes to the Zoning
Ordinance,89 see NH RSA 674:39. [Amended 8-14-2019]
(1) The subsection above should be placed as a note on the PLAN
within the PLANNING BOARD approval block. See Hudson Town
Code § 276-11.1B(4), as amended, and § 289-27A, as amended.
(2) The subsection above should be placed as a note on the PLAN
within the PLANNING BOARD approval block. See Hudson Town
Code § 276-11.1B(4), as amended, and § 289-27A, as amended.
B. (Reserved)
89.Editor's Note: See Ch. 334, Zoning.
§ 276-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 276-9
1:307
§ 276-10. Effective Date.
This chapter, and amendments thereto, shall become effective upon passage
(majority vote) by the PLANNING BOARD and upon filing in accordance
with RSA 675:6.
§ 276-11. Plan Requirements.
All engineered plans, PLANS prepared by Licensed land Surveyors,
SUBDIVISION PLANS and any other PLANS requested by the BOARD to
conform to this section shall meet the following requirements:
§ 276-11.1. General Plan Requirements.
C. An EXCAVATION PERMIT shall specify the date upon which it shall
expire. (Ref. § 200-10B.)
D. All permits without a BOARD-approved specific expiration date shall
expire after two years from approval if no active or substantial
DEVELOPMENT or construction has occurred.
(1) For subdivision plans that do not include improvements such as
roads, utilities or topographical modifications, substantial
development is achieved when:
(a) The plan is recorded and MONUMENTATION is bonded or set;
or
(b) The threshold levels of work specified by the BOARD at the
time the permit is granted are met.
A. A list of the names and addresses of the OWNER(s) of the property, the
APPLICANT(s), and all ABUTTERs as defined in RSA 672:3 and as
indicated in the office of the Town Assessor records not more than five
days prior to the day of filing. (NOTE: The ABUTTERs list must be
prepared within the five days prior to filing the application. The
APPLICANT must also certify the ABUTTERs list by his or her signature
as indicated on the SITE PLAN application.)
B. Eight copies of a PLAN drawn to scale containing the following
information or meeting the following criteria (or otherwise identifying
in written form any waivers requested):
(1) The sheet size shall be 22 inches by 34 inches. [NOTE: Larger sizes
may be utilized during the review process at the option of the
APPLICANT, provided that the final PLAN submitted to the
PLANNING BOARD shall be 22 inches by 34 inches.]
(2) The scale shall be no smaller than 50 feet to the inch for the portion
of the tract being proposed for development.
(3) A title block in the lower right-hand corner of the PLAN shall
contain at least the following information: title, including the term
§ 276-9 HUDSON CODE § 276-11.1
1:308
"site plan," the name for whom the PLAN was prepared, preparer
of the plan, the scale(s) of the plan, the date of the PLAN and
appropriate revision block.
(4) Approval block.
(a) A minimum two-inch-by-six-inch approval block containing the
statement "Approved by the Hudson, NH PLANNING BOARD,"
one line with the words "Date of Meeting: __________," and two
lines for the signatures of the PLANNING BOARD Chairman
and Secretary. The signature line shall provide space for the
signature, follow with the words, "Signature Date: __________."
The following sentences shall be included within the approval
block: "Site PLANS are valid for two years from the date of
PLANNING BOARD meeting final approval. Final approval
commences at the PLANNING BOARD meeting date at which
the PLAN receives final approval." [Amended 8-14-2019]
(b) The PLANNING BOARD approval block shall be located on the
lower left corner of each sheet in the PLAN set.
(5) A Two-inch-by-one-and-one-half-inch approximate space adjacent
to the approval block containing the following statement:
"Pursuant to the site review regulations of the Hudson PLANNING
BOARD, the SITE PLAN approval granted herein expires one year
from date of approval."
(6) OWNER's printed name and address and signature.
(7) Name and address of all abutting property OWNERS as shown on
the list of ABUTTERs filed with the application.
(8) A locus PLAN (at one inch equals 1,000 feet) showing the general
location of the total tract within the Town.
(9) Boundary of the entire parcel held in single ownership, regardless
of whether all or part of the tract is being developed at the time of
the proposal. (NOTE: All boundary dimensions shall be shown to
the nearest hundredth of a foot and bearings to the nearest 30
seconds.) The error of closure shall be stated on the PLAN and
certified by a land surveyor licensed under RSA 310-A. A North
point arrow is required.
(10) A zoning classification note of the tract and location of the zoning
district boundaries if the property is located in two or more zoning
districts.
(11) (Reserved)
(12) The location of all building setback lines as required by Chapter
334, Zoning, or as listed below, whichever is more stringent. No
buildings, parking or display areas may be located in this setback.
(NOTE: For this section, "residential use" shall mean any LOT
§ 276-11.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 276-11.1
1:309
which either contains a residential dwelling and/or has received
SUBDIVISION or SITE PLAN approval for the purpose of
constructing residential dwellings.)
(a) In the General (G) and the General-One (G-1) Zoning Districts,
where a proposed industrial use abuts or is across a HIGHWAY
from a residential use, there shall be a two-hundred-foot
distance from the residential property line to any improved
part of the industrial development.
(b) In the General (G) and the General-One (G-1) Zoning Districts,
where a proposed commercial use abuts or is across a
HIGHWAY from a residential use, there shall be a one-hundredfoot
distance from the residential property line to any
improved part of the commercial development.
(c) In all zoning districts other than the General (G) and the
General-One Zoning Districts, where a commercial or
industrial use or zoning district abuts a residential use or
zoning district, there shall be a one-hundred-foot distance
between the residential use or zoning district and any
improved part of the nonresidential development.
(13) The location, size and character of all signs or a note stating: "All
signs are subject to approval by the Hudson PLANNING BOARD
prior to installation thereof."
(14) The location, details and character of all exterior lighting or a note
stating: "There will be no exterior lighting."
(15) The location of all buildings within 50 feet of the tract.
(16) The location of roadways, DRIVEWAYS, travel areas or parking
areas within 200 feet of the tract. If any of the aforesaid features
cannot be so indicated on the primary drawing, an additional sheet
drawn to a scale of 100 feet to the inch or 200 feet to the inch shall
be submitted to satisfy the requirements of this section and/or
Subsection B(15). Aerial photography or Town topographic
mapping at a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet, which
suitably depicts the aforementioned features and properly
identifies the tract may be used for this purpose.
(17) Existing topography at two-foot contour intervals of that portion of
the tract being proposed for development. Said topography shall be
the result of a topographic survey. Contours on the remainder of
the tract, if applicable, may be a representation of contours
determined from other reliable PLAN sources, e.g., aerial
photogrammetry or maps of the United States Geological Survey.
Location and description of each permanent monument and
benchmark, including primary control points and reference to a
USGS benchmark, shall be provided.
§ 276-11.1 HUDSON CODE § 276-11.1
1:310
(18) Proposed topography at two-foot contour intervals.
(19) A note identifying the Tax Map and LOT number of the tract.
(20) The location of all existing buildings (including size and height),
DRIVEWAYS, sidewalks, parking spaces, loading area, open spaces,
large trees, open drainage courses, signs, exterior lighting, service
areas, easements, landscaping and other pertinent items.
(21) The location of all proposed construction, buildings, structures,
pavement, etc.
(a) For additions to existing buildings, structures, pavement areas
or man-made items, precise lines and areas are to be shown.
(b) For new buildings or structures, pavement areas and manmade
items, at least three alternate proposals shall be
submitted in sketch form for consideration by the PLANNING
BOARD after acceptance of the preliminary application.
(NOTE: Hand-drawn sketches on onionskin paper to be
overlaid on base blueprints of the SITE PLAN are acceptable.)
(22) A green (i.e., grass or landscaping) area shall be shown between
the RIGHT-OF-WAY line and any pavement, gravel or structure
(excepting approved DRIVEWAYS). The minimum width shall be 20
feet where there is a thirty-foot building setback line or 35 feet
where there is a fifty-foot building setback line.
(23)HIGHWAY projects listed on the transportation improvement
program adopted by the Nashua Regional Planning Commission or
shown in the Hudson Master Plan or listed in the Corridor Study
adopted by the Hudson PLANNING BOARD. If a RIGHT-OF-WAY
taking is determined necessary in accord with RSA 230 or RSA 231
(or is anticipated to be necessary as determined by the Town
Engineer), then the proposed RIGHT-OF-WAY line shall be used as
the property line on SITE PLANS that have frontage along said
HIGHWAY projects.
(24) Open space equal to not less than the following percentages of the
LOT (as defined in the Zoning Ordinance90) being developed shall
be required, thus:
(a) Thirty-five percent, if the area of the LOT is located within the
area bounded by the corridor or RIGHT-OF-WAY of the Nashua-
Hudson Circumferential HIGHWAY and the Merrimack River;
or
(b) Forty percent, if the area of the LOT is located outside of the
area bounded by the corridor or RIGHT-OF-WAY of the Nashua-
Hudson Circumferential HIGHWAY and the Merrimack River.
90.Editor's Note: See Ch. 334, Zoning.
§ 276-11.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 276-11.1
1:311
(NOTE: "Open space," in this regulation only, is defined as
grassed, treed, landscaped or natural growth areas
designated for no activity associated with the nonresidential
use proposed; there must be reasonable open space near or
adjacent to each building or structure, including pavement, as
determined by the PLANNING BOARD.)
(25)No parking area or travelway shall be proposed within the area
between the side LOT lines or rear LOT lines and the
corresponding setback lines. The PLANNING BOARD may allow
use of such areas for parking or travelways, provided that an equal
amount of frontage green area is added to the minimum green area
required or where shared ACCESS is required.
(26) Prior to applying for a building PERMIT for the site, the
APPLICANT shall provide a written request for Town approval of
the APPLICANT's professional engineer who shall be hired to
certify construction of the site in accordance with PLAN approvals.
(27) Prior to applying for a certificate of occupancy for a site
constructed in full accordance with the original approved plan, the
following items shall be accomplished:
(a) The APPLICANT's professional engineer shall submit a written
certification that all aspects of the site have been constructed
in full accordance with the originally approved plan.
(b) The APPLICANT shall make a written request to the Planning
Department for a site inspection to verify that as-built
conditions are in full accordance with the originally approved
plan.
(28) Prior to applying for a certificate of occupancy for a site
constructed with deviations from the originally approved plan, the
following items shall be accomplished:
(a) The APPLICANT's professional engineer shall submit a written
certification that all aspects of the site have been constructed
in full accordance with the originally approved plan, except for
all specifically noted deviations.
(b) The APPLICANT shall make a written request to the Planning
Department for a site inspection to verify that as-built
conditions are in full accordance with the originally approved
plan, except for all specifically noted deviations.
(c) An as-built PLAN of the site (three-mil, single-matte twentyfour-
inch-by-thirty-six-inch Mylar) with two prints shall be
provided for PLANNING BOARD approval, signature,
recording and Town files. The prints shall highlight all
specifically noted deviations from the originally approved SITE
PLAN.
§ 276-11.1 HUDSON CODE § 276-11.1
1:312
§ 276-11.2. Electronic Plan Submittal.
The electronic drawing submitted to the Town, with the exception noted
in § 289-44 for streets in SUBDIVISIONS, shall incorporate the following
information and layer configuration shall meet the following requirements:
(d) The as-built PLAN shall be placed on the agenda of a
PLANNING BOARD meeting for consideration and approval.
(e) Prior to recording an approved as-built SITE PLAN at the
Hillsborough County Registry of Deeds, a copy of the PLAN
shall be provided in electronic form acceptable to the Town.
The electronic drawing shall incorporate the same information
and layer configuration as specified in Hudson Town Code
§ 276-11.2.
A. Layers.
Layer Color Linetype Information
0 by layer by layer Blank
_01 by layer by layer Property lines
for the entire
site shall be
shown. All
corners shall be
connected. Do
not use "special
lines" such as
stone walls or
fences. Lines
shall be
contiguous.
_02 by layer by layer Bearing and
distances (in
italics text, *see
below).
_03 by layer by layer Polylines shall
be provided for
wetland
delineation,
buffers and
streams
easements
_04 by layer by layer Associated
wetland
§ 276-11.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 276-11.2
1:313
Layer Color Linetype Information
_05 by layer by layer Associated
wetland text (in
simplex text,
**see below)
_06 by layer by layer Water main
easements
_07 by layer by layer Water main,
structures and
details
_08 by layer by layer Water main text
(in simplex text,
**see below)
_09 by layer by layer Sewer line
easements
_10 by layer by layer Sewer lines,
structures and
details
_11 by layer by layer Sewer line text
(in simplex text,
**see below)
_12 by layer by layer Drain line
easements
_13 by layer by layer Drain lines,
structures and
details
_14 by layer by layer Drain line text
(in simplex text,
**see below)
_15 by layer by layer All other
easements or
dedications
_16 by layer by layer All other lines,
structures and
details
_17 by layer by layer All other
associated
easement text
(in simplex text,
**see below)
NOTES:
* Italic Text
Text style name should be "italic" for italic text.
§ 276-11.2 HUDSON CODE § 276-11.2
1:314
§ 276-12. Escrow Deposit.
The PLANNING BOARD may require the OWNER or his/her/its authorized
agent to deposit in escrow with the Town an amount of money sufficient to
cover the costs for any professional review of any SITE PLAN or PERMIT
documents or for preparation of any specific study which the PLANNING
BOARD determines is reasonably necessary to protect the general welfare
of the Town. The PLANNING BOARD may make such determinations any
time following preliminary application acceptance.
§ 276-13. Utilities.
Text font style should be "italic."
Text shall have preferred height of 20.
Text style name should be "simplex" for simplex text.
Text font style should be "simplex."
Text shall have a preferred height of 20.
B. For streets in SUBDIVISIONS, the following layer change shall apply:
Layer Color Linetype Information
_01 by layer by layer Property lines
for the entire
site shall be
shown. All
corners shall be
connected. Do
not use "special
lines" such as
stone walls or
fences. Lines
shall be
contiguous.
C. AutoCAD units shall be with one unit equals one foot.
D. All files shall be in AutoCAD dwg or dxf format, Release 14 or earlier.
E. All other information may be placed on other layers at the APPLICANT's
discretion.
A. The OWNER or his/her/its authorized agent shall be notified of such
determination and estimated costs, in writing.
B. Upon completion of the review or study process, any unused funds in
excess of $5 shall be returned to the APPLICANT.
C. Failure of the OWNER or agent to deposit such funds with the Town
within 15 days of the date of the written notification shall be sufficient
basis for PLANNING BOARD denial of the application.
§ 276-11.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 276-13
1:315
A. All electric, telephone, television and other communication lines, both
main and service connections, servicing new developments shall be
provided by underground wiring within easements or dedicated public
rights-of-way, installed in accordance with the prevailing standards and
practices of the utility or other companies providing such services.
"New developments" means any LOTs created by SUBDIVISION and
any SITE PLANS approved since the passage of this amendment. Where
the topography is such as to make difficult the inclusion of any utilities
or other facilities within the public area so laid out, the preliminary
PLAN shall show the boundaries of proposed permanent easements
over or under private property.
B. LOTs that abut existing easements or public rights-of-way where
overhead electric or telephone distribution supply lines and service
connections have previously been installed may be supplied with
electric and telephone service from those overhead lines, but the
service connections from the utilities' overhead lines shall be installed
underground. Replacement or relocation of overhead utility lines shall
only be permitted in SUBDIVISIONs and on SITE PLANS that existed
prior to the passage of this amended regulation.
C. Where overhead lines are permitted as a waiver, the placement and
alignment of poles shall be designed to lessen the visual impact of
overhead lines. Alignments and pole locations shall be carefully routed
to avoid locations along horizons; clearing swaths through treed areas
shall be avoided by selective cutting and staggering alignment; trees
shall be planted in open areas and at key locations to minimize the view
of the poles and the alignments; and alignments shall follow rear LOT
lines and other alignments.
D. Year-round screening of any utility apparatus appearing above the
surface of the ground, other than utility poles, shall be required.
E. In SUBDIVISIONs to be served by a public sewer or public water
system, the SUBDIVIDER shall submit a separate PLAN and profile of
the proposed STREET or HIGHWAY showing proposed sewers, water
mains and an additional PLAN and profile of the sewerage and water
connections from the existing public sewer and water lines through or
over any existing STREET or HIGHWAY or over private property to
connect with the proposed systems of the SUBDIVISION shall be
submitted. The SUBDIVIDER shall obtain a letter from the
governmental agency or public utility company controlling the system
or systems indicating their acceptance of the proposed design and
agreement to furnish the public service or services.
F. Upon completion of all improvements required herein, and all others
that may be agreed upon at the time of submittal of the proposed public
utility designs, upon the petition of the APPLICANT to the appropriate
governmental agency or public utility company and upon acceptance by
the appropriate governmental agency or public utility company, the
§ 276-13 HUDSON CODE § 276-13
1:316
§ 276-14. Application Completeness.
completed improvements shall become the property of the
governmental agency or public utility company.
G. In areas not currently served by public sewer systems, it shall be the
responsibility of the APPLICANT to provide adequate information to
prove that the area of each LOT is adequate to PERMIT the installation
and operation of an individual sewage disposal system (septic tank and
drain field). Such information shall consist of a PLAN and PERMIT
showing compliance with the requirements for SUBDIVISION, SITE
PLAN and other approvals required in the New Hampshire Department
of Environmental Services Subsurface Disposal Regulations, latest
edition. The engineer shall locate the best position of each private
sewerage system and shall submit a typical design for each system also
done in accordance with the above state regulations.
H. In areas not currently served by public water systems, it shall be the
responsibility of the APPLICANT to provide adequate information to
prove that the area of each LOT is adequate to PERMIT the installation
and operation of both individual on-LOT water and sewerage systems.
Each water system shall be at least 75 feet from any portion of a septic
tank or drainage field and shall be constructed in accordance with the
United States Department of Health, Education and Welfare publication
titled Manual of Individual Water Supply Systems, Public Health
Service Publication No. 24.
A. Pursuant to NH RSA 676:4, BOARD's Procedures on Plats, the Hudson
PLANNING BOARD designates the TOWN PLANNER as the authority
to determine if an application for PERMIT or plan is complete. The
TOWN PLANNER shall then determine, or can assign the Associate
Planner to determine, if the application plan set is complete and ready
for PLANNING BOARD review. The application checklist and the LAND
USE REGULATIONS shall be used as the measure in determining
completeness.
B. The checklist. The checklist, which is built into SITE PLAN application,
must itself be completed by the APPLICANT, if applicable. The planning
STAFF shall review the submitted application checklist for correctness.
Only planning staff, and not the APPLICANT, shall determine if a
checklist item is not applicable.
C. The LAND USE REGULATIONS. The LAND USE REGULATIONS shall
be followed by the APPLICANT. The planning STAFF shall review the
application submittal for conformance to the regulations.
D. Complete or incomplete. If any items are found to be incomplete, the
planning STAFF has the authority to return the entire application PLAN
set to the APPLICANT, with fees. If the application is found to be
complete, the PLAN shall be routed for STAFF review.
§ 276-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 276-14
1:317
§ 276-15. DIG SAFE.
All EXCAVATION, trenching, post hole digging, stump grinding, post driving
and any other underground work whatsoever shall require prior notification
of DigSafe (phone #811 or 888-DIG-SAFE) as required by the RSAs.
ALL PLANS referencing such work shall bear the current DigSafe logo and/
or phone number.
The intent of this section is to ensure that all APPLICANTS are aware that
digging without notifying DIG SAFE may pose a health and safety hazard to
the persons digging and to the community.
Chapter 281
STREET NUMBERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 178. Subdivision of land — See Ch. 289.
§ 281-1. Statutory authority.
RSA 31:39L provides the authority for this chapter.
§ 281-2. Administration.
E. If during STAFF review it is determined that the information provided,
while complete enough for STAFF review, is found to be inadequate for
BOARD consideration of the plan, the Town planning STAFF shall have
the authority to return the application to the APPLICANT until such
time that all necessary PLAN review materials are provided.
F. Scheduling a PLAN on a PLANNING BOARD agenda. Application PLAN
sets shall only be scheduled on PLANNING BOARD agendas when the
STAFF review is both deemed complete and not having resulted in
finding the plan.
A. The Fire Department Chief shall be responsible for assigning official
addresses, to be known as "approved addresses," to all residences and
other buildings within the Town of Hudson at the time such building site
is approved. He is authorized to make rules or regulations consistent
with this chapter governing the size or placement of approved street
numbers or approved addresses, which he shall file with the Town
Clerk.
B. The Assessor's Office shall be responsible for maintaining a file of all
approved addresses within the Town of Hudson. All addresses on file
with the Assessor's Office are declared to be approved addresses.
[Amended 10-11-1988 by Ord. No. O88-7]
§ 276-14 HUDSON CODE § 281-2
1:318
§ 281-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPROVED ADDRESS — The street number and the street name which
the Fire Chief has assigned a residence or other building pursuant to his
authority under § 281-2 of this chapter.
APPROVED STREET NUMBER — The number or combination of numbers
and letters which the Fire Chief has assigned a residence or other building
pursuant to his authority under § 281-2 of this chapter. (Example: In "126B
Main Street," "126B" is the "approved street number"; "126B Main Street"
is the approved address.)
LANDOWNER — Includes any person, partnership, corporation or entity
which has an ownership interest in a residence or other building located
in the Town of Hudson. The term includes condominium associations or the
owner of a condominium unit.
OCCUPANT — Includes any person, partnership, corporation or entity
which actually occupies a residence or building in the Town of Hudson
whether or not it owns or leases the residence or building.
STREET — Includes any street, avenue, road, lane, highway or other ways.
§ 281-4. Responsibility of landowner or occupant.
C. Prior to issuing building permits, the Chief Code Enforcement Officer
shall confirm that the Fire Chief has assigned an approved address to
the residences or buildings for which the permits are sought.
D. Prior to issuing certificates of occupancy, the Chief Code Enforcement
Officer shall confirm that the approved street numbers or approved
addresses have been posted in accordance with this chapter.
E. The Assessor shall ensure that all addresses entered on the Assessor's
records are approved addresses.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the landowner(s) and the occupant(s) of
each residence or other buildings within the Town of Hudson to assure
that the approved street number or the complete approved address is
properly posted on each dwelling or other building which he owns or
occupies in accordance with the terms of this § 281-4 of this chapter.
B. The landowner or occupant shall post the approved street number on
each residence or other building so as to be plainly visible from the
street which is included in its approved address.
C. When long driveways, inadequate streetlighting or other conditions
make it difficult or impossible to see a street number posted on a
residence or other building from the street, the landowner or occupant
shall post the approved street number at the end of the driveway or
§ 281-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 281-4
1:319
§ 281-5. When effective; repealer.
Chapter 284
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Highway Safety Committee — See Ch. 61.
Littering — See Ch. 245.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 259.
Sewers — See Ch. 270.
Site plan review — See Ch. 275.
Street numbering — See Ch. 281.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 317.
Inventory of streets — See Ch. A340.
close to the street so the approved street number can be plainly seen
from the street.
D. If the driveway or parking lot of a residence or building exits onto an
abutting street, the landowner or occupant shall also post the complete
approved address so as to be plainly seen from the abutting street.
E. If a residence or other building abuts another street, the approved
street number shall be plainly visible from the street which is included
in its approved address. If, however, the landowner or occupant also
chooses to display the street number on the abutting street, he shall
display the complete approved address on the abutting street and not
just the approved street number.
F. It shall be the responsibility of all landowners and occupants to
promptly remove all nonconforming street numbers or addresses from
their residences and buildings.
A. This chapter will take effect immediately upon publication of a notice of
adoption of this chapter.
B. This chapter supersedes all prior ordinances, regulations or bylaws
concerning regulation and posting of street numbers and addresses,
including Ordinance No. 13, dated February 14, 1955.
§ 281-4 HUDSON CODE § 281-5
1:320
ARTICLE I
Excavations
[Adopted 4-5-1963 as Ord. No. 24; amended in its entirety 8-7-1967
by Ord. No. 39]
§ 284-1. Permit required.91 [Amended 7-26-1988 by Ord. No. O88-3]
No person, firm, contractor or corporation shall disturb the surface within
the highway right-of-way without first obtaining a permit from the Board of
Selectmen or its designee.
§ 284-2. Excavation of unpaved surfaces.
§ 284-3. Excavation of paved areas.
Where excavation is in an area originally paved, the excavation shall be
backfilled in twelve-inch layers of suitable material, each layer being
compacted with a flat-faced mechanical tamper or vibrating soil compactor,
and the top 18 inches of backfill shall be good gravel, compacted and well
graded. All unsuitable material, such as wet clay and stones larger than six
inches, will be removed and replaced with bank run gravel. Edges of the
existing pavement shall be trimmed back to a reasonable straight line.
A. Where excavation is in an area originally topsoiled, the excavation shall
be backfilled in twelve-inch layers of suitable material, each layer being
compacted with a flat-faced mechanical tamper or vibrating soil
compactor, and the top six inches of backfill shall be good topsoil,
compacted and graded to conform to the adjacent ground. All
unsuitable material, such as wet clay and stones larger than six inches,
will be removed and replaced with bank run gravel.
B. Where excavation is in an area originally gravelled, the excavation shall
be backfilled in twelve-inch layers of suitable material, each layer being
compacted with flat-faced mechanical tamper or vibrating soil
compactor, and the top 18 inches of backfill shall be good gravel,
compacted and graded to conform to the adjacent ground. All
unsuitable material, such as wet clay and stones larger than six inches,
will be removed and replaced with bank run gravel.
A. If hot paving is used, the trimmed edge shall be thoroughly clean and
coated with an approved asphalt tack coat. The paving shall then be laid
in two layers, a two-inch binder and a one-and-one-half-inch finish, each
course being rolled until thoroughly compacted with a roller weighing a
minimum of eight tons or equivalent in compaction.
B. If cold patch is used, it will be of a material equivalent to the original
surface, laid in one layer of a four-inch minimum thickness, sealed with
1/4 gallon T6 tar per square yard, sanded and rolled until thoroughly
91.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
section has been revised to replace "Executive Administrator" with "Board of Selectmen."
§ 284-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-3
1:321
§ 284-4. Exceptions.92 [Amended 7-26-1988 by Ord. No. O88-3]
Any exception to the requirements in §§ 284-2 and 284-3 must be obtained
in writing from the Board of Selectmen or its designee.
§ 284-5. Bonds.93 [Amended 7-26-1988 by Ord. No. O88-3]
Bonds may be required at the discretion of the Board of Selectmen or its
designee.
§ 284-6. Responsibility.
Any person, firm, contractor or corporation disturbing the ground within
highway rights-of-way within the Town of Hudson will be held responsible
for each excavation for a period of one year from the date of backfill and/or
surfacing.
§ 284-7. Start of work. [Added 1-11-1971 by Ord. No. 58]
All excavations requested shall start within 15 days of issuance of a permit.
§ 284-8. Excavation not to impede traffic. [Added 1-11-1971 by Ord.
No. 58]
§ 284-9. Inspections.94 [Added 1-11-1971 by Ord. No. 58; amended
7-26-1988 by Ord. No. O88-3]
compacted with a roller weighing a minimum of eight tons or equivalent
in compaction.
A. All work shall be performed in such a manner that trenches are not left
open and dirt removed does not impede traffic flow.
B. In bad weather it shall be the duty of the excavator, owner or agent,
where final surface cannot be placed, to check and keep excavation
passable.
A. Before surface is placed, the Board of Selectmen or its designee must
be notified to inspect the same.
B. Upon completion of final surface, the Board of Selectmen or its
designee must be notified of date and time of the same.
92.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
section has been revised to replace "Executive Administrator" with "Board of Selectmen."
93.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
section has been revised to replace "Executive Administrator" with "Board of Selectmen."
94.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
section has been revised to replace "Executive Administrator" with "Board of Selectmen."
§ 284-3 HUDSON CODE § 284-10
1:322
§ 284-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-26-1988 by Ord. No.
O88-3]
Any violation of this Article will be subject to a fine of fifty dollars ($50.).
§ 284-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-10
1:323

ARTICLE II
Location of Utility Conduits
[Adopted 8-9-1966 as Ord. No. 35; amended in its entirety
7-26-1988 by Ord. No. O88-3]
§ 284-11. Approval required.95
Effective the date of this Article, any and all pipes, ducts, cables, etc., laid
in any street or road in the Town of Hudson shall have the location of
said pipes, ducts, cables, etc., approved by the Board of Selectmen or its
designee prior to installation.
95.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
section has been revised to replace "Executive Administrator" with "Board of Selectmen."
§ 284-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-11
1:325

ARTICLE III
Sidewalks and Sewers
[Article 46, voted in the affirmative 3-12-1968 by the Annual Town
Meeting, read in the warrant as follows: "To see if the Town will vote
to reaffirm the acceptance of Revised Statutes Annotated, Chapter
252,96
Prior to the vote, Article 46 was amended as follows: to substitute
"may" for "shall" and to insert the words "no more than" preceding
the word " 1/2."]
96.Editor's Note: See also RSA 149-I and RSA 231:111 through 113. referred to as Sidewalks
and Sewers. Further, that the Selectmen shall, in the construction of sidewalks, assess
each abuttor on such street, 1/2 of the expense of constructing the sidewalk, pursuant to
R.S.A. 252:2."
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-11
1:327

ARTICLE IV
Placement of Snow
[Adopted 1-6-1969 as Ord. No. 45]
§ 284-12. Impeding traffic.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, while plowing,
shoveling or removing snow, to place snow from their property onto the
street in such a way as to impede traffic or require extra work by snow
removal crews.
§ 284-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate this Article shall
be subject to a maximum fine of $25 at the discretion of the District Court.
§ 284-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-13
1:329

ARTICLE V
Use of Sidewalks
[Adopted 9-24-1981 as Ord. No. 103]
§ 284-14. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SIDEWALK — A paved way constructed adjacent to, but not part of, the
paved roadway, approximately four feet in width and defined by the limits of
its paving (brick, concrete, stone or bituminous concrete).
§ 284-15. Bicycles and horses.97
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle or horse upon or lead a
horse on any sidewalk in the Town of Hudson.
§ 284-16. Violations and penalties.
Each violation of this Article shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $5
for the first offense and not to exceed $100 for the second and subsequent
offenses.
97.Editor's Note: For provisions relating to animals, see Ch. 188.
§ 284-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-16
1:331
Chapter 289
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Driveways — See Ch. 193.
Excavation of soil — See Ch. 200.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 218.
Sewers — See Ch. 270.
Site plan review — See Ch. 275.
Administrative Requirements and
definitions — See Ch. 276.
Street numbering — See Ch. 281.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 290.
Zoning — See Ch. 334.
§ 284-16 HUDSON CODE § 284-16
1:332
Part 1
SUBDIVISION Regulations
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 289-1. Authority.
Pursuant to the authority vested in the Hudson PLANNING BOARD by the
voters of the Town of Hudson, and in accordance with the provisions of RSA
674, 675 and 676, as amended, the Hudson PLANNING BOARD adopts the
following regulations governing the SUBDIVISION of land in the Town of
Hudson, New Hampshire.
§ 289-2. Title.
These amended regulations shall be known and may be cited as the "TOWN
OF HUDSON Land SUBDIVISION Regulations," hereinafter referred to as
the "SUBDIVISION Regulations."
§ 289-3. Definitions.
Words in all capital letters are those with special definitions as noted in
§ 276-2 of the LAND USE REGULATIONS.
§ 289-4. Highway monuments.
HIGHWAY monuments shall be of natural or artificial stone of a size not
less than five inches by five inches by 30 inches with either a one-half-inch
drillhole, a chiseled cross or a lead or iron plug on the five-inch-by-five-inch
end.
§ 289-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 289-4
1:333

ARTICLE II
Application Procedure
§ 289-5. Preapplication submission and appearance.
Previous to the formal submission of a SUBDIVISION preliminary plan, a
subdivider, in order to save the cost of changes at a later date, may appear
at a regular meeting of the BOARD and submit a sketch PLAN for discussion
with the BOARD.
§ 289-6. Submission of application.
All applications shall conform to the requirements of §§ 276-3 and 276-11.
§ 289-7. Filing preliminary plan.
The preliminary PLAN as described in Article IV shall be filed with the
BOARD. The BOARD shall then study the preliminary STREET and LOT
layout and proposed improvements in connection with the Comprehensive
Town Plan, the Official Map (if and when one is adopted), the needs of the
surrounding area and neighborhood, the topography and soil conditions of
the area, the existing requirements of Chapter 334, Zoning, and any other
pertinent state or local regulations.
§ 289-8. Information required on preliminary plan.
The preliminary plan, as submitted, shall show the property tax code
number of the property, or properties, being subdivided and the names of
the ABUTTERs and tax property code numbers, with their addresses. The
lower right-hand corner of the PLAN shall also state the property tax code
number, name of the SUBDIVIDER, map number and LOT number being
subdivided.
§ 289-9. Revision of preliminary plan.
A. The BOARD, before taking formal action, shall hold a discussion with
the SUBDIVIDER or his/her/its agent(s) and may hear and confer with
other parties whose interest may be affected by the proposed layout.
After such discussion, and within 30 days of the receipt of the
application and preliminary plan, the BOARD shall communicate in
writing to the SUBDIVIDER the specific changes, if any, which it shall
require in the preliminary plan, and the types and amount of
construction or improvements it shall require as a condition precedent
to the approval of the SUBDIVISION PLAN.
B. The BOARD may disapprove of the preliminary PLAN in its entirety but
shall state its reasons for such disapproval.
C. The preliminary PLAN shall be approved or disapproved by the BOARD
within 60 days, unless the SUBDIVIDER shall have agreed in writing to
an extension of the period of consideration.
§ 289-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 289-10
1:335
§ 289-10. Final plat.
§ 289-11. Action on final plat.
§ 289-12. Conceptual future SUBDIVISION PLAN.
The application PLAN set shall, if required by the BOARD, also include a
"conceptual future SUBDIVISION PLAN" sheet to illustrate any intended
future SUBDIVISION of this tract. This illustration shall be drawn to scale.
This illustration is only to assist the PLANNING BOARD in understanding
potential future land SUBDIVISION.
A. The APPLICANT, after official notification by the BOARD with respect to
the PRELIMINARY PLAN and the changes, if any, to be made therein,
shall within six months thereafter file with the BOARD the final plat, the
completed application, Form A (See Appendix98), and the accompanying
material as described in Article V. The APPLICANT shall be furnished
with a receipt therefor.
B. The APPLICANT shall tender offers of cession in a form certified as
satisfactory by the Town legal counsel of all land included in streets,
HIGHWAYs or parks not specifically reserved by him, but approval of
the PLAT by the BOARD shall not constitute an acceptance by the Town
of the dedication of any street, HIGHWAY, park or other public open
space.
C. Performance sureties. Performance sureties, if required, shall be set
and controlled by the provisions or § 276-4
A. The BOARD shall consider any final PLAT submitted to it and shall act
within 30 days to approve or disapprove the PLAT in accordance with
RSA 674:41, as amended.
B. If the BOARD approves the plat, the Secretary of the BOARD shall
transmit a copy of such approval in writing to the Register of Deeds of
Hillsborough County. A copy of the final PLAT shall be retained by the
BOARD, a copy shall be filed or recorded in the Office of the Register of
Deeds of Hillsborough County by the BOARD and a copy shall be
returned to the subdivider.
98.Editor's Note: The Appendix is available and on file in the Town offices.
§ 289-10 HUDSON CODE § 289-12
1:336
ARTICLE III
General Requirements
§ 289-13. Requirements to be observed.
The SUBDIVIDER shall observe the following general requirements and
principles of land SUBDIVISION.
§ 289-14. Conformity required.
The PLAN shall conform with the HUDSON Master Plan, the Official Map,
if and when one is adopted, Chapter 334, Zoning, and any other pertinent
state or local laws or regulations.
§ 289-15. Unsafe and flood hazard areas.
§ 289-16. Shared ACCESS roads.
The PLANNING BOARD may require use of a shared ACCESS road where
two or more SUBDIVISIONs are being proposed, which SUBDIVISIONs
A. Land of such character that it cannot be safely used for building
purposes because of exceptional danger to health or peril from fire,
flood or other menace shall not be platted for residential occupancy, nor
for such other uses as may increase danger to health, life or property or
aggravate the flood hazard, until appropriate measures have been
taken by the SUBDIVIDER to eliminate such hazards. No floodway shall
be obstructed.
B. Flood hazard.
(1) Sufficient evidence (construction drawings, grading and land
treatment plans) shall be submitted so as to allow a BOARD
determination that:
(a) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage.
(b) All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical
and water systems are located, elevated and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage.
(c) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to
flood hazards.
(2) Adequate design information shall also be submitted to the BOARD
assuring that new or replacement water systems and/or sanitary
sewerage systems are designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the
systems into floodwaters and that on-site waste disposal systems
are located so as to avoid impairment of them or contamination
from them during flooding.
§ 289-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 289-16
1:337
shall be considered a single parcel of land for this specific purpose, even
though acquired by more than one conveyance or held nominally by more
than one OWNER.
§ 289-17. Lot requirements.
§ 289-18. Streets.
A. For minimum area and frontage requirements for new residential
SUBDIVISIONs, refer to the Hudson, New Hampshire, Zoning
Ordinance, Article VII, Dimensional Requirements, Hudson Town Code
§ 334-27, Table of Minimum Dimensional Requirements.
B. (Reserved)
C. No LOT that will result from a SUBDIVISION shall have an interior LOT
line that intersects a front LOT line at an angle of less than 45° as
measured from the front LOT line.
A. No STREET or HIGHWAY RIGHT-OF-WAY shall be less than 50 feet in
width and may be required to be more if a greater STREET width is
required by § 289-14 above or is warranted in the opinion of the
BOARD. Existing streets shall be widened as if they were new streets,
and only 1/2 of their additional widening shall be required on each side.
B. Cul-de-sac roads.99
(1) RIGHT-OF-WAY and pavement widths. Culs-de-sac, or dead-end
streets, designated to be permanently closed at one end, shall have
a RIGHT-OF-WAY width not less than 50 feet leading up to the
turnaround. The pavement width leading up to the turnaround shall
be 24 feet. The pavement width for the turnaround shall be 24 feet.
[Amended 4-24-2019 by Amdt. No. 1]
(2) Cul-de-sac roadway length. A cul-de-sac STREET shall not exceed
1,000 feet in length, and shall measure from the center point of the
outside edge of the cul-de-sac turnaround to the point of
intersection at the center line of an intersecting street. Said
intersecting STREET shall have, at minimum, two intersections
with other streets, leading to a collector/arterial STREET or
limited-ACCESS HIGHWAY.
(3) Radial turnaround. Closed ends of cul-de-sac streets shall be
provided with a radial-shaped turnaround having a minimum
RIGHT-OF-WAY radius of 75 feet and a minimum radius to the
outside edge of pavement, or curb, of 65 feet. The illustrative
sketches further define and clarify the turnaround requirements for
dead-end or cul-de-sac streets.
99.Editor's Note: The Typical Offset Cul-De-Sac illustration and the Typical Straight Cul-De-
Sac illustration are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 289-16 HUDSON CODE § 289-18
1:338
(4) Landscaping. Cul-de-sac roadways shall have a permanent area in
the center of the turnaround. The center of the turnaround shall
have suitable drainage and/or landscaping as approved by the
PLANNING BOARD.
(5) Signage. A dead-end informational sign shall be placed at the
beginning of the cul-de-sac roadway. The dead-end sign shall have
black lettering on a yellow background, a sign area of 18 inches by
24 inches and a minimum height of six feet measured from the
ground to the top of the sign as affixed to a pole.
C. Horizontal and vertical curves.
(1) No horizontal curve shall have a center line radius of less than 150
feet except on a cul-de-sac.
(2) No vertical curve shall have K values less than the following: 40
Sag; 30 Crest. Note: K values at stop condition situations shall be
evaluated on an individual basis.
D. Streets in cut or fill shall be provided with side slopes not steeper than
two feet horizontal to one foot vertical. All side slopes shall be
constructed outside the right-of-way.
E. STREET intersections and curves shall be designed to PERMIT
adequate visibility for both pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
Intersections shall comply with applicable sections of Chapter 193,
DRIVEWAYS.
F. Grades of all streets shall conform in general to the terrain and shall, so
far as practicable, not exceed 4% for major streets and 7% for minor
streets. No STREET shall have a grade of less than 1%.
G. The widths of blocks shall not be less than 500 feet.
H. Intersecting property lines at STREET intersections shall be joined by a
curve of at least 1/2 the width of the wider STREET in radius.
I. Streets shall be laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at right
angles. No STREET shall intersect another at an angle of less than 60°.
Streets entering opposite sides of another STREET shall be laid out
either directly opposite one another or with a minimum offset of 125
feet between their center lines. All STREET deflections shall be curved.
J. No STREET shall be accepted by the TOWN OF HUDSON until after a
public hearing and approval, in writing, by the Board of Selectmen.
K. STREET and HIGHWAY layouts. All streets and HIGHWAYs in the
TOWN OF HUDSON shall be laid out in accordance with the procedures
outlined in RSA 234 and by the final PLAT of this chapter. A deed shall
be given the Town by the OWNER of the SUBDIVISION covering all
STREET areas within the SUBDIVISION.
§ 289-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 289-18
1:339
L. STREET HIGHWAY layout requirements. Any person interested in
having a STREET or HIGHWAY laid out by the Town shall petition
therefor on a form to be supplied by the Board of Selectmen and shall
attach to said petition a PLAN satisfying all requirements of this
chapter and Chapter 334, Zoning.
M. PLAN requirements. The petitioner(s) for STREET or HIGHWAY layout
shall cause to be prepared and submitted to the Board of Selectmen, in
accordance with instructions from the Board of Selectmen, an accurate
PLAN and profile, showing the present length of frontage of each LOT,
the names of OWNERs thereof and the land to be taken, showing the
number of square feet to be taken from each LOT and also showing
such references to bounds and other marks on the premises as shall
enable the Board of Selectmen to locate said STREET with accuracy.
(1) Said PLAN and profile shall be submitted to the Board of Selectmen
with the petition for acceptance and shall contain a horizontal scale
of one inch equals 50 feet and a vertical scale of one inch equals
five feet.
(2) The PLAN and profile shall contain existing grades and proposed
grades of all streets. Existing and proposed grades shall be
adequately differentiated.
(3) The Board of Selectmen may make such alterations in the PLAN
and proposed grades as they may deem necessary.
N. Streets which join or are in alignment with streets of abutting or
neighboring properties shall bear the same name. Names of new streets
shall not duplicate, nor bear phonetic resemblance to, the names of
existing streets within the Town. Where practical, names shall have an
historical connection.100
O. All STREET names, in SUBDIVISIONs, shall be identified at all
intersections by metal signs, in accordance with HIGHWAY Department
specifications. The SUBDIVIDER shall, at his/her/its own expense,
install these STREET signs on metal posts, two inches inside diameter
and 10 1/2 feet long, galvanized. The galvanized steel posts shall be set
in concrete with the top of the post being eight feet above the ground,
subject to approval by the PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR. The signs shall
be metal, in conformity with new signs purchased by the Town, twofaced
and reflectorized, six inches high with three-and-one-half-inch
letters embossed and reflectorized with green background and white
letters, of aluminum metal. The PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR is charged
with the responsibility of approving final installation of all STREET
signs. [Amended 10-9-2018]
P. Any bridge or culvert shall be designed by a registered engineer, which
design shall accompany the preliminary layout.
100. Editor's Note: For related provisions, see Ch. 281, Street Numbering. For the inventory of
streets, see Ch. A340.
§ 289-18 HUDSON CODE § 289-18
1:340
Q. STREET and HIGHWAY acceptance requirements. Upon completion of
the layout proceedings, the parties interested in having the Town
accept the STREET or HIGHWAY shall petition therefor on a form to be
supplied by the Board of Selectmen, but no STREET or HIGHWAY shall
be accepted unless or until the provisions of this chapter are fully
satisfied.
R. Installation of improvements.
(1) The PLANNING BOARD shall weigh the burden that proposed
DEVELOPMENT places on public facilities, infrastructure, sewers
and amenities and shall require the installation of public
improvements, both on-site and off-site, to compensate for this
burden. Improvements may include, but are not limited to:
(a) Granite curbing.
(b) Sidewalk and STREET trees.
(c) Improvements to existing roadways and drainage.
(d) Traffic control devices.
(e) Open space.
(f) Recreational space.
(g) Moneys granted in lieu of land for recreational space, which
shall be held by the Town in a nonlapsing fund for the future
purchase and DEVELOPMENT of recreational space/facilities
to serve this particular neighborhood/development.
(h) Improvements to nearby traffic corridors as warranted by the
Town's cost allocation procedure traffic study.
(2) All requested improvements, whether on-site or off, shall be
consistent with the standards enunciated by the New Hampshire
Supreme Court and this legislature.
S. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all
streets shall conform to the Master PLAN whenever possible and shall
be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to
topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety and in their
appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by
such streets.
T. Where such is not shown in the Master Plan, the arrangement of streets
in a SUBDIVISION shall either:
(1) Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing
principal streets in surrounding areas; or
(2) Conform to a PLAN for the neighborhood approved or adopted by
the BOARD to meet a particular situation where topographical or
§ 289-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 289-18
1:341
§ 289-19. Utilities.
All utility installations, modifications, easements and other pertinent
elements of the PLAN shall conform to § 276-13 of the LAND USE
REGULATIONS.
§ 289-20. Flood, stagnant and stormwater.
All stormwater planning and management shall comply with Chapter 290 of
the LAND USE REGULATIONS. In addition:
other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing
streets impracticable.
U. Service streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic shall
be discouraged.
V. Where a SUBDIVISION abuts or contains an existing or arterial street,
the BOARD may require marginal-access streets, reverse frontage with
screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear
property line, deep LOTs with rear service alleys or such other
treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential
properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic.
W. Where a SUBDIVISION borders on or contains a railroad RIGHT-OFWAY
or limited-access HIGHWAY right-of-way, the BOARD may require
a STREET approximately parallel to and on each side of such RIGHTOF-
WAY at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening
land, as for park purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances shall
also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach
grades and future grade separations.
X. Pedestrian rights-of-way not less than 15 feet wide may be required
where deemed essential to provide circulation or ACCESS to schools,
playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation or other community
facilities. Where such pedestrian rights-of-way are provided, the
developer shall clear the areas of obstructing rocks, trees and
undergrowth, bring the RIGHT-OF-WAY to suitable grade and construct
a four-foot-wide BITUMINOUS CONCRETE sidewalk in accordance
with the Department of Public Works specifications.
Y. All proposed streets shall be designed with intersections of not more
than two-percent slope for a distance of 100 feet from the edge of
pavement of the intersection to the first point of vertical curvature. The
center line of the intersecting streets shall intersect one another as
near to a ninety-degree angle as possible but not less than 60°.
A. LOTs shall be laid out and graded to eliminate flood or stagnant water
pools.
(1) Where a building foundation is less than one foot above finished
road grade, suitable mechanical or natural drains shall be installed,
§ 289-18 HUDSON CODE § 289-20
1:342
subject to approval of the Selectmen.101 The type of construction
and size of pipe shall be clearly designated on the final plot plan, as
approved by the BOARD.
(2) No water shall be permitted to run across a STREET on the surface,
but shall be directed into catch basins and piped underground in a
pipe of adequate size, approved by the Selectmen,102 in writing.
B. Where feasible, stormwater should be directed to enter the nearest
open STREAM channel.
(1) Stormwater runoff, except in areas where the LOT size is 40,000
square feet or larger, or where it is in already existing open
STREAM channels, shall not be permitted to flow upon the surface
for a longer distance than 4,000 feet before it enters the
underground system.
(2) Catch basins shall be located on both sides of the roadway in
continuous grades at intervals of not more than 400 feet at all sags
in the roadway and near the corners of the roadway at intersecting
streets.
C. A STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN shall be prepared including
and using the following guidelines. NOTE: In preparing the
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN, please refer to and comply with
the requirements provided in Chapter 290, Stormwater Management
and Erosion Control, of these LAND USE REGULATIONS.
(1) No STORMWATER RUNOFF in excess of rates existing prior to new
construction shall be allowed to be discharged onto a public way or
into a public drainage system unless there is sufficient capacity to
handle the additional runoff. All drainage shall be designed to
achieve a zero-increase in runoff for both peak and volume where
practicable.
(2) The direction of flow of runoff through the use of arrows.
(3) The location, elevation and size of all catch basins, dry wells,
drainage ditches, swales, retention basins and storm sewers. If
infiltration systems are proposed as part of a stormwater
management plan, test pit and percolation test data in the vicinity
of the proposed infiltration system(s) must be provided.
(4) Engineering calculations used to determine drainage requirements
shall be based upon minimum storm frequency design events as
follows:
101. Editor's Note: Approval of the PLANNING BOARD is the requirement for installation of
drains.
102. Editor's Note: Approval of the size of the underground pipe is provided by the PLANNING
BOARD.
§ 289-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 289-20
1:343
§ 289-21. Utilities easements.
§ 289-22. Open spaces.
Before approval of a SUBDIVISION PLAN, the BOARD shall review said
PLAN for open space requirements to consist of parks, playgrounds or
permanently reserved open space. The open space shall not be
unreasonable in area and generally shall consist of 10% or less of the total
area. Open space areas shall be deeded to the TOWN OF HUDSON and shall
be so indicated on the final SUBDIVISION PLAN.
(a) Ten-year storm event for closed drainage systems and local
roadside ditches.
(b) Twenty-five-year storm event for culverts, major ditches and
swales and detention ponds.
(c) Fifty-year storm event for bridges.
(5) Certification by a licensed professional engineer. (See RSA 310-A.)
(6) Any other specific study, calculation or investigation as requested
by the Town Engineer.
[NOTE: Generally speaking, the stormwater drainage PLAN is
probably the single most important element of the entire SITE
PLAN. Yet, traditionally, it has been one of the most neglected
elements. The Hudson PLANNING BOARD recognizes that only a
professional engineer, licensed in accordance with RSA 310-A, can
certify the adequacy of proposed drainage plans. APPLICANTs are
expected to make the same recognition or to discuss this matter
with the PLANNING BOARD. The PLANNING BOARD emphasizes
that the criteria listed in § 289-20C(1) through (6) are minimum
requirements stated for these general regulations. It is expected
that the Town Engineer shall have the latitude to more precisely
define the criteria once a specific proposal is before the
PLANNING BOARD.]
A. Easements for utilities across LOTs or centered on rear or side LOT
lines shall be provided where necessary and shall be at least 15 feet
wide, except for watercourses proposed for public control, which shall
have a permanent easement of not less than 20 feet.
B. Where a SUBDIVISION is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel or stream, the BOARD may require that there be provided a
stormwater easement or drainage RIGHT-OF-WAY of adequate width to
conform substantially to the lines of such watercourse, drainageway,
channel or STREAM and to provide for construction or for other
necessary purposes.
§ 289-20 HUDSON CODE § 289-23
1:344
§ 289-23. Natural features.
Due regard shall be shown for all natural features, such as large trees,
watercourses, scenic points, historic spots and similar community assets
which, if preserved, shall add attractiveness and value to the SUBDIVISION.
§ 289-24. Reserve strips restricting access to public use land.
Reserve strips of land which, in the opinion of the BOARD, show an intent
on the part of the SUBDIVIDER to control ACCESS to land dedicated or to
be dedicated to public use shall not be permitted.
§ 289-25. Remnants of lots.
Remnants of lots below usable size left over after subdividing a large tract
shall be added to adjacent lots rather than remain as unusable parcels.
§ 289-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 289-25
1:345

ARTICLE IV
Preliminary Plan
§ 289-26. Form; required information.
A. Each SUBDIVIDER shall file with the BOARD three black-and-white
copies of a preliminary PLAN at a horizontal scale of one inch to either
20 feet, 40 feet, 50 feet or 100 feet and a vertical scale of not more than
40 feet to the inch. The overall sheet size shall be 24 inches by 36
inches, with separate sheets numbered and showing their relationship
to each other by means of match marks. A margin of at least one inch
shall be provided outside ruled border lines on three sides and of at
least two inches along the left side for binding.
B. The preliminary PLAN shall show or be accompanied by the following
information:
(1) Proposed SUBDIVISION name, signature and address of OWNER
of record, signature of SUBDIVIDER and engineer or surveyor, date
and North point and scale.
(2) Names of OWNERs of record abutting properties certified by the
Selectmen103 on Form B (see Appendix104), abutting SUBDIVISION
names, streets, easements, setbacks, alleys, parks and public open
spaces and similar facts regarding abutting property.
(3) Location of property lines and their approximate dimensions;
existing easements, buildings, watercourses, ponds or standing
water, rock ledges and other essential features.
(4) Existing water mains, sewers, culverts, drains and proposed
connections or alternative means of providing water supply and
disposal of sewage and surface drainage; location of each
percolation test hole and the results, each proposed septic tank and
drainage field, each proposed well and typical designs of proposed
on-LOT water and sewerage systems. A certificate of approval from
the Board of Health of the TOWN OF HUDSON105 shall be required
when on-LOT utilities must be installed.
(5) Location, name and RIGHT-OF-WAY widths of existing and
proposed streets and HIGHWAYs within the SUBDIVISION and on
abutting land within 200 feet, along with their grades and profiles,
and the elevations of sufficient points on the property to indicate
the general topography of the property. For land that slopes less
than approximately 2%, spot elevations at all breaks in grade,
along all drainage channels or swales and at selected points not
more than 100 feet apart in all directions; for land that slopes more
103. Editor's Note: The certified list of abutting OWNERs of record may be obtained from the
Assessor's Office.
104. Editor's Note: The appendix is available and on file in the Town offices.
105. Editor's Note: Approval is required from the state for on-LOT utilities.
§ 289-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 289-26
1:347
than approximately 2% either contours with an interval of not more
than five feet, if ground slope is regular, or not more than two
feet, if ground slope is irregular. If any of the aforesaid features
cannot be so indicated on the primary drawing, an additional sheet
drawn to a scale of 100 feet to the inch or 200 feet to the inch
shall be submitted to satisfy the requirements of this section. Aerial
photography or Town topographic mapping which suitably depicts
the aforementioned features and properly identifies the tract may
be used for this purpose.
(6) Proposed LOTs, approximate square foot size of each LOT and
setback lines. House numbers shall be assigned as directed by the
Board of Selectmen and shown on the final plat.106
(7) Location of all parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to public
use and the conditions of such dedication, and a copy of such
private deed restrictions as are intended to cover part or all of the
tract.
(8) Preliminary designs of any bridges or culverts which may be
required.
(9) Where the preliminary PLAN submitted covers only a part of the
subdivider's entire holding, a sketch of the prospective future
STREET system of the unsubmitted part shall be furnished, and the
STREET system of the submitted part shall be considered in the
light of adjustments and connections with the STREET system of
the part not submitted.
106. Editor's Note: House numbers are assigned by the Fire Department. For related
provisions, see Ch. 281, Street Numbering.
§ 289-26 HUDSON CODE § 289-26
1:348
ARTICLE V
Final Plat
§ 289-27. Form; required information.
A. PLANNING BOARD approval block.
(1) Eight printed copies of the original PLAN shall be submitted for
approval and subsequent recording. The size of sheet, margins and
scales shall be as required in Article IV, Preliminary Plan. A
minimum two-inch-by-six-inch approval block containing the
statement "Approved by the Hudson, NH PLANNING BOARD," one
line with the words "Date of Meeting: __________," and two lines for
the signatures of the PLANNING BOARD Chairman and Secretary.
The signature line shall provide space for the signature, follow with
the words "Signature Date: __________."
(2) The following sentences shall be included within the approval
block: "SUBDIVISIONs are valid for two years from the date of
PLANNING BOARD meeting final approval. For an APPLICANT to
gain an exemption from all subsequent changes in SUBDIVISION
regulations, SITE PLAN regulations and changes to the Zoning
Ordinance, see NH RSA 674:39."
(3) The PLANNING BOARD approval block shall be located on the
lower left corner of each sheet in the PLAN set.
B. The final PLAT shall show, in addition to all items required under Article
IV, Preliminary Plan, the following:
(1) Proposed SUBDIVISION name or identifying title, the name and
address of OWNER of record and subdivider, and the name, license
number and seal of the engineer and/or name and address of
surveyor.
(2) STREET lines, setback lines, pedestrian ways, LOT lines, LOT sizes
in square feet, identification number for each LOT, reservations,
easements and areas to be dedicated to public use and areas the
title to which is reserved by the developer.
(3) STREET cross sections, approximate grades and profiles and
designs of any bridges or culverts.
(4) Proposed layout of storm drainage, water supply and sewage
disposal systems.
(5) Typical design and location of each proposed on-LOT sewerage and
water system and location and size of each proposed storm pipe
and catch basin.
(6) Sufficient data to determine readily the location, bearing and
length of every STREET line, LOT line, boundary line and to
reproduce such lines upon the ground. All dimensions shall be
§ 289-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 289-27
1:349
shown to the nearest hundredth of a foot and bearings to the
nearest 30 seconds. The error of closure shall be one in 10,000 or
better. The final PLAT shall show the boundaries of the property.
(7) Location and description of each permanent monument and
benchmark, including primary control points and reference to a
USGS (United States Geological Survey) benchmark.
(8) Reference to recorded SUBDIVISION plats of adjoining platted
areas by county registry record, name, date and number.
(9) Sworn statement by OWNER dedicating streets, rights-of-way and
any sites for public use.
(10) A locus plan, drawn at a scale of one inch equals 1,000 feet, which
shall depict STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY lines, major utility lines,
external property lines, waterways and any feature usually shown
on the Official Town Map.
C. All sheets of the PLAN set, recommended by STAFF to be recorded, and
approved by the PLANNING BOARD, shall be recorded at the
Hillsborough County Registry of Deeds at the APPLICANT's expense,
with the provision that any subsequent changes to these PLANS might
also be required to be so recorded, at the option of the PLANNING
BOARD, at the APPLICANT's expense.
§ 289-27 HUDSON CODE § 289-27
1:350
ARTICLE VI
Improvements
§ 289-28. Requirements.
The following improvements shall be installed and constructed by the
SUBDIVIDER to the satisfaction of the PLANNING BOARD107 and under its
supervision, either before submission of the final plat, or the SUBDIVIDER
together with the final PLAT shall file a bond or make other suitable
arrangements as contained in § 289-10.
A. Monuments shall be set at all block corners, angle points, points of
curves in streets, property corners and at any other points the
PLANNING BOARD108 may deem necessary to control the line of
streets.
B. The paved roadway shall have a minimum width in accordance with the
type of street, as defined in § 289-3, as follows:
(1) Major streets, collector streets and commercial streets shall be
paved a minimum of 36 feet or wider where the PLANNING BOARD
determines that the nature and/or intensity of the proposed use
would require a wider pavement.
(2) Residential streets, service streets and access streets of 1,000 feet
in length or less shall be paved 24 feet wide. Residential streets,
service streets and access streets greater than 1,000 feet in length
shall be paved 28 feet wide. [Amended 4-24-2019 by Amdt. No.
2]
C. The roadway shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications
of the Engineering Department and the typical roadway cross-section
as approved by the PLANNING BOARD.109
D. All proposed drainage facilities and culverts shall be installed in
accordance with the specifications of the Engineering Department and
as approved by the PLANNING BOARD.
E. The roadway shall be graded and paved to the final grade in accordance
with the profile and cross section submitted.
F. Slope granite curbing shall be installed on both sides of the proposed
roadway.
G. A BITUMINOUS CONCRETE sidewalk four feet wide shall be
constructed on one side of the proposed roadway.
107. Editor's Note: Improvements are to be installed and supervised by the PLANNING BOARD.
108. Editor's Note: The locations of monuments are determined by the PLANNING BOARD.
109. Editor's Note: The Typical Cross-Section Subdivision Street illustration is included as an
attachment to of this chapter.
§ 289-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 289-28
1:351

ARTICLE VII
Administration
§ 289-29. Agent to receive preliminary plans and final plats.
The Selectmen may appoint an agent charged with the responsibility of
receiving for the BOARD preliminary PLANS and final plats, checking them
to determine if they meet the requirements of this chapter and inspecting
improvements for compliance with this chapter and requirements of the
Board of Selectmen.
§ 289-30. Responsibility to institute legal action.
It shall be the duty of the Selectmen to institute appropriate action to
recover all penalties and to enjoin any violation in a civil action brought in
the name of the Town, in the manner and to the extent permitted by statute.
§ 289-31. Variances.
Where strict conformity to this chapter would cause undue hardship or
injustice to the OWNER of the land, a SUBDIVISION PLAN substantially in
conformity with this chapter may be approved by the BOARD, provided that
the spirit of this chapter and public convenience and welfare shall not be
adversely affected.
§ 289-32. Amendments.
This chapter may be amended or rescinded by the BOARD, but only
following public hearing on the proposed change. The Chairman or
Secretary of the BOARD shall transmit a record of any changes so
authorized to the Registry of Deeds of Hillsborough County. Approval of all
SUBDIVISIONS, in conflict with the proposed amendments to this chapter,
shall be suspended pending the public hearings covering the proposed
amendments, and decision by the PLANNING BOARD.
§ 289-33. Interpretation.
In matters of judgment or interpretation of the above requirements for
SUBDIVISION of land, the opinion and decision of the PLANNING BOARD
shall prevail.
§ 289-34. Severability.
If any section, provision, clause, portion or phrase of this chapter shall be
held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent authority,
such holding shall not affect, impair or invalidate any other section, clause,
provision, portion or phrase of this chapter.
§ 289-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 289-35
1:353
§ 289-35. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect upon its adoption, and amendments shall go
into effect on the date they are approved by a majority of the members on
the PLANNING BOARD.
§ 289-35 HUDSON CODE § 289-35
1:354
ARTICLE VIII
Phased Lot Approval Plan
§ 289-36. Review of subdivision effect on services.
The PLANNING BOARD shall, in the exercise of the authority vested under
RSA 674:36, I and II, review all proposed SUBDIVISIONs with a view
toward determining the impact that the proposed DEVELOPMENT shall
have on various services, and to that end, said BOARD shall also review
all such SUBDIVISIONs with a view toward determining whether such
SUBDIVISION, if permitted, would constitute a scattered or premature
SUBDIVISION of land as would involve danger or injury to health, safety or
prosperity by reason of the lack of water supply, drainage, transportation,
schools or fire services or necessitate an excessive expenditure of public
funds for the supply of such services.
§ 289-37. Plan schedule and form.
A. In consonance with RSA 674:36, I and II, the minimum duration of time
for total DEVELOPMENT and the extent to which a proposed
SUBDIVISION may be developed in any given year shall conform at
least to the schedule set forth below so that said minimum duration of
time for total DEVELOPMENT shall not be less than the amount
specified, and the maximum extent to which the SUBDIVISION may be
developed in any given year shall not be more than the amount
specified below.
Number of LOTs
Proposed
Length of Time
(years)
Number of LOTs
Given Final Approval
in One Year
(percent)
Under 6 — All
6 to 16 2 50%
17 to 30 3 30%
31 to 50 4 25%
51 to 100 5 or more 20%
Subdivisions proposing over 100 lots shall have the phasing plan
established by the PLANNING BOARD at a public hearing. Such public
hearing may be as part of the formal APPLICATION approval process
or at a pre-APPLICATION hearing requested by the APPLICANT solely
for this purpose subsequent to a conceptual plan presentation. The
BOARD reserves the right to place conditions on such phasing with
relation to any conceptual plans presented, and may further require
that such phasing approval be made part of the formal APPLICATION
process, and significant changes to the conceptual plan that appear as
part of the formal APPLICATION may, at the discretion of the BOARD,
require re-approval of the changes with regard to the phasing plan.
§ 289-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 289-37
1:355
B. Final PLANS shall be drawn up to meet all other SUBDIVISION
requirements, except that a Master PLAN for the SUBDIVISION shall
be submitted to the PLANNING BOARD showing which LOTs and how
many will be submitted for each phase. A phase (first) shall constitute
one year from the date of final approval, and each subsequent year shall
constitute a subsequent phase (second, third, etc.). The Master PLAN
shall not be filed at the registry but shall be retained by the
SUBDIVIDER and PLANNING BOARD.
C. The final PLAN submitted by the SUBDIVIDER for the final hearing
shall show only those LOTs being approved for that phase. Other future
LOTs shall be shown on the Master Plan. Roads may be built in sections
and temporarily terminated by a cul-de-sac until continued.
§ 289-37 HUDSON CODE § 289-37
1:356
ARTICLE VIIIA
DEVELOPMENT Agreement
§ 289-38. Agreement required; contents.
Pursuant to the PLANNING BOARD's statutory authority to attach
reasonable conditions to SUBDIVISION and SITE PLAN approvals, the
PLANNING BOARD shall require the APPLICANT to execute a
DEVELOPMENT agreement. This agreement shall detail the terms,
conditions and responsibilities of the APPLICANT and the Town in
conjunction with an approved plan.
§ 289-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 289-38
1:357

ARTICLE VIIIB
Incomplete and Inactive SUBDIVISION or SITE PLAN Application
plan sets
§ 289-39. Return of application plan sets; refund.
Refunds of fees and the return of application PLAN sets shall be in
compliance with § 276-8 of the LAND USE REGULATIONS.
§ 289-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 289-39
1:359

ARTICLE VIIIC
Street Disposition Awareness
§ 289-40. Identification of unaccepted streets; responsibility of
developer.
A. Purpose. Residents and prospective residents need to know what kind
of maintenance and support can be expected for the streets on which
they live. Such persons need to be able to easily determine that a given
STREET is accepted and maintained by the Town. The purpose also is to
promote safety as much as possible.
B. Signage; warning signs. For all new DEVELOPMENTs, a warning sign
shall be placed at the junction where an unapproved street(s) meet(s)
an approved street(s). Such warning sign shall be installed at the
developer's own cost. Sign message shall read: "Notice: Unaccepted
Street, Maintenance is the Responsibility of Developer or ABUTTERs,
Pass at Own Risk." This warning sign shall remain in place until the
STREET in question is accepted by the Town. Until Town STREET
acceptance, sign maintenance shall be the responsibility of the
developer.
C. Signage design specifications.
(1) Dimensions for sign area: 24 inches wide by 30 inches high.
(2) Background of sign: white.
(3) Lettering: black.
(4) The sign shall conform to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices.
D. Signage cost, if purchased through the Town of Hudson. The sign may
be ordered through the Hudson Department of Public Works. Including
sign post and mounting hardware, the cost is $100. Payment is required
at time of sign order. The developer may choose to acquire the sign
without purchase through the Town.
E. Signage installation. The sign shall be installed by the developer.
F. Winter maintenance bond. Prior to the issuance of a building PERMIT
for any dwelling or other habitable structure on an unaccepted street,
the developer/OWNER of such a STREET shall be required to post a
winter maintenance bond with the Town. The winter maintenance bond
shall be separate from the SUBDIVISION performance bond and any
escrow fees that the developer establishes with the Town. The winter
maintenance bond shall be designed to reimburse the Town for the
potential cost of maintaining an unaccepted street, should said party of
responsibility fail to do so in a manner deemed acceptable by the Town
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR, resulting in the Town being forced to use
§ 289-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 289-40
1:361
the Emergency Lane Statute (i.e., NH RSA 231:59-a) to maintain the
street. [Amended 10-9-2018]
§ 289-40 HUDSON CODE § 289-40
1:362
ARTICLE VIIID
Period of Validity of Approved PLANS
§ 289-41. PLANS approved at PLANNING BOARD meeting, but not
signed and recorded at Hillsborough County Registry of Deeds.
PLAN validity shall be as be as required in § 276-9 of the LAND USE
REGULATIONS.
§ 289-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 289-41
1:363

ARTICLE VIIIE
Utilities
§ 289-42. Installation requirements.
All utility installations and modifications shall comply with the requirements
of § 276-13 of the LAND USE REGULATIONS.
§ 289-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 289-42
1:365

ARTICLE VIIIF
Application Completeness
§ 289-43. Determination of application completion.
Application completeness shall be determined in accordance with §§ 276-3
and 276-14 of the LAND USE REGULATIONS.
§ 289-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 289-43
1:367

ARTICLE VIIIG
Electronic Copy of plan
§ 289-44. Form requirements.
Prior to recording a SITE PLAN at the Hillsborough County Registry of
Deeds, a copy of the PLAN shall be provided in electronic form acceptable
to the Town.
A. The electronic drawing for all but streets shall incorporate the
information and layer configuration specified in § 276-11.2A.
§ 289-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 289-44
1:369

Part 2
Streets In Subdivisions
The electronic drawing shall incorporate same layer configuration as
required by § 276-11.2A and § 276-11.2B.
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 289-44
1:371

ARTICLE IX
Surfacing and Costs of Surfacing
(Article 21, voted in the affirmative 3-14-1967 by the Annual Town Meeting,
reads as follows: "To see if the Town shall vote to rescind the action taken
under Article 26 of the 1963 Town Meeting relative to the surfacing of
streets in subdivisions and substitute in its stead the following: To see if
the Town shall vote to require OWNERs or developers of new subdivisions,
subdivisions with unsold LOTs or homes owned by the subdivider or his/
her/its agents, to surface all unsurfaced streets either by the Town at total
cost, including equipment, or by a private contractor under supervision
of the PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR.110 A bond shall be required from the
subdivider, developer, or his/her/its agents to insure faithful performance
and guarantee that the paving shall be in accordance with Town
specifications.")
110. Editor’s Note: The term “Road Agent” was changed to “Public Works Director” 10-9-2018.
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 289-44
1:373
Chapter 290
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Excavation of soil — See Ch. 200.
Site plan review — See Ch. 275.
Administrative requirements and
definitions — See Ch. 276.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 289.
Zoning — See Ch. 334.
§ 290-1. Purpose; when effective; applicability.
The purpose of this regulation is to control runoff and soil erosion and
sedimentation resulting from site construction and DEVELOPMENT and
to comply with U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) stormwater
management legislation for municipal separate storm sewer systems
(MS4s), as amended. SUBDIVISIONs and SITE PLANS shall include PLANS
for managing stormwater and controlling erosion and sedimentation as
provided below. Any errors or omissions in these regulations shall not
exempt APPLICANTs from complying with applicable state and federal
statutes. In the event of conflicting requirements between this regulation
and any existing or subsequently adopted regulation or ordinance of the
Town of Hudson, pursuant to RSA 676:14, the provision that imposes the
greater restriction or higher standard shall be controlling. The regulation
shall become effective upon adoption by the PLANNING BOARD in
accordance with provisions of RSA 675:6 and shall apply thereafter to
all development within the Town of Hudson, pursuant to the PLANNING
BOARD's authority to regulate SUBDIVISIONs and SITE PLANs.
§ 290-2. Definitions; abbreviations.
Words in all capital letters are those with special definitions as noted in
§ 276-2 of the LAND USE REGULATIONS.
As used in this regulation, the terms listed in § 276-2 of the LAND USE
REGULATIONS shall have the meanings indicated therein.
§ 290-3. Conditions under which plans are required.
A. The APPLICANT shall design and submit a site-specific construction
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION CONTROL PLAN to the
PLANNING BOARD and Town Engineer for any tract of land being
developed, redeveloped or subdivided within the boundaries of Hudson,
where one or more of the following conditions are proposed:
(1) A cumulative disturbed area exceeding 20,000 square feet.
§ 289-44 HUDSON CODE § 290-3
1:374
§ 290-4. Design standards.
The design shall conform to the standards set forth in NHDES regulations
or as directed in the LAND USE REGULATIONS, whichever dictates the
higher standard.
(2) Construction or reconstruction of a STREET or road with greater
than one acre of disturbance.
(3) A SUBDIVISION of more than three building LOTs.
(4) Proposed work adjacent to a wetlands or wetlands buffer.
(5) Disturbed CRITICAL AREAS (see definitions).
B. The APPLICANT shall design and submit a permanent Stormwater
Management and Erosion Control PLAN to the PLANNING BOARD and
Town Engineer for any tract of land within the boundaries of Hudson
where one or more of the conditions described in Subsection A(1)
through (5) are proposed. The plan's contents shall be as described
§ 290-4 below.
A. Temporary/Construction stormwater management design. The
following standards shall be applied in planning for stormwater
management and erosion control as related to construction. (These
standards are in addition to requirements that may be found in this and
other sections of the SITE PLAN Review and SUBDIVISION
Regulations.)
(1) All measures in the PLAN shall meet, as a minimum, the BEST
MANAGEMENT PRACTICEs set forth in the Stormwater
Management and Erosion and SEDIMENT Control Handbook for
Urban and Developing Areas in New Hampshire, Rockingham
County Conservation District, NH Department of Environmental
Services, Soil Conservation Service (now the Natural Resources
Conservation Service), August 1992, as amended from time to time.
Additional BMPs are available at the following locations:
(a) http://www.des.state.nh.us/factsheets/wqe/wqe-6.htm -
NHDES Environmental Fact Sheet WD-WQE-6 (Soil Erosion
and SEDIMENT Control on Construction Sites, 1996).
(b) http://www.epa.gov/npdes/national-menu-best-managementpractices-
bmps-stormwater#edu - EPA National Pollution
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) [National Menu of
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICEs (BMPs) for Stormwater].
(c) http://www.epa.gov/npdes - EPA National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES).
(2) Whenever practical, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected
or supplemented. The stripping of vegetation shall be done in a
manner that minimizes soil erosion.
§ 290-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-4
1:375
(3) Appropriate erosion and SEDIMENT control measures shall be
installed prior to land disturbance.
(4) The area of disturbance shall be kept to a minimum. Disturbed
areas remaining idle for more than 30 days shall be stabilized.
(5) Measures shall be taken to control erosion within the project area.
SEDIMENT in runoff water shall be trapped and retained within
the PROJECT AREA using approved measures. Wetland areas and
surface waters shall be protected from sediment.
(6) SEDIMENT basins. For common drainage that serves an area with
10 or more acres disturbed at one time, a temporary (or
permanent) SEDIMENT basin provides storage for a calculated
volume of runoff from measures, and must be provided where
attainable until final stabilization of the site. Where no such
calculation has been performed, a temporary (or permanent)
SEDIMENT basin providing 3,600 cubic feet of storage per acre
drained, or equivalent control measures, must be provided where
attainable until final stabilization of the site. When computing the
number of acres draining to a common location, it is not necessary
to include flows from off-site areas and flows from on-site areas that
are either undisturbed or have undergone final stabilization where
such flows are diverted around both the disturbed areas and the
SEDIMENT basin. In determining whether a SEDIMENT basin is
attainable, the operators may consider such factors as site soils,
slope, available area on site, etc. In any event, the operator must
consider public safety, especially as it relates to children, as a
design factor for the SEDIMENT basin, and alternative SEDIMENT
controls must be used where site limitations would preclude a safe
design.
(7) For drainage locations which serve 10 or more disturbed acres at
one time and where a temporary SEDIMENT basin or equivalent
controls are not attainable, smaller SEDIMENT basins and/or
SEDIMENT traps should be used. At a minimum, a silt fence,
vegetative buffer strips, or equivalent SEDIMENT controls are
required for all down slope boundaries (and for those side slope
boundaries deemed appropriate as dictated by individual site
conditions).
(8) For drainage locations serving fewer than 10 acres, smaller
SEDIMENT basins and/or SEDIMENT traps should be used. At a
minimum, a silt fence, vegetative buffer strips, or equivalent
SEDIMENT controls are required for all down slope boundaries
(and for those side slope boundaries deemed appropriate as
dictated by individual site conditions) of the construction area
unless a SEDIMENT basin providing storage for a calculated
volume of runoff from a two-year, twenty-four-hour storm or 3,600
cubic feet of storage per acre drained is provided.
§ 290-4 HUDSON CODE § 290-4
1:376
(9) Off-site surface water and runoff from undisturbed areas shall be
diverted away from disturbed areas where feasible or carried
nonerosively through the project area. Integrity of downstream
drainage systems shall be maintained.
(10) Measures shall be taken to control the post-DEVELOPMENT peak
rate of runoff so that it does not exceed pre-DEVELOPMENT runoff
for the two-year, twenty-four-hour storm event and for additional
storm event frequencies as specified in the design criteria of the
Stormwater Management and Erosion and SEDIMENT Control
Handbook for Urban and Developing Areas in New Hampshire.
(11) Priority should be given to preserving natural drainage systems,
including perennial and intermittent streams, wetlands, swales,
and drainage ditches for conveyance of runoff leaving the project
area.
(12) All temporary erosion and SEDIMENT control measures shall be
maintained in functioning condition until final site stabilization is
accomplished.
(13) All temporary erosion and SEDIMENT control measures shall be
removed after final site stabilization. Trapped SEDIMENT and
other disturbed soil areas resulting from the removal of temporary
measures shall be permanently STABILIZED within 30 days unless
conditions dictate otherwise.
(14) Naturally occurring streams, channels, and wetlands shall be used
for conveyance of runoff leaving the PROJECT AREA only after
appropriate sedimentation control measures have been employed.
B. Permanent stormwater management general design criteria. The
following standards shall be applied in planning for stormwater
management and erosion control as related to long-term management
of municipal water quality:
(1) Under one acre of disturbance: This shall require a basic
stormwater quality management system. At a minimum, all
stormwater must pass through basic pretreatment (beyond catch
basin sumps) prior to leaving the site.
(2) Over one acre of disturbance:
(a) Within the UA requires a well-thought-out, systematic,
permanent stormwater quality management system. The latest
technology and most up-to-date performance data must be
considered when selecting permanent control measures. As
noted above, catch basin sumps alone are not considered a
valid water quality control measure. Mechanical devices may
be required to supplement any proposal. Maintenance
programs and schedules shall be required as part of the
proposal. Water quality control measures associated with a
§ 290-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-4
1:377
§ 290-5. Application requirements.
The following minimum PLAN requirements apply to all stormwater
management and erosion control plans. Additional requirements may be
found in this and other sections of the SITE PLAN Review and
SUBDIVISION Regulations.
SUBDIVISION or SITE PLAN may be required to provide longterm
escrow funds to cover future maintenance expenses. Sites
with appropriate separation to the seasonal high groundwater
table must also consider groundwater recharge. All
groundwater recharge systems shall require on-site test pit
and percolation test data to be submitted as part of the review.
(b) Outside the UA requires a basic systematic permanent
stormwater quality management system. Catch basin sumps
alone are not considered a valid water quality control measure.
(3) Adjacent to the wetlands buffer (any size disturbance):
(a) Any new project adjacent to the wetlands buffer shall require
permanent water quality control measures.
(b) Projects involving redevelopment or expansion shall be
considered on a case-by-case basis.
(4) Municipal projects: All municipal projects shall comply with water
quality control measures defined in this regulation. Nothing
regarding municipal projects is intended to impose any greater
requirement than is already required by RSA 674:54.
C. Permanent stormwater management technical design criteria. All
measures in the PLAN shall as a minimum meet the BEST
MANAGEMENT PRACTICEs set forth in the Stormwater Management
and Erosion and SEDIMENT Control Handbook for Urban and
Developing Areas in New Hampshire, Rockingham County
Conservation District, NH Department of Environmental Services, Soil
Conservation Service (now the Natural Resources Conservation
Service), August 1992, as amended from time to time.
A. Site drawing of existing and proposed conditions:
(1) Locus map showing property boundaries.
(2) North arrow, scale, date.
(3) Property lines.
(4) Easements.
(5) Structures, utilities, roads and other paved areas.
(6) Topographic contours.
§ 290-4 HUDSON CODE § 290-5
1:378
(7) CRITICAL AREAS.
(8) Surface water and wetlands, drainage patterns, and watershed
boundaries.
(9) Vegetation.
B. Soils information for design purposes or for determining HIGHLY
ERODIBLE SOILS shall be determined from a National Cooperative Soil
Survey (NCSS) soil series map. A High Intensity Soil Map of the site,
prepared in accordance with the Society of Soil Scientists of Northern
New England (SSSNNE) Special Publication No. 1, can only be used for
design purposes and not for determining HIGHLY ERODIBLE SOILS.
C. Temporary and permanent stormwater management and erosion and
SEDIMENT control BMPs.
D. Areas and timing of soil disturbance.
E. A schedule for self-inspection and maintenance of all BMPs.
F. Narrative section including discussion of each measure, its purpose,
construction sequence, and installation timing as they apply to the site.
G. If infiltration or exfiltration is proposed as part of the drainage solution,
test pit information regarding estimated seasonal high water table shall
be provided at the elevation of the proposed infiltrating or exfiltrating
device.
H. Calculations for the infiltration or exfiltration system. These
calculations should also account for frozen ground conditions, when the
devices may not function at their optimal design.
I. Any other specific study, calculation, or investigation as requested by
the Town.
J. The drainage PLANS and report shall be certified by a licensed
professional engineer, registered in the State of New Hampshire.
K. Completed application requirements. The following shall be required in
the final PLAN unless the project is under one acre or is of sufficiently
minimal impact to qualify for the minimum requirements specified in
§ 290-4, Design standards, of this regulation as determined by the Town
Engineer.
(1) Construction drawings; supporting documents.
(2) Locus map showing property boundaries.
(3) North arrow, scale, date.
(4) Property lines.
(5) Structures, roads, utilities, EARTH stockpiles, equipment storage,
and plan for stump and debris removal.
§ 290-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-5
1:379
(6) Topographic contours at two-foot intervals.
(7) CRITICAL AREAS within the PROJECT AREA and within 200 feet of
project boundary surface waters, wetlands, and drainage patterns
and watershed boundaries.
(8) Vegetation.
(9) Extent of one-hundred-year floodplain boundaries if published or
determined.
(10) Soils information for design purposes from a National Cooperative
Soil Survey (NCSS) soil series map or a High Intensity Soil Map of
the site, prepared in accordance with SSSNNE Special Publication
No. 1. HIGHLY ERODIBLE SOILS shall be determined by soil
series.
(11) Easements.
(12) Areas of soil disturbance.
(13) Areas of cut and fill.
(14) Locations of EARTH stockpiles.
(15) Locations of equipment storage and staging.
(16) Stump disposal.
(17) Areas of soil disturbance.
(18) Highlighted areas of poorly and very poorly drained soils.
(19) Highlighted areas of poorly and/or very poorly drained soils
proposed to be filled.
(20) Locations, descriptions, details, and design calculations for all
structural, nonstructural, permanent, and temporary erosion and
sedimentation control measures and BMPs.
(21) Identification of all permanent control measures.
(22) Identification of permanent snow storage areas.
(23) Identification of snow management measures during construction.
(24) Construction schedule.
(25)EARTH movement schedule.
(26) A combination of SEDIMENT and erosion control measures is
required to achieve maximum pollutant removal.
(a) SEDIMENT basins: for common drainage that serves an area
with 10 or more acres disturbed at one time, a temporary (or
permanent) SEDIMENT basin which provides storage for a
§ 290-5 HUDSON CODE § 290-5
1:380
calculated volume of runoff from a drainage area from a twoyear,
twenty-four-hour storm, or equivalent control measures,
must be provided where attainable until final stabilization of
the site. Where no such calculation has been performed, a
temporary (or permanent) SEDIMENT basin providing 3,600
cubic feet of storage per acre drained, or equivalent control
measures, must be provided where attainable until final
stabilization of the site. When computing the number of acres
draining to a common location, it is not necessary to include
flows from off-site areas and flows from on-site areas that are
either undisturbed or have undergone final stabilization where
such flows are diverted around both the disturbed areas and
the SEDIMENT basin. In determining whether a SEDIMENT
basin is attainable, the operators may consider such factors as
site soils, slope, available area on site, etc. In any event, the
operator must consider public safety, especially as it relates
to children, as a design factor for the SEDIMENT basin, and
alternative SEDIMENT controls must be used where site
limitations would preclude a safe design.
(b) For drainage locations which serve 10 or more disturbed acres
at one time and where a temporary SEDIMENT basin or
equivalent controls are not attainable, smaller SEDIMENT
basins and/or SEDIMENT traps should be used. At a minimum,
a silt fence, vegetative buffer strips, or equivalent SEDIMENT
controls are required for all down slope boundaries (and for
those side slope boundaries deemed appropriate as dictated by
individual site conditions).
(c) For drainage locations serving fewer than 10 acres, smaller
SEDIMENT basins and/or SEDIMENT traps should be used. At
a minimum, a silt fence, vegetative buffer strips, or equivalent
SEDIMENT controls are required for all down slope
boundaries (and for those side slope boundaries deemed
appropriate as dictated by individual site conditions) of the
construction area unless a SEDIMENT basin providing storage
for a calculated volume of runoff from a two-year, twenty-fourhour
storm or 3,600 cubic feet of storage per acre drained is
provided.
(d) A proposed schedule for the inspection and maintenance of all
measures. Inspections must be conducted at least once every
seven calendar days or once every 14 calendar days and within
24 hours of the end of a storm event of 0.5 inch or greater.
(e) Identification of all permanent control measures and
responsibility for continued maintenance.
L. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN, including:
§ 290-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-5
1:381
(1) Design calculations for all temporary and permanent structural
control BMP measures.
(2) A proposed schedule for the inspection and maintenance of all
BMPs.
(3) Identification of all permanent control measures and responsibility
for continued maintenance.
(4) Drainage report with calculations showing volume, peak discharge,
and velocity of present and future runoff for the ten-year, twentyfour-
hour storm event.
(5) PLANS showing the entire drainage area affecting or being
affected by the DEVELOPMENT of the site. Proposed LOT
boundaries and drainage areas shall be clearly shown on the plan.
(6) The direction of flow of runoff through the use of arrows shall
clearly be shown on the plan.
(7) The location, elevation, and size of all existing and proposed catch
basins, dry wells, drainage ditches, swales, retention basins, and
storm sewers shall be shown on the plan.
(8) When detention structures are planned to reduce future condition
peak discharge, the soil cover complex method shall be used to
compute the runoff volume and peak discharge for designing the
structure. The design shall conform to the criteria outlined for
those types of structures given in the Stormwater Management and
Erosion and SEDIMENT Control Handbook for Urban and
Developing Areas in New Hampshire.
(9) Copies of pertinent state and federal permits.
(10) An example stormwater management PLAN table of contents
follows:
(a) Project overview.
(b) OWNER.
(c) Address of DEVELOPMENT.
(d) Location of the site.
(e) Description of receiving waters.
(f) Nature and purpose of the land-disturbing activity.
(g) Limits of disturbance.
(h) Construction schedule.
(i) Existing conditions summary.
§ 290-5 HUDSON CODE § 290-5
1:382
§ 290-6. Responsibility for installation and construction.
(j) Define topography, drainage patterns, soils, ground cover,
CRITICAL AREAS, adjacent areas, upstream areas draining
through site, existing DEVELOPMENT, existing stormwater
facilities, on- and off-site utilities, construction limitations,
buffers, wetlands, streams, sensitive areas, and other pertinent
features.
(k) An existing conditions PLAN (drawing) showing the above
existing conditions and labeled per the narrative above.
(l) Off-site analysis.
(m) Description of the tributary area (include at least 1/4 mile
downstream), drainage channels, conveyance systems and
downstream receiving waters.
(n) Review of the existing or potential problems resulting from the
DEVELOPMENT, including, but not limited to, sedimentation,
erosion, water quality issues, chemical spills.
(o) A demonstration or explanation showing that the
DEVELOPMENT of the site shall not affect the downstream
systems negatively.
(p) A demonstration or explanation showing the adequate capacity
of the downstream system to handle flow conditions after
DEVELOPMENT.
(q) As applicable, an off-site drainage PLAN. (The PLAN may be
part of the existing conditions plan.)
(r) Special reports, studies, maintenance information.
(s) As applicable, inclusion of test pit log forms, soil conditions
data, wetland delineation information.
(t) As applicable, inclusion of information regarding long-range
maintenance of any closed drainage systems, detention/
retention facilities, etc.
(u) Appendix (include copies of all tables, graphs, and charts, test
pit, and percolation test data used in any of the above
calculations).
A. The APPLICANT and the APPLICANT's engineer (or technical
representative) shall schedule and attend a mandatory preconstruction
meeting with the Town Engineer or his/her/its designee at least two
weeks prior to commencement of construction. Two copies of the
SWPPP and NOI (if required), the SWMP, and associated construction
documents must be provided at that time. The SWMP must bear the
seal and signature of the New Hampshire registered professional
§ 290-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-6
1:383
engineer preparing the documents. Prior to commencement of
construction, the Community Development Department shall confirm
that the documents submitted meet the conditions of PLAN approval.
An appropriate notation shall be made on the "official" construction set
used by the Code Enforcement Officer and Engineering Division. (Note:
Preconstruction conferences shall typically not be required for singlefamily
and duplex construction.)
(1) The APPLICANT shall provide the TOWN an emergency contact
name and number for stormwater management emergency
incidents.
(2) The contact name and number shall remain current during the life
of the permit, and shall require a minimum four-hour response to
emergencies.
B. The Town's Community Development Department Engineering Division
reserves the right to prepare and request the APPLICANT's
acknowledgement of a preconstruction checklist.
C. The APPLICANT shall bear final responsibility for the installation,
construction, inspection and disposition of all stormwater management
and erosion control measures required by the provisions of this
regulation.
D. The Town's Community Development Department Engineering Division
may require a bond or other security in an amount and with surety
conditions satisfactory to the Town, providing for the actual
construction and installation of such measures within a period specified
by the Town and expressed in the bond or the surety.
E. The Town's Community Development Department Engineering Division
may require the OWNER or his/her/its authorized agent to deposit in
escrow with the Town an amount of money sufficient to cover the
Town's costs for inspection and any professional assistance required for
site compliance monitoring.
F. Site DEVELOPMENT shall not begin before the SWMP has been
reviewed and approved from the Town and a NOI has been
acknowledged by the EPA. BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICEs shall be
installed as designed and scheduled as a condition of final approval of
the plan.
G. Commercial and industrial DEVELOPMENT and/or redevelopment. The
APPLICANT, OWNER, and OWNER's legally designated representative
(if any) shall all hold responsibility for implementing the SWMP.
H. Residential DEVELOPMENT and redevelopment. The APPLICANT is
responsible for implementing the SWMP. There are two ways for the
Town to consider an APPLICANT to be removed as the responsible
party (The APPLICANT may also be required to comply with other
regulating entities' additional requirements.):
§ 290-6 HUDSON CODE § 290-6
1:384
§ 290-7. Plan approval and review.
§ 290-8. Maintenance and inspection.
(1) The APPLICANT completes the project in a manner satisfactory to
the Town and files a notice of termination (NOT) with the EPA in
accordance with the terms of the federal requirements.
(2) The APPLICANT passes legal responsibility for the PLAN to
another competent party. In the case of a new SUBDIVISION where
LOTs may be transferred to a different entity for construction of the
buildings, it is the APPLICANT's responsibility to ensure that the
APPLICANT has a legal basis to require compliance by the new
entity.
I. Individual homeowner development. The homeowner, of a subdivided
property bears responsibility for compliance with the approved SWMP.
If the homeowner is contracting building services to another person or
entity, the homeowner may choose to pass legal responsibility of
compliance to the contracted entity. If the responsibility is not passed,
the homeowner remains the responsible party and must comply with
the terms of the original plan.
A. The PLANNING BOARD shall indicate approval of the SWMP, as filed, if
it complies with the requirements and objectives of this regulation.
Review and recommendation shall be provided by the Town Engineer or
agent thereof. As applicable, such approval shall be a component of
SUBDIVISION or SITE PLAN approval.
B. Final SWMP approval shall be contingent upon collection of any
required fees or escrow amounts related to technical review of any
SWMP prepared under this regulation.
A. A narrative description of ongoing construction and operational
maintenance requirements for water quality measures required by
SWMP after final PLANNING BOARD approval shall be incorporated
into the DEVELOPMENT agreement of the property on which such
measures are located and recorded at the Hillsborough County Registry
of Deeds. The narrative shall be in the form of a typical SITE PLAN
management or DEVELOPMENT agreement, or as otherwise set forth
by the PLANNING BOARD.
B. The purpose of this section is to enact locally the administrative and
enforcement procedures set forth in RSA Chapter 676 of the existing
planning and land use statutes.
C. If the APPLICANT is unable to adequately provide the required
maintenance activities during construction, the Town may require
additional escrow funding to be used by either the APPLICANT or the
Town solely to repair, replace and/or maintain the required measures.
§ 290-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-8
1:385
§ 290-9. Other required permits.
In addition to local approval, copies of the following permits shall be
required if applicable:
§ 290-10. Post-construction operation.
D. The Town may require inspections to verify ongoing maintenance of
water quality protection measures. Such inspections shall be performed
by the Town or its designee at reasonable times to the landowner.
E. As a condition of PLANNING BOARD approval, the owner, his/her/its
successor and assigns shall consent to inspections by the PLANNING
BOARD or its designee for compliance with these regulations.
F. Self-inspection reports are to be filed on-site in a location easily
accessible to a Town inspector.
A. RSA 485-A:17 requires a PERMIT from the New Hampshire Water
Supply and Pollution Control Division for ". . .any person proposing to
significantly alter the characteristics of the terrain, in such a manner as
to impede the natural runoff or create an unnatural runoff. . ."
Regulations require this PERMIT for any project involving more than
100,000 contiguous square feet of disturbance or if such activity occurs
in or on the border of the surface waters of the state.
B. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater
discharge permit: a PERMIT issued by the EPA or by the state under
authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b) that authorizes the
discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States. For a cumulative
disturbance of one acre of land that the EPA considers "construction
activity," which includes, but is not limited to, clearing, grading,
EXCAVATION and other activities that expose soil typically related to
landscaping, demolition and construction of structures and roads, a
federal PERMIT shall be required. Consult the EPA for specific rules.
This EPA PERMIT is in addition to any state or local PERMIT required.
To apply, the entity or individual responsible for construction site
operations shall file a notice of intent (NOI) with the EPA at least seven
days prior to work beginning. Discharge is authorized when the
application status is listed as "authorized" in the EPA public NOI
database or when the APPLICANT receives an EPA authorization letter
by mail. A sample NOI is provided in Attachment 2, included as an
attachment to this chapter.
A. Stormwater discharges associated with commercial/industrial
activities. Each commercial and industrial facility approved under this
regulation is required to perform annual site inspections (at a
minimum). The site inspection must be documented and at a minimum
should include: review of stormwater flow paths, condition of any
SEDIMENT or contaminant control devices, water quality notations,
corrective actions and time frames if unacceptable water quality runoff
§ 290-8 HUDSON CODE § 290-10
1:386
§ 290-11. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
is noted, and the name and position of the inspector. All records of the
inspections must be made available to the Town or authorized agent
upon request.
B. Notification of spills or other nonstormwater discharges. As soon as any
person responsible for a facility, site, activity or operation has
information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or
nonstormwater discharges which are resulting or may result in illicit
discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the Town of
Hudson's municipal storm system, state waters, or waters of the United
States, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the
discovery, containment and cleanup of such release so as to minimize
the effects of the discharge. (If said individual is not competent to
assess, contain, or clean up, that person shall immediately notify
another competent individual or firm.) If the substance poses an
immediate health or safety concern, the TOWN OF HUDSON
Emergency Services must immediately be notified. If the substance
does not pose an immediate concern, the TOWN OF HUDSON
Community Development Department should be notified. This
notification should be made as soon as possible; however, no later than
24 hours post-event. This notification does not preclude and must be
made in addition to any federal or state required notifications. The site
operator/owner must be aware that discharges such as treated
swimming pool water are not allowed discharges unless appropriate
measures have been taken to reduce the treatment chemical
concentrations in the water.
A. Any violation of the requirements of this regulation shall be subject to
the enforcement procedures detailed in RSA Chapter 676 in addition to
any other remedy available in law or equity.
B. Written notice of violation (first offense). A written notice of violation
shall be issued to the property OWNER by certified mail from the Town
Engineer or designee if the agent determines that conditions at the site
are in violation of any of the requirements of this regulation or PLANS
approved under this regulation and that the violation is not an
immediate threat to public health and safety. The notice of violation
shall:
(1) Specify the actions or conditions which violate the requirements of
this regulation or PLANS approved under this regulation.
(2) Identify what needs to be done to correct the violation(s).
(3) Specify a reasonable time frame within which the violation shall be
corrected.
(4) Be provided to the property OWNER with a copy to be kept in the
official Community Development records.
§ 290-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-11
1:387
C. Civil penalty (second or multiple offenses). A letter outlining all of the
above may be accompanied by a notice of civil penalty. In addition to the
corrections required by the initial notice of violation and any
subsequent reported infractions, a civil penalty may be imposed, not to
exceed $275 for the first offense and $550 for subsequent offenses for
each day that such violation is found to continue after the conviction
date or after the date on which the violator received notice from the
Town that the violator is in violation, whichever is earlier.
D. Cease-and-desist order. In accordance with RSA 676:17-a, cease-anddesist
orders may be issued to the property OWNER by the TOWN OF
HUDSON if the agent determines that conditions at the site are in
violation of any of the requirements of this regulation and the violation
is either:
(1) An immediate threat to public health and safety; or
(2) The property OWNER has failed to take corrective action(s)
identified in a written notice of violation issued under Subsection B
of this section within the time frame specified therein.
E. Revocation of SUBDIVISION or SITE PLAN approval or building
PERMIT or certificate of occupancy. If the Town and the developers are
unable to reach a viable agreement related to any on-site violation, the
PLANNING BOARD may revoke the SUBDIVISION or SITE PLAN
approval pursuant to the provisions of RSA 676:4-a. In addition, the
Community Development Department may revoke the building PERMIT
or certificate of occupancy pursuant to the provisions of the TOWN OF
HUDSON Zoning Ordinance111 and Building Code. This action is only to
be used in cases where the above measures have failed to move the
project into compliance with the established regulations or design
standards or those standards subsequently adopted by state and/or
federal agencies.
F. Criminal penalties. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this
regulation or any provision or specification of any application, plat, or
plan, or any requirement or condition of a PERMIT or decision issued by
the PLANNING BOARD or the Town Engineer shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor if a natural person or guilty of a felony if any other
person.
G. Associated fees. In any legal action brought by the Town to enforce
these regulations or any requirement or condition imposed by the
PLANNING BOARD or the Town Engineer, the Town shall recover its
costs and reasonable attorney's fees actually expended in pursuing a
legal action if it is found to be a prevailing party. For the purposes of
this subsection, recoverable costs shall include all out-of-pocket
expenses actually incurred, including but not limited to inspection fees,
expert fees, and investigatory expenses.
111. Editor's Note: See Ch. 334, Zoning.
§ 290-11 HUDSON CODE § 290-12
1:388
§ 290-12. Mandatory regulated MS4s in urbanized areas.112
Municipal separate storm sewer systems (MS4s) within urbanized areas
(UAs), as defined by the Bureau of Census, fall under mandatory regulation
under EPA Phase II Stormwater Management Regulations. Within the UAs,
all roads and streets and associated drainage systems, both open and
closed, fall under regulation. Map 1 depicts the two urbanized areas in
Hudson. The northern area is within the Nashua, New Hampshire UA and
the southern area is within the Boston, Massachusetts, New Hampshire,
and Rhode Island UA. All land in Hudson shall comply with this regulation.
Chapter 304
TATTOO, BODY PIERCING, BRANDING AND PERMANENT
MAKEUP
112. Editor's Note: The Map of Urbanized Areas is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 290-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-12
1:389

ARTICLE I
Statutory Authority; Definitions
§ 304-1. Authority.
§ 304-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases when used
herein shall be construed as follows:
A. This chapter has been enacted by the Health Officer and approved by
the Board of Selectmen for the Town of Hudson, under the authority
granted in RSA 147:1, Local Regulations, NH RSA 31:39M, effective
July 1, 1989, and amended August 14, 1989, with an effective date of
October 14, 1989, and by the authority set forth in RSA 314-A, effective
July 1, 1994.
B. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the safety, health and welfare
of the general public and not to protect the personal or property
interest of individuals. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to be
the making of a promise or the undertaking of a special duty towards or
relationship with any person who gets a tattoo or is body-pierced; nor
shall the provisions of or failure to provide such licenses or to
undertake particular inspections or types of inspections be deemed to
create a special relationship or duty towards any person upon which
any action in negligence or other tort might be founded.
C. This chapter is based on the following legislative findings:
(1) There is a risk of harm to the public from the practice of tattooing,
including the application of permanent makeup by tattooing, and
from body piercing. The risk arises from the characteristics of
these practices, the characteristics of clients served and the
characteristics of the workplace environment and supervisory
practices.
(2) Tattooing and body piercing are invasive procedures in which the
skin is penetrated by a foreign object. If proper sterilization and
antiseptic procedures are not followed by tattooists and body
piercers, there is a risk of transmission of blood-borne or other
infections.
(3) Tattooing and body piercing may cause allergic reactions in
persons sensitive to dyes or metals used in ornamentation.
(4) The public can be protected from this risk by requiring the use of
universal precautions related to the transmission of blood-borne
infections and by disclosure requirements to facilitate informed
choice.
§ 304-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-2
1:391
BOARD OF HEALTH — As defined in NH RSA 128:3, whereas the Health
Officer shall be the Secretary and Executive Officer of and with the Board
of Selectmen, shall constitute the local "Board of Health" for the town.
BODY PIERCING — The technique whereby various body parts are pierced
and surgical steel rings or studs are inserted. Body sites may include, but
may not be limited to, ear, nose, cheek, tongue, navel, forehead, nipples and
genitals.
BODY PIERCING ARTIST — Any person who actually performs the work of
body piercing.
BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENT — Any room or space where the body
piercing is practiced or where the business of body piercing is conducted,
or any part thereof.
BODY PIERCING OWNER OR OPERATOR — Any person who controls,
operates, conducts or manages any body piercing establishment, whether
actually performing the work of body piercing or not.
BRANDING — The technique whereby a heated metal form is placed on the
skin for the purpose of inducing permanent scarring in the shape of the
design attached to the end of the branding iron handle.
CERTIFICATE OF INSPECTION — An inspection report made by the Health
Officer or his/her duly appointed agent prior to issuing a body piercing and/
or tattoo establishment license indicating that the establishment complies
with the requirements of this chapter.
COMMUNICABLE DISEASE — Any disease caused by an infectious agent
which may be transmitted directly or indirectly from one individual to
another.
HEALTH CERTIFICATE — A card or letter valid for one (1) year issued to
a tattoo artist or person performing body piercing by a medical physician,
licensed to practice in New Hampshire or Massachusetts, after satisfactory
tests for Tuberculosis and after a satisfactory examination for apparent
communicable diseases, particularly in respect to arms and hands.
PERMANENT MAKEUP — The tattooing of permanent makeup onto the
face of a client, to include but not necessarily be limited to eyebrows,
eyeliner, lip liner, lip color, cheek blush, eye shadow and beauty marks.
TATTOO — An indelible mark or figure fixed upon the surface of the body by
the insertion of pigment under the skin or by the production of scars.
TATTOO ARTIST — Any person who actually performs the work of tattooing.
TATTOO ESTABLISHMENT — Any room or space where tattooing is
practiced or where the business of tattooing is conducted, or any part
thereof.
TATTOO ESTABLISHMENT OWNER OR OPERATOR — Any person who
controls, operates, conducts or manages any tattoo establishment, whether
actually performing the work of tattooing or not.
§ 304-2 HUDSON CODE § 304-2
1:392
UNIVERSAL PRECAUTIONS — Precautionary guidelines issued by the
National Centers for Disease Control (CDC) for use in the prevention of
transmission of infectious diseases from contact with potentially infected
body fluids. Universal precautions apply to blood and other body fluids
containing visible blood. Universal precautions also apply to semen and
vaginal secretions, tissues and body fluids such as cerebrospinal fluid and
pleural fluid. Universal precautions do not apply to feces, nasal secretions,
sputum, tears, urine and vomitus unless they contain visible blood. They
require the use of, but not limited to, protective clothing, goggles, masks
and latex gloves.
§ 304-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-2
1:393

ARTICLE II
Restrictions
§ 304-3. Prohibitions.
§ 304-4. Exemptions.
A. Tattooing of minors. Pursuant to NH RSA 639:3 II, the tattooing of any
person under the age of 18 is prohibited and constitutes endangering
the welfare of a minor. Parental consent does not constitute an
exemption to this requirement.
B. Branding shall be prohibited in the Town of Hudson unless performed
by a physician licensed to practice medicine in the State of New
Hampshire.
C. Permanent makeup shall be prohibited in the Town of Hudson unless
performed by a physician licensed to practice medicine in the State of
New Hampshire.
D. Body piercing below the waist shall be prohibited in the Town of
Hudson unless performed by a physician licensed to practice medicine
in the State of New Hampshire. The body piercing of any site except
ears on minors under the age of 18 years shall be prohibited without the
presence of a parent or guardian. The parent or guardian shall sign a
permission form, at the site, at the time of piercing.
A. These regulations shall not apply to physicians licensed to practice
medicine in New Hampshire and those they directly supervise as part of
their practice.
B. These regulations shall not apply to those novelty or jewelry stores in
the business of ear piercing with the use of a piercing gun. These
establishments shall use proper procedures and sanitization practices
as required by OSHA (Occupational Safety and Health Administration)
regulations. These establishments shall be prohibited from performing
body piercings at other sites except ears without satisfying all the
requirements of this chapter.
§ 304-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-4
1:395

ARTICLE III
Licensing Procedure
§ 304-5. License required.
A. Establishment license. No person shall own or operate a tattoo
establishment or engage in the practice or business of tattooing, own or
operate a body piercing establishment or engage in the practice or
business of body piercing without first obtaining an establishment
license for the location from the Health Officer or the Health Officer's
duly authorized agent. Applications for establishment licenses shall
include, at a minimum, the following:
(1) The name of the owner.
(2) The name of the establishment.
(3) The street address of the tattoo establishment.
(4) The mailing address of the tattoo establishment if it is different
from the street address.
(5) The telephone number of the owner.
(6) The telephone number of the tattoo establishment.
(7) The name, address and a copy of the current license of all tattoo
practitioners who work at the establishment.
(8) The fee required by this chapter.113
(9) The signature of the owner.
B. Artist license.
(1) No person shall engage in the practice or business of tattooing and/
or body piercing in a licensed establishment without first obtaining
an artist license from the Health Officer or the Health Officer's duly
authorized agent.
(2) Applications for such licenses shall be made in writing on a form
prescribed by the Town of Hudson,114 wherein the applicant shall
agree to conform to all rules and regulations governing such places
now in effect or as subsequently enacted, and to authorize and
permit such examinations and inspections as may be deemed
necessary by the Health Officer. The completed application shall
include, at a minimum, the following:
(a) The applicant's name.
(b) The applicant's address.
113. Editor's Note: The current fee amounts are set forth in § 304-6 of this chapter.
114. The forms required are on file in the town offices.
§ 304-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-5
1:397
§ 304-6. Terms of license; renewal of license; fees.
(c) The applicant's telephone number.
(d) The applicant's date of birth.
(e) A statement as to the experience the applicant has had in
performing tattooing, scarification or body piercing, including
apprenticeship served, or the licenses held, with a copy of such
licenses attached.
(f) A listing of the type of procedures the applicant intends to
perform.
(g) A statement signed by a licensed physician, licensed advanced
registered nurse practitioner or licensed physician's assistant
stating that they have examined the applicant no more than
ninety (90) days prior to the submission of the application and
found him/her to be in good mental health and physical health.
(h) A signed passport photograph of two inches by two inches or
an equivalent identification of the applicant.
(i) The fee required by this chapter.115
C. No person shall be granted an establishment license to operate a tattoo
establishment, body piercing establishment or engage in the practice or
business of tattooing or body piercing in the Town of Hudson without
site plan approval from the Hudson Planning Department and/or
Planning Board.
D. No person shall operate a mobile tattoo business or mobile body
piercing business in the Town of Hudson.
E. No person shall be granted a tattoo and/or body piercing artist license
or license renewal in the Town of Hudson without a current health
certificate from a physician submitted at the time of license application
and/or renewal.
F. No person shall be granted a tattoo and/or body piercing artist license
in the Town of Hudson without having first obtained a license from the
State of New Hampshire, pursuant to RSA 314-A, when such license is
required by the State of New Hampshire.
A. All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall, unless revoked as set
forth hereafter, expire on March 31 following their date of issue. The
requirements for the renewal thereof shall be the same as for new
licenses.
(1) Establishment license: a fee of $50 per year, per tattoo and/or body
piercing establishment, shall be charged. The owner(s) of the
115. Editor's Note: The fees are included in § 304-6 of this chapter.
§ 304-5 HUDSON CODE § 304-6
1:398
§ 304-7. Inspection schedule.
It shall be the duty of the Health Officer or his duly authorized agent to
cause inspections to be made on a recurring basis at all establishments
and the equipment thereof. If said place of business is not maintained,
conducted or operated in conformity with the requirements of this chapter
as now enacted or as subsequently amended, then the Health Officer may
revoke the establishment license as described in § 304-25A until said
establishment and the operation thereof is made to conform to the
requirements of this chapter. No owner, operator or artist shall operate
without a valid establishment license.
§ 304-8. Records required.
establishment shall be listed as licensee and the license shall not
be transferable.
(2) Artist license: a fee of $100 per year, per tattooist or person
engaged in body piercing, shall be charged for the issuance of a
license to operate from a permitted tattoo or body piercing
establishment. Each applicant shall, upon paying the fee of $100,
submitting the health certificate and meeting the requirements of
this chapter, be issued a separate license.
B. Form and transfer of license. All licenses shall be issued in the name of
the individual person applying, shall give the location and name of the
establishment where said applicant will operate and shall not be
transferable to another owner, operator, artist or location.
C. Public display of license. It shall be the duty of the owner of the
establishment to display the current establishment and artist licenses
of everyone working at the site in a conspicuous place where they may
be readily observed by the public.
A. Records for each patron or customer shall be kept and maintained by
the operator of each establishment. The record shall contain the name,
address and signature of each patron or customer. In the case of body
piercing of minors, a form signed by the parent or guardian at the time
of piercing shall be kept as a permanent record. All records shall be
available for inspection upon request of the Health Officer or
authorized representative. Records shall be maintained a minimum of
two years.
B. The operator and/or artist shall inquire if the patron has at any time
experienced a jaundiced condition or been infected with hepatitis.
Those indicating a history of jaundice or hepatitis shall not be tattooed
or pierced.
§ 304-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-8
1:399

ARTICLE IV
Tattoo Operating Room Facilities
§ 304-9. Separate operating room.
§ 304-10. Personal cleanliness of tattoo artists; required
equipment.
A. Each tattoo establishment shall have an operating room which shall be
separate and apart from a waiting room or public room that may be
used for other than tattooing purposes. Patrons or customers shall be
tattooed only in said operating rooms.
B. The operating room shall be equipped with hot and cold running,
potable water, together with such sinks and basins as may be necessary.
C. Furniture and furnishings used within the operating room shall be
constructed of such material as to permit proper cleansing with hot
water and disinfecting solution.
D. There shall be no overhead or otherwise exposed sewerage lines so as
to create a potential hazard to the sanitary environment of the
establishment.
E. All operating tables shall be constructed of easily cleanable material,
with a smooth washable finish and at least six inches from any observer
or waiting customers and/or separated by a panel at least four feet high.
Observers shall not be allowed in the operating room during the
tattooing process.
F. The operating room shall have proper and sufficient lighting as needed
to perform the tattooing process.
A. The practice of universal precautions shall be used during the tattooing
process as required by the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration's (OSHA) Blood-Borne Pathogen Rule. This rule applies
to any workplace in which one or more employees is engaged in
practices that may present a risk for transmission of HIV (AIDS) or HBV
(Hepatitis B) to the worker.
B. There shall be available within said tattoo establishment adequate hot
and cold potable running water, soap, germicidal solution, individual
hand scrub brushes and fingernail files or orange sticks for each tattoo
artist.
C. Each tattoo artist shall scrub his hands and forearms with soap and hot
water using an individual hand brush, clean his/her fingernails with an
individual file or orange stick and thoroughly rinse his/her hands in a
germicidal solution before working on each patron or customer. An
individual disposable towel or napkin shall be used for drying the tattoo
artist's hands and arms after rinsing.
§ 304-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-10
1:401
D. Each tattoo artist shall wear clean clothes or lab coat. Surgical gloves
shall be worn during the tattooing process and shall be changed for
each patron.
E. There shall be no smoking, eating or drinking in the operating room
during the tattooing process.
F. The following table summarizes the use of disinfectants in the tattooing
procedure:
Agent PreparatUiosnes
Hypochlorite
(5.25%
chlorine
laundry
bleach)
Make
up
daily; 1
part
bleach
with 10
parts
water
Corrodes metals; use for disinfection of
needles before disposal; excellent for other
materials
Glutaraldehyde
(CIDEX)
Make
up
weekly
using
activator;
do not
dilute
Used for motors and damp wiping
70% Spirit/
Agent
Do not
dilute
Preparation
Skin, table tops, alcohol metals Uses
Clear
phenolics
(Hycolin)
Make
up
daily;
dilute
per
instructions
Table tops, damp wiping, motors
G. Solutions of proven equivalence may be approved by the local Health
Officer. All products shall be used according to label requirements and
have Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) approval.
H. Solutions of proven equivalence may be approved by the local Health
Officer. All products shall be used according to label requirements and
have Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) approval.
§ 304-10 HUDSON CODE § 304-10
1:402
ARTICLE V
Required Equipment
§ 304-11. Storage of tattooing equipment and materials;
sterilization.
A. The needle bars and tubes shall be cleaned by use of an ultrasonic
cleaner prior to sterilization. Immersion time for all equipment shall be
at least five minutes. Ultrasonic cleaning tank detergent shall be
changed daily. The tank shall be scrubbed thoroughly with isopropyl
alcohol between detergent changes.
B. Any establishment licensed after the date of this chapter shall have an
autoclave on site for the sterilization of rods, needles, tubes, needle
bars and other instruments used in the processes. Boiling is not a
sterilizing option.
C. Instruments used in tattooing, such as needle bars, grips and tubes,
shall be individually packaged and sterilized in an autoclave before use
on each patron. Autoclaving shall be done under 15 pounds of pressure
for 15 minutes at 126° C. or for 20 minutes at 121° C. Instrument
sterilization bags shall have autoclave indicator tape and shall be dated.
Autoclaves shall be maintained in accordance with manufacturer's
recommendations, and a record of all maintenance shall be kept which
includes the date and type of maintenance activity.
(1) The sterilization date shall be noted on each instrument pack.
Sterile instruments shall be used within 30 days or shall be
repackaged and resterilized.
(2) After completion of the procedure, all individual use items shall be
disposed of and the area cleaned with a disinfectant solution.
D. If autoclaving is the method of sterilization, all tubes, grips and needle
bars shall be left in the wrappers used during the autoclaving process
until use.
E. Boiling is not an approved method of sterilization.
F. Needles, if used, shall be used only once and discarded.
G. Under no circumstances shall any instrument to be sterilized be coated
with petrolatum, lubricating jelly, glycerin, oil or grease before being
sterilized.
H. The tubes (holders for the stainless steel needle bars) shall also be
sterilized together with other instruments used.
I. The motors or frames cannot be sterilized and they must be dampwiped
with seventy-percent alcohol or with freshly made one-and-fivetenths-
percent solution of clean and soluble phenolic (carbolic acid) or
with activated aqueous glutaraldehyde (e.g., Cidex).
§ 304-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-12
1:403
§ 304-12. Floors, walls and ceilings.
The floor of the operating room of the tattoo establishment shall be of
impervious material and shall be, at all times, maintained in a clean
condition. The walls and ceiling of the operating room shall be a light color,
shall be maintained in good repair without flaking or chipping and shall be
of such material as to permit cleansing.
§ 304-13. Disposition of waste material.
A. The tattoo establishment shall have proper facilities for the disposition
of biomedical waste materials as now defined by state or federal
regulations and as subsequently defined. A contract with an approved,
licensed biomedical waste company is required and a copy of such
contract shall be required at the time of licensing.
B. Sufficient toilet, urinal and hand-washing facilities shall be accessible
to customers, operators and artists within the tattoo establishment or
the building in which said tattoo establishment is located.
§ 304-12 HUDSON CODE § 304-13
1:404
ARTICLE VI
Tattooing Procedure
§ 304-14. Preparation of area to be tattooed.
§ 304-15. Stencil for transferring design.
The stencil for transferring the tattoo shall be used for a single tattooing
procedure only.
§ 304-16. Tattooing process.
A. When it is necessary to shave the area to be tattooed, a new disposable
razor for each patron shall be used. The common use of shaving mugs
and brushes is prohibited.
B. After shaving the area to be tattooed, or if the area does not need to be
shaved, the site of the tattoo shall be cleaned with soap and hot water,
rinsed with clean water and germicidal solution applied in a sanitary
manner before the design is placed on the skin. Only sterile, individual
towels and gauze shall be used in preparing the site to be tattooed.
These dressings shall be properly disposed of after use with each
patron.
C. If Vaseline or other jellies are applied, it shall be done with a sterile
swab or sterile spatula for the use of each patron. Unused portions of
jellies remaining from service on a patron shall be discarded.
D. Alum or any material used to stop the flow of blood must be used only in
the form of a powder or liquid and applied only with sterile gauze or
sterile absorbent cotton.
A. A sterile set of individual, single use needles shall be used for each
patron. The open end of the needle tube of the tattooing machine shall
be cleaned and sterilized after each use. The use of disinfectants does
not constitute an approved sterilization method.
B. Single service or individual containers of dye or ink shall be used for
each patron and any remaining ink or dye in the container following the
procedure shall be discarded. Nontoxic, FDA approved dyes and inks
shall be used in all tattoo procedures.
C. Single-use containers shall be disinfected prior to use.
D. Excess dye applied to the skin shall be removed with individual gauze
pads or sterile cotton only. The area tattooed shall then be allowed to
dry and the entire site covered with a piece of sterile gauze only, which
may then be covered with a piece of dressing and fastened with
adhesive. Only approved surgical dressings and tapes shall be used on
patrons. The use of paper napkins, other materials and mastic tape for
dressings is prohibited.
§ 304-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-17
1:405
§ 304-17. Tattooing restrictions.
§ 304-18. Equipment aftercare.
§ 304-19. Infection control.
A. No tattooing shall be done on any person who is under the obvious
influence of alcohol or other drugs.
B. No tattooing shall be done on any person under the age of 18 (per NH
RSA 639:3 II).
C. No tattooing shall be done above the neck, below the ankles, below the
wrists or on the genitalia.
D. No tattooing shall be done on skin surface that has a rash, pimples,
boils, infections or other unhealthy skin conditions.
E. No skin area shall be penetrated, abraded or treated with chemicals for
the purpose of removing, camouflaging or altering any blemish,
birthmark, scar or previous tattoo.
F. Medical history records obtained earlier shall be checked and updated,
and anyone giving a history of jaundice, hepatitis, HIV infection or other
infectious or communicable diseases shall not be tattooed.
A. After each customer is tattooed, the needle bars, grips and tubes must
be disengaged, with the tubes, from the machine and placed in an
autoclavable dish. The needle bars must be cleaned ultrasonically, then
resterilized. Ultrasonic treatment alone is not effective. All used
needles shall be disinfected before discarding. Used needles must be
placed in a fresh solution of hypochlorite for 30 minutes before
disposal.
B. The pigment capsules must be disposed of after each customer.
C. Capsule holders and forceps must be sterilized between sessions.
D. Holding tubes for motors must be sterilized between sessions.
E. Used needles shall be placed in an appropriate infectious waste sharps
container.
A. Written instructions, approved by the Health Officer, shall be given to
each patron or customer on the care of the tattooed site to prevent
infection after each tattooing. A copy of these instructions shall also be
posted in a conspicuous place in the tattoo establishment, clearly
visible to the person being tattooed.
B. All infections resulting from the practice of tattooing which become
known to the operator(s), owner(s) and/or artist(s) shall be reported to
the Health Officer by the owner of the tattoo establishment.
§ 304-17 HUDSON CODE § 304-19
1:406
C. All tattooists are strongly advised to receive the Hepatitis B vaccine
which would provide them with immunity from contracting the disease
from a patron and protect the patrons from contracting the disease
from a nonsymptomatic tattooist.
§ 304-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-19
1:407

ARTICLE VII
Body Piercing
§ 304-20. Body piercing operating room facilities.
§ 304-21. Body piercing procedure.
§ 304-22. Infection control.
A. Any person engaged in the process of body piercing, as described and
restricted in this chapter, shall meet the tattoo operating room facilities
requirements of Article IV as they apply to body piercing.
B. All piercing needles, stainless steel expanders, jewelry and other
equipment used in the piercing process shall be sterilized as described
in § 304-11.
C. The jewelry inserted should be composed of gold, surgical stainless
steel or niobium, a composite metal formed from oxides of the stainless
steel production process.
A. When it is necessary to shave the area to be pierced, a new disposable
razor for each patron shall be used. The common use of shaving mugs
and shaving brushes is prohibited.
B. After shaving the area to be pierced, or if the area does not need to be
shaved, the site of the piercing shall be washed with soap and water,
rinsed with clean water and a germicidal solution applied in a sanitary
manner. Only sterile, individual towels and applicators shall be used to
prepare and cleanse the site.
C. Only instruments and equipment that have been properly cleaned and
sterilized prior to use shall be used during the piercing process.
D. The person doing the piercing shall wear clean clothes or lab coat.
Surgical gloves shall be worn during the piercing and shall be changed
for each patron.
E. There shall be no smoking, eating or drinking in the operating room
during the piercing process.
A. Written instructions, approved by the Health Officer, shall be given to
each patron on the care of the piercing site to prevent infection after
the piercing. A copy of these instructions shall also be posted in a
conspicuous place in the piercing establishment, clearly visible to the
person being pierced.
B. All infections resulting from the practice of body piercing which
become known to the operator(s), owner(s) and/or artist(s) shall be
reported to the Health Officer by the owner of the piercing
establishment.
§ 304-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-22
1:409
§ 304-23. Body piercing restrictions.
C. All persons engaged in body piercing are strongly advised to receive the
Hepatitis B vaccine which would provide them with immunity from
contracting the disease from a patron and protect patrons from
contracting the disease from a nonsymptomatic person engaged in body
piercing.
A. No body piercing shall be done on any person who is under the obvious
influence of alcohol or other drugs.
B. No body piercing except ears shall be done on any person under the age
of 18 without parents/guardians on site to sign a permission form.
These forms shall be generated by the piercing establishment and
approved by the Health Officer.
C. No body piercing shall be done below the waist in the Town of Hudson
unless performed by a physician licensed to practice medicine in the
State of New Hampshire.
D. No piercing shall be done on skin surface that has a rash, pimples, boils,
infections or other unhealthy skin conditions.
E. Medical history records obtained earlier shall be checked and updated,
and anyone giving a history of jaundice, hepatitis, HIV infection or other
infections or communicable diseases shall not be pierced.
§ 304-22 HUDSON CODE § 304-23
1:410
ARTICLE VIII
Tattoo or Body Piercing Establishment Noncompliance
§ 304-24. Revocation of license.
Any tattoo establishment and/or body piercing establishment licensed to
operate in the Town of Hudson and found to be in noncompliance with any
of the requirements of this chapter may have his/her license revoked by the
Health Officer or his/her duly appointed agent at the time of inspection.
§ 304-25. Penalties for offenses.
A. A first offense revocation shall be for a period of at least 48 hours or
until such time as the issues of noncompliance are brought into
compliance. A reinspection fee of $150 shall be charged individually to
all artists involved in the issues of noncompliance.
B. Any licensed tattoo and/or body piercing establishment found to be in
noncompliance of this chapter and not operating under the intent of
this chapter shall have his/her license permanently revoked. Such
revocations may be made by the Health Officer, his/her duly appointed
agent, and/or per order of the Board of Health and shall be the result of
documentation of such noncompliance.
C. Appeals from administrative decisions to revoke a license(s) shall be
made within ten (10) days of the revocation in writing to the Board of
Health with a request for a public hearing.
D. Any licensed tattoo or body piercing establishment found to be in
noncompliance with this chapter for a second offense shall face court
action and fines per offense as allowable under NH RSA 31:39 III
(effective August 9, 1993). If the court rules that the establishment may
reopen upon compliance, a reinspection fee as addressed in § 304-25A
shall be assessed.
E. Anyone operating a tattoo or body piercing establishment in an
unapproved zoning site shall face court action and fines as allowable
under NH RSA 676:17 for each day that such violation continues after
the violator has received written notice from the municipality that he/
she is in violation.
F. Anyone found to be operating an unlicensed tattoo or body piercing
establishment or otherwise found to be performing unlicensed tattooing
or body piercing in the Town of Hudson shall face court action and fines
as allowable under NH RSA 31:39 III per offense. The establishment
shall remain closed until all requirements of this chapter are in
compliance and a permit has been issued.
§ 304-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-25
1:411

ARTICLE IX
Construction with State Health Regulations
§ 304-26. Compliance with other provisions.
The regulations set forth in this chapter are to be read in the context of
and in concert with regulations adopted by the State of New Hampshire
pursuant to RSA 314-A. To the extent that these regulations differ from the
regulations adopted by the State of New Hampshire, the more stringent
regulations shall apply.
§ 304-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-26
1:413
Chapter 306
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Purchasing and contracts — See Ch. 98. Tax Collector — See Ch. 137.
§ 304-26 HUDSON CODE § 304-26
1:414
ARTICLE I
Semiannual Tax Collection
[Article 10, voted in the affirmative 3-10-1970 by the Annual Town Meeting, reads as follows:
"To see if the Town will vote to accept the provisions of New Hampshire Revised Statutes
Annotated 76:15a and 76:15b, as passed by the 1969 Legislature, relative to semi-annual
collection of taxes, June 1st and December1st each year, beginning June 1, 1970 and each
year thereafter until rescinded by a vote of the Town."]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-26
1:415

ARTICLE II
Elderly Tax Exemption
[Article 1, voted in the affirmative 3-8-1974 by ballot, by the Annual Town Meeting, reads
as follows: "Shall we adopt the Homeowner's Exemption provisions of N.H.R.S.A. Chapter 72
granting a $5,000 exemption based on equalized assessed valuation on all owner-occupied
units and a $10,000 exemption based on equalized assessed valuation on all owner-occupied
units owned by persons over sixty-five years of age?" Article 26, voted in the affirmative
3-13-2007 by ballot, provided as follows: "Shall the Town of Hudson modify the elderly
exemptions, pursuant to RSA 72:39-b, from property tax in the Town of Hudson, based on
assessed value, for qualified taxpayers, to be as follows: for a person 65 years of age up to
75 years, $105,000; for a person 75 years of age up to 80 years, $125,000; for a person 80
years of age or older, $150,000? To qualify, the person must have been a New Hampshire
resident for at least three consecutive years, own the real estate individually or jointly, or if
the real estate is owned by such person's spouse, they must have been married for at least five
consecutive years. In addition, the taxpayer must have a net income of not more than $35,000
or, if married, a combined net income of not more than $45,000; and own net assets not in
excess of $150,000, excluding the value of the person's residence. If approved, this article
shall take effect for the 2007 property tax year."]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-26
1:417

ARTICLE III
Expanded Elderly Tax Exemption
[Article 2, voted in the affirmative 3-2-1976 by ballot, by the Annual Town Meeting, reads as
follows: "Shall we adopt the provisions of R.S.A. 72:43-b and 43-c for expanded exemptions
on real estate which provide for a resident sixty-five years of age up to seventy-five, a five
thousand dollar exemption; a resident seventy-five years of age up to eighty, a ten thousand
dollar exemption; a resident eighty years of age or older, a twenty thousand dollar exemption,
provided that the resident owns the real estate individually or jointly with another or his
spouse with whom he has been living for at least five years as man and wife; said resident
had a net income of less than seven thousand dollars or combined income with a spouse of
less than nine thousand dollars; and owns assets of any kind, tangible or intangible, less
bona fide encumbrances, not in excess of thirty-five thousand dollars?" Article 20, voted in
the affirmative 3-11-2003, by the Annual Town Meeting, reads as follows: "Shall we modify
the elderly exemptions from property tax in the Town of Hudson, based on assessed value,
for qualified taxpayers, to be as follows: for a person 65 years of age up to 75 years, $75,000;
for a person 75 years of age up to 80 years, $90,000; for a person 80 years of age or older,
$115,000? To qualify, the person must have been a New Hampshire resident for at least five
years, own the real estate individually or jointly, or if the real estate is owned by such person's
spouse, they must have been married for at least five years. In addition, the taxpayers must
have a net income of not more than $26,000 or, if married, a combined net income of less
than $34,000; own net assets not in excess of $100,000 excluding the value of the person's
residence. (If approved, this article shall take effect for the 2003 property tax year.)" Article
17, voted in the affirmative 3-8-2005 by the Annual Town Meeting, reads as follows: To see if
the Town will vote to modify the elderly exemptions from property tax in the Town of Hudson,
based on assessed value, for qualified taxpayers, to be as follows: for a person 65 years of age
up to 75 years, $95,000; for a person 75 years up to 80 years, $115,000; for a person 80 years
of age or older, $145,000. To qualify, the person must have been a New Hampshire resident
for at least five consecutive years, own the real estate individually or jointly, or if the real
estate is owned by such person's spouse, they must have been married for at least five years.
In addition, the taxpayer must have a net income of not more than $30,000 or, if married, a
combined net income of not more than $40,000; and own net assets not in excess of $125,000,
excluding the value of the person's residence. If approved, this article shall take effect for the
2005 property tax year."]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-26
1:419

ARTICLE IV
Blind Tax Exemption
[Adopted 3-11-1986 by Ord. No. O86-1]
§ 306-1. Adoption. [Amended 3-11-2003 ATM, Art. 22; 3-13-2007
ATM, Art. 27]
The provisions of RSA 72:37 are adopted, and every inhabitant of the
Town of Hudson who is legally blind, as determined by the Blind Services
Department of the Vocational Rehabilitation Division of the Education
Department of the State of New Hampshire, shall be exempt each year from
taxation upon his or her residential real estate to the value of $105,000.
§ 306-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 306-1
1:421

ARTICLE V
Residence Tax
[Adopted 6-10-1986 by Ord. No. O86-04]
§ 306-2. Tax not to be assessed, levied or collected.
The Town of Hudson adopts the provisions of RSA 72:1-c, which authorizes
the Town not to assess, levy and collect a residence tax, effective April 1
following the passage of this Article.
§ 306-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 306-2
1:423

ARTICLE VI
Optional Adjusted Elderly Tax Exemption
[Adopted 9-9-1991 by Ord. No. O91-01116 ]
§ 306-3. Exemptions established; qualifications.
The optional exemptions, based on assessed value, for qualified taxpayers
shall be as follows: for a person 65 years of age up to 75 years, $45,000;
for a person 75 years of age up to 80 years, $60,000; and for a person
80 years of age or older, $75,000. To qualify, the person must have been
a New Hampshire resident for at least five years and own the real estate
individually or jointly or, if the real estate is owned by his spouse, they
must have been married for at least five years. In addition, the taxpayer
must have a net income of less than $10,000 or, if married, a combined net
income of less than $12,000 and own net assets not to exceed $100,000,
excluding the value of the person's residence.
116. Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. VI, Optional Adjusted Elderly
Tax Exemption, adopted 10-13-1987 by Ord. No. O87-6.
§ 306-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 306-3
1:425

ARTICLE VII
Veterans Tax Exemption
[Adopted 3-13-1990 by Res. No. R90-2]
§ 306-4. Exemption adopted; amount.117 [Amended 3-9-2004;
3-8-2005 ATM, Art. 20; 3-13-2007 ATM, Art. 25]
The Board of Selectmen shall adopt the provisions of RSA 72:28 V and VI
for an optional veterans exemption and an expanded qualifying war service
for veterans seeking the exemption. The optional veterans tax credit shall
be $500.
117. Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
section has been revised to replace "Town Council" with "Board of Selectmen."
§ 306-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 306-4
1:427

ARTICLE VIII
Veterans Disability Exemption
[Adopted 3-13-1990 by Res. No. R90-3]
§ 306-5. Exemption adopted; amount.118 [Amended 3-9-2004]
The Hudson Board of Selectmen shall adopt the provisions of RSA 72:35 IV
for an optional property tax exemption of residential property for a serviceconnected
total disability. The optional disability exemption is $2,000.
rather than $1,400.
118. Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
section has been revised to replace "Town Council" with "Board of Selectmen."
§ 306-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 306-5
1:429

ARTICLE IX
Totally and Permanently Disabled Property Tax Exemption
[Adopted 4-8-1997 ATM, Art. 24]
[Article 21, voted in the affirmative 3-11-2003, by the Annual Town Meeting, reads as follows:
"Shall we modify the exemption for the disabled? The exemption, based on assessed value, for
qualified taxpayers shall be $75,000. To qualify, the person must have been a New Hampshire
resident for at least five years and own and occupy the real estate individually or jointly, or
if the real estate is owned by a spouse, they must have been married for at least five years.
In addition, the taxpayer must have a net income of not more than $26,000, or, if married, a
combined net income of not more than $34,000; and own net assets not in excess of $100,000,
excluding the value of the person's residence (If approved, this article shall take effect for
the 2003 property tax year.)" Article 18, voted in the affirmative 3-8-2005 by the Annual
Town Meeting, reads as follows: "To see if the Town will vote to modify the exemption for the
disabled. The exemption, based on assessed value for qualified taxpayers, shall be $95,000.
To qualify, the person must have been a New Hampshire resident for at least five consecutive
years and own and occupy the real estate individually or jointly, or if the real estate is owned
by a spouse, they must have been married for at least five years. In addition, the taxpayer
must have a net income of not more than $30,000 or, if married, a combined net income of not
more than $40,000; and own net assets not in excess of $125,000, excluding the value of the
residence. If approved, this article shall take effect for the 2005 property tax year." Article 27,
voted in the affirmative 3-13-2007 by ballot, provided as follows: "Shall the Town of Hudson
modify the exemption, pursuant to RSA 72:37-b, for the disabled? The exemption, based on
assessed value, for qualified taxpayers shall be $105,000. To qualify, the person must have
been a New Hampshire resident for at least five years, and own and occupy the real estate
individually or jointly, or if the real estate is owned by a spouse, they must have been married
for at least five years. In addition, the taxpayer must have a net income of not more than
$35,000, or, if married, a combined net income of not more than $45,000; and own net assets
not in excess of $150,000, excluding the value of the residence. If approved, this article shall
take effect for the 2007 property tax year."]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 306-5
1:431

ARTICLE X
Surviving Spouse Veterans' Tax Credit
[Adopted 3-9-2004 ATM, Art. 32]
[Article 32, voted in the affirmative 3-9-2004 by the Annual Town Meeting, reads as follows:
"To see if the Town of Hudson will vote to adopt the provisions of RSA 72:29-a, II to approve
the surviving spouse tax credit for surviving spouses of veterans who died while on active duty
in certain conflicts to $2,000. (Effective for the 2004 property tax year).]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 306-5
1:433

ARTICLE XI
Solar Energy System Exemption
[Adopted 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. 15-04]
§ 306-6. Exemption adopted; amount.
The Town of Hudson adopts the provisions of RSA 72:61 and RSA 72:62
for a "solar energy systems exemption" in an amount equal to 100% of the
assessed value of qualifying equipment under the statutes, for property tax
purposes, for persons owning real property which is equipped with a solar
energy system as defined in RSA 72:61.
§ 306-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 306-6
1:435
Chapter 310
TAXICABS AND TAXICAB DRIVERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 248. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 317.
Chapter 314
TRAPS
§ 314-1. Restrictions on use.
Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall, at any time, set or use a
steel jaw leghold trap of any kind designed or intended to take hold of,
capture or kill any animal within the limits of the Town of Hudson, nor shall
any landowner permit the use of such a trap.
§ 314-2. Impounding of trap.
Whenever a trap is used contrary to the provisions of this chapter within the
confines of the Town of Hudson, the same may be impounded by any duly
authorized police officer or by any New Hampshire Fish and Game Warden
until judicial action occurs.
§ 314-3. Violations and penalties.
Each and every person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not to exceed
$500. Any landowner who knowingly permits the use of such a trap on his/
her land shall pay a fine not to exceed $500.
§ 314-4. Purpose.
Pursuant to the town's authority to adopt measures that further public
health, safety and welfare, this chapter is hereby adopted for the protection
of small children and other persons.
Chapter 317
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Motor vehicles in parks and recreation
areas — See Ch. 259.
Motor vehicle racetracks — See Ch. 264.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 284.
Taxicabs and taxicab drivers — See Ch. 310.
Inventory of streets — See Ch. A340.
§ 306-6 HUDSON CODE § 314-4
1:436
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 317-1. Amendment.119
The provisions of this chapter may be amended by ordinance of the Board
of Selectmen.
§ 317-2. Repealer.
All prior ordinances and other enactments, or parts of such, of this Town
regulating traffic and parking are hereby repealed, except that this repeal
shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person
for any act done or committed in violation of any such ordinance or other
enactment prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
§ 317-3. Severability.
If any Article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or provision
of this chapter shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid, such adjudication shall not affect, impair or invalidate the
remainder thereof, but shall be confined in its operation to the Article,
section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or provision thereof
directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 317-4. Violations and penalties.
The violation of any provision in this chapter that constitutes a violation
within the meaning of the New Hampshire Criminal Code shall be
punishable by such penalties as the court may direct pursuant to its
authority and jurisdiction over such matter. Other violations of this chapter
shall be punishable by the appropriate penalty established hereunder,
which shall not exceed $1,000.
§ 317-5. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARKING — The stopping of a vehicle upon a street otherwise than in
compliance with traffic signs or signals for a period of time longer than
reasonably necessary to load or unload passengers or freight.
VEHICLE — Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported upon a highway, including, without limiting the
foregoing, any motor vehicle, bicycle or horse-drawn vehicles.
119. Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
section has been revised to replace "Town Council" with "Board of Selectmen."
§ 317-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 317-5
1:437

ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 317-6. Crosswalks.
All motor vehicles must yield to pedestrians walking on designated
crosswalks as per RSA 262A:83.
§ 317-7. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection of
those streets described in Schedule I (§ 317-28), attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 317-8. Yield intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule II (§ 317-29), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated yield intersections, at which
vehicles approaching on the first-named streets shall yield the right-of-way
to vehicles approaching on the second-named streets.
§ 317-9. Stop intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule III (§ 317-30), attached to and
made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as stop intersections,
and any vehicle approaching such intersections on the first-named streets
shall come to a full stop before entering said intersections.
§ 317-10. One-way streets.
The streets and parts of streets described in Schedule IV (§ 317-31) are
hereby designated as one-way streets, and traffic shall proceed thereon only
in the directions indicated.
§ 317-10.1. Prohibited turns. [Added 8-18-1992 by Ord. No. O92-22]
The intersections described in Schedule XII (§ 317-39), attached to and
made a part of this chapter, prohibit vehicular traffic from turning in the
direction, and at the times, indicated at the specified locations.
§ 317-11. Speed limits.
The speed limits for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule V (§ 317-32), attached to and in made a part
of this chapter, are hereby established at the rate of speed indicated.
§ 317-12. Streets closed.
Unless otherwise indicated, the streets and parts of streets indicated in
Schedule VI (§ 317-33) are hereby closed to all vehicular traffic during the
times indicated.
§ 317-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 317-12.1
1:439
§ 317-12.1. Limited entry streets. [Added 7-25-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-2; amended 11-28-1989 by Ord. No. O89-25]
Entry to streets indicated in Schedule VIA (§ 317-33.1) is prohibited to all
vehicular traffic, except school buses, during the times indicated at the
specified location.
§ 317-13. Trucks, commercial vehicles and heavy vehicles.
A. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL TRUCK TRAFFIC — Any vehicle 1 1/2 tons or heavier,
engaged in business either for profit or not for profit.
HEAVY VEHICLE — Vehicles in accordance with RSA 259:1 XII
("highway building equipment"), XVI ("motor truck"), XVI-B ("heavy
truck"), XVI-C ("tractor-trailer"), XXVIII ("semi-trailer") and XXXII-A
("transporter").
THROUGH TRUCK TRAFFIC — Any commercial vehicle, 1 1/2 tons or
heavier, other than those commercial vehicles which are engaged in
making local deliveries or pickups on a restricted street or street that
is directly connected to a restricted street.
B. No commercial truck traffic shall be permitted, except by special permit
issued by the Town of Hudson, on any road in the Town of Hudson
before 6:00 a.m. and after 7:00 p.m., unless otherwise specified under
Subsection F, except on Route 111, Route 102, Route 3A and West
Road.
C. Special per vehicle permits may be granted upon written application to
the Board of Selectmen indicating reason of need and necessity and
payment of a permit application fee.120
(1) Permits shall be in the possession of the vehicle operator.
(2) Trucks used for farming or agricultural purposes shall be exempted
from the above provisions.
(3) Permits will be valid for one year from date of issue and may be
renewed upon request.
(4) A copy of said permit is to be filed with the Hudson Police
Department.
D. The restrictions of this section shall not apply to emergency vehicles
engaged in emergency activities, such as snowplowing, fire calls,
rescue calls or the like.
120. Editor's Note: Pursuant to Res. No. R92-71, adopted 6-8-1992, effective 7-1-1992, this
subsection has been revised to replace "Executive Administrator" with "Board of
Selectmen." The specific fees included in this subsection were removed at the direction of
the Town. For current fees, see Ch. 205, Fees.
§ 317-12.1 HUDSON CODE § 317-13
1:440
E. At all times, through truck traffic entering the Town of Hudson via
Route 111, Route 102, Route 3A, Kimball Hill Road, Dracut Road or the
Sagamore Point Bridge shall be restricted to these routes while
traveling through the Town of Hudson.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any truck in any manner
or at any time or on any day indicated on any of the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule VII (§ 317-34), when such truck is of a
type indicated in § 317-34 and defined in this section or when such
truck is larger or heavier than the maximum size or weight indicated in
Schedule VII for that street or part of a street.
§ 317-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 317-13
1:441

ARTICLE III
Parking Restrictions
§ 317-14. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC STREETS — All ways serviced by public snow removal equipment
and all streets accepted by the Town.
§ 317-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-27-2007; 2-8-2016
by Ord. No. 16-01]
§ 317-16. Removal.
All vehicles found in violation of this article may be removed at the
discretion of the Police Department. Costs of such removal and of
subsequent storage of removed vehicles shall be paid by the vehicle owners
prior to release of such vehicles to said owners.
A. Fines for parking violations shall be as follows:
Violation Fine
Interference with snow-clearing
operations
$100
Winter parking ban $20
Blocking private/public driveway $20
Parking within crosswalk / 20 feet $20
Parking on crosswalk $20
Parking on sidewalk $20
Parking within intersection / 30 feet $20
Restricted parking zone (all) $20
Double parking $20
Obstructing traffic lane $20
Fire hydrant / 15 feet $25
Fire lane $25
Handicapped parking (summons to Court) $25
B. If the fine for this violation is not paid within 72 hours, the operator or
registered owner shall be issued a summons to appear in Nashua
District Court and may be subject to the maximum fine allowed by law.
Checks shall be made payable to the Town of Hudson, New Hampshire.
§ 317-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 317-17
1:443
§ 317-17. All-night parking in winter.
No vehicle or trailer shall be parked on any public street between the hours
of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. from December 1 to March 30.
§ 317-18. Impeding of snow removal.
No vehicle shall be parked on any public street.
§ 317-19. Interference with snow-clearing operations.
No person having the custody or control of any vehicle shall stop or cause
to be stopped or park on any public street or highway in the Town, so as to
impede or interfere with the proper snow clearing operations of the Town.
§ 317-20. (Reserved)121
§ 317-21. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule VIII (§ 317-35), attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 317-22. Parking prohibited certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule IX
(§ 317-36) of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described in said Schedule IX, attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 317-23. Time limit parking.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in
Schedule X (§ 317-37) at any time between the hours listed in said Schedule
X of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or parts
of streets described in said Schedule X, attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 317-24. Parallel parking.
All vehicles shall be parked parallel with the edge of the streets and parts
of streets indicated in Schedule XI (§ 317-38) and shall be parked not more
than 12 inches from said edge of the street or part of street.
§ 317-24.1. Permitted parking in Benson Park. [Added 7-12-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-03]
A. This section establishes up to five permit parking spaces on the top
parking area of Benson Park (near the Historic District).
121. Editor's Note: Former § 317-20, Overnight parking, was repealed 8-13-2002 by Ord. No.
02-02.
§ 317-17 HUDSON CODE § 317-24.1
1:444
B. The Benson Park Committee is authorized to issue parking permits with
the following conditions:
(1) Applicants must be a recognized volunteer for Benson Park and
show proof of a valid vehicle registration and driver's license.
(2) Permits shall be issued on an annual basis April 1 of each year
expiring March 31 of the next year. Permits are valid for one year.
(3) Permits shall be displayed on the driver's side oldie dashboard of
vehicle for which the permit is issued and shall be positioned so as
to be easily seen through the windshield of the vehicle.
(4) Permits shall be issued by the Benson Park Committee, which shall
maintain an electronic record of permits issued.
(5) Permits are not transferrable. Permits may be revoked by the
Benson Park Committee or the Board of Selectmen.
(6) Permits will be color coded and will change color every year.
(7) Vehicles not properly displaying a valid permit shall be subject to
fines and penalties pursuant to § 317-15 [restricted property zone
(all)] and § 317-16 (removal).
(8) Permit parking spaces are first-come, first-serve for parking permit
holders.
§ 317-24.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 317-24.1
1:445

ARTICLE IV
Fire Lanes
§ 317-25. Obstruction unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any person to block, obstruct or close, or cause to be
blocked, obstructed or closed, by any vehicle, structure, alteration or other
means, any designated fire lane which has been duly posted and marked
jointly by the Fire and Police Departments.
§ 317-26. Violations and penalties.
§ 317-27. Enforceability.
This Article shall become enforceable immediately upon the posting and
marking of any private or public way as a designated fire lane.
A. Any owner or building occupant violating any of the provisions of this
Article shall be fined $50 for each offense, and a separate offense shall
be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
B. Any other person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall be
fined $25 for each offense.
§ 317-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 317-27
1:447

ARTICLE V
Schedules
§ 317-28. Schedule I: Traffic Control Signals.
In accordance with the provisions of § 317-7, traffic control signals shall be
installed at the following described intersections:
Intersection
Central Street and Lowell Road [Added 11-14-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-20]
Chase Street and Ferry Street
Derry Street and Elm Avenue [Added 11-14-1989 by Ord. No. O89-20]
Derry Street, Highland Street and Library Street [Added 11-14-1989 by
Ord. No. O89-20]
Derry Street and the Hudson Mall Entrance [Added 11-14-1989 by Ord.
No. O89-20]
Greeley Street and Central Street
Library Street and Ferry Street
Lowell Road and Dracut Road [Added 11-14-1989 by Ord. No. O89-20]
Lowell Road and Sagamore Bridge
Lowell Road and Wason Road/Flagstone Drive [Added 11-14-1989 by
Ord. No. O89-20]
River Road and Pine Road
§ 317-29. Schedule II: Yield Intersections.
As provided in § 317-8, the following described intersections are hereby
designated as yield intersections, at which vehicles approaching such
intersections on the controlled streets shall yield right-of-way to traffic
approaching on the unregulated streets, and yield signs shall be installed as
follows:
Yield Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Beachwood Road North Boulder Drive
Chase Street [Added
1-9-2007 by Ord. No.
07-01]
West —
Dugout Road West Barretts Hill Road
Pelham Road [Repealed
5-14-2014]
Pine Road [Repealed
5-14-2014]
§ 317-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 317-29
1:449
Yield Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Spur A [Added 10-27-1992
by Ord. No. O92-24]
West Windham Road
Sullivan Road [Added
8-22-2006 by Ord. No.
06-02]
West Clement Road
§ 317-30. Schedule III: Stop Intersections.
As provided in § 317-9, the following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections, at which vehicles approaching such
intersections shall come to a full stop before entering such intersections,
and stop signs shall be installed as follows:
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
*Indicates three- or four-way stop or stop on more than one street in the
intersection.
A Street* [Amended
10-8-2002 by Ord. No.
02-03]
Both B Street
A Street [Added 6-27-1989
by Ord. No. 089-7]
South Belknap Road
A Street West County Road
Able Street [Added
11-12-1991 by Ord. No.
O91-05]
North Melendy Road
Adelaide Street North Ferry Street
Adelaide Street South Central Street
Adelaide Street [Added
4-22-1994 by Ord. No.
O94-04]
South Raymond Street
Anna Louise Drive [Added
11-12-1991 by Ord. No.
O91-03]
North Schaeffer Circle
B Street* [Added
10-8-2002 by Ord. No.
02-03]
Both A Street
Baker Street* Both Cummings Street
Barretts Hill Road [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
South Windham Road
Barretts Hill Road West Greeley Street
§ 317-29 HUDSON CODE § 317-30
1:450
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
*Indicates three- or four-way stop or stop on more than one street in the
intersection.
Barretts Hill Road West Hazelwood Road
Bay Street [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
North Melendy Road
Beechwood Road [Added
11-12-1991 by Ord. No.
O91-03]
South Boulder Drive
Beechwood Road South Hazelwood Road
Belknap Road* Both Melendy Road
Belknap Road North Central Street
Belknap Road [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
West County Road
Birch Street East Lowell Road
Birch Street North Winnhaven Drive
Blackstone Street North Ridge Avenue
Blueberry Lane [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
East Dracut Road
Blueberry Lane [Added
12-22-2009]
South Philbrick Street
Bockes Road [Added
7-12-2016 by Ord. No.
16-04]
West Lawrence Road
Bond Street [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7; amended
11-12-1991 by Ord. No.
O90-03]
Both Blackstone Street
Boyd Road South Robinson Road
Brookfield Drive [Added
11-12-1991 by Ord. No.
O91-03]
West Dracut Road
Bruce Street [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
East Lowell Road
Burnham Road East Central Street
Burns Hill Road South Wason Road
§ 317-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 317-30
1:451
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
*Indicates three- or four-way stop or stop on more than one street in the
intersection.
Burns Hill Road West Pelham Road
Bush Hill Road East Kimball Hill Road
Buswell Street [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
North Highland Street
Buswell Street South Ferry Street
Butternut Street Both Cottonwood Drive
Campbell Avenue North Ferry Street
Cardinal Drive [Added
7-23-1996 by Ord. No.
O96-5]
North/ South Meadowlark Drive
Cardinal Drive [Added
9-1-1992 by Ord. No.
O92-25]
North/ South Towhee Drive
Cardinal Drive [Added
8-23-1994 by Ord. No.
O94-02]
North/ South Wentworth Drive
Cathedral Lane [Added
11-24-1992 by Ord. No.
O92-31]
East Musquash Road
Chagnon Lane* South Stonewood Drive and
Heritage Circle
Chalifoux Road [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
East River Road
Chase Street South Central Street
Cheney Drive [Added
11-12-1991 by Ord. No.
O91-03]
East Sullivan Road
Cherry Street [Added
7-25-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7A; amended
7-23-1996 by Ord. No.
O96-5]
South Eayers Pond Road
Clement Road [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
North Route 111
§ 317-30 HUDSON CODE § 317-30
1:452
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
*Indicates three- or four-way stop or stop on more than one street in the
intersection.
Clement Road [Added
9-1-1992 by Ord. No.
O92-25]
South Kimball Hill Road
Constitution Drive [Added
8-22-2006 by Ord. No.
06-01]
East Clement Road
Copeland Drive [Added
8-15-1995 by Ord. No.
O95-05]
East Dugout Road
Copeland Drive [Added
8-15-1995 by Ord. No.
O95-05]
South Barretts Hill Road
County Road [Added
8-22-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-11]
North/ South Belknap Road
County Road [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
North/ South Lowell Road
Crestwood Road [Added
11-10-1997 by Ord. No.
O97-02; amended
11-10-1997 by Ord. No.
O97-03]
North Gowing Road
Crestwood Road [Added
11-10-1997 by Ord. No.
O97-02; amended
11-10-1997 by Ord. No.
O97-03]
West Musquash Road
Cross Street North/ South Riverside Avenue
Cummings Street East Derry Street
Cummings Street* Both Baker Street
Cummings Street [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
West Webster Street
Cutler Road West Derry Street
Daniel Webster Drive
[Added 6-27-1989 by Ord.
No. O89-6]
South Greeley Street
§ 317-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 317-30
1:453
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
*Indicates three- or four-way stop or stop on more than one street in the
intersection.
David Drive [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
East Griffin Road
Deerfield Avenue [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
West Dracut Road
Derry Lane East Derry Highway
Derry Lane West Route 3A
Derry Street [Repealed
11-12-1991 by Ord. No.
O91-04]
Dugout Road [Added
10-26-2004 by Ord. No.
04-04]
East Lawrence Road
E Street [Added 6-27-1989
by Ord. No. O89-7]
South B Street
Eayers Pond Road [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
West River Road
Elder Street [Added
7-25-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7A]
North Philbrick Street
Elder Street [Added
7-23-1996 by Ord. No.
O96-5]
South Eayers Pond Road
Elm Avenue [Repealed
11-12-1991 by Ord. No.
O91-04]
Evergreen Drive [Added
11-23-1993 by Ord. No.
O93-06]
North NH Route 102
Evergreen Drive [Added
11-23-1993 by Ord. No.
O93-06]
South Marsh Road
Executive Drive [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-6]
East Lowell Road
§ 317-30 HUDSON CODE § 317-30
1:454
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
*Indicates three- or four-way stop or stop on more than one street in the
intersection.
Executive Drive [Added
8-9-1994 by Ord. No.
O94-01; repealed
8-5-2014 by Ord. No.
14-05]
Falcon Drive [Added
4-25-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-4; amended 9-1-1992
by Ord. No. O92-25]
North Towhee Drive
Federal Street [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
East Webster Street
Ferry Avenue North Ferry Street
First Street North Ferry Street
First Street [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
North/ South School Street
Flagstone Drive [Repealed
11-12-1991 by Ord. No.
O91-04]
Frenette Drive [Added
11-23-1993 by Ord. No.
O93-06]
West Greeley Street
Friars Drive [Added
9-8-2014]
West Executive Drive
Fulton Street North Central Street
George Street North Highland Street
George Street South Ferry Street
Gibson Road [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
North Kimball Hill Road
Gillis Street North Central Street
Gillis Street Extension
[Added 11-12-1991 by
Ord. No. O91-03]
North Chapin Street
Glen Drive [Added
5-26-1992 by Ord. No.
O92-05]
West Virginia Drive
§ 317-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 317-30
1:455
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
*Indicates three- or four-way stop or stop on more than one street in the
intersection.
Glenview Drive [Added
11-12-1991 by Ord. No.
O91-05]
West Musquash Road
Gloria Avenue South Ferry Street
Glover Brook Lane [Added
7-23-1996 by Ord. No.
O96-5]
North Highland Street
Grace Drive North Sunland Drive
Grand Avenue East Derry Street
Grand Avenue [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
West Webster Street
Greeley Street [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
North Old Derry Road
Hamblett Avenue North Central Street
Hampshire Drive South Flagstone Drive
Hampshire Drive [Added
8-5-2014 by Ord. No.
14-06]
West Wentworth Drive
Hartson Circle [Added
9-22-1998 by Ord. No.
O98-05]
North/ South Cheney Drive
Harwood Avenue (Trigate
Road Extension)
West Wason Road
Haverhill Street East Highland Street
Haverhill Street West Derry Street
Hawkview Road [Added
8-23-1994 by Ord. No.
O94-03]
East Gibson Road
Hazelwood Road [Added
11-14-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-18]
West Barretts Hill Road
Henry Drive [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
North Robinson Road
§ 317-30 HUDSON CODE § 317-30
1:456
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
*Indicates three- or four-way stop or stop on more than one street in the
intersection.
Henry Drive [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
West Chagnon Drive
Heritage Circle* North Chagnon Lane and
Stonewood Drive
Highland Avenue East Derry Street
Highland Avenue West Baker Street
Highland Street [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
East Greeley Street
Highland Street* West Library Street
High Pine Drive [Added
11-10-1997 by Ord. No.
O97-02; amended
11-10-1997 by Ord. No.
O97-03]
South Highland Street
Hilindale Drive [Added
11-24-1992 by Ord. No.
O92-33]
West Belknap Road
Hopkins Drive [Added
8-18-1992 by Ord. No.
O92-21]
East Bockes Road
Hurley Street [Added
11-12-1991 by Ord. No.
O91-03]
North Oakwood Avenue
Hurley Street South Central Street
Industrial Drive [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
North Route 111
Ireland Street [Added
7-25-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7A; amended
7-23-1996 by Ord. No.
O96-5]
South Eayers Pond Road
Ironwood Road [Added
7-23-1996 by Ord. No.
O96-5]
South Pinewood Road
§ 317-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 317-30
1:457
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
*Indicates three- or four-way stop or stop on more than one street in the
intersection.
Jeanne Street [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
West Dracut Road
Krystal Drive [Added
11-23-1993 by Ord. No.
O93-06]
East Greeley Street
Lawrence Road [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
East/ South Route 111
Leslie Street [Added
11-12-1991 by Ord. No.
O91-03]
East Derry Street
Leslie Street [Added
11-12-1991 by Ord. No.
O91-03]
West Baker Street
Library Street [Added
11-12-1991 by Ord. No.
O91-03]
South Central Street
Little Hales Circle [Added
11-24-1992 by Ord. No.
O92-30]
East Musquash Road
Lions Avenue [Added
11-12-1991 by Ord. No.
O91-03]
East Adelaide Street
Lions Avenue [Added
11-12-1991 by Ord. No.
O91-03]
West Hurley Street
Lois Drive [Added
6-8-1993 by Ord. No.
O93-01]
East Barretts Hill Road
Lund Drive [Added
12-8-1998 by Ord. No.
O98-06]
West Hartson Circle
Madison Drive [Added
1-27-2000 by Ord. No.
00-01]
East Greeley Street
Mallard Drive [Added
7-23-1996 by Ord. No.
O96-5]
South Barretts Hill Road
§ 317-30 HUDSON CODE § 317-30
1:458
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
*Indicates three- or four-way stop or stop on more than one street in the
intersection.
Maple Avenue [Added
11-12-1991 by Ord. No.
O91-03]
North Central Street
Marshmallow Path South Ferry Street
Marsh Road [Added
11-12-1991 by Ord. No.
O91-03]
West Route 102
McKinney Drive* East/ West Winslow Farm Road
Meadowlark Drive [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
West Derry Street
Melendy Road* Both Belknap Road
Melendy Road South Pelham Road
Melendy Road West Central Street
Merrimack Street East Webster Street
Mountainview Drive
[Added 7-23-1996 by Ord.
No. O96-5]
East Wason Road
Mountainview Drive
[Added 7-23-1996 by Ord.
No. O96-5]
South Pasture Drive
Muldoon Drive [Added
1-24-1989 by Ord. No.
O88-11]
South Chalifoux Road
Musquash Road [Added
2-12-2002 by Ord. No.
O2-01]
Both Sanders Road
Musquash Road East Sanders Road and Gowing
Road
Musquash Road North Gowing Road
Musquash Road North Wason Road
Musquash Road [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
West Dracut Road
Nathaniel Drive [Added
11-23-1993 by Ord. No.
O93-06]
Southwest Dracut Road
§ 317-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 317-30
1:459
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
*Indicates three- or four-way stop or stop on more than one street in the
intersection.
Nevens Street [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
East Belknap Road
Oakwood Street East Second Street
Old Derry Road [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
North/ South Robinson Road
Old Derry Road [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
West Route 102
Page Road [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
East Route 102
Paget Drive [Added
8-22-2006 by Ord. No.
06-01]
South Sullivan Road
Park Avenue [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
North Route 111
Pasture Drive [Added
7-23-1996 by Ord. No.
O96-5]
East Wason Road
Pelham Road [Added
5-14-2014]
North Bush Hill Road
Pelham Road [Added
11-14-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-14]
West Burns Hill Road
Pelham Road West Lowell Road
Pelham Road [Added
1-23-1990 by Ord. No.
O90-1]
West Melendy Road
Philbrick Street [Added
12-22-2009]
East Blueberry Lane
Philbrick Road [Added
8-18-1992 by Ord. No.
O92-21]
West Route 3A
Philips Drive [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-19]
West Derry Street
§ 317-30 HUDSON CODE § 317-30
1:460
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
*Indicates three- or four-way stop or stop on more than one street in the
intersection.
Pine Road East Dracut Road
Pine Road East Winslow Farm Road
Pine Road* [Added
3-23-1999 by Ord. No.
O99-01]
South Winslow Farm Road
Pine Road* [Added
3-23-1999 by Ord. No.
O99-01]
West Winslow Farm Road
Pinewood Road [Added
11-14-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-19]
East/ West Beechwood Road
Plaza Drive [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
West Webster Street
Pleasant Street South Ferry Street
Ponderosa Drive [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
West Dracut Road
Putnam Road [Added
9-23-2008 by Ord. No.
08-01]
Southeast Old Derry Road
Rangers Drive [Added
11-12-1991 by Ord. No.
O91-05]
North Barretts Hill
Raymond Street [Added
4-22-1994 by Ord. No.
O94-04]
East Adelaide Street
Raymond Street [Added
4-22-1994 by Ord. No.
O94-04]
West Hurley Street
Rebel Road West Route 102
Rega Street East Ridgecrest Drive
Rena Street East Ridgecrest Drive
Ridge Avenue [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
North Ferry Street
Ridge Avenue North Ridgecrest Drive
Ridgecrest Drive South Rena Street
§ 317-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 317-30
1:461
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
*Indicates three- or four-way stop or stop on more than one street in the
intersection.
Ridgecrest Street East Rena Street
Riverside Avenue [Added
2-13-2001 by Ord. No.
O1-01]
West Riverview Avenue and
Watersedge Avenue
Riverview Avenue [Added
2-13-2001 by Ord. No.
O1-01]
North Riverside Avenue and
Watersedge Avenue
Robin Drive [Added
11-23-1993 by Ord. No.
O93-06]
North Marsh Road
Robinson Road [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
South Griffin Road
Robinson Road South Lawrence Road
Robinson Road West Derry Highway
Robinson Road West Route 102
Roosevelt Avenue West Lowell Road
Sagamore Park Road East Lowell Road
St. Anthony Drive [Added
8-15-1995 by Ord. No.
O95-05]
North Burns Hill Road
St. Francis Place [Added
8-15-1995 by Ord. No.
O95-05]
North Burns Hill Road
St. Laurent Drive [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
West Webster Street
Sandalwood Road [Added
7-23-1996 by Ord. No.
O96-5]
South Pinewood Road
Sanders Road [Added
2-12-2002 by Ord. No.
O2-01]
Both Musquash Road
Sanders Road [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
West Dracut Road
Sand Hill Road [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
East Dracut Road
§ 317-30 HUDSON CODE § 317-30
1:462
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
*Indicates three- or four-way stop or stop on more than one street in the
intersection.
Schaeffer Circle [Added
11-12-1991 by Ord. No.
O91-03]
East Dracut Road
School Street [Repealed 11-12-1991 by Ord. No. O91-04]
School Street [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
East/ West Chase Street
School Street [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
East/ West First Street
School Street East/ West Library Street
Second Street [Added
11-12-1991 by Ord. No.
O91-03]
Both School Street
Second Street North Ferry Street
Second Street [Added
11-12-1989 by Ord. No.
O91-03]
South Oakwood Avenue
Security Drive [Added
4-28-1999122]
West Lowell Road
Security Drive [Added
11-24-1992 by Ord. No.
O92-34]
West River Road
Sheraton Drive [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
East Belknap Road
Sherburne Road [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
West Dracut Road
Somerset Drive [Added
11-12-1991 by Ord. No.
O91-05]
South Gowing Road
Sousa Boulevard [Added
11-10-1997 by Ord. No.
O97-02; amended
11-10-1997 by Ord. No.
O97-03]
East Greeley Street
122. Editor's Note: Said intersection was added by the State of New Hampshire Department of
Transportation.
§ 317-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 317-30
1:463
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
*Indicates three- or four-way stop or stop on more than one street in the
intersection.
Speare Road North Kimball Hill Road
Speare Road [Added
10-26-2004 by Ord. No.
04-04]
West Bush Hill Road
Springwood Circle [Added
11-24-1992 by Ord. No.
O92-32]
South Greeley Street
Springwood Circle [Added
11-23-1993 by Ord. No.
O93-06; amended
11-10-1997 by Ord. No.
O97-02; 11-10-1997 by
Ord. No. O97-03]
West Greeley Street
Spruce Street East Birch Street
Spruce Street West Fir Street
State Street North Ferry Street
Stonewood Drive* West Chagnon Lane and Heritage
Circle
Stonewood Lane [Added
11-24-1992 by Ord. No.
O92-29]
North Robinson Road
Stoney Lane Added
8-23-1994 by Ord. No.
O94-03]
South Boulder Drive
Stoney Lane North Robinson Road
Stuart Street [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
East Dracut Road
Stuart Street [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
West River Road
Sullivan Road North Bridle Bridge Road
Sunland Drive East Patricia Drive
Sunland Drive [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
West Webster Street
Sunrise Drive South Winnhaven Drive
Tamarack Street East Cottonwood Drive
§ 317-30 HUDSON CODE § 317-30
1:464
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
*Indicates three- or four-way stop or stop on more than one street in the
intersection.
Third Street North Ferry Street
Thorning Road [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
East Melendy Road
Towhee Drive [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
West Derry Street
Tracy Lane East Route 102
Travers Street North Blackstone Street
Vernon Street [Added
7-9-1996 by Ord. No.
O96-4]
South Haverhill Street
Vinton Street South Central Street
Virginia Drive [Added
5-26-1992 by Ord. No.
O92-05]
North Glen Drive
Virginia Drive [Added
1-27-1992 by Ord. No.
O91-09]
North Pelham Road
Wade Road South Wende Street
Walnut Street [Added
12-22-2009]
North Philbrick Street
Walnut Street [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-6]
North/ South Eayers Pond Road
Washington Street [Added
1-27-2000 by Ord. No.
00-01]
East Greeley Street
Washington Street [Added
8-15-1995 by Ord. No.
O95-05]
East Munroe Drive
Wason Road North Bush Hill Road
Wason Road West Lowell Road
Watersedge Avenue [Added
2-13-2001 by Ord. No.
01-01]
South Riverview Avenue and
Riverside Avenue
§ 317-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 317-30
1:465
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
*Indicates three- or four-way stop or stop on more than one street in the
intersection.
Watersedge Drive [Added
3-28-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-1]
South Riverside Avenue
Webster Street [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
North Elm Avenue
Wende Drive [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
West Phillips Drive
Wentworth Drive [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-6]
North/ South Executive Drive
West Road East Route 102
Whippoorwill Drive [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
West Derry Street
Williams Drive [Added
7-23-1996 by Ord. No.
O96-5]
North Pine Road
Willow Street Both Sycamore Street
Windham Road [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No.
O89-7]
East Route 111
Winnhaven Drive East Lowell Road
Winn Avenue East Lowell Road
Winn Avenue West Cross Street
Winslow Farm Road_
[Added 1-24-1989 by Ord.
No. O88-11; amended
3-23-1999 by Ord. No.
O99-01]
East Pine Road
Winslow Farm Road* East/ West McKinney Drive
Winslow Farm Road West River Road
Wissahickon Drive [Added
11-23-1993 by Ord. No.
O93-06]
East Pine Road
York Road [Added
5-11-2004 by Ord. No.
04-01]
South Bockes Road
§ 317-30 HUDSON CODE § 317-31
1:466
§ 317-31. Schedule IV: One-Way Streets.
As provided in § 317-10, the following described streets or parts of streets
are hereby designated as one-way streets, and vehicles traveling on them
shall proceed only in the direction indicated:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Dunkin Donuts [Added
10-20-1992 by Ord.
No. O92-27]
Driveway,
southerly access
facing Route 102
Route 102/Derry Street
Riverside Avenue West From Lowell Road to Cross
Street
Spur A [Added
8-18-1992 by Ord. No.
O92-23]
West From Route 111 to Windham
Road
§ 317-32. Schedule V: Speed Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 317-11, speed limits are hereby
established upon the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Beechwood Road 25 From Hazelwood Road to Boulder
Drive
Boulder Drive 25 From Beechwood Road to Stoney
Lane
Boyd Road 30 From Robinson Road to
Londonderry Town Line
Central Street 30 From Lowell Road to Veterans
Memorial Bridge
Chalifoux Road 25 Entire length
Derry Road 30 From Highland Street and Library
Street to Ferry Street and Baker
Street
Ferry Street 30 From Pleasant Street to and
including east side of Veterans
Memorial Bridge
Hazelwood Road 25 From Robinson Road to
Beechwood Road
Henry Drive 25 From Robinson Road to Chagnon
Lane
Hurley Street 25 Entire length
§ 317-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 317-32
1:467
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Library Street 30 Entire length
McKinney Drive [Added
11-15-1988 by Ord.
No. O88-10]
20 Entire length
Musquash Road 30 Entire length
Nathaniel Drive [Added
5-8-2007 by Ord. No.
07-04]
25 From Dracut Road to Musquash
Road
Steele Road 30 West from Lowell Road to end
Stoney Lane 25 From Boulder Drive to Robinson
Road
Wason Road 30 Entire length
Water Street (June 1
through September 30)
30 Entire length
Webster Street 30 From Veterans Memorial Bridge to
Elm Street
Winslow Farm Road
[Added 11-15-1988 by
Ord. No. O88-10]
20 From River Road to Pine Road
§ 317-33. Schedule VI: Streets Closed.
In accordance with the provisions of § 317-12, the following streets and
parts of streets are hereby closed to all vehicular traffic during the times
indicated:
Name of Street Hours/Days Limits
*Indicates streets, otherwise closed, on which the following traffic shall
continue to be permitted: residents living within the restricted area;
school buses picking up or discharging pupils; emergency vehicles or
officials en route to emergencies; vehicles servicing homes, schools or
utilities in the restricted area.
School Street* 7:30 a.m. to 3:30
p.m./ school days
From First Street to Library
Street
§ 317-33.1. Schedule VIA: Limited Entry Streets. [Added 7-25-1989
by Ord. No. O89-2]
In accordance with the provisions of § 317-12.1, entry to the following
streets and parts of streets is hereby limited to all vehicular traffic during
the times indicated:
§ 317-32 HUDSON CODE § 317-33.1
1:468
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits Hours/ Days
Campbell Avenue
[Added 5-26-1992
by Ord. No.
O92-07]
All From Ferry
Street
4:30 p.m. to 6:30
p.m./ Monday
through Friday
Claveau Landing
[Added 11-10-2008
by Ord. No. 08-02]
All From
Highland
Street
Dusk to dawn/Every
day
School Street [Added 11-12-1991 by Ord. No. O91-02; repealed
5-26-1992 by Ord. No. O92-07]
Webster Street South From Elm
Avenue
6:30 a.m. to 9:30
a.m./ Monday
through Friday
§ 317-34. Schedule VII: Truck, Commercial Vehicle and Heavy
Vehicle Limitations.
In accordance with the provisions of § 317-13F, trucks shall be restricted
from the following streets and parts of streets in the manner and to the
extent indicated below:
Name of Street
Vehicle Type,
Max. Height or
Max. Weight
Prohibited
Direction of
Travel; hours/
days Limits
*Indicates prohibitions that shall not apply to pickup trucks, vans,
recreation vehicles mounted on pickup trucks, recreation vehicles no
larger than a one-ton capacity van or pickup truck.
**Indicates prohibitions that shall not apply to heavy vehicles making
specific on-call pickups from or deliveries to designated residences on the
indicated streets.
***Indicates prohibitions that shall not apply to vehicles making deliveries
or pickups and so-called camping trailers.
Barretts Hill Road
[Added
5-26-1992 by
Ord. No. O92-08]
Truck traffic Both; all From Hazelwood
Road to Old
Windham Road
Belknap Road
[Amended
3-28-1989 by
Ord. No. O89-3]
Commercial, 1 1/
2 tons
Both From Central
Street/Route 111
to County Road
Blueberry Lane Heavy vehicle Both; all From Dracut Road
to Philbrick Street
§ 317-33.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 317-34
1:469
Name of Street
Vehicle Type,
Max. Height or
Max. Weight
Prohibited
Direction of
Travel; hours/
days Limits
*Indicates prohibitions that shall not apply to pickup trucks, vans,
recreation vehicles mounted on pickup trucks, recreation vehicles no
larger than a one-ton capacity van or pickup truck.
**Indicates prohibitions that shall not apply to heavy vehicles making
specific on-call pickups from or deliveries to designated residences on the
indicated streets.
***Indicates prohibitions that shall not apply to vehicles making deliveries
or pickups and so-called camping trailers.
Bockes Road
[Added
10-10-1989 by
Ord. No. O89-10]
Through truck
traffic
East; all From York Road to
Windham Town
line
Bruce Street Heavy vehicle Both; all From Lowell Road
to Linda Street
Campbell Avenue*
[Amended
1-8-1991 by Ord.
No. 090-15]
1 ton Both; all From Ferry Street
to School Street
Central Street [Repealed 3-28-1989 by Ord. No. O89-3]
Claveau Landing
[Added
11-10-2008 by
Ord. No. 08-02]
Commercial, 1 1/
2 tons
South; all Entire length
Cummings Street Commercial, 1 1/
2 tons
Both; all Entire length
Cutler Road** Heavy vehicle Both; all From Route 102 to
Putnam Road
Daw Street**
[Added
8-24-1993 by
Ord. No. O93-04]
Truck traffic Both; all Intersection of
Daw Street and
Webster Street
Dugout Road
[Added
5-26-1992 by
Ord. No. O92-09]
Truck traffic Both; all From Barretts Hill
Road to Lawrence
Road
Eayrs Road Heavy vehicle Both; all From River Road
to Laurel Street
Greeley Street [Repealed 5-26-1992 by Ord. No. O92-10]
Highland Street [Repealed 5-26-1992 by Ord. No. O92-10]
§ 317-34 HUDSON CODE § 317-34
1:470
Name of Street
Vehicle Type,
Max. Height or
Max. Weight
Prohibited
Direction of
Travel; hours/
days Limits
*Indicates prohibitions that shall not apply to pickup trucks, vans,
recreation vehicles mounted on pickup trucks, recreation vehicles no
larger than a one-ton capacity van or pickup truck.
**Indicates prohibitions that shall not apply to heavy vehicles making
specific on-call pickups from or deliveries to designated residences on the
indicated streets.
***Indicates prohibitions that shall not apply to vehicles making deliveries
or pickups and so-called camping trailers.
Highland Street Commercial, 1 1/
2 tons
East; 8:00 p.m.
to 6:00 a.m./
Monday
through
Saturday
(Permits under
§ 317-13B and C
not applicable)
From Greeley
Street to Derry
Street/ Route 102
Highland Street
[Added
5-26-1992 by
Ord. No. O92-12]
Truck traffic Both; all From Greeley
Street to Liberty
Street
Leslie Street**
[Added
8-24-1993 by
Ord. No. O93-05]
Truck traffic Both; all Intersection of
Leslie Street and
Route 102
Linda Street Heavy vehicle All; all/all From Steele Road
to Bruce Street
Maple Avenue***
[Added
6-22-1992 by
Ord. No. O92-19]
Trailers Both; all From Central
Street to the north
side of the
entrance to
Merrill Park
Old Derry Road [Repealed 5-26-1992 by Ord. No. O92-10]
Old Derry Road
[Added
5-26-1992 by
Ord. No. O92-11]
Through truck
traffic
Both; all From Greeley
Street to Robinson
Road
Philbrick Street Heavy vehicle Both; all From River Road
to Blueberry Lane
§ 317-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 317-34
1:471
Name of Street
Vehicle Type,
Max. Height or
Max. Weight
Prohibited
Direction of
Travel; hours/
days Limits
*Indicates prohibitions that shall not apply to pickup trucks, vans,
recreation vehicles mounted on pickup trucks, recreation vehicles no
larger than a one-ton capacity van or pickup truck.
**Indicates prohibitions that shall not apply to heavy vehicles making
specific on-call pickups from or deliveries to designated residences on the
indicated streets.
***Indicates prohibitions that shall not apply to vehicles making deliveries
or pickups and so-called camping trailers.
Putnam Road** Heavy vehicle Both; all From Old Derry
Road to Cutter
Road
Sandhill Road Heavy vehicle Both; all From Dracut Road
to Blueberry Lane
School Street
[Added 1-8-1991
by Ord. No.
O90-15]
1 ton Both; all From Campbell
Avenue to Chase
Street
Webster Street 8 feet, 4 inches
or 6 tons
South; all From Elm Street
to Ferry Street
Winslow Farm
Road [Added
1-24-1989 by
Ord. No. O88-15]
Heavy vehicle All; all/all From River Road
to Pine Road
§ 317-35. Schedule VIII: Parking Prohibited at All Times.
In accordance with the provisions of § 317-21, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Able Street [Added
6-22-2004 by Ord. No.
04-02; amended
12-28-2004 by Ord. No.
04-06]
Both Entire length
Bush Hill Road Both South from Kimball Hill Road
for 1,500 feet
Central Street North From a point 250 feet east of
Veterans Memorial Bridge to
Fulton Street
§ 317-34 HUDSON CODE § 317-35
1:472
Name of Street Side Location
Chase Street East From School Street to Ferry
Street
Chase Street West Entire length
Clark Street North Entire length
Connell Street South East from Library Street for 500
feet
Constitution Drive [Added
8-15-1995 by Ord. No.
O95-06]
Both From a point 750 feet west of
Clement Road
County Road East From A Street to Roosevelt
Avenue
Derry Street [Added
12-22-1987 by Ord. No.
O87-9123]
Both Between the intersections of
Elm Avenue and Cummings
Street
Derry Street North From Putnam Road to a point
1,000 feet east of Londonderry
Road
Derry Street West From Cummings Street to Ferry
Street
Executive Drive [Added
1-27-2000 by Ord. No.
00-02]
Both West from Lowell Road for 300
feet
Ferry Street South From Central Street (west
intersection) to a point 15 feet
east of Campbell Avenue
Ferry Street South From Veterans Memorial Bridge
to Chase Street
Flagstone Drive [Added
1-27-2000 by Ord. No.
Both West from Lowell Road for 300
feet
Ferry Street South From Central Street (west
intersection) to a point 15 feet
east of Campbell Avenue
Ferry Street South From Veterans Memorial Bridge
to Chase Street
Flagstone Drive [Added
1-27-2000 by Ord. No.
00-02]
Both West from Lowell Road for 300
feet
Fulton Street East South from Central Street to
Reed Street
123. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for a penalty of $25 and costs or expenses
incurred by the Town in towing any vehicle.
§ 317-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 317-35
1:473
Name of Street Side Location
Greeley Street [Added
7-10-2007 by Ord. No.
07-05]
West Approximately 425 feet from
Route 111 intersection (entire
length of guardrail)
Library Street East From Central Street to Ferry
Street
Library Street [Added
1-9-1996 by Ord. No.
O96-02]
West From Ferry Street to School
Street
Library Street [Added
1-9-1996 by Ord. No.
O96-02]
West From a point 85 feet south of
School Street
Lowell Road Both From Central Street to
Sagamore Bridge Road
Lowell Road West From Birch Street to
Winnhaven Drive
Maple Avenue [Added
7-11-2000 by Ord. No.
00-03]
East From Central Street to Reed
Street
Melendy Road [Added
8-15-1995 by Ord. No.
O95-04]
East From a point 100 feet east of
Able Street
Melendy Road [Added
12-9-1991 by Ord. No.
O91-07]
South Between Able Street and
Central Street
Melendy Road [Added
8-15-1995 by Ord. No.
O95-04]
West From No. 16 Melendy Road 200
feet west
Reed Street South From Maple Avenue to Fulton
Street
School Street Both West from Library Street for
200 feet
Water Street South East from Library Street for 500
feet
§ 317-36. Schedule IX: Parking Prohibited Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 317-22, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours listed upon any of the following described streets or
parts of streets:
§ 317-35 HUDSON CODE § 317-36
1:474
Name of Street Side Hours/ Days Location
Alvirne Drive
[Added 1-27-1998
by Ord. No.
O98-02]
Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m./ September
to June
From Grace Avenue
to Patricia Drive
Alvirne Drive
[Added 5-13-1997
by Ord. No. O97-1]
Both 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m.
From Patricia Drive
East
Cutler Road Both Afternoon or
evening when
event permitted
and scheduled at
Hudson Speedway
From Old Derry
Road to Route 102
Dell Drive [Added
1-27-1998 by Ord.
No. O98-02]
Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m./ September
to June
From Sunland Drive
to Alvirne Drive
Evergreen Drive
[Added 12-17-1996
by Ord. No. O96-7]
Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m./ Monday
through Fri- day
from Labor Day
through June 25
From Route 102 to
Marsh Road
Ferry Street South 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m./All
From Chase Street
to Library Street
Ferry Street South 4:00 p.m. to 6:00
p.m./All
From Chase Street
to Library Street
First Street West 8:00 a.m. through
9:00 a.m./All
(during school
year)
From School Street
to Oakwood Street
First Street West 2:30 p.m. through
3:30 a.m./All
(during school
year)
From School Street
to Oakwood Drive
Forest Road [Added
1-27-1998 by Ord.
No. O98-02]
Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m./ September
to June
From St. Laurent
Drive to Patricia
Drive
Grace Avenue
[Added 1-27-1998
by Ord. No.
O98-02]
Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m./ September
to June
From Sunland Drive
to Alvirne Drive
Library Street Both School hours/
School days
From a point 200
feet south of Ferry
Street to School
Street
§ 317-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 317-36
1:475
Name of Street Side Hours/ Days Location
North Ridge Road
[Added 10-11-
2005 by Ord. No.
05-02]
Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m./ Monday
through Friday
from Labor Day
through June 25
Entire length
Old Derry Road Both Afternoon or
evening when
event permitted
and scheduled at
Hudson Speedway
From Londonderry
Town Line to Route
102
Patricia Drive
[Added 1-27-1998
by Ord. No.
O98-02]
Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m./ September
to June
From Alvirne Drive
to St. Laurent Drive
Putnam Road Both Afternoon or
evening when
event permitted
and scheduled at
Hudson Speedway
From Old Derry
Road to Route 102
Robinson Road Both Afternoon or
evening when
event permitted
and scheduled at
Hudson Speedway
From Route 102 to
Boyd Road
Sunland Drive
[Added 1-27-1998
by Ord. No.
O98-02]
Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m./ September
to June
From Webster Street
to Patricia Drive
§ 317-37. Schedule X: Time Limit Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 317-23, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer than the time limit shown upon any of the following described
streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
(Reserved)
§ 317-38. Schedule XI: Parallel Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 317-24, all vehicles parked on the
following streets and parts of streets shall be parked parallel to and no more
than 12 inches from the edge of the street or part of street:
§ 317-36 HUDSON CODE § 317-38
1:476
Name of Street Side Location
Central Street Both From Fulton Street to Hudson/
Nashua Line
Ferry Street Both From Derry Street to Hudson/
Nashua Line
§ 317-39. Schedule XII: Prohibited Turns. [Added 8-18-1992 by Ord.
No. O92-22]
In accordance with the provisions of § 317-10.1, turning from the following
streets is prohibited in the direction and at the times at the intersections
indicated:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel
Turn
Prohibited at
Intersection Hours/ Days
Dunkin Donuts
[Added 10-20-1992
by Ord. No.
O92-28]
North Left turn at
Route 102
All
Ferry Street [Added
8-24-1993 by Ord.
No. O93-03]
North Left turn from
Ferry Street onto
Library Street
All
Spur A West Left at Windham
Road
All
§ 317-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 317-39
1:477
Chapter 323
WASTEWATER DISPOSAL
Chapter 326
WELFARE
Chapter 334
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Regional Planning Commission — See Ch.
116.
Zoning Board of Adjustment — See Ch. 143.
Building construction — See Ch. 178.
Building, planning and zoning civil
penalties — See Ch. 181.
Site plan review — See Ch. 275.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 289.
§ 317-39 HUDSON CODE § 317-39
1:478
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 334-1. Title.
This chapter shall be cited as the "Code of the Town of Hudson, NH." It is
hereinafter referred to as "this chapter."
§ 334-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety and general
welfare of the inhabitants as well as efficiency and economy in the process
of development, by encouraging the most appropriate use of land
throughout the Town and to:
§ 334-3. Statutory authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to authority granted by Title LXIV of the
New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated and by New Hampshire RSA
674:16 through 674:21, inclusive.
§ 334-4. Adoption and replacement of prior ordinance.
This chapter was originally adopted March 10, 1942, by ballot at the Annual
Town Meeting. This chapter replaces the Zoning Ordinance of record as of
this date, in its entirety.
A. Lessen congestion in streets.
B. Secure safety from fires, panic and other dangers.
C. Provide adequate light and air.
D. Prevent the overcrowding of land.
E. Avoid undue concentration of population.
F. Conserve property values.
G. Facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, solid waste
facilities, water, sewerage, schools, parks, child day-care and housing
opportunities for all family types and income levels.
H. Assure the proper use of natural resources and other public
requirements.
I. Preserve and enhance the quality of life.
J. Prevent the establishment of nuisances. [Added 3-12-1996]
§ 334-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-4
1:479

ARTICLE II
Terminology
[Amended 3-12-1996; 3-10-1998; 3-9-1999; 3-13-2001 by Amdt. No.
7; 3-12-2002 by Amdt. No. 3; 3-13-2007 by Amdt. No. 1; 3-16-2017
by Art. No. 2]
§ 334-5. Word usage and interpretation.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words, terms or phrases shall
bear the meanings defined in § 334-6, unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise. Such words, terms and phrases shall appear in CAPITAL
LETTERS when used as herein defined.
A. Words in the present tense include the future.
B. The singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular.
C. Hierarchy:
(1) Terms and words not defined in this article but defined in
applicable New Hampshire state statutes or regulations shall have
the meanings given therein.
(2) Terms and words not defined in this article but defined in the
Building Code shall have the meanings given therein.
(3) Terms and words not defined in this article, the RSAs or in the
Building Code shall have the meanings understood in common
usage and as defined in standard American dictionaries.
D. In interpreting any portion of this chapter, it shall be held as the
minimum requirement adopted for promotion of the public health,
safety and general welfare of the Town. Whenever any provision of this
chapter is at variance with any other provision of the chapter, or with
the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rule or regulation, the
most restrictive, or that imposing the highest standard, shall govern.
E. In case of any difference in meaning or implication between the text of
these regulations and any caption, illustration, summary table or
illustrative table, the text shall govern.
F. The words "shall,"" will," "shall not," "will not" or "may not" are always
mandatory and not discretionary, the word "may" is permissive.
G. The terms "building" or "structure" include any part thereof.
H. The term "person" includes an individual, a corporation a partnership,
an incorporated association, or any other similar entity.
I. The terms "includes" and "including" shall not limit a term, definition or
set of examples to the specified examples, but are intended to extend
their meaning to all other instances or circumstances of the like kind of
character.
§ 334-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-5
1:481
§ 334-6. Definitions.
The following words have the following meanings for the purposes of this
chapter and do not affect or supersede definitions contained in any other
TOWN ordinance or regulation.
A
ABANDONMENT — The visible or otherwise apparent intention of an owner
to discontinue a use of a structure or LOT.
ABUTTER — Any person whose property is located in New Hampshire
and adjoins or is directly across the street or stream from the land under
consideration by the local land use board as defined in RSA 672:3. For
purposes of receipt of notification by a municipality of a local land use board
hearing, in the case of an abutting property being under a condominium or
other collective form of ownership, the term "ABUTTER" means the officers
of the collective or association, as defined in New Hampshire RSA 356-B:3,
XXIII.
ACCESS — The right vested in the owner of land to enter and return from
that land without obstruction to and from a public way.
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (ADU) — A residential living unit that is
within or attached to a single-family dwelling, and that provides
independent living facilities for one or more persons, including provisions
for sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel of land as
the principal DWELLING UNIT it accompanies, as defined in RSA 674:71.
ACCESSORY BUILDING or SHED — A structure of any kind other than an
AWNING or CANOPY, the purpose of which is storage or other accessory
use.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES — A detached building or other structure, the
use of which is customarily incidental and subordinate to that of the
principal building, and which is located on the same lot as that occupied by
the principal building. These include, but are not limited to:
J. Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation
involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected
by the conjunctions "and," "or," or "either... or," the conjunction shall be
interpreted as follows:
(1) "And" or "plus" indicates that all the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply.
(2) "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or
events may apply singly or in any combination.
(3) "Either ... or" indicates that the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination.
A. ACCESSORY BUILDING or SHED.
B. AWNING.
§ 334-5 HUDSON CODE § 334-6
1:482
ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE — A SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS that devotes display, shelf, rack, table, stand or floor area,
utilized for the display and sale of the following:
ADULT CABARET — A type of SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS that is
a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar establishment which meets the
definition of "harmful to minors" and/or "sexual conduct" as set forth in
NH RSA 571-B:1, and/or feature films, motion pictures, videocassettes,
DVDs, Blu-Ray discs, electronic media and storage devices, slides or other
photographic or electronic reproductions, a SUBSTANTIAL PORTION of the
total presentation time of which is devoted to showing of material which
meets the definition of "harmful to minors" and/or "sexual conduct" as set
forth in NH RSA 571-B:1.
ADULT DRIVE-IN THEATER — A type of SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS
that is an open lot or part thereof, with appurtenant facilities, devoted
primarily to the presentation of motion pictures, films, theatrical
productions and other forms of visual productions, for any form of
consideration to persons in motor vehicles or on outdoor seats, in which
materials are shown which meet the definition of "harmful to minors" and/
or "sexual conduct" as set forth in NH RSA 571-B:1.
ADULT USE ESTABLISHMENT — A type of SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS that is an establishment offering goods, services or
accommodations distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the
depiction of materials which meet the definition of "harmful to minors" and/
or "sexual conduct" as set forth in NH RSA 571-B:1.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE ARCADE — A type of SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS that is any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-, token- or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or
mechanically controlled still or motion-picture machines, projectors, or
other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or
fewer persons per machine at any one time, in which the images so
displayed are devoted to the showing of material which meets the definition
of "harmful to minors" and/or "sexual conduct" as set forth in NH RSA
571-B:1.
C. CANOPY.
D. PORTABLE GARAGE.
E. CAR CANOPY.
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs,
films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, tapes, records, CD-ROM's
or other forms of visual or audio representations which meet the
definition of "harmful to minors" and/or "sexual conduct" as set forth in
NH RSA 571-B:1; or
A.
Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in
connection with "sexual conduct" as defined in NH RSA 571-B:1, other
than birth control devices.
B.
§ 334-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-6
1:483
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — A type of SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS that has a capacity of five or more persons, where for any form
of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar
photographic reproductions are shown, and in which a SUBSTANTIAL
PORTION OF THE TOTAL PRESENTATION TIME is devoted to the showing
of material which meets the definition of "harmful to minors" and/or "sexual
conduct" as set forth in NH RSA 571-B:1, for observation by patrons.
ADULT THEATER — A type of SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS that is a
theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar establishment, either indoor or
outdoor in nature, which for any form of consideration regularly features
live performances, which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on activities which meet the definition of "harmful to minors" and/or "sexual
conduct" as set forth in NH RSA 571-B:1.
ALTERNATIVE FACILITIES/TECHNOLOGIES (TELECOMMUNICATIONS)
— Innovative siting techniques for use with commercial wireless
telecommunication facilities such as artificial trees, clock towers, bell
towers, steeples, light poles and similar alternative design mounting
structures which camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas, towers
or facilities; as well as utility pole and cable-based technologies.
ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SYSTEMS — ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SYSTEMS
include wind, solar, geothermal, fuel cell, hydroelectric and other similar
energy production systems. See:
ANTENNA — The radiating system used to perform or achieve (transmit
and/or receive) a desired communication or telecommunication service.
APPLICANT — The person, persons, corporation or other legal entity, or
their assigns, applying for a VARIANCE, SPECIAL EXCEPTION or APPEAL
OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISION.
AWNING — A cover or appurtenance that is permanent, retractable,
temporary or portable in nature and is attached to and wholly supported by
a building or other structure.
A. METEOROLOGICAL TOWER (MET TOWER).
B. SYSTEM MODIFICATION.
C. NET METERING.
D. POWER GRID.
E. SHADOW FLICKER.
F. SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM.
G. SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM HEIGHT.
H. SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM TOWER.
I. WIND GENERATOR.
§ 334-6 HUDSON CODE § 334-6
1:484
AWNING SIGN — A sign painted on or attached flat or flush against the
surface of the awning, but not extending above, below or beyond the awning
or attached to the underside.
B
BANNER SIGN — A temporary sign of lightweight material (paper, plastic
or fabric) hung either with or without frames. Flags and insignias
containing only markings of any government, corporation or business are
not considered "banners" and are defined separately as "flags."
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE — A proven or accepted structural,
nonstructural, or vegetative measure, the application of which reduces
erosion, sediment, or peak storm discharge, or improves the quality of
stormwater runoff. The standard described in the latest published copy of
Erosion and Sediment Control Design Handbook for Developing Areas of
New Hampshire prepared by United States Department of Agriculture Soil
Conservation Services.
BMP — See "BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE."
BOARD, ZBA or ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT — Unless otherwise
specified, "BOARD" or "ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT" means the
Town of Hudson, NH, ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT as appointed by
the Town Selectmen.
BOG — A wetland distinguished by stunted evergreen trees and shrubs, the
presence of peat deposits and/or highly acidic soil and/or water conditions
as defined in the New Hampshire Code of Administrative Rules issued by
the New Hampshire Wetlands Board.
BUFFER — Physical distance and/or vertical elements, such as plants,
berms, fences or walls, the purpose of which is to separate and/or screen
incompatible land uses from each other. (See also "WETLAND BUFFER.")
BUILDING CERTIFICATE — A certificate obtained from the Planning Board
entitling the holder to obtain one building permit for one dwelling unit.
Dwelling units, as defined in this article, include single-family homes and
duplexes on individual lots, as well as individual condominium units and
apartments in multifamily structures shown on approved site plans. A
building certificate is valid for a period of two years from the date of
issuance, by which time it must be redeemed for a building permit, or
expire.
BUILDING, STRUCTURE (Accessory) — See "ACCESSORY STRUCTURES."
BUILDING, ATTACHED — A building having any portion of one or more
walls or roof in common with adjoining buildings.
BUILDING, DETACHED — A building not sharing any walls or portions of
any walls or roof with adjoining buildings.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the principal
use of the lot on which it is located.
§ 334-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-6
1:485
BUILDING SETBACK — The minimum distance from the RIGHT-OF-WAY to
a FRONT, SIDE or REAR LOT LINE at which a building, driveway or other
regulated structure or feature may be set or constructed.
BUILDING SIGN — Any sign affixed, mounted, attached to or painted onto
the exterior of a building, including awnings, canopies, roof-mounted and
projecting signs.
C
CANOPY — A temporary or permanent covered structure, the primary
purpose of which is to shield the area beneath it from the elements, and
which is supported by posts, poles, columns or other elements directly on
or into the ground.
CAR CANOPY — A freestanding, lightweight structure used to house
vehicles and constructed of tube framing and is partially covered by a
canvas, polyethylene or other woven or nonwoven fabric or sheeting cover.
This type of structure typically has no side walls and can be easily
disassembled and moved. See also "CANOPY."
CARE FACILITIES — See NH RSAs.
CHILD DAY CARE — The care and supervision of a child away from the
child's home and apart from the child's parents.
CHILD DAY-CARE AGENCY — Any person, corporation, partnership,
voluntary association or other organization, either established for profit or
otherwise, which regularly receives for child day care one or more children,
unrelated to the operator or staff of the agency. The total number of hours
in which a child may remain in child day care shall not exceed 13 hours per
day, except in emergencies. The types of child day-care agencies are defined
as follows:
A. DAY-CARE NURSERY.
B. CHILD DAY CARE.
C. CHILD DAY-CARE AGENCY.
D. FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME.
E. FAMILY GROUP DAY-CARE HOME.
F. GROUP CHILD DAY-CARE CENTER.
G. NIGHT-CARE AGENCY.
H. PRESCHOOL PROGRAM.
I. RESIDENCE.
PRESCHOOL PROGRAM — A child day-care agency providing care and
a structured program for children three years of age and older who
are not attending a full-day school program. The total amount of hours
A.
§ 334-6 HUDSON CODE § 334-6
1:486
CERTIFIED SOILS SCIENTIST — A professional soils scientist certified by
the State of New Hampshire pursuant to New Hampshire state statutes and
licensed to practice in the state.
CERTIFIED WETLANDS SCIENTIST — A professional wetland scientist
certified by the State of New Hampshire pursuant to New Hampshire state
statutes and licensed to practice in the state.
CO-LOCATION, CO-LOCATED (telecommunications — ANTENNA) — The
placement of more than one ANTENNA or INTEGRATED ANTENNA ARRAY
on a supporting structure, and appurtenant equipment and devices on
the supporting structure and/or ground, necessary to perform or achieve
a desired telecommunication service or radio service which is discrete
from any other telecommunication or radio service(s) located on the same
supporting structure.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE, LIGHT — A vehicle used in commerce, which
does not exceed 13,000 pounds gross weight.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE, HEAVY — A vehicle used in commerce, which
exceeds 13,000 pounds gross weight.
COMMERCIAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY — Any
structure, ANTENNA, MAST, tower or other device used to provide a
discrete commercial telecommunication service by a single provider or
multiple CO-LOCATED providers to a broad base of usually unrelated users;
generally including, but not limited to, cellular telephone, personal
communications services (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), enhanced
specialized mobile radio (ESMR) and paging.
CONFORMING LOT — A parcel of land capable of being occupied by one
principal structure or use and its accessory structures or uses and as shown
and identified as such on a plat as defined in the TOWN Code.
CORNER LOT — See lot, corner.[2-2-2019 ATM, Art. 03, adopted
3-12-2019]
D
DAY-CARE NURSERY — A child day-care agency in which child day care is
provided for any part of a day, for five or more children under the age of
three years.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — Signs identifying entrances, exits, parking areas or
loading docks or providing other messages necessary to direct vehicles and
pedestrians through or within a site.
DIRECTORY SIGN — Signs which identify or locate the occupants of
buildings.
DISTRICT — An area of land within the TOWN designated as one of the five
land use classifications in § 334-9 of this ordinance.
a child may be enrolled in a preschool program shall not exceed five
hours per day.
§ 334-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-6
1:487
DUPLEX — Two DWELLING UNITS attached by any portion of one or more
floors, walls or roofs.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms arranged for living, sleeping
and cooking purposes with sanitary facilities for the use of one or more
individuals living as a single housekeeping unit.
DWELLING UNIT, MULTIFAMILY — Three or more DWELLING UNITS
attached by any portion of one or more floors, walls or roofs.
E
ELECTRONIC CHANGING SIGN — Electronic message center (EMC),
electronic message sign (EMS) and changeable copy board (CCB) signs that
display illuminated messages that can change frequently, can flash, display
and/or convey messages in text, graphics, pictures, symbols, multiple
colors, rhythms, animation and/or patterns. This sign's message may be
changed by the electronic switching of lamps, illuminated tubes, bulbs and/
or through the apparent movement of light. These signs are capable of
storing and/or displaying single or multiple messages in various formats at
varying intervals. Definitions related to ELECTRONIC CHANGING SIGNS
are:
ENGINEER or SURVEYOR — The designated, legally recognized engineer
or surveyor of the APPLICANT, licensed by the State of New Hampshire, as
may be pertinent to the actual services to be performed in accordance with
the provisions of RSA 310-A:1 et seq. and as amended.
BRIGHTNESS — Also known as "intensity"; the LED Industry measures
display intensity in candelas per square meter, which is also referred to
as "NITS."
A.
DIMMING — The ability to increase or decrease the overall display
intensity brightness.
B.
DIODE — Also called "light-emitting diode" (LED) or "surface-mounted
diode" (SMD).
C.
LED (LIGHT-EMITTING DIODE/SMD) — A solid-state component that
uses a semiconductor (a silicon chip or some type of semiconductor)
that emits visible light when electric current passes through it.
D.
LUMINANCE — The amount of light that passes through or is emitted
from a particular area. The SI unit for luminance is candela per square
meter.
E.
NIT or NITS — A luminance-measuring unit equal to one candela (one
candle) per square meter measured perpendicular to the rays from the
source.
F.
G. SI UNIT — An abbreviation for the International System of Units.
H. TEXT — Any form in which writing exists.
§ 334-6 HUDSON CODE § 334-6
1:488
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA — The federal agency
responsible for implementing the Clean Water Act, including the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) program.
EXTERIOR DISPLAY — The placement of goods for sale or for
advertisement, outside of the building or structure, including but not
limited to vehicles, garden supplies, gas, tires, motor oil, food and
beverages, whether or not contained in vending machines, boats, farm
equipment, motor homes and clothes.
EXTERIOR ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign illuminated by an external
electrical source similar, but not limited to, an uplight spotlight or top-hung
art light. The external electrical source may be turned on/off manually.
F
FAIR-SHARE REGION AVERAGE GROWTH RATE (FSRAGR) — Average
annual percentage increase in residential building permits issued in the
six adjacent municipalities of Litchfield, Londonderry, Nashua, Pelham,
Windham and Tyngsborough, MA, for the preceding five-year period.
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — An occupied residence in which child day care
is provided for less than 24 hours per day, except in emergencies, for up
to six children from one or more unrelated families. The six children shall
include any foster children residing in the home and all children who are
related to the caregiver except children who are 10 years of age or older. In
addition to the six children, up to three children attending a full-day school
program may also be cared for up to five hours per day on school days and
all day during school holidays.
FAMILY GROUP DAY-CARE HOME — An occupied residence in which child
day care is provided for less than 24 hours per day, except in emergencies,
for seven to 12 children from one or more unrelated families. The 12
children shall include all children related to the caregiver and any foster
children residing in the home, except children who are 10 years of age or
older. In addition to the 12 children, up to five children attending a full-day
school program may also be cared for up to five hours per day on school
days and all day during school holidays.
FEEPAYER — The person, whether individual or corporate, who pays an
impact fee in conjunction with the issuance of a building permit or
occupancy permit.
FLASHING SIGN — Any directly or indirectly illuminated sign that exhibits
changing natural or artificial light or color effects by any means whatsoever;
does not include electronic changing signs (message center).
FREESTANDING SIGN — Any sign not affixed or attached to a building
which is established on a freestanding frame, mast or pole.
FRONTAGE — The distance measured along the FRONT LOT LINE between
points of intersection with the SIDE LOT LINES. FRONTAGE along culde-
sac roadways (HIGHWAYS) shall be measured at the appropriate yard
building SETBACK depth from the FRONT LOT LINE between the points of
§ 334-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-6
1:489
intersection with the SIDE LOT LINES. "FRONTAGE" shall be contiguous
and measured along the joining boundary of the FRONT LOT LINE and a
Class V or better public RIGHT-OF-WAY. Lot lines bordering limited access
roads cannot be considered "FRONTAGE." FRONTAGE shall be capable of
providing ACCESS.
G
GENERAL RETAIL — Retail stores and service establishments other than
those listed in the Table of Permitted Principal Uses.124
GROUP CHILD DAY-CARE CENTER — A child day-care agency in which
child day care is provided for preschool children and up to five schoolage
children, whether or not the service is known as day nursery, nursery
school, kindergarten, cooperative, child development center, day-care
center, center for the developmentally disabled, progressive school,
Montessori school, or by any other name.
GUY WIRE — A cable-type appurtenant device which is used to secure and
steady a tower or mast; and includes all hardware which attaches the cable
to the tower or mast and to the ground.
H
HEIGHT (GENERAL USE) — The distance measured from the ground
adjacent to the structure, or some other alternatively specified point, up to
the highest point of a BUILDING, ANTENNA, STRUCTURE or a supporting
structure.
HEIGHT, SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — The vertical distance from
ground level to the tip of the wind generator blade when it is at its highest
point.
HEIGHT, SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM TOWER — The height above
grade of the fixed portion of the tower, excluding the wind generator.
HIGHWAY — Any travelway, dedicated to or accepted by the Town, whether
improved or unimproved, within the TOWN OF HUDSON that is available as
public use for travel, regardless of whether or not its popular or legal name
contains the term "street," "highway," "road," "roadway," "route," "avenue,"
"boulevard" or other such nomenclature, which shall include any Class VI
roads within HUDSON. In this code, the terms street, road, route, roadway
or avenue may be used interchangeably with HIGHWAY.
HOME OCCUPATION — The accessory use of a residence for business
purposes which is clearly incidental to the principal residential use,
provided that the use does not significantly change the residential character
or function of the property.
HOUSING FOR OLDER PERSONS — Housing that qualifies as "Housing
for Older Persons" as defined in § 334-70 and developed according to the
provisions of § 334-71 of the Town of Hudson Zoning Ordinance.
124. Editor's Note: The Table of Permitted Uses is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 334-6 HUDSON CODE § 334-6
1:490
HUDSON — The TOWN of HUDSON, New Hampshire.
I
INFLATABLE OR BALLOON SIGN — A sign that inflates with air or helium
to display advertisements or promotional activities typically known as, but
not limited to, tubes, tubes in motion, inflatables, rotatable inflatables or
rooftop balloons.
INTEGRATED ANTENNA ARRAY — An ANTENNA, MAST or MONOPOLE
containing multiple coordinated radiating elements.
INTERIOR ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign that has an internal light source
(such as LED, neon or bulb) that may be turned on/off either manually or
by remote control and used to display text that is manually affixed to and/or
manually changeable in an external message area.
J
JUNK — Any material, such as, but not limited to, discarded metal, glass,
paper, building debris, demolition debris, salvage materials, rubber, textiles,
rubbish or trash or junked, dismantled or wrecked motor vehicles or motor
vehicle parts.
JUNKYARD — A commercial establishment or place of business which is
used for storing, keeping, buying or selling junk but not including approved
solid waste disposal facilities or registered motor vehicle dealers.
JUNKYARD, MOTOR VEHICLE — Any place of storage or deposit, whether
in connection with another business or not, which has two or more
unregistered motor vehicles which are no longer fit for legal use on public
highways or any combination of motor vehicle parts or materials, the sum
of which in build is equal to or greater than two or more motor vehicles.
L
LAND USE REGULATIONS — The Town of Hudson, NH, Land Use
Regulations, consisting of Chapters 193, 200, 275, 276 and 290 of the
Hudson Town Code.
LED SIGN — A sign that uses light-emitting diodes to form numbers, as
in digital clocks, transmit information to the sign from remote controls,
form text images and/or illuminate from tiny bulbs that fit into an electrical
circuit.
LOT — A single contiguous parcel of land. (See also CONFORMING and
NONCONFORMING)
LOT, CORNER — A corner lot is defined as a lot located at the intersection
of two HIGHWAYS that has frontage on each HIGHWAY.[2-2-2019 ATM,
Art. 03, adopted 3-12-2019]
LOT LINE, FRONT — The property line dividing a lot from any street
(HIGHWAY) or public RIGHT-OF-WAY without regard to the arrangement or
orientation of buildings or structures on the lot.
§ 334-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-6
1:491
LOT LINE, REAR — The property line opposite the front lot line, except in
the case of corner lots where the owner has the option of choosing which
of the property lines not contiguous with streets (HIGHWAYS) or public
RIGHTS-OF-WAY is to be considered the "rear lot line."
LOT, NONCONFORMING — A lot lawfully existing at the effective date
of this chapter, or any subsequent amendment thereto, which is not in
conformity with all provisions of this chapter. Notwithstanding the minimum
lot area requirements set forth in § 334-27, in any DISTRICT in which
structures are permitted, a structure may be erected on a lot which was a
LEGAL LOT OF RECORD, even though such lot fails to meet the present
requirements for frontage or area, or both, that are applicable for that use
in the DISTRICT allowed; provided, however, that such lot is not contiguous
with another lot or lots in the same ownership, provided that the property
is either on Town sewer or the property owner obtains a state and/or
municipal septic permit, and further provided that the zone's minimum
front, side and back yard SETBACKS are satisfied.
LOT OF RECORD — Land designated as a separate and distinct parcel
prior to the date of posting (November 3, 2000) of this article either in a
legally recorded deed filed with the Hillsborough County Registry of Deeds
or lots or units described as part of a subdivision or site plan recorded
at the Hillsborough County Registry of Deeds prior to the date of posting.
For the purpose of this article, a lot of record shall also be defined to
include separately defined condominium units, as well as individual units in
duplexes and multifamily structures, shown on site plans and/or subdivision
plans accepted for review by the Hudson Planning Board prior to the date
of posting.
LOT, THROUGH — An interior lot, the FRONT and REAR LOT LINES of
which abut streets (HIGHWAYS), or a corner lot two opposite lines of which
abut streets (HIGHWAYS); any lot that has street (HIGHWAY) frontage
along two or more nonadjacent LOT LINES.
M
MANUFACTURED HOUSING — A home built entirely in a factory under
the federal building code administered by the Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD), and constructed to meet the current
Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards (HUD Code). A
manufactured home is permanently attached to a steel frame, can be moved
from one TOWN-approved location to another TOWN-approved location,
and is considered personal property. MANUFACTURED HOUSING does
not include MODULAR HOUSING, nor campers or recreational mobile
homes.125
MARSH — A wetland where the vegetation is distinguished by the absence
of trees and shrubs and dominated by soft-stemmed herbaceous plants and
other emergent vegetation, such as grasses, reeds and sedges. The water
125. Editor’s Note: The definition of “major commercial project,” which immediately preceded
this definition, was repealed 3-13-2018 ATM by Amdt. No. 5.
§ 334-6 HUDSON CODE § 334-6
1:492
table is at or above the surface throughout the year but can fluctuate
seasonally.
METEOROLOGICAL TOWER (MET TOWER) — Includes the tower, base
plate, anchors, guy wires and hardware, anemometers (wind speed
indicators), wind direction vanes, booms to hold equipment for
anemometers and vanes, data loggers, instrument wiring, and any
telemetry devices that are used to monitor or transmit wind speed and wind
flow characteristics over a period of time for either instantaneous wind
information or to characterize the wind resource at a given location. For the
purpose of this article, "met towers" shall refer only to those whose purpose
is to analyze the environmental factors needed to assess the potential to
install, construct or erect a small wind energy system.
MODULAR HOUSING — A home built entirely in a factory under the current
NH State building code, which is also a part of the current IRC
(International Residential Code). A modular home is assembled on site,
cannot be moved, is considered real property, and is allowed in all
residential districts in the TOWN.
MONOPOLE — A freestanding tower consisting of a single pole, constructed
without guy wires or lattice characteristics, which relies solely on selfsupport
(direct attachment to the ground) to remain upright.
MONUMENTATION — The installation of permanent markers that define
corners, boundaries, and rights-of-way when surveying land.
N
NEW DEVELOPMENT — The subdivision, building construction or other
land use change which results in: a net increase in the capital facilities
service demands as identified in the Planning Board's impact fee schedules;
and/or the conversion of a legally existing use to another use or activity
which created an increase in capital facilities service demands.
NET METERING — The difference between the electricity supplied to a
customer over the electric distribution system and the electricity generated
by the customer's wind or solar energy system that is fed back into the
electric distribution system over a billing period.
NHDOT — The New Hampshire Department of Transportation.
NHDES — The New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services.
NIGHT-CARE AGENCY — A center or family home in which child day care is
provided during the evening and night hours. A child day-care agency may
be licensed for day care, night care, or both.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A parcel of land not capable of being occupied
by one principal structure or use and its accessory structures or uses and
as shown and identified as such on a plat as defined in the Town Code.
NUDE MODEL STUDIO — A place where a person who appears in a state of
nudity or displays male genitals in a state of sexual arousal and/or the vulva
or more intimate parts of the female genitals, and is observed, sketched,
§ 334-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-6
1:493
drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other
persons who pay money or any form of consideration or such display is
characterized by an emphasis on activities which meet the definition of
"harmful to minors" and/or "sexual conduct" as set forth in NH RSA 571-B:1.
O
OCEAN CONTAINER — A shipping container of the type typically used
for freight movement. Constructed of steel and typically sealed from the
weather and lockable. Also known as "cargo container," "CONEX container"
and "land/sea container."
OPEN SPACE DEVELOPMENT (OSD) — A form of land subdivision where
lot size and other dimensional requirements and minimum road widths may
be reduced in exchange for the permanent preservation or provision of
proportional areas of open space, farmland, recreational land and other
lands.
OUTSIDE STORAGE — The placement of goods outside of a building or
structure.
P
PARKING SPACE — An off-street space, whether inside or outside a
structure, for exclusive use as a parking stall for one motor vehicle.
PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — A facility predominantly
providing uses including, but not limited to, hair salons, barber shops,
manicures, health spas, tailors, dry cleaners, tattooing, body piercing,
fortune telling and other psychic services, cobblers and massage therapy.
PLAT — The map, drawing or chart on which the final PLAN of
SUBDIVISION is presented to the PLANNING BOARD, and which, if
approved, shall be filed or recorded with the Hillsborough County Register
of Deeds.
POORLY DRAINED SOILS — Soils where the water is removed so slowly
that the soil is saturated periodically during the growing season or remains
wet for long periods of time as defined in the United States Soil
Conservation Service Soils Survey of Hillsborough County, Eastern Half
(latest edition). (See also "VERY POORLY DRAINED SOILS.")
PORTABLE CARPORT — See "CAR CANOPY."
PORTABLE GARAGE — A freestanding, lightweight structure used to house
vehicles and constructed of tube framing and fully enclosed by a canvas,
polyethylene cover or other woven or nonwoven fabric or sheeting. This
structure type typically has no permanent footing or floor and can be easily
disassembled and moved.
PORTABLE SIGN — A sign that is movable, typically set up on a daily basis
outside the business establishment, such as, but not limited to, sandwich
boards, swinger sidewalk signs, portable billboards, Portasigns, Portasigns
in motion or roadside readerboards.
§ 334-6 HUDSON CODE § 334-6
1:494
POWER GRID — The transmission system, managed by ISO New England,
created to balance the supply and demand of electricity for consumers in
New England.
PREEXISTING TOWERS, MASTS AND ANTENNAS — Any TOWER, MAST,
MONOPOLE or ANTENNA lawfully constructed or permitted prior to the
adoption of this article. Also, any TOWER, MAST, MONOPOLE or ANTENNA
lawfully constructed in accordance with this article which predates an
application currently before the Town.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Any use that may endanger the health, safety, peace
or enjoyment of the community or a neighborhood due to the emission of
smoke, fumes, particulates, noise, vibration, radiation, visual blight or any
other like condition.
R
RADIO SERVICE FACILITY — Any structure, ANTENNA, MAST,
MONOPOLE or other radio installation device used to achieve desired
communication(s) by a user with a narrow base of related or unrelated
users; generally including, but not limited to, amateur radio service, general
mobile radio service, citizens band radio service, low-power radio service,
aeronautical and marine communications and any other similar radio
communications or service which is not specifically named within this
definition.
RECEIVE-ONLY FACILITY — Any ANTENNA, MAST, MONOPOLE or other
device designed and constructed with the intent to receive broadcast
signals typically for household use; including, but not limited to, personal
satellite and off-the-air television signals and AM, FM, shortwave and other
similar radio signals.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle, motorized or not, which is designed
and used primarily for the purpose of recreation, including but not limited
to the following: vehicles defined in RSA Chapter 215, boats, motorhomes
and recreational trailers.
RESERVE STRIP — Includes areas for which future public use is intended
for street (HIGHWAY) connections, for street (HIGHWAY) improvements
and for street or pedestrian ways giving ACCESS to land dedicated for
public use.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The area of land owned, used by or available to the Town
for street (HIGHWAY) purposes, including any ancillary purposes thereto.
RSA — The NH Revised Statutes, Annotated.
S
SECONDARY USE — A use of land or of a building or of a portion thereof
which is unrelated to the principal use of the land or building.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, either mineral or organic, that is in
suspension, is transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by
erosion.
§ 334-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-6
1:495
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — A business or commercial enterprise
that as one of its primary business purposes offers for any form of
consideration:
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES — Businesses generally falling into
categories regulated or defined in NH RSA 571 et seq. See:
SHADOW FLICKER — The visible flicker effect when rotating blades of the
wind generator cast shadows on the ground and nearby structures, causing
a repeating pattern of light and shadow.
SHED — See "ACCESSORY BUILDING."
SIGN — An object, display device or structure visible to the public from
the exterior of a building which contains any combination of lights, letters,
words, objects, graphics, figures, designs, symbols, pictures, logos or colors
which are intended to advertise, identify, direct, convey a message to the
public or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization,
business or service. See:
Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons
of the opposite sex; or
A.
Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same
sex when one or more persons is in the state of nudity; and
B.
When the activities in Subsection A or B above are characterized by an
emphasis on activities which meet the definition of "harmful to minors"
and/or "sexual conduct" as set forth in NH RSA 571-B:1.
C.
A. ADULT BOOKSTORE/ADULT VIDEO STORE.
B. ADULT CABARET.
C. ADULT DRIVE-IN THEATER.
D. ADULT USE ESTABLISHMENT.
E. ADULT MOTION-PICTURE ARCADE.
F. ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER.
G. "THE TOTAL PRESENTATION TIME."
H. "SUBSTANTIAL PORTION OF THE TOTAL PRESENTATION TIME."
I. SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER.
J. SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.
K. NUDE MODEL STUDIO.
A. AWNING SIGN.
B. BANNER SIGN.
C. BUILDING SIGN.
§ 334-6 HUDSON CODE § 334-6
1:496
SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — A wind energy conversion system
consisting of a wind generator, a tower, and associated control or
conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity of 100 kilowatts or less
and will be used primarily for on-site consumption.
SOIL — "Overburden," as described in Basic Soils Engineering, by B.K.
Hough, Second Edition, 1969, a copy of which is on file in the office of the
Town Engineer.
STAFF — The person holding the title of TOWN PLANNER for the Town of
Hudson, NH, and, under his or her supervision, any Town administrative,
clerical and legal personnel who are engaged by or are employees of the
Town.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION CONTROL PLAN (SWMP)
— A plan which outlines project features, proposed temporary and
permanent erosion control features, maintenance schedules and practices,
and the design basis used to establish temporary and permanent
stormwater design features.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) — A plan
required by the EPA that clearly describes appropriate pollution control
measures that include a description of all pollution control measures (i.e.,
BMPs) that will be implemented as part of the construction activity to
control pollutants in stormwater discharges and describes the interim and
permanent stabilization practices for the site.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — The water from precipitation that is not
absorbed, evaporated, or otherwise stored within the contributing drainage
area.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials assembled at a fixed location
to give support or shelter, such as, but not limited to, a building, bridge,
trestle, tower, framework, retaining wall, tank, tunnel, tent, stadium,
reviewing stand, platform, bin, fence, sign, flagpole or portable or
temporary canopy or garage.
D. DIRECTIONAL SIGN.
E. DIRECTORY SIGN.
F. ELECTRONIC CHANGING SIGN.
G. EXTERIOR ILLUMINATED SIGN.
H. FLASHING SIGN.
I. FREESTANDING SIGN.
J. INTERIOR ILLUMINATED SIGN
K. INFLATABLE OR BALLOON SIGN.
L. LED SIGN.
M. PORTABLE SIGN.
§ 334-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-6
1:497
SUBDIVIDER — The registered OWNER or authorized agent of the
registered OWNER of a SUBDIVISION.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more
LOTs for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, rent, lease
or building development, or requiring the extension of municipal utilities,
or the creation of one or more new streets, or the extension of existing
streets; provided, however, that DEVELOPMENT for agricultural purposes
is expressly excluded. When appropriate to the context of this chapter, the
term "SUBDIVISION" shall relate either to the process of subdividing or to
the land or area subdivided.
SUBSTANTIAL PORTION OF THE TOTAL PRESENTATION TIME — For the
purposes of this chapter, "substantial portion of the total presentation time"
shall mean the presentation of films or shows described above for viewing
on more than seven days within any fifty-six-consecutive-day period.
SURFACE WATER BODY — Those portions of waters of the state, as defined
by RSA 482-A:4, which have standing or flowing water at or on the surface
of the ground. This includes, but is not limited to, rivers, streams, lakes and
ponds.
SUSTAINABLE RATE OF DEVELOPMENT — A target number of building
permits to be issued in Hudson in the current year equaling the fair-share
region average growth rate for the preceding five years times the total
number of dwelling units existing in Hudson in the preceding year. Round
any fraction calculated herein to the next whole number.
SWAMP — A wetland that is dominated by trees and/or shrubs.
SWPPP — Stormwater pollution prevention plan (see § 290-5).
SYSTEM MODIFICATION — When applied to ALTERNATIVE ENERGY
SYSTEMS, any change to the small wind, solar or other ALTERNATIVE
ENERGY SYSTEM that materially alters the size, type or location of the
system. Like-kind (same size and general conformation) replacements shall
not be construed to be a modification.
T
TOTAL DWELLING UNITS (DU) — The total number of dwelling units in
Hudson on December 31. This number includes single-family homes, as well
as dwelling units in duplexes, apartments, condominium developments and
other multifamily structures. Note: For 1999, the DU number is 7,965 based
on an estimated accounting of the number of dwelling units.
TOWN ENGINEER — The professional engineer who holds the position
of Town Engineer for the Town of Hudson, or his or her designated
representative, either in a permanent or temporary capacity.
TOWN OF HUDSON, HUDSON or TOWN — The Town of Hudson, NH.
TOWN PLANNER — The person occupying the position of the Town of
Hudson, NH, Town Planner.
§ 334-6 HUDSON CODE § 334-6
1:498
TOWER — A structure which is designed and constructed to support one
or more antennas used by commercial wireless telecommunication facilities
and includes all appurtenant devices attached to it. A tower can be
freestanding (solely self-supported by attachment to the ground) or
supported (attached directly to the ground and with guy wires) of either
lattice or monopole construction.
U
USE, ACCESSORY — Any use which is customary, incidental and
subordinate to the principal use of a structure or lot.
USE, CHANGE OF — A "change of use" occurs when the use of any land or
building is changed from one land use classification to another or from one
category to another category within a land use classification. See Article
III, § 334-9B, Use classification, and Article V, § 334-21, Table of Permitted
Principal Uses.
USE, PRINCIPAL — The main or primary purpose for which a structure or
lot is used.
V
VARIANCE — A variance is a request to deviate from current zoning
requirements. If granted, it permits the owner to use the land in a manner
not otherwise permitted by the zoning ordinance. It is not a change in the
zoning law. Instead, it is a specific waiver of requirements of the zoning
ordinance.
VERY POORLY DRAINED SOILS — Soils where the water is removed so
slowly that free water remains at or on the surface during most of the
growing season as defined in the United States Soil Conservation Service
Soils Survey of Hillsborough County, Eastern Half (latest edition).
W
WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water
or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal conditions does support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, in accordance with the
latest edition Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional
Wetlands as amended. "Wetlands" include, but are not limited to, swamps,
marshes, bogs and similar areas.
WETLAND BUFFER — A naturally vegetated upland zone of
noninterference extending 50 feet from the edge of a wetland area, or from
the top of the bank of a surface water body toward the adjacent upland
environment. "Naturally vegetated" includes uncut or undisturbed forest
and abandoned pasture or fields.
WETLAND CONSERVATION DISTRICT — All wetland areas, surface water
bodies and areas of poorly drained or very poorly drained soils and the
associated wetland buffers, as defined above. The "Wetland Conservation
DISTRICT" is an overlay DISTRICT which adds requirements and
§ 334-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-6
1:499
restrictions to those of the underlying zone in order to preserve the function
of a wetland area.
WIND GENERATOR — The blades and associated mechanical and electrical
conversion components mounted on top of the tower whose purpose is
to convert the kinetic energy of the wind into rotational energy used to
generate electricity.
Y
See Bylaws Chapter 143 TOWN Code.
§ 334-6 HUDSON CODE § 334-6
1:500
ARTICLE III
General Regulations
§ 334-7. Conformity required.
No building or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building
or structure or part thereof shall be erected, moved or altered unless in
conformity with the regulations specified in this chapter for the district in
which it is located.
§ 334-8. Certificate of occupancy.
A certificate of occupancy will not be issued until all chapter requirements
and site plan/development regulations have been met.
§ 334-9. Land use classifications.
§ 334-10. Mixed or dual use on a lot. [Amended 3-13-2018 ATM by
Amdt. No. 1]
A. For the purposes of this chapter, all uses or activities are considered to
fall into one of five land use classifications. The Table of Permitted
Principal Uses in Article V, § 334-21, further divides each land use class
into various related categories.
B. Use classifications shall be as follows:
(1) Residential.
(2) Community facilities.
(3) Agricultural.
(4) Retail and service.
(5) Industrial.
A. Multiple Principal Uses on a lot in the Industrial or Business Zones are
permitted provided that the lot meets the area and frontage
requirements for the principal use for the district in which it is located
and each use is in conformity with all other requirements set forth in
this chapter and the Hudson Land Use Regulations pertaining to that
use. [2-2-2019 ATM, Art. 06, adopted 3-12-2019]
(1) The Business or Industrial lot has sufficient frontage to satisfy the
minimum frontage requirement for the principal use requiring the
most frontage.
(2) The Business or Industrial lot is of sufficient size to satisfy the
minimum lot size requirement for the principal use requiring the
most lot area.
§ 334-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-10
1:501
§ 334-11. Classification of Town roads.
Town roads shall be classified as follows:
B. For the purposes of this chapter, multiple commercial or industrial uses/
activities developed as part of a single site are considered a single
principal use.
C. For the purposes of this article, the addition of accessory uses to a
principal use does not result in a dual or mixed use of property.
D. Multiple or mixed uses on a single lot, which includes a residential use,
shall only be allowed by Special Exception in accordance with the
general requirements listed in Article VI, § 334-23. In addition to the
general requirements for special exception listed in Article VI, § 334-23,
the mixed or dual uses shall be compatible. [2-2-2019 ATM, Art. 06,
adopted 3-12-2019]
A. Arterials.
(1) NH 3A (Elm Street, Lowell Road, Webster Street and River Road).
(2) NH 102 (Derry Street).
(3) NH 111 (Central Street).
(4) Dracut Road.
B. Collectors.
(1) Barretts Hill Road.
(2) Belknap Road.
(3) Burns Hill Road.
(4) Bush Hill Road.
(5) Greeley Street.
(6) Highland Street.
(7) Kimball Hill Road.
(8) Lawrence Road.
(9) Musquash Road.
(10) Old Derry Road.
(11) Pelham Road.
(12) Pine Road.
(13) Robinson Road.
§ 334-10 HUDSON CODE § 334-11
1:502
§ 334-12. Fences and similar enclosures. [Amended 3-14-1995 by
Amdt. No. 3; 3-9-2010 by Amdt. No. 6]
All fences, walls and similar enclosures, except trees, shrubs and natural
vegetation, are subject to the following restrictions:
§ 334-13. Junkyards prohibited; outdoor storage.
(14)Wason Road.
(15)West Road.
(16)Windham Road.
A. No permit shall be required for any fence not exceeding eight feet in
height in any residential district.
B. A permit shall be required for any fence, including sports/ tennis
enclosures, exceeding eight feet in height in any residential district.
C. Any fence exceeding eight feet in height must be installed adjacent to
or behind the front corner of the home.
D. Any fence exceeding eight feet in height must have metal or metal
reinforced support posts.
E. Any fence, sports/tennis enclosure, other than for agricultural uses,
exceeding 10 feet in height is subject to Planning Board review.
F. A fence is not subject to setback requirements.
G. A fence shall be erected so that the side facing adjacent property
owners and/or public rights-of-way presents a reasonable appearance.
H. No fence, hedge, planting or enclosure wall shall obstruct or interfere
with roadway and/or driveway sight distances as determined by the
office of the Town Engineer.
I. Outdoor in-ground swimming pools shall be enclosed by a permanent
fence which, by itself or together with other permanent appurtenant
structures, surrounds the entire perimeter of the intended pool apron
area. Except for intended access gates, no openings in the fence shall
exist which would allow a sphere greater than four inches in diameter
to pass through.
(1) For one-family and two-family residences, fences shall not be less
than four feet in height, and access gates shall have latching and
locking mechanisms installed on interior surfaces or yoke-type
latches with padlock holes.
(2) For all other residential and nonresidential uses, fences shall be not
less than six feet in height, and access gates shall have mechanisms
which automatically latch and lock during off-season and closed
hours and when lifeguards are off duty.
§ 334-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-13
1:503
§ 334-14. Building height. [Amended 3-8-2016 by Amdt. No. 4;
3-16-2017 by Art. No. 3; 2-2-2019 ATM, Art. 04, adopted 3-12-2019]
No occupiable structure may exceed 38 feet in height in any district, except
as provided in Subsection A below. Height is measured from the average
elevation of the finished grade within five feet of the structure to the
highest point of the roof, excluding accessory, unoccupied protuberances
such as antennas, flagpoles and the like. Nonoccupiable structures such as
church spires, steeples, smokestacks, flagpoles, lightpoles and other similar
structures may not exceed 100 feet in height in any district, except as
provided for in Article VI, Special Exceptions. In all cases, a nonoccupiable
structure shall not be capable of falling or collapsing beyond the bounds
of the property on which it is situated. The maximum heights and special
exception conditions for communications towers, masts and antennas are
separately addressed within Article XVIII, Commercial Wireless
Telecommunication, Radio Service and Receive-Only Facilities.
A. The operation of a junkyard is not permitted in any district.
B. The outdoor storage of any of the following are not permitted in any
district:
(1) More than one unregistered vehicle.
(2) Any quantity of waste, refuse, junk or ashes.
(3) Bulk storage of oil or gasoline, other than in standard or approved
containers or containment facilities.
A. In the following described zoning districts/parcels, the maximum
allowed occupiable building height shall be 50 feet, and said maximum
height shall be restricted to those areas of buildings used exclusively
for manufacturing, warehouse, distribution and office space ancillary to
said principal uses: Sagamore Industrial Park (IP), located in an
Industrial (I) Zoning District, bordered by Sagamore Bridge Road to the
south, the Merrimack River to the west, the existing General (G)
District to the north and the existing Business (B) District, abutting
Lowell Road. (Rte. 3A) to the east, and including all parcels located
within this I Zoning District. The General (G) Zoning District abutting to
the north of the above-described Sagamore IP, and known locally as the
"Friar Property," having frontage off Friars Drive and 161 Lowell Road
(Map 209/Lot 001). The portion of the General-One (G-1) Zoning
District located to the south of Sagamore Bridge Road and exclusive to
the following parcels: Green Meadow Golf Club, 43 Steele Road (Map
239/Lot 001), 11 Steele Road (Map 234/Lot 005), 2 Friel Golf Road
(Map 234/Lot 001), 267 Lowell Road (Map 234/Lot 035) and 273 Lowell
Road (Map 234/Lot 034). The Industrial (I) Zoning District located
along the south border of Central Street (NH Rte. 111), starting at the
westernmost border of this I District (i.e., just west of Hudson Park
Drive), running along said south border of Central Street to the west
border of Sullivan Road and including all parcels located within this I
§ 334-13 HUDSON CODE § 334-14
1:504
§ 334-15. Parking.
§ 334-16. Building permits. [Amended 3-14-1995 by Amdt. Nos. 7
and 8; 3-10-1998; 3-4-2000; 3-9-2004; 3-13-2012 by Amdt. Nos. 1
and 2]
Any person, firm or corporation shall obtain a building permit before
commencing work on the erection, alteration or movement of any building
or structure, except as exempted under Subsection A. For one- and twofamily
dwellings, the Town of Hudson has adopted by reference and follows
Zone. The Industrial (I) Zoning District located along the north side
of Derry Street (NH Rte. 102), at the intersection of West Street, and
including all parcels located within this I Zone.
A. All land uses shall provide for and maintain off-street parking spaces.
[Amended 3-10-1998]
(1) Required off-street parking facilities shall be provided on the same
lot as the principal use they are designed to serve. All parking
spaces shall be paved.
(2) Multifamily and all nonresidential uses shall provide and maintain
off-street parking in accordance with the site plan or subdivision
regulations.
(3) Parking spaces (except for driveways) in residential zones shall not
be located within front, side or rear setback areas.
B. Parking prohibited. Parking or storing of vehicles in excess of the
amounts specified in this section is prohibited.
(1) Outdoor parking or storage of more than one unregistered motor
vehicle per residential unit.
(2) Outside parking or storage of vehicles or trailers used in commerce
at residential sites with gross vehicle weight greater than 13,000
pounds. [Amended 3-14-1995 by Amdt. No. 5; 3-10-1998;
3-13-2007 by Amdt. No. 2]
(3) Outdoor parking or storing of more than one recreational vehicle
per residence. Parking or storage shall not take place within
setback areas, other than on a driveway. [Amended 3-10-1998]
(4) Sale of automobiles, trucks or recreational vehicles on a
consignment basis is expressly prohibited at any residential or
nonresidential site without site plan approval by the Planning
Board as a sales location.126 [Added 3-14-1995 by Amdt. No. 6]
126. Editor’s Note: Former §334-15.1, Retail gasoline sales, added 3-12-2002 by Amdt. No. 1,
requiring that lots with stores selling gasoline at retail be located at least 800 feet from
another lot with a store selling gasoline at retail, was repealed 3-13-2018 ATM by Amdt.
No. 2.
§ 334-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-16
1:505
the 2009 International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings.
The Town of Hudson also adopts by reference the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA) as outlined in 28 CFR Part 36. For structures other
than one- and two-family dwellings, the Town of Hudson shall enforce the
current provisions of the State Building Code as promulgated pursuant to
RSA 155-A:1, as may be amended from time to time. Whenever a provision
of this ordinance differs from the authority of the 2009 International
Residential Code for one- and two-family dwellings, the provision which
imposes the greater restriction or higher standard shall be controlling.
A. Exemptions. Building permits shall not be required for the following:
accessory structures, such as mailboxes, doghouses, birdbaths,
ornamental landscaping features, swing sets, children's playhouses,
clotheslines, fences eight feet or less in height and other similar types
of structures which by custom and reason, in the opinion of the Building
Inspector, do not require building permits.
B. Unoccupied public utility structures. Unoccupied structures up to 200
square feet erected by public utilities which are necessary for the
furnishing of adequate service for the public health, safety or general
welfare are permitted in all zones and are not subject to the building
setback, lot size or frontage requirements of this chapter. Prior to the
issuance of a building permit, such structures and their sites shall be
approved by the Planning Board in order to ensure they present a
reasonable appearance and do not create a hazard to the public or
interfere with the surrounding area.
C. Conditions of issuance.
(1) No permit, however, shall be issued unless the structure will
present a reasonable appearance and will be in keeping with the
neighborhood and unless the building is to be finished on the
exterior in a permanent manner and is to be suitably painted on the
outside whenever the same is of wood or a material customarily
painted. This is intended to eliminate the erection of structures
obviously out of place for the neighborhood as judged by the
property values and neighborhood character.
(2) No permit shall be issued for the construction of a dwelling unless
plans therefor provide for the following:
(a) Single residential buildings shall have a minimum of 850
square feet of living area.
(b) Duplex residential buildings shall have a minimum of 1,500
square feet of living area.
(c) Three-unit and four-unit residential buildings shall have a
minimum of 2,250 square feet and 3,000 square feet,
respectively.
§ 334-16 HUDSON CODE § 334-16
1:506
§ 334-16.1. Site plan approval. [Added 3-4-2000]
No person, persons, partnership, proprietorship, company, trust or
corporation shall commence a new use, change a use or commence any
site development activity (other than one- or two-family residential activity)
without first securing site plan approval from the Hudson Planning Board
pursuant to this chapter. These regulations shall apply to the development
or change or expansion of use of tracts for nonresidential uses or for
"multifamily dwelling units," which are defined as any structures containing
more than two dwelling units, whether or not such development includes
a subdivision or resubdivision of the site. For the purpose of this chapter,
change of use occurs when the use of any land or building is changed
from one land use classification to another or from one category to another
category within a land use classification as specified in this chapter. E.g.,
grocery store changes to a food service establishment. No building permits
shall be issued until site plan approval has been obtained from the Town
of Hudson Planning Board and is recorded with the Hillsborough County
registry of Deeds.
(d) Multifamily residential buildings shall have a minimum perunit
size of 750 square feet.
(e) No more than one single-family home or duplex shall be
constructed on one lot without Planning Board site plan
approval.
(3) A certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Building Inspector
only after the Zoning Administrator shall have fully inspected the
completed premises and found such premises, in all zoned districts,
including subdivisions, to be in full compliance with the zoning and
subdivision regulations pertaining to the premises to be occupied.
No premises shall be occupied without a certificate of occupancy
issued by the Building Inspector.
(4) No permit shall be issued for nonresidential or multifamily units in
excess of duplex-residential prior to Planning Board site plan
approval. The Planning Board shall have jurisdiction, prior to the
issuance of a building permit, over the site location, parking
facilities and recreational facilities of all multifamily dwellings and
nonresidential structures in all zones. If it is in the public interest, a
public hearing shall be held, the cost of which will be borne by the
individual or firm requesting the building permit.
D. Validity. If no substantial construction takes place within one year of
issuance, the building permit becomes null and void.
§ 334-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-16.1
1:507

ARTICLE IV
Establishment of Districts
§ 334-17. Districts enumerated; Zoning Map. [Amended 3-13-2001
by Amdt. No. 3]
For the purposes of this chapter, the Town of Hudson is divided into the
following districts as shown and defined on the Official Zoning Map. The
Official Zoning Map is made a part of this chapter, by reference, for the
purpose of designating the boundaries of districts. The Zoning Map is
available in the offices of the Town Planner and Zoning Administrator.
Full Name Short Name
Residential – One R-1 (formerly A-1SF)
Residential – Two R-2 (formerly A-1 and A-2)
Town Residence TR
Business B (formerly B-1 and B-2)
Industrial District I
General G (formerly D, Rural)
General-One G-1
§ 334-18. Districts described.
A. Residential - One (R-1). The R-1 Residential District is established to
provide for the development of single-family detached homes and
customary accessory uses and structures at low densities. The district
is intended to be strictly residential in character with a minimum of
disturbances due to traffic or overcrowding.
B. Residential - Two (R-2). The R-2 Residential District is established to
provide for the development of single-family and/or two-family (duplex)
residences and customary accessory uses and structures and
complementary nonresidential uses. The district is intended to provide
a diversity of housing types, community facilities, recreational uses and
other uses which benefit and are enhanced by the predominantly
residential character of the district.
C. Town Residence (TR). The TR District encompasses established
residential neighborhoods which have been developed on smaller lots
than the lot size established in other residential districts. The setbacks
and use densities reflect traditional New England town or village lot
development patterns. The district is intended to permit the continued
use, maintenance and vitality of these unique residential areas,
protecting their residential character, while simultaneously limiting the
expansion of these neighborhoods into adjacent, undeveloped lands.
D. Business (B). The B District is established to provide for the
development of general wholesale and retail commercial uses, services,
§ 334-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-18
1:509
§ 334-19. Interpretation of Zoning Map and Zoning District
Boundaries.
Where appropriate and unless otherwise indicated, zoning district
boundaries shown on the Zoning Map are the center lines of streets, power
line rights-of-way, the middle of the channel of waterways or other bodies
of water or the Town boundary line. Where a boundary is so indicated that
it parallels the center line of a street, such boundary shall be considered to
be parallel thereto at the distance therefrom shown on the Zoning Map. Any
boundary within 10 feet of a property line shall be considered to coincide
with such property line. Where no distance is stated on the Zoning Map,
the distance shall be determined by the use of the scale on the map. In
any instance where there is doubt as to the location of a zoning district
boundary, the Zoning Administrator shall determine the location of such
boundary, consistent with the intent of this chapter and the Zoning Map.
Boundaries defined by the overlay Wetland District are excluded from this
section.
offices uses, multifamily dwellings and customary accessory uses and
structures. [2-2-2019 ATM, Art. 02, adopted 3-12-2019]
E. Industrial (I). The I District is established to provide for industrial
development, warehousing, limited business and commercial uses and
customary accessory uses and structures. The district is intended to be
strictly nonresidential in character.
F. General (G). The G District includes all areas not specifically designated
as being within an R-1, R-2, TR, B or I District. The district is designed
to permit a wide diversity of land uses. Most uses permitted in the other
five districts are permitted in the G District. The G District is intended
to allow natural constraints, such as infrastructure development and
market forces to determine the most appropriate use of land. It is also
intended that the G District will eventually be absorbed by the
expansion of other existing districts or replaced by newly created
districts. The Planning Board will be responsible for maintaining sound
planning concepts in this district and shall ensure that conflicting land
uses do not abut each other without appropriate buffers. [Amended
3-8-2016 by Amdt. No. 3]
G. General-One (G-1). The G-1 District includes all areas not specifically
zoned as being within an R-1, R-2, TR, B, or I District located outside
the right-of-way of the Circumferential Highway as depicted on the
Town Zoning Map. The District is designed to permit a wide diversity of
land uses at a density appropriate to the rural nature of the area, the
natural constraints of the land and the lack of infrastructure. Uses
permitted in this District are the same as those permitted in the G
District. [Added 3-13-2001 by Amdt. No. 3; amended 3-8-2016 by
Amdt. No. 3]
§ 334-18 HUDSON CODE § 334-19
1:510
ARTICLE V
Permitted Uses
§ 334-20. Allowed uses provided in tables. [Amended 3-12-2002 by
Amdt. No. 2]
Any uses not specifically listed in the Table of Permitted Principal or
Accessory Uses are hereby expressly prohibited.127
§ 334-21. Table of Permitted Principal Uses.
The Table of Permitted Principal Uses shall be as follows:128
§ 334-22. Table of Permitted Accessory Uses.
The Table of Permitted Accessory Uses129 lists the accessory uses which may
accompany those principle uses set forth in the Table of Permitted Principal
Uses in § 334-21. The addition of such accessory uses does not result in
the mixed or dual use of a parcel and does not require additional lot area,
frontage or setbacks. The accessory uses listed in the Table of Permitted
Accessory Uses are not intended to be the only accessory uses allowed.
Accessory uses, not provided for in the Table of Permitted Accessory Uses,
that are appropriate to a district can be permitted as a special exception
from the Zoning Board of Adjustment in accordance with the general
requirements of Article VI.
A. In all zoning districts all motor vehicle(s) displayed for sale shall be set
back a minimum of 15 feet from the edge of roadway pavement. [Added
3-9-2004]
127. Editor's Note: The Tables of Permitted and Accessory Uses ae included at the end of this
chapter.
128. Editor's Note: The Table of Permitted Principal Uses is included at the end of this chapter.
129. Editor's Note: The Table of Permitted Accessory Uses is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 334-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-22
1:511

ARTICLE VI
Special Exceptions
§ 334-23. General requirements.
Unless otherwise specified, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall permit a
use by special exception, subject to the following conditions:
§ 334-24. Home occupations. [Amended 3-13-2007 by Amdt. No. 3;
3-10-2009 by Amdt. No. 3]
Home occupations are defined by the Zoning Ordinance as "any activity
carried out for gain by a resident in their dwelling unit, and such activity is a
secondary use to the residence." The intent of providing a home occupation
special exception is to allow for growth and development of a small inhome
business while maintaining the character of residential areas. The
applicant acknowledges that if the business grows and no longer meets
the listed requirements, the business shall be moved to an appropriately
zoned location such as Business, General or Industrial. Home occupations
which include sales or service operations for wholesale goods produced or
services provided on-site shall be permitted only as a special exception.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment must find any such home occupation
application to be in full compliance with the following requirements prior to
approval of such special exception:
A. The use requested is listed as permitted by special exception in the
Table of Permitted Principal or Accessory Uses130 for the district in
which the use is requested or is so similar to other uses permitted by
special exception in the relevant district that prohibition of the
proposed use could not have been intended.
B. The proposed use meets all the applicable requirements established in
this chapter.
C. The proposed use is consistent with the purpose and intent of the
district in which it is proposed to be located.
D. The proposed use is compatible with the character of the surrounding
neighborhood.
E. Nonresidential principal uses proposed to be located in residential
districts must take primary access from arterial or collector roads.
A. The home occupation shall be secondary to the principal use of the
home as the business owner's residence.
B. The home occupation shall be conducted only by the residents of the
dwelling who reside on the premises. If the applicant is the owner, the
owner must sign an affidavit, stating he/she is the owner, and the
130. Editor's Note: See § 334-21, Table of Permitted Principal Uses, or § 334-22, Table of
Permitted Accessory Uses.
§ 334-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-24
1:513
residents of the dwelling are the only individuals conducting the
activities associated with the home occupation. Said affidavit shall also
state that the owner is responsible for any violations of this chapter.
If the applicant is a renter, the owner of the dwelling must sign an
affidavit, stating he/she is the owner, and shall acknowledge that the
home occupation for the premises shall only be conducted by the
current renter(s), who shall be identified on the application. The owner
shall also acknowledge that he/she, as the owner of the dwelling,
is responsible for any violations of this chapter conducted at said
dwelling. Approval of the home occupation special exception expires
with the change of ownership of the property or the rental agreement in
effect at the time the home occupation special exception was granted.
The home occupation special exception is conditional on the residents
of the dwelling and not on the property.
C. There shall be no employees or "for hire" staff conducting the home
occupation activities, unless the employee(s) also resides on the
premises.
D. The home occupation business shall be carried out within the residence
and/or within a structure accessory to the residence, such as a garage.
E. The requested special exception shall be for an occupation which is
consistent for what is routinely and/or typically done in a home
environment such as a day care, direct office billing, or other activities
that are generally service-oriented or produce goods for wholesale
purposes.
F. On-site retail sales are an expressly prohibited home occupation special
exception use.
G. No more than 50% of the finished living space of the dwelling unit shall
be used in connection with the home occupation.
H. Other than the sign(s) permitted under Article XII, there shall be no
exterior display nor other exterior indication of the home occupation,
nor shall there be any variation from the primarily residential character
of the principal or accessory building.
I. Exterior storage may be permitted only by special exception, granted
by the Zoning Board of Adjustment, and must be screened from
neighboring views by a solid fence or by evergreens of adequate height
and bulk at the time of planting to effectively screen the area. In
situations where a combination of existing foliage and/or long distances
to neighboring views provide screening, the fencing requirements may
be waived at the discretion of the Board.
J. Objectionable circumstances, such as, but not limited to, noise,
vibrations, dust, smoke, electrical disturbances, odors, heat or glare,
shall not be produced.
§ 334-24 HUDSON CODE § 334-24
1:514
§ 334-25. Height of structure.
Special exceptions may be granted to the building height limits defined
in Article III, § 334-14, when required to reduce emissions or improve air
quality in accordance with applicable state and/or federal environmental
standards, regulations or guidelines.
§ 334-26. (Reserved)131
K. No traffic shall be generated by the home occupation activity that will
be substantially greater in volume than would normally be expected in
the neighborhood.
L. Parking.
(1) Parking for the home occupation shall be provided off-street and
shall not be located in the front yard or within the required
setbacks from the side and rear lot lines. Only the existing driveway
may be used for the parking of customers. Customer parking shall
be limited to a maximum of two vehicles at any one time.
(2) Parking of vehicles used in commerce:
(a) One registered vehicle used in commerce may be parked at the
principal or accessory structure, and further provided that
personal vehicles used in commerce are excluded from this
provision.
(b) In the B, I and G Zones (pertaining only to the home occupation
activity), one registered vehicle used in commerce may be
parked at the principal or accessory structure, provided that
there are no heavy commercial vehicles which exceed a weight
of 13,000 pounds (gross vehicle weight) and the screening
requirements of § 334-24I are met, and further provided that
personal vehicles used for purposes of commerce are excluded
from this restriction.
M. Approval of the home occupation special exception expires with the
change of ownership of the property or the rental agreement in effect at
the time the home occupation special exception was granted. The home
occupation special exception is conditional on the residents of the
dwelling and not on the property.
N. The Community Development Director/Zoning Administrator reserves
the right to revoke the home occupation special exception if all
conditions of the special exception are not maintained.
131. Editor’s Note: Former § 334-26, Reduction of requirements for mixed and dual uses;
compatibility of uses, was repealed 2-2-2019 ATM, Art. 06, adopted 3-12-2019.
§ 334-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-26
1:515

ARTICLE VII
Dimensional Requirements
§ 334-27. Table of Minimum Dimensional Requirements. [Amended
3-14-1995 by Amdt. No. 2; 3-13-2001 by Amdt. No. 3; 3-11-2008 by
Amdt. No. 1; 3-10-2009 by Amdt. No. 1]
The Table of Minimum Dimensional Requirements is included at the end of
this chapter.
§ 334-27.1. General requirements. [Added 3-14-1995 by Amdt. No.
2]
§ 334-27.2. Lot requirements for subdivision of land. [Added
3-12-2002 by Amdt. No. 5]
All lots shall meet the minimum lot area, minimum lot frontage, and building
setback requirements provided in § 334-27, Table of Minimum Dimensional
Requirements. The minimum lot area shall be contiguous land and shall not
be separated by a wetland, a waterway, or a right-of-way. The minimum lot
area shall not contain wetland, as defined by the Hudson Zoning Ordinance,
and shall contain no slopes in excess of 25%.
A. A lot with one or the other (water or sewage) will be treated as having
neither.
B. The minimum buildable lot area shall not contain wetlands, as defined
by the Hudson Zoning Ordinance, shall be contiguous dry land and shall
contain no slopes in excess of 25%. [Added 3-9-1999; amended
3-4-2000]
C. Accessory storage structures (sheds) shall be placed to the rear of the
main building. [Amended 3-10-1998]
D. Frontage shall be measured in a continuous line along the sideline of a
Class V or better street between the points of intersection of the side lot
lines with the street. If a lot has frontage on more than one street, the
frontage on one street only may be used to satisfy the minimum lot
frontage. [Amended 3-13-2001 by Amdt. No. 1]
§ 334-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-27.2
1:517

ARTICLE VIII
Nonconforming Uses, Structures and Lots
§ 334-28. General requirements.
Any lawful use of land or buildings rendered nonconforming by the initial
adoption of this chapter (in 1942) or by any subsequent amendments to the
chapter may be continued, and any use of land or buildings permitted under
a variance granted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment may be continued in
conformity with any conditions or requirements imposed by the Zoning
Board of Adjustment although such use does not otherwise conform to the
requirements of this chapter.
§ 334-29. Extension or enlargement of nonconforming uses.
A nonconforming use shall not be extended or enlarged, except by variance.
§ 334-30. Changes to or discontinuance of nonconforming uses.
A nonconforming use may not be changed to another nonconforming use.
If an existing nonconforming use is discontinued, lapses or is abandoned
for a continuous period of 12 months, any subsequent use of such land or
building(s) shall conform to the terms of this chapter.
§ 334-31. Alteration and expansion of nonconforming structures.
§ 334-32. Nonconforming lots. [Amended 3-4-2000; 3-13-2018 ATM
by Amdt. No. 3]
A nonconforming lot is a lot lawfully existing at the effective date of this
chapter, or any subsequent amendment thereto, which is not in conformity
with all provisions of this chapter. Notwithstanding the minimum lot area
requirements set forth in Article VII, § 334-27, Table of Minimum
A. A nonconforming structure may not be altered or expanded, except by
variance. A nonconforming structure may be altered, reconstructed,
externally or structurally modified, provided that such alterations,
reconstruction, extension or structural modification does not make any
portion or portions of the existing structure more nonconforming. A
nonconforming structure cannot be reconstructed after demolition,
except when the structure was demolished by an act of God, fire or
flood. A nonconforming building or a building occupied by a
nonconforming use may be strengthened and made safe. [Amended
3-9-2004]
B. General - One (G-1) District. Any structure located in the G-1 District
that was lawfully occupied upon the posting of the adoption of the
regulations for the G-1 District (October 27, 2000) shall be deemed a
conforming structure for the purpose of this chapter. [Added
3-13-2001 by Amdt. No. 4]
§ 334-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-32
1:519
Dimensional Requirements, in any district in which structures are
permitted, a structure may be erected on a lot which is a lot of record, even
though such lot fails to meet the present requirements for frontage or area,
or both, that are applicable for that use in the district allowed; provided
that the property is either on Town sewer or the property owner obtains a
state and/or municipal septic permit, and further provided that the zone's
minimum front, side and back yard setbacks are satisfied. Where a question
exists to the applicability of this section the Zoning Administrator shall
make any administrative determination with reference to RSA 674:39-a and
674:39-aa.
§ 334-32 HUDSON CODE § 334-32
1:520
ARTICLE IX
Wetland Conservation District
[Amended 3-14-1995 by Amdt. No. 1]
§ 334-33. Authority and purpose.
By the authority granted in New Hampshire RSA 674:16-17 and 674:20-21,
and in the interest of the public health, safety and general welfare, and
to assure the proper use of natural resources, the Hudson Wetland
Conservation District is hereby established to regulate the uses of wetland.
These regulations are intended to achieve the following:
§ 334-34. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — The standard described in the latest
published copy of Erosion and Sediment Control Design Handbook for
Developing Areas of New Hampshire prepared by United States
Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Services.
A. Prevent the development of structures and certain land uses in wetland
areas and their adjacent buffer zones that could contribute to the
pollution, degradation or impairment of surface water and groundwater
resources.
B. Prevent the destruction or significant alteration of wetland areas which
provide groundwater recharge, flood mitigation and pollution
abatement, and thus preserve irreplaceable water resources for future
use.
C. Prevent unnecessary or excessive public expenditures for public
services and utilities, which can arise from unwise uses of or careless
impact upon wetland areas.
D. Preserve and enhance aesthetic values associated with Hudson's
wetland areas.
E. Protect wildlife habitats, maintain ecological balance and enhance
ecological values such as those cited in RSA 482-A:1.
F. Protect rare and endangered species of flora and fauna.
G. Protect wetland areas from excessive sedimentation associated with
construction on, and denudation of, steep slopes adjacent to wetland
areas.
H. Avoid the cost of constructing and maintaining massive containment
and retaining devices at public expense.
I. Prevent damage to structures and abutting properties caused by
inappropriate development in wetland areas.
§ 334-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-34
1:521
BOG — A wetland distinguished by stunted evergreen trees and shrubs, the
presence of peat deposits and/or highly acidic soil and/or water conditions
as defined in the New Hampshire Code of Administrative Rules issued by
the New Hampshire Wetlands Board.
CERTIFIED SOILS SCIENTIST — A professional soils scientist certified by
the state of New Hampshire pursuant to New Hampshire state statutes and
licensed to practice in the state.
CERTIFIED WETLANDS SCIENTIST — A professional wetland scientist
certified by the state of New Hampshire pursuant to New Hampshire state
statutes and licensed to practice in the state.
MARSH — A wetland where the vegetation is distinguished by the absence
of trees and shrubs and dominated by soft-stemmed herbaceous plants and
other emergent vegetation, such as grasses, reeds and sedges. The water
table is at or above the surface throughout the year but can fluctuate
seasonally.
POORLY DRAINED SOILS — Soils where the water is removed so slowly
that the soil is saturated periodically during the growing season or remains
wet for long periods of time as defined in the United States Soil
Conservation Service Soils Survey of Hillsborough County, Eastern Half
(latest edition).
SURFACE WATER BODY — Those portions of waters of the state, as defined
by RSA 482-A:4, which have standing or flowing water at or on the surface
of the ground. This includes, but is not limited to, rivers, streams, lakes and
ponds.
SWAMP — A wetland that is dominated by trees and/or shrubs.
VERY POORLY DRAINED SOILS — Soils where the water is removed so
slowly that free water remains at or on the surface during most of the
growing season as defined in the United States Soil Conservation Service
Soils Survey of Hillsborough County, Eastern Half (latest edition).
WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal conditions does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically
adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, in accordance with the 1989
Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands.
"Wetlands" include, but are not limited to, swamps, marshes, bogs and
similar areas.
WETLAND BUFFER — A zone of noninterference extending 50 feet from
the edge of a wetland area, or area of poorly drained or very poorly drained
soils, or from the top of the bank of a surface water body toward the
adjacent upland environment.
WETLAND CONSERVATION DISTRICT — All wetland areas, surface water
bodies and areas of poorly drained or very poorly drained soils and the
associated wetland buffers, as defined above. The "Wetland Conservation
District" is an overlay district which adds requirements and restrictions to
§ 334-34 HUDSON CODE § 334-34
1:522
those of the underlying zone in order to preserve the function of a wetland
area.
§ 334-35. Uses within Wetland Conservation District.
A. Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the Wetland
Conservation District, subject to review by the Conservation
Commission, the Planning Board and the Zoning Administrator. This
review is intended to assure that best management practices are used
to prevent degradation of the Wetland Conservation District by slope
erosion, sedimentation and chemical and thermal pollution.
(1) Forestry and tree farming. Forestry and tree farming uses are
limited to the removal of not more than 50% of the basal area of the
standing timber in any ten-year period, leaving a well-distributed
stand of healthy, growing trees. Temporary forest management
roads and skidder trails across wetland areas, poorly and very
poorly drained soils and streams are permitted if done in
accordance with Best Management Practices for Controlling Soil
Erosion on Timber Harvesting Operations in New Hampshire
(latest edition) and if appropriate crossing devices have been
utilized and a complete notification of forest management activities
having minimum wetland impacts has been filed with the Wetlands
Board.
(2) Agriculture, including grazing, cultivation and harvesting of crops,
if done in accordance with the Best Management Wetland Practices
for Agriculture (latest edition) and with Wetlands Board permit.
The stockpiling of manure or chemicals or the filling, draining,
impounding or excavating of wetland areas or poorly or very poorly
drained soils is excluded.
(3) Water supply wells, public and private.
(4) Conservation areas and nature trails constructed and used in a
manner that will minimize negative impacts to drainage, flora and
fauna.
B. Uses permitted by special exception. Exceptions are considered upon
review by the Conservation Commission and the Planning Board for
input to the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The Planning Board review
and input shall not include existing single-family and duplex residential
uses. The Natural Resources Conservation Service and the State
Wetlands Board, where applicable as determined by the Conservation
Commission, shall also be requested to review any proposed use to
assess its environmental effect upon the wetland in question. The
Zoning Board of Adjustment shall conduct a review and findings of fact.
Conditions and exceptions are listed as follows: [Amended 3-12-1996;
3-10-1998]
(1) Conditions:
§ 334-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-35
1:523
§ 334-36. (Reserved)132
(a) The proposed use is essential to the reasonable use of land
outside the Wetlands Conservation District.
(b) There is no reasonable alternative to the proposed use that
does not adversely affect a Wetland Conservation District.
(c) Design, construction and maintenance methods shall be
prepared by a professional engineer (PE) and shall include
restoration of the site, as nearly as possible, to its original
grade and condition. In the case of a development which
involves only a single-family or a two-family dwelling unit or
the carving out of a single lot designated for construction of
only a single-family or a two-family dwelling unit, this
requirement may be waived by the Conservation Commission.
(d) The proposed use within the Wetland Conservation District is
not based primarily on economic considerations.
(e) Provision is made for wildlife access corridors to promote the
free migration of wildlife along the length of the Wetland
Conservation District.
(2) Uses permitted by special exception. [Amended 3-4-2000]
(a) Drainageways, swales, culverts and other devices designed to
control the volume and timing of stormwater runoff.
(b) Stormwater detention basins, settling basins and other
methods of improving the quality of stormwater runoff.
(c) Public utilities, including, but not limited to, electric
transmission lines, telephone lines, cable television lines and
pipelines.
(d) Regrading of the ground surface within the buffer zone of the
Wetland Conservation District but not inside the wetland
boundaries.
(e) Roads designed and built in such a fashion as to minimize the
impacts on the Wetland Conservation District where wetlands,
very poorly drained soils or open water must be crossed.
C. All construction activity is expressly prohibited in wetlands and in the
Wetland Conservation District, unless the proposed use meets the
criteria for a special exception and such a permit has been issued.
[Amended 3-4-2000]
132. Editor's Note: Former § 334-36, Lot area requirements, was repealed 3-9-1999.
§ 334-35 HUDSON CODE § 334-37
1:524
§ 334-37. Additional setback requirements.
To prevent degradation of the wetland areas and surface water bodies by
excessive nutrients present in leachate from septic systems, septic tanks
and leach fields shall have an additional setback from the boundary of the
Wetland Conservation District as follows:
§ 334-38. Special provisions.
§ 334-39. Procedural requirements, administration and
enforcement.
A. Systems located entirely or partially in highly permeable soils as
defined in United States Soil Conservation Service Soils Survey of
Hillsborough County, Eastern Half (latest edition): 50 feet from the
edge of the Wetland Conservation District.
B. Systems located entirely or partially in somewhat poorly drained soils,
moderately well-drained soils or soils with a restrictive layer and a
slope of 8% or greater: 25 feet from the edge of the Wetland
Conservation District.
C. Systems located in all other soils: setbacks as required by the New
Hampshire DES.
A. For any proposed use resulting in the aggregate disturbance of wetland
areas in excess of 1,000 square feet, compensatory wetland mitigation
of an area equal to that being disturbed may be recommended by the
Conservation Commission and/or required by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment. The mitigation shall be located in an area on or near the
site of disturbance (or at a remote location approved by the
Conservation Commission) where there is a reasonable expectation of
successful creation of a functional wetland or successful enlargement of
an existing functional wetland.
B. Where an existing, nonconforming use or structure within the Wetland
Conservation District is destroyed or in need of extensive repair, it may
be replaced or rebuilt, provided that the provisions of Article VIII of this
chapter are met.
C. The replaced or rebuilt use shall not have a greater impact on the
Wetland Conservation District than the impact of the original use.
A. Establishing wetland boundaries.
(1) Where maps or field investigation indicate that wetlands or other
areas of poorly drained or very poorly drained soils exist on a site
proposed for development, the boundary of the area shall be
delineated by a high intensity soil survey (HISS) prepared by a
certified soils scientist. An evaluation by a certified wetlands
scientist may be required in addition to the HISS to identify
wetland vegetation. In the case of a development which involves
§ 334-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-39
1:525
only one single-family or two-family dwelling unit or the carving out
of a single lot designated for construction of only one-single-family
or two-family dwelling unit, this requirement may be waived by the
Conservation Commission.
(2) Applications for developments, subdivisions and site plan reviews
shall locate and depict on the survey/subdivision plat/site plan all
lands qualifying for Wetland Conservation District designation.
(3) All proposed uses which may have an impact on the Wetland
Conservation District shall be reviewed by the Conservation
Commission before submission of the plan to the Planning Board.
B. Adjusting the wetland boundary.
(1) Where there is a concern that an area has been incorrectly
designated as a Wetland Conservation District, or that an area not
so designated as a Wetland Conservation District meets the criteria
for inclusion in the district, the Conservation Commission may
require the applicant to engage a certified soils scientist and/or
certified wetlands scientist to determine the location of the
Wetland Conservation District and its boundaries. The person
delineating the boundaries in the field shall submit a written report
of findings to the Conservation Commission for comment and then
to the Planning Board for possible action as defined in Subsection
B(3). This report may include a soils map with a detailed
description of the soil profile and a wetlands vegetation report. The
location of subsurface investigations shall be surveyed, and the
location, elevation and descriptions must be posted to a map
containing the Wetland Conservation District boundaries.
(2) Upon receipt of the report, the Planning Board, in consultation with
the Conservation Commission, may refer it for review to a certified
soils scientist and/or certified wetlands scientist of its choosing.
The applicant shall be responsible for reasonable costs incurred in
connection with this independent review.
(3) Based on the evidence, the boundary of the Wetland Conservation
District shall be adjusted by the Conservation Commission. If the
evidence indicates that the area in question has been incorrectly
designated, the restrictions of the Wetland Conservation District
shall apply only to that part of the area in question that is
determined to be within the Wetland Conservation District.
C. Other procedures. The Town of Hudson welcomes the establishment of
conservation easements, deed restrictions and outright gifts of
unbuildable lands which will enhance and help to safeguard existing
conservation lands and wetland areas. Any such encumbrances should
be noted on the site plan and in the development agreement between
the Town and the developers.
§ 334-39 HUDSON CODE § 334-39
1:526
§ 334-40. through § 334-41. (Reserved)
D. Site plan and subdivision review. All site plans and subdivisions that
propose any impact on the Wetland Conservation District or propose
any construction within the Wetland Conservation District shall obtain a
wetland special exception prior to submission of a site plan or
subdivision application. Failure to comply with the terms of this article
shall constitute a material defect in application submission such that
the plan cannot be accepted by the Planning Board or the Town Planner.
[Added 3-12-2002 by Amdt. No. 6]
§ 334-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-40
1:527

ARTICLE X
Manufactured Housing
§ 334-42. Requirements for manufactured home subdivisions.
Manufactured home subdivisions must meet the following requirements:
§ 334-43. Manufactured home parks.
A. Manufactured home subdivisions are only permitted in the General
District; see the Table of Permitted Principal Uses in § 334-21 of Article
V.
B. The minimum size of the tract of land to be subdivided must be 10
acres.
C. Only single-family manufactured homes are permitted, and only one
manufactured home may be placed on each residential lot within a
subdivision.
D. Each manufactured home shall be affixed to a permanent foundation.
E. The subdivision shall be screened along its perimeter by a permanent
buffer area, not less than 50 feet wide, composed of trees, shrubs or
other suitable buffer approved by the Planning Board. The buffer area
may be placed on individual lots within the subdivision.
F. Each manufactured home lot within the subdivision shall meet the
dimensional requirement for single-family use in the Table of Minimum
Dimensional Requirements in § 334-27 of Article VII.
A. Manufactured home parks shall be permitted in the General District;
see the Table of Permitted Principal Uses in § 334-21 of Article V.
B. There are two types of parks: manufactured home park - rental, and
manufactured home park - condominium.
(1) A rental park is for the rental of land or space within the park for
the siting of manufactured homes and may also be for the rental of
utilities and other services.
(2) A condominium park is a park established as a condominium in
accordance with the Condominium Act, RSA 356-B, or established
with cooperative ownership otherwise permitted by state law.
C. Each park must contain a minimum of 10 acres.
D. Each park must have a principal access to either an arterial or a major
collector street. All-season safe sight distance in both directions must
be attained at the street entrance.
E. In all parks, homes must either be skirted with suitable codeconforming
materials approved by the Planning Board and anchored or
§ 334-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-43
1:529
§ 334-44. Permit required for manufactured homes.
No manufactured home may be moved into the Town of Hudson or be placed
on a lot unless it has been issued a permit from the Building Inspector.
placed on a permanent foundation. Only single-family manufactured
homes are permitted on both types of parks.
F. The maximum density of homes allowed in a manufactured home park is
determined by total lot area divided by the minimum building lot area
as defined in Article VII, § 334-27.1B, e.g., if the parcel is 100 acres and
65 acres are dry area and less than 25% slopes, 65 units are permitted.
[Amended 3-9-1999]
G. In all parks, each home must be placed on a parcel of land within a
park, known as a "space," with a minimum area of 15,000 square feet
and with a minimum contiguous frontage of 100 feet along a private
road within the park. Only one home may be placed on each space. Each
space shall be permanently delineated on the approved site plan. The
Planning Board may make reasonable requirements for the location of
the placement of homes on a space, including reasonable setback
requirements.
H. The difference between the total of the area of the manufactured home
park and the total area of all home lots shall be set aside as common
open space to be used for recreation and/or common land purposes.
I. All on-site facilities (such as roadways, driveways, sewers and drainage
systems) shall not be dedicated to the Town unless the Planning Board
expressly determines that such a dedication is in the best interests of
the Town. On-site facilities shall be constructed to meet Town
standards.
J. All subsurface sewage disposal and water supply requirements for
individual or community systems shall be compiled with, or Town water
and sewer shall be provided. Community wells and septic disposal
systems shall not be located on the required minimum space for the
mobile home. Septic disposal areas do not count towards the minimum
required open space.
K. Manufactured housing park developments shall be adequately
screened/buffered from abutting residential uses. A permanent buffer
area, not less than 50 feet wide, shall be required and approved by the
Planning Board for adequacy. The Planning Board shall also make
reasonable requirements to ensure that the screen/buffer area will be
permanently maintained and preserved.
L. Two off-street parking spaces must be provided for each space.
M. All manufactured homes must comply with BOCA and current FHA
manufactured home standards.
§ 334-43 HUDSON CODE § 334-45
1:530
§ 334-45. Permit for temporary use of manufactured homes.
§ 334-46. Storage of manufactured homes.
A. A property owner who is building or rebuilding a home may obtain a
permit from the Zoning Administrator to place a manufactured home on
the lot where the home is being built or rebuilt for the property owner
and his household to occupy as a temporary residence during
construction.
B. The permit shall be issued for a period not greater than one year, to
expire 30 days after issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the home.
The Zoning Administrator may, for good and sufficient cause, grant the
property owner a six-month extension of the permit. The manufactured
home must be removed from the property within 60 days of occupancy
of the principal structure (house).
C. Before receiving the permit, the property owner shall obtain a building
permit for the home and shall provide the Zoning Administrator with
reasonable assurances that construction will be completed within one
year.
D. A person, partnership or corporation engaged in construction or
development may obtain a permit from the Zoning Administrator to
place one or more manufactured homes or trailers for nonresidential
uses on the construction site for use as office space, storage or sanitary
or rest facilities for employees. Such permit shall be issued for an initial
period not to exceed one year and may be extended for six-month
periods until completion of construction or development.
A. Manufactured homes may not be stored on land within the Town, except
as approved by the Planning Board in accordance with site plan
requirements. This provision shall not apply to review homes placed on
land in accordance with this article.
B. No manufactured home may be moved into the Town of Hudson or be
placed on a lot unless it has been issued a permit from the Building
Inspector.
§ 334-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-46
1:531

ARTICLE XI
Open Space Development
§ 334-47. Purpose.
The purpose of open space developments is to preserve the rural and
scenic character of Hudson by encouraging more efficient patterns of land
development which conserve open and green spaces, farmland, wildlife
habitats, water resources, scenic areas and other natural resources. It is
also designed to provide for increased recreational opportunities and to
promote greater neighborhood cohesion, without altering overall land use
densities or land use patterns.
§ 334-48. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OPEN SPACE DEVELOPMENT (OSD) — A form of land subdivision where
lot size and other dimensional requirements and minimum road widths may
be reduced in exchange for the permanent preservation or provision of
proportional areas of open space, farmland, recreational land and other
lands. An "OSD" shall adhere to the permitted uses and density
requirements otherwise applicable to the district in which the "OSD" is
located.
§ 334-49. Applicability.
OSDs may be located in any zoning district and may include any use or
combination of uses permitted in the district in which the OSD is located.
§ 334-50. Density. [Amended 3-12-2002 by Amdt. No. 7
Minimum density requirements for all uses in an OSD correspond with
the minimum lot size requirements established in Article VII, Dimensional
Requirements. Total open space provided as a part of an OSD application
must be of sufficient land area, when added together with the total land
area devoted to individual lots, to provide an overall density no greater
than that which would be provided in a non-OSD development. To aid in
evaluating the number of allowable lots, all OSD applications submitted to
the Planning Board for review shall include both a preliminary, conventional
subdivision plan and an OSD plan. The preliminary conventional plan shall,
at a minimum, include the zoning district, proposed streets, driveways, lot
lines, wetland delineation, wetland setbacks, and a table with calculations
for each lot.
§ 334-51. Lot sizes.
The area of individual lots within an OSD may be reduced by up to 50% of
the minimum lot size requirements established in Article VII, as provided
herein.
§ 334-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-51
1:533
§ 334-52. Dimensional requirements. [Amended 3-13-2001 by Amdt.
No. 2]
Frontage and setback requirements for individual lots within an OSD may
be reduced up to 50% of the minimum frontage and setback requirements
established in Article VII, as provided herein, if approved by the Planning
Board.
§ 334-53. Open space requirements.
The minimum open space requirement of § 334-50 may be provided through
common land or individually owned land placed in permanent conservation
or recreational easements or by other land use restrictions. The OSD shall
comply with the following conditions:
A. An area of land, equal to or greater than the difference between the size
of each open space lot and the minimum lot size, shall be dedicated to
permanent open space, conservation land or recreation land.
B. No reduced area residential lots shall be arranged to front or abut
preexisting streets, roads or highways.
C. All subsurface sewage disposal and water supply requirements for
individual or community systems shall be compiled with, or Town water
and sewer shall be provided.
A. No reduced frontage lots shall be allowed to front on preexisting
streets, roads or highways.
B. Setback reductions shall not be permitted along property lines that
abut non-OSD residentially developed properties.
A. Only undeveloped land, landscaped green space or recreational areas
may be included in the calculation of minimum open space
requirement. Setback areas along the perimeter of the subdivision may
not be included in the open space calculations.
B. Roadways, driveways, rights-of-way, utility easements, parking areas
and other developed areas, except for recreational paths, trails or
facilities, may not be included as part of minimum open space
requirements.
C. Wetland(s), road rights-of-way, and slopes in excess of 25%, shall not be
considered in the calculation of total lot area. The one-hundred-year
floodplain areas shall not exceed 25% of the total land area of the OSD.
[Amended 3-9-1999; 3-12-2002 by Amdt. No. 8]
D. Whenever possible, lots or dwelling units should be arranged to abut or
have direct access to common open space or recreational land.
E. Lots and open space should be arranged to preserve and protect
prominent natural features, historic or archaeological resources, scenic
§ 334-51 HUDSON CODE § 334-53
1:534
§ 334-54. Compensatory open space.
§ 334-55. Road standards. [Amended 3-13-2001 by Amdt. No. 2]
Minimum road and right-of-way widths may be reduced at the discretion
of the Planning Board, where such reductions would result in development
patterns more harmonious to the natural or man-made features of the site
without sacrificing public convenience or safety. All roads within the open
space plat shall be public roads.
§ 334-56. Procedures. [Amended 3-12-2002 by Amdt. No. 9]
Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, all single- or two-family
OSD subdivisions must comply with the submission, review and approval
requirements of Hudson's Land Subdivision Regulations.133 Nonresidential
or multifamily residential OSD shall comply with thesubmission, review and
approval requirements of Hudson's Site Plan Regulations.134 The Planning
Board may adopt additional OSD subdivision or site plan review regulations
vistas, surface water bodies and streams and other important natural
and man-made landscape features.
F. The deed for each building lot shall contain an undivided proportional
share of all common open space, except as provided for in § 334-54.
A. Off-site compensatory open space may be permitted at the discretion of
the Planning Board where the land meets the following conditions:
(1) The land is either comprised of prime farmland soils or it has been
used for active agricultural purposes within the five years prior to
the date of application;
(2) It encompasses important wildlife habitats as recognized or
approved by the Conservation Commission;
(3) It consists of land with strong potential for providing needed
recreational areas for future residents of the proposed
development as well as for the Town as a whole;
(4) It would serve to provide access to important surface or to protect
groundwater resources; or
(5) It encompasses other areas of exceptional scenic or historic value.
B. Where compensatory open space is provided in lieu of on-site open
space, the Planning Board may require the developed portion of the
OSD to be adequately screened from adjacent properties.
C. Screening provided under Subsection B shall not be included within
minimum open space or lot size calculations.
133. Editor's Note: See Ch. 289, Subdivision of Land, Part 1.
134. Editor's Note: See Ch. 275, Site Plan Review.
§ 334-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-56
1:535
to govern the review of common lands, private covenants, homeowners'
association agreements and other pertinent issues.
§ 334-56 HUDSON CODE § 334-56
1:536
ARTICLE XII
Signs
§ 334-57. Purpose. [Amended 3-10-2009 by Amdt. No. 2]
The purpose of this article is to encourage the effective use of signage to
direct movement, advertise and inform the public while protecting public
safety, preserving neighborhood character, aesthetics and minimizing visual
clutter.
§ 334-58. Permit required; exemptions.
A. No sign shall be erected or affixed to any building exterior or placed
freestanding on any premises, public or private roadways or rights-ofway
or altered or moved without a permit issued by the Building
Inspector and approved by Zoning Administrator, except as otherwise
exempted in this chapter. [Amended 3-10-2009 by Amdt. No. 2]
B. The following signs may be erected without a permit and are not
included in the maximum sign area allowed unless otherwise indicated,
but must comply with all other requirements of this chapter as stated
herein:
(1) Historic plaques or markers no greater than two square feet in
area.
(2) Contractor job signs no greater than 12 square feet.
(3) Directional or directory signs, no greater than three square feet,
which are located outside of setback areas and which are not
visible from public rights-of-way or abutting properties; other
directional or directory signs are governed by § 334-68 below.
(4) National or state flags (not to exceed 40 square feet in area).
[Amended 3-10-2009 by Amdt. No. 2]
(5) Building name signs or signs indicating the date of construction of
a building which are no greater than 12 square feet in area and are
permanently affixed to a building facade.
(6) Temporary signs advertising special events for charitable, religious
or other nonprofit organizations in accordance with § 334-61B.
These signs must be registered with the Zoning Administrator.
(7) Political campaign signs must comply with NH RSA 664:17 as may
be amended from time to time. [Amended 3-13-2007 by Amdt.
No. 4]
(8) On-site, temporary signs advertising employment opportunities.
These signs are limited to 12 square feet in size. These signs can be
in place for no more than 30 days.
§ 334-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-58
1:537
(9) Signs affixed to or placed within 12 inches of the interior side of a
window so as to be visible from the exterior, which advertise
products or services available within the building, prices, payment
methods or sales, provided that the combined area of the sign(s)
does not exceed 25% of the total area of the window. [Amended
3-4-2000]
(10) Utility signs which identify the location of utility lines, cables or
pipes.
(11) Lettering, logos or graphics affixed to products or packaging
displayed for on-site sales.
(12) Lettering, logos or graphics identifying or describing products or
their manufacturers, vendors or distributors, which are affixed to
the exterior of devices such as vending machines, gasoline pumps
and other similar devices.
(13) Lettering, logos or graphics identifying vehicles or equipment or
their manufacturers, vendors or distributors, which are
permanently affixed to the exterior of the vehicles or equipment.
(14) Temporary signs, which advertise garage or yard sales or lost pets.
These signs can be in place for no more than three days.
(15) Signs identifying street addresses or the occupants of residences.
(16) On-site temporary signs advertising the opening of a new business
in accordance with § 334-61.
(17) Signs installed by governmental bodies.
(18) Customary signs which give warnings, no larger than two square
feet in area, such as "Beware of Dog" or "No Trespassing" signs.
(19) Residential real estate signs. One unlit sign, no greater than 12
square feet in area, is permitted per residence or residentially
zoned parcel of less than 10 acres in area, except in the case of
corner or through lots, where one sign is permitted for each side of
the lot which fronts on a public right-of-way.
(20) Nonresidential and large lot real estate signs. One unlit sign, no
greater than 32 square feet in area, is permitted per nonresidential
site or for any parcel of greater than 10 acres in area, except in the
case of corner or through lots, where one sign is permitted for each
side of the lot which fronts on a public right-of-way.
(21) Temporary construction signs. Construction signs for public safety
and/or information, including: electronic changing signs (ECS),
electronic message centers (EMC) and/or LED signs being used to
inform the public at or near construction and traffic-related sites.
[Amended 3-10-2009 by Amdt. No. 2]
§ 334-58 HUDSON CODE § 334-58
1:538
§ 334-59. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply; other
definitions are included in Article II:
AWNING SIGN — A sign painted on or attached flat or flush against the
surface of the awning, but not extending above, below or beyond the awning
or attached to the underside.
BANNER SIGN — A temporary sign of lightweight material (paper, plastic
or fabric) hung either with or without frames. Flags and insignias
containing only markings of any government, corporation or business are
not considered "banners" and are defined separately as "flags."
BUILDING SIGN — Any sign affixed, mounted, attached to or painted on to
the exterior of a building, including awnings, canopies, roof-mounted and
projecting signs.[Amended 3-10-2009 by Amdt. No. 2]
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — Signs identifying entrances, exits, parking areas or
loading docks or providing other messages necessary to direct vehicles and
pedestrians through or within a site.
DIRECTORY SIGN — Signs which identify or locate the occupants of
buildings.
ELECTRONIC CHANGING SIGN — Electronic message center (EMC),
electronic message sign (EMS) and changeable copy board (CCB), signs
that display illuminated messages that can change frequently, can flash,
display and/or convey messages in text, graphics, pictures, symbols,
multiple colors, rhythms, animation and/or patterns. This sign's message
may be changed by the electronic switching of lamps, illuminated tubes,
bulbs and/or through the apparent movement of light. These signs are
capable of storing and/or displaying single or multiple messages in various
formats at varying intervals.[Amended 3-10-2009 by Amdt. No. 2]
EXTERIOR ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign illuminated by an external
electrical source similar, but not limited to, an uplight spotlight or tophung
art light. The external electrical source may be turned on/off
manually.[Added 3-10-2009 by Amdt. No. 2]
FLASHING SIGN — Any directly or indirectly illuminated sign that exhibits
changing natural or artificial light or color effects by any means whatsoever;
does not include electronic changing signs (message center).
FREESTANDING SIGN — Any sign not affixed or attached to a building
which is established on a freestanding frame, mast or pole.
(22) A sign less than 12 square feet for a hawker and peddler when a
hawker and peddler permit is issued by the Town of Hudson.
[Added 3-14-1995 by Amdt. No. 9]
(23) Signs used exclusively for the posting or display of an official notice
by a public agency or official, or by a person giving legal notice.
These signs are limited to three square feet in size. [Added
3-8-2011 by Amdt. No. 2]
§ 334-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-59
1:539
INTERIOR ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign that has an internal light source
(such as LED, neon or bulb) that may be turned on/off either manually or
by remote control and used to display text that is manually affixed to and/
or manually changeable in an external message area.[Added 3-10-2009 by
Amdt. No. 2]
INFLATABLE OR BALLOON SIGN — A sign that inflates with air or helium
to display advertisements or promotional activities typically known as, but
not limited to, tubes, tubes in motion, inflatables, rotatable inflatables or
rooftop balloons.[Added 3-10-2009 by Amdt. No. 2]
LED SIGN — A sign that uses light-emitting diodes to form numbers, as
in digital clocks, transmit information to the sign from remote controls,
form text images and/or illuminate from tiny bulbs that fit into an electrical
circuit.[Added 3-10-2009 by Amdt. No. 2]
PORTABLE SIGN — A sign that is movable, typically set up on a daily basis
outside the business establishment, such as, but not limited to, sandwich
boards, swinger sidewalk signs, portable billboards, Portasigns, Portasigns
in motion or roadside readerboards.[Added 3-10-2009 by Amdt. No. 2]
§ 334-60. General requirements.
The following requirements apply to all signs:
A. No sign may be erected within a public right-of-way.
B. Except as noted in § 334-65, no off-premises advertising signs are
permitted in any district.
C. All signs shall be set back from any public right-of-way a distance not
less than 50% of the front setback requirement for other structures
within the district in which the sign is located.
D. No sign may be erected in side or rear setback areas.
E. All signs shall be set back a distance not less than 25 feet from the point
of intersecting rights-of-way.
F. No sign shall be erected in a residential district, except as allowed in
§ 334-67, Home occupation signs, § 334-62, Subdivision identification
signs, and § 334-58, Residential real estate signs. [Amended 4-8-1997
by Amdt. No. 2; 3-10-2009 by Amdt. No. 2]
G. No flashing signs are permitted in any district.
H. Electronic changing signs are permitted in the Business (B) and
Industrial (I) Zoning Districts subject to the requirements of § 336-64C
below. Electronic changing signs shall be prohibited in the Town
Residence (TR), Residential (R-1, R-2) and General (G and G-1) Zoning
Districts. [Amended 3-4-2000; 3-10-2009 by Amdt. No. 2;
3-9-2010 by Amdt. No. 2]
§ 334-59 HUDSON CODE § 334-60
1:540
§ 334-61. Temporary signs.
Temporary signs for the purposes indicated below are subject to the
following requirements:
I. Nonconforming signs and signs associated with nonconforming uses
are governed by Article VIII, Nonconforming Uses, Structures and Lots.
[Amended 3-10-2009 by Amdt. No. 2]
J. In zoning districts that allow freestanding signs, the maximum height of
such signs shall be 30 feet. In addition to the language specific to
advertising, all freestanding signs shall have the street number clearly
identified. Numbers are to be four inches in height and black or white,
whichever will contrast with the proposed sign colors. [Added
3-4-2000; amended 3-8-2011 by Amdt. No. 2]
K. No inflatable, balloon or portable signs are allowed in any DISTRICT
unless specifically authorized in a permit issued by the TOWN Board of
Selectmen for a fair, festival, limited-duration performance or other
event of a temporary nature. [Added 3-10-2009 by Amdt. No. 2;
amended 3-16-2017 by Art. No. 4]
L. No sign in any zoning district shall include nudity, images of or
reference to specific sexual conduct or activities, images of or
references to specific anatomical areas, images of or references to
instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in
connection with specific sexual conduct or activities in any district.
[Added 3-10-2009 by Amdt. No. 2]
M. No sign in any zoning district shall emit audible sound, odor, smoke,
steam, mist, laser, hologram or other visible matter, including any sign
that employs any stereopticon or motion picture projection. [Added
3-10-2009 by Amdt. No. 2]
A. Grand opening signs: one unlit sign no greater than 32 square feet in
the business, industrial and general districts and 12 square feet in all
other districts, advertising the opening, reopening or new location of a
business, is permitted per business location for a period not to exceed
30 consecutive days.
B. Special event signs: one unlit on-site sign, no greater than 32 square
feet in the business, industrial and general districts and 12 square feet
in all other districts, advertising special events or functions for
charitable, religious or other nonprofit organizations or for transitory
sporting, cultural or recreational events, provided that the sign is
erected no sooner than 30 days prior to the event and is removed within
seven days after the event. Special event signs also include banner
signs.
C. Commercial/industrial signs: commercial and industrial sites may
display one unlit sign per site for a time period of not more than 10 days
§ 334-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-61
1:541
§ 334-62. Subdivision identification signs.
Signs identifying residential subdivisions are subject to the following
requirements:
§ 334-63. Business and industrial building signs.
Except as otherwise permitted in this article, each individual business
may have either one wall, roof-mounted or projecting sign attached to
the building within which the business is located subject to the following
requirements. The building sign may be implemented in the form of an
awning sign.
§ 334-64. Freestanding business and industrial signs.
Except as otherwise permitted in this article, each individual site may have
no more than one freestanding pole or ground sign, not attached to any
building, subject to the following requirements:
in a thirty-day period; the sign shall not exceed 12 square feet. [Added
3-14-1995 by Amdt. No. 10]
A. One double-faced or two single-faced unlit signs are permitted at the
primary entrance to a subdivision. Dimensions and appearance are to
be determined by the Planning Board. [Amended 3-14-1995 by
Amdt. No. 11]
B. Only the name of the subdivision, address, any associated symbols or
graphics may appear on the sign.
A. Maximum size, single-tenant buildings. The maximum sign area,
measured in square feet, is 20% of the total area of the building facade
upon which the sign is attached or an area equivalent to two times the
building frontage, whichever is less.
B. Maximum size, multitenant buildings. The maximum sign area,
measured in square feet, for multitenant buildings is equivalent to two
times the building frontage of the individual business.
C. All signs attached to multitenant buildings shall be of uniform type and
height.
D. No sign may be erected so that its height exceeds the peak of the roof of
the building to which it is attached.
E. Each individual business may have one additional wall or projecting
sign to identify side or rear entrances which provide access directly to
the business, provided that the size of the additional sign does not
exceed 50% of the size of the business principal sign. [Amended
3-10-2009 by Amdt. No. 2]
A. Maximum size: one square foot for each linear foot of road frontage up
to a maximum of 100 square feet.
§ 334-61 HUDSON CODE § 334-64
1:542
B. Corner lots or parcels which otherwise abut two public rights-of-way
may have one additional freestanding pole or ground sign identifying a
side or rear entrance to the site, provided that the size of the additional
sign does not exceed 50% of the size of the site's principal sign.
C. Electronic changing signs are allowed only as a component of a
freestanding sign and shall conform to the following minimum
requirements along with all other requirements for freestanding signs
within the sign ordinance: [Added 3-9-2010 by Amdt. No. 2]
(1) Definitions relevant to electronic changing signs:
BRIGHTNESS — Also known as "intensity”; the LED Industry
measures display intensity in candelas per square meter, which is
also referred to as "NITS."
DIMMING — The ability to increase or decrease the overall display
intensity brightness.
DIODE — Also called "light-emitting diode" (LED) or "surfacemounted
diode" (SMD).
LED (LIGHT-EMITTING DIODE/SMD) — A solid-state component
that uses a semiconductor (a silicon chip or some type of
semiconductor) that emits visible light when electric current
passes through it.
LUMINANCE — The amount of light that passes through or is
emitted from a particular area. The SI unit for luminance is candela
per square meter.
NIT or NITS — A luminance-measuring unit equal to one candela
(one candle) per square meter measured perpendicular to the rays
from the source.
SI UNIT — An abbreviation for the International System of Units.
TEXT — Any form in which writing exists.
(2) No more than one electronic changing sign shall be allowed per lot.
(3) Electronic changing signs shall not exceed 50% of the area of a
freestanding sign or 50 square feet, whichever is smaller.
Electronic changing signs shall be restricted to a maximum of four
lines of text or message display, and text shall be restricted to a
maximum of 10 inches in height.
(4) Electronic changing signs shall be required to have a minimum of
150 feet between other electronic changing signs located on the
same side of a street or roadway.
(5) Electronic changing signs shall be allowed only on lots with a
minimum street frontage in accordance with the Table of Minimum
Dimensional Requirements.135
§ 334-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-64
1:543
§ 334-65. Industrial park signs/business park. [Amended 3-8-1994
by Amdt. No. 4]
An industrial park sign will be permitted along a public right-of-way, in
addition to other signage, for the purpose of project identification at the
entrances to large-scale developments. The industrial park sign is permitted
in addition to other signage.
(6) Electronic changing signs shall be located a minimum of 200 feet
from any residential dwelling unit.
(7) The portion of a freestanding sign that contains an electronic
changing sign component shall only be operated during the hours
the business associated with the electronic changing sign is open.
(8) All illumination elements on the face of electronic changing signs
shall remain at a fixed level of illumination for a period of not less
than 15 minutes.
(9) All text and message displays of an electronic changing sign shall
fade onto and off of the electronic message display area, statically
and uniformly, at a rate of change of no more than two seconds.
(10) Electronic changing signs shall be equipped with automatic
dimming controls, so the brightness level will be highest during the
day and lowest at night. Manufacturer specifications shall be
submitted at the time of sign permit specifying maximum sign
brightness. The maximum brightness shall not exceed 8,000 NITS
with a maximum nighttime reading not to exceed 20% of the sign's
maximum brightness.
(11) Under the provisions of this subsection, the applicant for a sign
permit for an electronic changing sign shall provide with the
application an affidavit, sworn or attested by the landowner,
applicant and sign installer, attesting to the fact that:
(a) The sign to be installed meets all of the criteria set forth in the
subsection; and
(b) That the sign shall operate in a manner consistent with the
criteria set forth in this subsection; and
(c) The landowner and applicant agree to be held liable,
separately or collectively, if these provisions are not met, for
any fines or cost incurred by the Town of Hudson to enforce
these provisions arising from such violations. This provision
shall not be construed to supersede any other responsibility or
remedy for such violations set forth in this chapter.
135. Editor's Note: The Table of Minimum Dimensional Requirements is included at the end of
this chapter.
§ 334-64 HUDSON CODE § 334-65
1:544
§ 334-66. Institutional signs.
Except as otherwise permitted in this article, signs associated with
noncommercial institutions such as churches, schools, membership clubs
and other similar institutions are subject to the following requirements:
§ 334-67. Home occupation signs.
Except as otherwise permitted in this chapter, each home occupation may
have no more than one exterior sign subject to the following requirements:
§ 334-68. Directional and directory signs.
Directional or directory signs, other than those excluded under
§ 334-58B(3), are permitted with a permit but are not considered to be
freestanding or building signs for the purposes of this article, provided
that they are no greater than three square feet in area and do not contain
any additional advertising or messages other than incidental corporate or
institutional symbols or logos.
A. Maximum sign area shall be 225 square feet for one sign. If one sign
cannot be used to identify the project, because of sign location, two
signs may be used. In this case each sign may not exceed 100 square
feet for each of the two signs.
B. Minimum setback shall be 25 feet. The sign setback may be reduced by
special exception where it can be demonstrated that conditions of the
site (e.g., slope, topography, site layout, proximity to limited access
arterial roadways, unusual soils or vegetation, etc.) necessitate an
exception to the requirements. Issues relative to sight distance and
safety shall not be adversely impacted. Proposed signage shall be
incorporated into any previously approved landscape or site plan.
A. Institutions in residential districts may have one freestanding sign, a
maximum of 12 square feet in area.
B. Signs associated with institutions located in all other districts shall
comply with the requirements of §§ 334-63 and 334-64 for business and
industrial signs.
A. Maximum size. The maximum sign area is three square feet.
B. Maximum height. Freestanding pole or ground signs may not exceed
eight feet in height.
C. If the home occupation is carried out in an accessory structure which is
set back more than 100 feet from the nearest public right-of-way, an
additional sign of two square feet or less may be attached to the
accessory structure.
D. Signs which are not attached to a building must be set back from the
right-of-way a minimum of 15 feet.
§ 334-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-69
1:545
§ 334-69. Area and dimensional calculations.
A. Area. The area of a sign is considered to be the entire face of a sign or
largest single side of a freestanding or projecting sign, including the
perimeter or framing which forms the outside shape of the sign. In the
absence of a clear perimeter or border, the area of the sign is calculated
by enclosing the entire area within which letters, symbols or graphics
are contained within an easily recognized geometric shape. Round,
three-dimensional or irregularly shaped signs are calculated based on a
flat cross section of the broadest portion of the sign. All appendages or
riders are calculated within the area of the sign to which they are
appended.
B. Height. The height of a sign is the vertical distance measured from the
adjacent undisturbed grade of the sign to the highest point of the sign.
§ 334-69 HUDSON CODE § 334-69
1:546
ARTICLE XIII
Housing for Older Persons
[Amended 3-14-1995 by Amdt. No. 12; 3-13-2001 by Amdt. No. 6;
3-9-2004 ATM, Art. 5; 9-12-2006 by Amdt. No. 1]
§ 334-70. Applicability; purpose.
§ 334-71. Lot size.
A. Housing planned specifically for older persons, in the form of multiple
attached units or detached units, as defined as "Housing for Older
Persons," in NHRSA 354-A:15 (I), (II), and (III), as the same may be,
from time to time, amended, may be developed only in the R-2, TR and
G Districts, in accordance with the provisions of this article.
B. Purpose: to provide affordable alternative housing for the older persons
population.
A. For housing which conforms to the definition of "housing for older
persons," in NHRSA 354-A:15(II), as same may be from time to time
amended, the minimum buildable land area shall be 7,500 square feet
per bedroom and shall have Town water and Town sewer. For housing
which conforms to the definition of "housing for older person," in
NHRSA 354-A:15(III), as same may be from time to time amended, the
minimum buildable land area shall be 10,000 square feet per bedroom
and shall have Town water and Town sewer. Further, the maximum
building ground coverage of each older persons housing development
shall not exceed 20% of the tract and 3,000 square feet, per unit. In
addition, all such housing shall conform to the following additional
standards:
(1) Each dwelling unit shall have no more than two bedrooms, and
shall be specifically designed for occupancy by older persons.
(2) The occupancy of units within the development shall be limited to
family units in which the head of household or spouse is at least 55
years old.
(3) The minimum tract area shall be 10 acres and the tract shall have
at least 200 feet of frontage on a public road.
(4) The development shall, where possible, make provision for on- or
off-site pedestrian access to the various community facilities.
(5) Emergency vehicle access shall be provided to all structures.
B. For the purposes of this section, single-room or efficiency units are
considered to be one bedroom.
C. Units are to be no less than 600 square feet.
D. Parking spaces shall be calculated as 1.4 spaces per unit.
§ 334-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-72
1:547
§ 334-72. Buffers and screening.
The Planning Board may require sufficient landscaped or naturally
vegetated buffers for adjacent uses. Buffers shall be maintained to provide
continued screening.
§ 334-73. Planning Board approval of site plan required.
Planning Board approval of the site plan is required. The Planning Board
may adopt specific regulations for reviewing older persons housing
development site plans.
§ 334-72 HUDSON CODE § 334-73
1:548
ARTICLE XIIIA
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS
[Added 3-14-1995 by Amdt. No. 16; amended 3-14-2006 by Amdt.
No. 3; 3-16-2017 by Art. No. 5]
§ 334-73.1. (Reserved)
§ 334-73.2. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to increase the supply of affordable housing
in the Town without the need for more infrastructure or further land
development, while maintaining aesthetics and residence use compatible
with homes in the neighborhood.
§ 334-73.3. Provisions.
An ADU shall be permitted in zoning DISTRICTS that permit single-family
dwellings, and only in accordance with the following provisions:
A. An ADU is allowed only in single-family dwellings. An ADU is not
allowed in two- or multifamily dwellings or in any nonresidential uses.
B. An ADU is not allowed as a freestanding detached STRUCTURE or as
part of any STRUCTURE which is detached from the principal dwelling.
MANUFACTURED HOUSING, RECREATIONAL VEHICLES or trailers
may not be erected or added to the principal dwelling as an ADU.
C. Either the principal DWELLING UNIT or the ADU must be occupied by
the owner of record of the principal dwelling. Upon request of the
Zoning Administrator or other official with the authority to enforce this
ordinance, the owner of record shall demonstrate that one of the units
is his or her principal place of residence.
D. The front face of the principal dwelling STRUCTURE is to appear as a
single-family dwelling after any alterations to the STRUCTURE are
made to accommodate an ADU. Any additional separate entrances must
be located on the side or rear of the STRUCTURE.
E. At least one common interior access between the principal DWELLING
UNIT and an ADU must exist. Two external means of egress (common
or separate) from both a principal DWELLING UNIT and an ADU must
exist.
F. Separate utility service connections and/or meters for the principal
DWELLING UNIT and an ADU shall not exist. (This does not preclude
using a type of heating system for an ADU different from the type for
the principal DWELLING UNIT.) Separate service connections for
common areas shall be as required by building and electrical codes.
G. A minimum of four off-street paved parking spaces shall be provided to
serve the combined needs of the principal DWELLING UNIT and an
ADU. There shall not be a separate driveway for the ADU.
§ 334-73.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-73.3
1:549
§ 334-73.4. (Reserved)
§ 334-73.5. Procedural requirements.
An ADU application submitted under the auspices of this article shall
include: an accurate copy of the plan, which shall denote, describe and/or
identify the intended ADU area. The application shall be submitted to the
TOWN Zoning Administrator for determination as to its compliance with
this article.
§ 334-73.6. Minimum lot dimension requirements.
An ADU shall not be considered an additional DWELLING UNIT for the
purposes of determining minimum dimensional requirements of a principal
dwelling LOT. An ADU shall be allowed to exist in a principal dwelling on
a legal nonconforming lot so long as all provisions of this article can be
satisfied. An ADU shall comply with all setback requirements.
H. The size of an ADU shall not be less than 350 square feet nor greater
than 750 square feet. The size of the principal dwelling shall not be
reduced to less than 850 square feet in order to accommodate the
creation of an ADU. Measurement of size shall be consistent with Town
Assessor’s practices. [2-2-2019 ATM, Art. 05, adopted 3-12-2019]
I. An ADU shall not have more than two bedrooms.
J. A building permit for an ADU must be approved and issued prior to the
construction of an ADU or conversion of existing space into an ADU.
K. The house number for the ADU shall be the same as that of the primary
DWELLING UNIT, and there shall not be a separate mailbox for the
ADU.
L. Multiple ADUs are not permitted on any LOT in any DISTRICT.
M. The maximum number of unrelated persons occupying an ADU shall not
exceed two.
N. An ADU shall have an interconnected fire alarm system with the
principal DWELLING UNIT.
O. An ADU shall make provision for adequate water supply and sewage
disposal in compliance with RSA 485-A: 38 and regulations adopted by
the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services, but
separate systems shall not be required for the principal STRUCTURE
and ADU. Verification of compliance with RSA 485-A:38 shall be filed
with the Town prior to issuance of a building permit. [2-2-2019 ATM,
Art. 05, adopted 3-12-2019]
§ 334-73.3 HUDSON CODE § 334-73.7
1:550
§ 334-73.7. Enforcement authority.
The Zoning Administrator shall be the final authority on compliance and
enforcement issues of this article.
§ 334-73.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-73.7
1:551

ARTICLE XIV
Impact Fees
[Amended 3-12-1996]
§ 334-74. (Reserved)136
§ 334-74.1. Applicability of article.
§ 334-74.2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
A. This article, as well as regulations and studies adopted by the Planning
Board consistent with and in furtherance of this article, shall govern the
assessment of fees imposed upon development, including subdivision,
building construction or other land use change, in order to meet the
needs occasioned by that development for the construction or
improvement of capital facilities owned or operated by the municipality,
including and limited to water treatment and distribution facilities;
waste water treatment and disposal facilities; sanitary sewer;
stormwater, drainage and flood control facilities; public road systems
and rights-of-way; municipal office facilities; public school facilities; the
municipality's proportional share of capital facilities of a cooperative or
regional school district of which the municipality is a member; public
safety facilities; solid waste collection, transfer, recycling, processing
and disposal facilities; public library facilities; and public recreational
facilities not including public open space. This article is authorized by
New Hampshire RSA 674:21, as an innovative land use control.
B. The Town of Hudson's Master Plan and Capital Improvements Program
have incorporated Town-wide transportation, library, school and
recreation expansion plans which identify corresponding capital
improvement needs. New development shall be assessed a proportional
share of the municipal capital improvement costs which are reasonably
related to the capital needs created by the development referenced
above and to the benefits accruing to the development from the capital
improvements financed by the fee. New development shall be assessed
a proportional share of new improvement costs, insofar as new growth
places an increased burden on the municipality's capital facilities,
including library, school, recreation and transportation facilities. In the
future, the Hudson Planning Board may adopt studies and regulations
which provide for the assessment of an impact fee upon development
with respect to any of the other enumerated capital facilities owned or
operated by the municipality for which an impact fee is not presently
assessed, but upon which a fee may be lawfully assessed.
136. Editor's Note: Former § 334-74, Statutory authority, was superseded by §§ 334-74.1
through 334-74.12, adopted 3-12-1996.
§ 334-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-74.2
1:553
FEEPAYER — The person, whether individual or corporate, who pays an
impact fee in conjunction with the issuance of a building permit or
occupancy permit.
NEW DEVELOPMENT — The subdivision, building construction or other
land use change which results in:
§ 334-74.3. Imposition of roadway improvement impact fee.
§ 334-74.4. Computation of impact fee.
§ 334-74.5. Assessment and payment of impact fee. [Amended
3-8-2005 by Amdt. No. 1]
Impact fees shall be assessed by the Planning Board at the time of
subdivision or site plan approval, and shall be stated in the Board's Notice
of Decision. When no Planning Board approval is required, impact fees shall
be assessed prior to, or as a condition for the issuance of, a building permit
or other appropriate permission to proceed with development. Impact fees
shall be collected at the time a certificate of occupancy is issued. If no
A net increase in the capital facilities service demands as identified in
the Planning Board's impact fee schedules; or
A.
The conversion of a legally existing use to another use or activity which
created an increase in capital facilities service demands.
B.
A. Any person who seeks to commence new development in the Town of
Hudson shall pay an impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in
§ 334-74.4.
B. A person may request a full or partial waiver of impact fee payments
from the Planning Board if the Board agrees to accept as equivalent
value, proposed contributions of land, easements or other
improvements. The value of on-site or off-site improvements which are
required by the Planning Board as a result of subdivision or site plan
review, and which would have to be completed by the developer
regardless of the impact fee regulations, shall not be considered
eligible for waiver under this article.
C. Impact fees shall be computed on a fair-share basis, public share and
private share.
A. The amount of the impact fee shall be determined by an Impact Fee
Schedule prepared in accordance with the methodology adopted by the
Planning Board.
B. In the case of new development created by the conversion or
modification of an existing use, the impact fee shall be based upon the
net increase in capital facilities service demands arising from the new
use as compared to that which was or would have been assessed upon
the previous use.
§ 334-74.2 HUDSON CODE § 334-74.5
1:554
certificate of occupancy is required, impact fees shall be collected when
the development is ready for its intended use. The Planning Board and
the developer or feepayer may agree on an alternate, mutually acceptable
schedule of impact fees payments. If an alternate schedule of payment is
established, the Town may require the posting of a bond or issuance of a
letter of credit to guarantee future payment of the assessed impact fees.
§ 334-74.6. Appeals.
§ 334-74.7. Administration of funds collected.
§ 334-74.8. Refund of fees paid.
For plans which received application acceptance after July 1, 1993, and in
conjunction therewith had an impact fee imposed as a condition of Planning
Board approval, the person who paid the impact fee shall be entitled to a
refund of that fee, plus accrued interest where:
A. If a feepayer elects to dispute the amount of the impact fee, the
feepayer may prepare and submit to the Planning Board an
independent fee calculation study for the new development activity
which is proposed. The Planning Board shall review such study and
render a decision. All costs incurred by the Town for the review of such
study shall be paid by the feepayer.
B. The decision of the Planning Board may be appealed to the Superior
Court as provided by RSA 677.15.
A. All funds collected shall be properly identified and promptly transferred
for deposit in individual impact fee accounts for each of the projects for
which fees are assessed and shall be used solely for the purpose
specified. Impact fee accounts shall be special revenue funds accounts
and under no circumstances shall such revenues accrue to the general
fund.
B. The Town Finance Department shall have custody of all fee accounts
and shall pay out the same only upon written approval of the Board of
Selectmen.
C. The Town Finance Department shall record all fees paid, by date of
payment and the name of the person making payment, and shall
maintain an updated record of the current ownership, Tax Map and lot
reference number of properties for which fees have been paid under
this article for a period of at least six years.
A. The impact fee has not been encumbered or legally bound to be spent
for the purpose for which it was collected within a period of six years
from the date of the complete payment of the fee; or
B. The calculation of an impact fee has been predicated upon some portion
of capital improvement costs being borne by the municipality, and the
legislative body has failed to appropriate the municipality's share of the
§ 334-74.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-74.8
1:555
§ 334-74.9. Credits.
§ 334-74.10. Additional assessments.
Payment of an impact fee does not restrict the Town or the Planning
Board from requiring other payments from the feepayer, including such
payments relating to the cost of the extensions of water and sewer mains
or the construction of roads or streets or other infrastructure and facilities
specifically benefiting the development which are required by the
subdivision or site plan review regulations or as otherwise permitted by law.
§ 334-74.11. Premature and scattered development.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit the existing authority of
the Hudson Planning Board to deny new proposed development which is
scattered or premature, to require an unbudgeted expenditure of public
funds or to otherwise violate the Town of Hudson Zoning Ordinance or
the Hudson Planning Board Site Plan Review Regulations or Subdivision
Regulations.137
§ 334-74.12. Review of schedule.
The Impact Fee Assessment Schedule shall be reviewed annually by the
Planning Board, using the methodology established. Such review may result
in recommended adjustments in one or more of the fees based on the most
recent available data regarding current construction cost information.
capital improvement costs within six years from the complete payment
of the impact fee.
A. Land and/or public capital facility improvements may be offered by the
feepayer as total or partial payment of the required impact fee. The
offer must be determined to represent an identifiable dollar value
computed in a manner acceptable to the Planning Board. The Planning
Board may authorize the feepayer an impact fee credit in the amount of
the value of the contribution.
B. Any claim for credit must be made prior to the Planning Board vote on
subdivision/site plan approval or disapproval.
C. Credits shall not be transferable, and run only with a specific
subdivision or site plan approval.
D. Credits shall not be transferable from one type of the public capital
facilities impact fee to any other impact fee type.
E. Determinations made by the Planning Board pursuant to the credit
provisions of this section may be appealed to the Superior Court in
accordance with RSA 677:15.
137. Editor's Note: See Ch. 275, Site Plan Review, and Ch. 289, Subdivision of Land,
respectively.
§ 334-74.8 HUDSON CODE § 334-74.12
1:556
ARTICLE XV
Enforcement and Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 334-75. Severability.
The invalidity, unconstitutionality or illegality of any article, section or
provision of this chapter or of any zoning district or boundary shown on
the Zoning Map shall not have any affect upon the validity, constitutionality
or legality of any other article, section, provision, zoning district or zoning
district boundary.
§ 334-76. Authorization to administer and enforce chapter.
It is the authority of the Board of Selectmen to administer and enforce this
chapter.
§ 334-77. Zoning Administrator.
The Board of Selectmen may appoint a Zoning Administrator to administer
and enforce this chapter under its general supervisory authority.
§ 334-78. Building Inspector.
The Board of Selectmen may appoint a Building Inspector, who shall be the
administrative officer charged with the duty of administering and enforcing
all codes adopted by the Town that relate to building/structure construction
and reconstruction, subject to the general supervisory authority of the
Board of Selectmen. Nothing in this provision shall affect any provision
contained in the New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated that pertains
to Building Inspectors.
§ 334-79. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-14-2006 by Amdt.
No. 2]
The Town is empowered to pursue violations to this chapter by means of
any of the equitable or legal remedies available in state statute, including
but not limited to the injunctive relief provision set forth in RSA 676:15; the
fines and penalties provision set forth in RSA 676:15; the fines, penalties
and award of attorney's fees as set forth in RSA 676:17; the provisions for
cease and desist orders as set forth in RSA 676:17-a; the provisions for local
land use citations and pleas by mail as set forth in RSA 676:17-b; and such
other enforcement or penalty provisions which may be enacted by the New
Hampshire Legislature.
§ 334-80. Board of Adjustment.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA) is established under this chapter in
accordance with RSA 673:3.
§ 334-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-81
1:557
§ 334-81. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Zoning Administrator or other
officer of the Town charged with administering this chapter may appeal to
the ZBA. Such an appeal must be made within 30 days from the date of the
order or decision complained of, in writing addressed to the Clerk of the
ZBA.
§ 334-82. Time limit. [Added 3-14-1995 by Amdt. No. 13]
A. A grant of a variance or special exception by the Hudson Zoning Board
of Adjustment shall be valid if exercised within a period of two years
following the vote of approval by the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
[Amended 3-13-2018 ATM by Amdt. No. 4]
B. If subsequent Planning Board action is needed before work or activity
may be commenced pursuant to the variance or special exception, the
applicant or his/her successor in interest must gain application
acceptance by the Hudson Planning Board within six months of the ZBA
vote of approval regarding the granting of the special exception or
variance in order to stay the two-year limitation period set forth in
Subsection A above. The term "application acceptance" is defined
pursuant to Planning Board regulation and the New Hampshire Revised
Statutes Annotated. [Amended 3-13-2018 ATM by Amdt. No. 4]
C. For variances or special exceptions which require subsequent Planning
Board review and which have gained application acceptance within six
months of the original variance or special exception vote of approval,
the variance or special exception shall be valid for a period of two years
from the Planning Board vote to give conditional or final approval to the
applicant's plan, unless active and substantial development or building
has begun on the site in accordance with the terms of the approved
plan. If conditional approval precedes final approval, the two-year time
period shall run from the vote of conditional approval. [Amended
3-13-2018 ATM by Amdt. No. 4]
D. For variances or special exceptions which do not require subsequent
Planning Board review, all variances and special exceptions shall expire
within two years of the vote of approval as specified in Subsection A
above, unless active and substantial development or building has begun
on the site in accordance with the special exception, variance or
building permit or the variance or exception granted from the terms of
this chapter has been otherwise exercised by the applicant or successor
in interest. [Amended 3-13-2018 ATM by Amdt. No. 4]
E. If an applicant who has been granted a variance or special exception
fails to gain Planning Board application acceptance within six months of
the vote of approval for the special exception or variance, the applicant
shall not gain any exemption for the running of the two-year time period
which governs the grant of a variance or special exception. [Amended
3-13-2018 ATM by Amdt. No. 4]
§ 334-81 HUDSON CODE § 334-82
1:558
F. Any request for an extension or renewal of a variance or special
exception shall follow the same procedure required for the original
appeal: the applicant must fill out a new application, pay a new set of
fees in accordance with the fee policy in effect at the time and then
bring the matter before the ZBA for a full hearing and review in
accordance with the New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated, this
chapter and the bylaws of the Hudson Zoning Board of Adjustment.
Extensions and renewals shall be subject to the statutes, this chapter,
regulations and ZBA bylaws in effect at the time of the renewal/
extension application. Extensions and renewals are disfavored. A
renewal/extension application shall be made no sooner than 90 days
prior to the date of expiration and no later than 30 days prior to the
variance or special exception expiration.
G. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may impose reasonable fees upon
applicants for the expense of consulting services, investigative studies,
review of documents and any other matters that may be required for a
particular application. Any such fee shall be subject to the provisions of
RSA 673:16. [Amended 3-8-2005 by Amdt. No. 2]
§ 334-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-82
1:559

ARTICLE XVI
Flood Hazard Areas
[Added 3-14-1995 by Amdt. No. 14]
§ 334-83. Incorporation of provisions by reference.
Flood hazard area regulation as described in Chapter 218 of the Code of the
Town of Hudson is incorporated by reference as part of this chapter.
§ 334-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-83
1:561

ARTICLE XVII
Sexually Oriented Businesses
[Added 3-9-1999; readopted 3-13-2001 by Amdt. No. 7]
§ 334-84. Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose of this article to establish reasonable and uniform
regulations to prevent the concentration of sexually oriented businesses
within the Town of Hudson; and, it is the intent to promote the health, safety
and general welfare of the citizens of the Town of Hudson; and, it is the
intent of this article that the regulations be utilized to prevent problems
of blight and deterioration which accompany and are brought about by the
concentration of sexually oriented businesses; and, the provisions of this
amendment have neither the purpose nor the effect of imposing limitation
or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including
sexually oriented materials; and, it is not the intent nor effect of this article
to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected
by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution, or to deny access
by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their
intended market; and, neither is it the intent nor effect of this article to
condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.
§ 334-85. Permitted locations.
The establishment of sexually oriented businesses shall only be permitted in
the Industrial Zone, provided all regulations, requirements and restrictions
pertaining to that zone are met, and the establishment of sexually oriented
businesses shall not be permitted within 500 feet of a church or place of
worship, parish house or convent; a public, parochial or private school;
a state-approved day-care center; another sexually oriented business; a
sexually oriented business for which a building permit has been applied for;
a residence; any business in which minors constitute more than 50% of the
patrons; a public park, recreation or sports facility; Town boundaries; or
buildings owned by the Town of Hudson and operated for government use.
The word "establishment," as used in this section, shall mean and include
either the opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as
a new business or the conversion of an existing business, whether or not
a sexually oriented business, to any use included within the definition of a
sexually oriented business.
§ 334-86. Setback distance.
The setback distance between any sexually oriented business and any
protected use shall be 500 feet, measured from the property line of the
protected use to any existing (or proposed) parking lot or structure of the
sexually oriented business.
§ 334-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-87
1:563
§ 334-87. Site plan approval.
Site plan approval by the Hudson Planning Board shall be a prerequisite for
the establishment of a sexually oriented business. The Planning Board may
impose reasonable restrictions relative to buffers, outdoor lighting, signs,
parking, egress and ingress, pedestrian movement, landscaping, building
aesthetics and measures to ensure that displays of merchandise conform
with NH RSA 571-B.
§ 334-88. Public nuisance per se.
Violation of the use provisions of this article is declared to be a public
nuisance per se, which shall be abated by the Town by way of civil
abatement procedures.
§ 334-89. Limiting clause.
Nothing in this article is intended to authorize, legalize or permit the
establishment, operation or maintenance of any business, building or use
which violates any Town of Hudson ordinance or statute of the State of
New Hampshire regarding public nuisances, sexual conduct, lewdness or
obscene or harmful matter or the exhibition or public display thereof.
§ 334-90. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or any portion of this
article is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision
of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this article. The legislative body of the
Town of Hudson hereby declares that it would have adopted this article
and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof
irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections,
sentences, clauses, phrases or portions be declared invalid or
unconstitutional.
§ 334-87 HUDSON CODE § 334-90
1:564
ARTICLE XVIII
Commercial Wireless Telecommunication, Radio Service and
Receive-Only Facilities
[Added 3-9-1999]
§ 334-91. Scope.
The scope of this article is to promulgate regulations which address the
different operating environments of commercial wireless
telecommunication facilities, receive-only facilities and radio service
facilities identified pursuant to the applicable federal law and Code of
Federal Regulations, adopted pursuant thereto.
§ 334-92. Purpose: commercial wireless telecommunication
facilities.
In recognition of the federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, this article is
designed and intended to balance the interests of the residents of Hudson,
telecommunication providers and telecommunication customers in the
siting of wireless telecommunication facilities within the Town of Hudson;
so as to ensure coordinated development of telecommunication
infrastructure while preserving the legitimate need to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the Town, its residents and visitors. This article
establishes general guidelines for the siting of commercial wireless
telecommunication facilities, towers and antennas to enhance and fulfill the
following goals:
A. Preserve the authority of Hudson to regulate and to provide for
reasonable opportunity for the siting of commercial wireless
telecommunication facilities by enhancing the ability of providers of
telecommunication services to provide such services to the community
quickly, effectively and efficiently;
B. Reduce adverse impacts such facilities may create, including, but not
limited to, impacts on aesthetics, environmentally sensitive areas,
historically significant locations, flight corridors, health and safety by
injurious accidents to person and property, and prosperity through
protection of property values;
C. Provide for co-location and minimal impact siting options through
assessment of technology, current location options, future available
locations and innovative siting techniques;
D. Permit the construction of new towers only where all other reasonable
opportunities have been exhausted; and to encourage the users of
towers and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the
adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas;
E. Require cooperation and co-location, to the highest extent possible,
between competitors in order to reduce cumulative negative visual and
property value impacts upon the Town;
§ 334-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-92
1:565
§ 334-93. Definitions.138
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALTERNATIVE FACILITIES/TECHNOLOGIES — Innovative siting
techniques for use with commercial wireless telecommunication facilities
such as artificial trees, clock towers, bell towers, steeples, light poles and
similar alternative design mounting structures which camouflage or conceal
the presence of antennas, towers or facilities; as well as utility pole and
cable-based technologies.[Added 3-9-1999]
ANTENNA — The radiating system used to perform or achieve (transmit
and/or receive) the desired communication or telecommunication service.
An "integrated antenna array" means multiple coordinated radiating
elements.[Added 3-9-1999]
CO-LOCATION — The placement of more than one antenna or integrated
antenna array on a supporting structure, and appurtenant equipment and
devices on the supporting structure and/or ground, necessary to perform
or achieve a desired telecommunication service or radio service which is
discrete from any other telecommunication or radio service(s) located on
the same supporting structure.[Added 3-9-1999]
COMMERCIAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY — Any
structure, antenna, tower or other device used to provide a discrete
commercial telecommunication service by a single provider to a broad
base of usually unrelated users; generally including, but not limited to,
cellular telephone, personal communications services (PCS), specialized
mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR) and
paging.[Added 3-9-1999]
GUY WIRE — A cable-type appurtenant device which is used to secure and
steady a tower or mast; and includes all hardware which attaches the cable
to the tower or mast and to the ground.[Added 3-9-1999]
F. Provide maintenance and safety inspections for any and all facilities;
G. Provide for the removal of abandoned facilities that are no longer
inspected for safety concerns and Building Code compliance; provide a
mechanism for the Town to remove these abandoned facilities to
protect the citizens from imminent harm and danger;
H. Provide for the removal or upgrade of facilities which are
technologically outdated; and
I. Provide for the protection of the environment and open space; and
preserve community character, scenic vistas and historic heritage.
138. Editor's Note: See also § 334-6, Definitions, for general definitions pertaining to this
chapter.
§ 334-92 HUDSON CODE § 334-93
1:566
HEIGHT — The distance measured from the ground, or some other
alternatively specified point, up to the highest point of an antenna or a
supporting structure.[Added 3-9-1999]
MAST — A structure which is designed and constructed to support one
or more antennas used by radio service and/or receive-only facilities and
includes all appurtenant devices attached to it. A mast can be of "lattice"
construction having a diameter of no more than one foot which is
freestanding (solely self-supported by direct attachment to the ground),
supported (attached to the ground directly and with guy wires), anchored
(attached to the ground directly and to some other substantial structure
such as a building) and anchored/supported (attached directly to the ground
and some other substantial structure and with guy wires to the ground and/
or some other substantial structure); or it can be of "pipe" construction
having a diameter of no more than four inches which is supported solely
by direct attachment to a substantial structure such as a building.[Added
3-9-1999]
MONOPOLE — A freestanding tower consisting of a single pole, constructed
without guy wires or lattice characteristics, which relies solely on selfsupport
(direct attachment to the ground) to remain upright.[Added
3-9-1999]
PREEXISTING TOWERS, MASTS AND ANTENNAS — Any tower, mast or
antenna lawfully constructed or permitted prior to the adoption of this
article. Also, any tower, mast or antenna lawfully constructed in accordance
with this article which predates an application currently before the
Town.[Added 3-9-1999]
RADIO SERVICE FACILITY — Any structure, antenna, mast or other radio
installation device used to achieve desired communication(s) by a user with
a narrow base of related or unrelated users; generally including, but not
limited to, amateur radio service, general mobile radio service, citizens
band radio service, low-power radio service, aeronautical and marine
communications and any other similar radio communications or service
which is not specifically named within this definition.[Added 3-9-1999]
RECEIVE-ONLY FACILITY — Any antenna, mast or other device designed
and constructed with the intent to receive broadcast signals typically for
household use; including, but not limited to, personal satellite and offthe-
air television signals and AM, FM, shortwave and other similar radio
signals.[Added 3-9-1999]
SECONDARY USE — A use of land or of a building or of a portion thereof
which is unrelated to the principal use of the land or building.[Added
3-9-1999]
TOWER — A structure which is designed and constructed to support one
or more antennas used by commercial wireless telecommunication facilities
and includes all appurtenant devices attached to it. A tower can be
freestanding (solely self-supported by attachment to the ground) or
supported (attached directly to the ground and with guy wires) of either
lattice or monopole construction.[Added 3-9-1999]
§ 334-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-94
1:567
§ 334-94. Applicability.
§ 334-95. Siting standards.
General provisions: The uses listed within this section are deemed to be
permitted uses in the designated district in accordance with all other
applicable ordinances and regulations of the Town, including site plan
review and approval by the Hudson Planning Board.
A. Public property. Antennas, towers or facilities situated on property
owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the Town may be exempt from
the requirements of this article; except that uses are only permitted in
the districts and areas delineated within § 334-96. This partial
exemption shall be available if a license or lease authorizing the
antenna, tower or facility has been approved by the governing body and
the governing body elects, subject to state law and local ordinance, to
seek the partial exemption from this article.
B. Essential services and public utilities. Commercial wireless
telecommunication facilities shall not be considered essential services,
infrastructure or public utilities as defined or used elsewhere in the
Town's ordinances and regulations. Siting for commercial wireless
telecommunication facilities is a use of land and is subject to the Town's
Zoning Ordinance and all other applicable ordinances and regulations.
A. Commercial wireless telecommunication facilities may be considered
either principal or secondary uses. A different existing use or an
existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of a
commercial wireless telecommunication facility on such a lot.
B. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a commercial
wireless telecommunication facility complies with district development
standards, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though
the facility may be located on leased parcels within such lots.
C. A commercial wireless telecommunication facility which is constructed
in accordance with the provisions of this article on a nonconforming lot,
or in conjunction with a nonconforming use, shall not be deemed to
constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use or structure.
D. Towers shall not exceed 180 feet in height above the ground. In all
cases, a tower's maximum height shall be the minimum height above
the ground necessary to perform or achieve the desired
communication(s) or telecommunication service(s). Co-location is
considered to be within the definition of a desired communication or
telecommunication service.
E. An RF Engineering/Facilities Master Plan shall be submitted for review
to include present and future network infrastructure in both Hudson
and abutting communities. The lay person shall be able to easily
understand the Master Plan and supporting documentation. It shall
explain sufficiently why the tower must be in this location. With the
§ 334-94 HUDSON CODE § 334-95
1:568
§ 334-96. (Reserved).139
§ 334-96.1. Districts where conditionally permitted. [Added
3-13-2007 by Amdt. No. 6]
The goals of this section of this article are to minimize visual blight to
nearby property abutters and users of the Town's principal corridors,
minimize adverse value impacts to abutters, protect the environment and
open space and preserve historic heritage, community character and scenic
beauty, while reasonably accommodating desired communication(s) or
commercial wireless telecommunication service(s) and encouraging colocation
of facilities. The maximum tower height of a commercial wireless
telecommunication facility shall be 180 feet above the ground. In all cases,
a tower's maximum height shall be the minimum height above the ground
necessary to perform or achieve the desired commercial wireless
telecommunication service(s).
Table of Conditionally Permitted Facilities
Zoning District
Facility Type I B G/G-1 R1 R2 TR
Alternative facilities/
technologies
C C C C C C
Monopole -=100, +5xCOR,
+5xRES
C C C C C C
Monopole -100, +5xCOR,
-5xRES
C C C – – –
Monopole -100, -5xCOR,
+5xRES
C C C – – –
Monopole -100, -5xCOR
-5xRES
C C C – – –
Monopole +100, +5xCOR,
+5xRES
C C C – – –
exceptions of alternative facilities/technologies, which do not have
visible outdoor equipment, and telecommunication facilities placed on
existing utility poles, site plan approval is required for all commercial
wireless telecommunication facilities, including any such facilities
situated on residential sites. [Amended 3-4-2000]
F. The FCC regulates radio frequency (RF) emissions, and local
jurisdictions are preempted from prohibiting the construction of
commercial wireless telecommunication facilities on the basis of
exposure to RF emissions. Owners/operators of commercial wireless
telecommunications facilities shall construct such facilities in
accordance with FCC regulations pertaining to RF emissions.
139. Editor's Note: Former § 334-96, Districts permitted, was repealed 3-13-2007 by Amdt. No.
6. See now §§ 334-96.1 and 334-96.2.
§ 334-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-96.1
1:569
Table of Conditionally Permitted Facilities
Zoning District
Facility Type I B G/G-1 R1 R2 TR
Monopole +100, +5xCOR,
-5xRES
C – C – – –
Monopole +100, -5xCOR,
+5xRES
C C C – – –
Monopole +100, -5xCOR,
-5xRES
C – – – – –
*Lattice -100, +5xCOR,
+5xRES
C – C – – –
*Lattice -=100, +5xCOR,
-5xRES
C – C – – –
*Lattice -100, -5xCOR,
+5xRES
C – – – – –
*Lattice -=100, -5xCOR,
-5xRES
– – – – – –
*Lattice +100, +5xCOR,
+5xRES
C – C – – –
*Lattice +100, +5xCOR,
-5xRES
C – C – – –
*Lattice +100, -5xCOR,
+5xRES
C – – – – –
*Lattice +100, -5xCOR,
-5xRES
– – – – – –
Notes:
X = proposed tower height
COR = distance from corridor (3A, 102, 111)
RES = distance from residential use
*Lattice permitted only if it maximizes co-location vs. monopole
C = Conditional Use permit required
- = not conditionally permitted (variance required)
§ 334-96.2. Conditional use permit required. [Added 3-13-2007 by
Amdt. No. 6]
Pursuant to NH RSA 674:21(II), the Hudson Planning Board is hereby
authorized to issue a conditional use permit for commercial wireless
telecommunication facilities according to the Table of Conditionally
Permitted Facilities as set forth in § 334-96.1. Application for a conditional
use permit shall be made concurrently with application for subdivision
and/or site plan approval. In addition to the application submission
§ 334-96.1 HUDSON CODE § 334-96.2
1:570
requirements for subdivision and/or site plan approval, the Planning Board
may require the applicant for a conditional use permit to submit an RF
Engineering/Facilities Master Plan as provided in § 334-95E. In acting upon
any such conditional use permit application the Planning Board shall
determine whether the applicant has satisfied the general guidelines set
forth in § 334-92 and the siting standards set forth in § 334-95, and the
Board may impose such conditions of approval on the conditional use permit
as are consistent with this Article XVIII and other provisions of the Hudson
Zoning Ordinance. The Planning Board shall hold at least one public hearing
on any such conditional use application and, following the public hearing,
the Planning Board shall act to approve the application, deny it, or approve
it with conditions. Any person aggrieved by a Planning Board decision
concerning a conditional use permit may appeal that decision to the
Superior Court in the manner provided by RSA 677:15, Court Review. As
provided in NH RSA 676:5, III, a Planning Board decision concerning a
conditional use permit cannot be appealed to the Hudson Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
§ 334-97. Bonding security and insurance. [Amended 3-4-2000]
Recognizing the extremely hazardous situation presented by abandoned
and unmonitored towers, the Planning Board shall set the form and amount
of security that represents the cost for removal and disposal of abandoned
towers in the event that the tower is abandoned and the tower owner
is incapable and/or unwilling to remove the tower in accordance with
§ 334-98. Bonding and surety shall be consistent with the provisions in
the Subdivision Regulations. Furthermore, the Planning Board shall require
submission of proof of adequate insurance covering accident or damage.
Bonding shall not be required for alternative facilities/technologies which
are an integrated part of an existing structure. Bonding shall be nonlapsing
of not less than five-year intervals.
§ 334-98. Removal of abandoned antennas and towers.
Any commercial wireless telecommunication facility which is not operated
for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned and
hazardous to the public health and safety, unless the owner of said
commercial wireless telecommunication facility provides proof of quarterly
inspection. The owner shall remove the abandoned structure within 90 days
of receipt of a declaration of abandonment from the Town. A declaration
of abandonment shall only be issued following a public hearing, noticed
according to RSA 676:4, with notice to abutters and the last known owner/
operator of the tower. If the abandoned commercial wireless
telecommunication facility is not removed within 90 days, the Town may
execute the bonding security and have the commercial wireless
telecommunication facility removed.
§ 334-96.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-99
1:571
§ 334-99. Purpose: radio service facilities.
The purpose of this section is to balance a legitimate need to protect the
health, safety and welfare of the Town, its residents and its visitors with
requirements to reasonably accommodate the operation of radio service
facilities under the standards as may be promulgated by any applicable
state and/or federal laws and regulations. Particular attention is given to
RSA 674:16, IV, which refers to 101 FCC 2d. 952 (1985) entitled "Amateur
Radio Preemption" by the FCC.
§ 334-100. Applicable federal regulation references.
Applicable federal regulations for the various radio services characterized
herein as radio service facilities are all contained within Title 47 Code of
Federal Regulations as follows:
§ 334-101. Antenna and mast height.
A. Amateur radio service: 47 CFR 97.
B. General mobile radio service: 47 CFR 95.
C. Citizens band radio service: 47 CFR 95.
D. Radio control radio service: 47 CFR 95.
E. Low-power radio service: 47 CFR 95.
F. Aeronautical radio service: 47 CFR 87.
G. Marine radio service: 47 CFR 80.
A. Antennas mounted on "pipe-type" masts directly attached to a building,
and which are 20 feet or less in height above the roofline peak of the
building, and which are assembled and erected using sound practices
so they will fall or collapse completely within a property's bounds, are
exempt from regulation by this article.
B. Subject to the added requirements of § 334-102 Fall zone calculation,
the maximum height of any antenna and/or mast for a radio service
facility shall be the lesser of:
(1) Eighty feet above the ground; or
(2) The maximum height specified in the CFR applicable to a particular
radio service if same is less than 80 feet above the ground.
C. If the CFR applicable to a particular radio service allows a maximum
height greater than 80 feet above the ground, then the maximum height
of any antenna and/or mast for that particular radio service may, by
granting of a special exception, exceed 80 feet above the ground,
subject to the following conditions:
§ 334-99 HUDSON CODE § 334-101
1:572
§ 334-102. Fall zone calculation.
§ 334-103. Number of masts for antennas.
(1) The added requirements of § 334-102, Fall zone calculation, are
satisfied; and
(2) The maximum height specified in the applicable CFR is not
exceeded; and
(3) For amateur radio service operations, the maximum height shall be
the minimum height required to accomplish the desired
communication(s) using the minimum required transmitting power;
or
(4) For all other types of radio service operations, the maximum height
shall be the minimum height required to accomplish the desired
communication(s) using the transmitting power levels authorized
by the FCC for the particular radio service;
(5) That adequate technical data, presented in sufficiently layman
terms, shall be provided with any special exception application to
demonstrate the basis of need for the application.
D. Construction or extension of an antenna and/or mast at a height
approved by a special exception shall be delayed to no sooner than 60
days before the date that the desired communication(s) being the basis
for the special exception need will actually commence.
A. No antenna and/or mast shall be capable of falling or collapsing beyond
the bounds of the property on which it is situated. A fall zone
calculation, utilizing graph paper and a drawing compass to plot it,
shall be performed for any antenna and/or mast at the time a building
permit or special exception application is made to demonstrate
compliance with this requirement. (A sample fall zone calculation
appears as an exhibit at the end of this chapter). All antennas and/or
masts shall be assembled and erected to a manufacturer's standards
using sound practices.
B. The low point of height at which the fall zone calculation shall be based
is as follows:
(1) For freestanding masts: the ground attachment point of the mast.
(2) For supported masts: the point of the lowest support attachment
above the ground.
(3) For anchored masts: the highest point of anchoring on a substantial
structure.
(4) For anchored/supported masts: the point of the lowest support
attachment above the highest point of anchoring on a substantial
structure.
§ 334-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-103
1:573
§ 334-104. Co-location.
§ 334-105. Yard and green space setback requirements.
No antenna, mast or supporting appurtenant devices are permitted to exist
within any yard setback area and, for nonresidential properties, within any
green space areas.
§ 334-106. Hazardous RF emission certifications and environmental
evaluations.
At the time of building permit or special exception application, an amateur
radio service station licensee shall provide a written certification that
either:
A. Antennas mounted on "pipe-type" masts directly attached to a building,
and which are 20 feet or less in height above the roofline peak of the
building, and which are assembled and erected using sound practices
so they will fall or collapse completely within a property's bounds, are
exempt from regulation by this article.
B. For "lattice-type" masts, the total area of the site on which it/they will
be placed shall determine the number allowed according to the
following schedule:
(1) For sites 2.0 acres in area or less: one mast.
(2) For sites greater than 2.0 acres in area: two masts.
(3) For sites greater than 3.0 acres in area: three masts.
C. For mast quantities that differ from the requirements of § 334-103B, a
special exception shall be required. The special exception application
shall demonstrate a correlation between the number of masts
requested, the transmitting power level(s) proposed and the desired
communication(s) to be achieved. Adequate technical data, presented
in sufficiently layman terms, shall be provided with any special
exception application to demonstrate the basis of need for the request
A. Commercial wireless telecommunication facilities are not permitted to
co-locate on radio service or receive-only facilities.
B. Radio service or receive-only facilities may co-locate on commercial
wireless telecommunication facilities.
A. During operations, transmitter power levels will not exceed the
maximum allowed for wavelength bands as noted in the table at 47 CFR
97.13(c)(1), therefore precluding the need for any routine RF
environmental evaluation to be performed; or
B. During operations, transmitter power levels may exceed the maximum
allowed for wavelength bands as noted in the table at 47 CFR
§ 334-103 HUDSON CODE § 334-106
1:574
§ 334-107. Receive-only facilities.
97.13(c)(1), therefore a routine RF environmental evaluation will be
performed; and
C. That the licensee will promptly take action to prevent human exposure
to any excessive RF emissions levels which the routine RF
environmental evaluation indicates could exist, in compliance with the
requirements of 47 CFR 97.13.
A. Antennas mounted on "pipe-type" masts directly attached to a building,
and which are 20 feet or less in height above the roofline peak of the
building, and which are assembled and erected using sound practices
so they will fall or collapse completely within a property's bounds, are
exempt from regulation by this article.
B. The maximum height of any antenna and/or mast shall not exceed 60
feet above the ground, subject only to the additional requirements of
§ 334-94, Fall zone calculation, of this article.
C. The maximum height of any antenna and/or mast for a receive-only
facility may, by granting of a special exception, exceed 60 feet above the
ground, subject to the following conditions:
(1) The additional requirements of § 334-102, Fall zone calculation, are
satisfied; and
(2) That adequate information (such as a video or audio recording of
preapplication reception conditions and photographs of the subject
and abutting property areas) is provided with any special exception
application which demonstrates the need basis for the request; and
(3) That the maximum height approved by a special exception shall be
the minimum height necessary to obtain a reasonable improvement
in overall signal(s) reception.
§ 334-106 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-107
1:575

ARTICLE XIX
Growth Management
[Added 3-13-2001 by Amdt. No. 5]
§ 334-108. Purpose.
Based on the Master Plan and Capital Improvements Program, which assess
and balance community development needs with those of the wider region,
the following growth management article is deemed necessary to control
the rate of residential development in Hudson for the following reasons:
§ 334-109. Authority.
This article is adopted as a growth management ordinance under the
authority of RSA 674:22.
§ 334-110. Findings.
A. Promote the development of an economically sound and
environmentally stable community, which considers and balances local
and regional development needs.
B. Ensure that Hudson accommodates its fair share of regional growth
while protecting it from the adverse fiscal, traffic, and environmental
impacts that can result from uncontrolled growth.
C. Guide efforts by the Town to monitor, evaluate, and establish a rate of
residential growth that is consistent with its capacity for planned and
orderly expansion of public services to accommodate growth.
D. Provide a mechanism for situations when municipal services are
strained due to rapid residential growth to reduce the rate of such
growth in order to provide the Town the time and opportunity to correct
any service deficiencies.
E. Protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the
Town of Hudson.
F. Address the community development goals and objectives of the Town
of Hudson Master Plan and Capital Improvements Program.
A. Hudson's developable land area, as estimated by the Nashua Regional
Planning Commission (NRPC), is sufficient to support extensive new
growth and development. According to a 1997 study by NRPC, there
are approximately 3,650 buildable, residentially zoned acres out of a
total of 17,371 acres in Hudson.
B. Hudson's population increased 39.3% from 1980 to 1990, and 18.5%
from 1990 to 1999, for an overall increase of 65%, or 3.4% annually
over the nearly twenty-year period. By contrast, the total population of
the communities making up the Nashua Regional Planning Commission
(NRPC region) increased by 24% from 1980 to 1990, and 13% from
§ 334-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-110
1:577
1990 to 1999, for an overall increase of 44%, or 2.3% annually over the
nearly twenty-year period. As evidenced by these statistics, Hudson has
grown at a faster rate than the region.
C. The number of housing units in Hudson increased by 58% between
1980 and 1990, and by 17.5% between 1990 and 1999, for an overall
increase of 85.5%, or 4.5% annually over the nearly twenty-year period.
By contrast, the number of housing units in the NRPC region increased
by 38.5% between 1980 and 1990, and by 10.2% between 1990 and
1999, for an overall increase of 52.7%, or 2.9% annually over the nearly
twenty-year period.
D. The average annual rate of new housing unit construction in Hudson is
greater than the average for a Hudson first-tier fair-share region that
consists of the six adjacent communities of Litchfield, Londonderry,
Nashua, Pelham, Windham, and Tyngsborough, MA. In Hudson, the
average annual increase in housing units for the period 1995 to 1999
was 1.7%, compared to a first-tier fair-share region average annual
growth rate of 1.1%.
E. Population projections for Hudson issued by the New Hampshire Office
of State Planning (NHOSP) in 2000 project a 3,111 person, or 13.4%
increase in population from 2000 to 2010.
F. High levels of demand for housing in Hudson are expected to continue
according to the 1999 Regional Housing Needs Assessment by NRPC.
With the region divided into four parts, the eastern Towns of Hudson,
Litchfield, and Pelham had the largest increase in the number of home
sales for the period 1991 to 1998, at 116%.
G. As of 1999, there were approximately 7,965 dwelling units in Hudson,
according to estimates by the NHOSP. According to a build-out study
performed by NRPC for the 1996 Hudson Master Plan, there is the
potential to add approximately 4,700 units in Hudson's residential
zoning districts, an increase of 58% over the 1999 figure.
H. Hudson's total population at build-out, according to the Master Plan,
could approach 33,300 persons, an increase of 10,200, or 44%, over the
estimated 1999 population of 23,100.
I. The Town of Hudson, in its Master Plan, supports controlled growth as
one method of ensuring that the Town grows in a sustainable manner.
Land-Use Goal B.3 states that Hudson should "[c]onsider the adoption
of growth controls or development phasing to limit population increases
and housing development to manageable levels." Population Goal A
states that Hudson should "[p]rovide an acceptable rate of growth in
relation to the regional rate of growth and in keeping with the ability of
the Town to provide essential facilities and services."
J. Community facilities.
§ 334-110 HUDSON CODE § 334-110
1:578
(1) Many community facilities in Hudson are being adversely impacted
by rapid population and housing growth in the community. The
Community Facilities section of the 1996 Hudson Master Plan
states that: "The significant and rapid growth that occurred in
Town over the past years has caused the current Town facilities to
become inadequate. The growth of the Town facilities has not kept
pace with the rest of the Town." Some of the municipal facilities
adversely impacted by rapid growth include:
(a) Fire Department: In its FY 2002 submittal to the Hudson
Capital Improvements Plan Committee, the Fire Department
noted that "the present fire stations are not conducive to
providing timely responses for emergency services. The
growth of the Town has passed the available level of service
that the Fire Department can provide to the community from
its present location." As a result of this deficiency, the Town
will be assessing possible locations for additional fire stations.
(b) Hills Memorial Library: The 1996 Hudson Master Plan notes
that "[w]ith just 3,645 square feet in the original building, the
inadequacies of the facility and crowding have been major
concerns for many years." The Library has documented the
need for a new 25,000 square-foot facility to meet present and
future demands for library services.
(c) Schools: The Town's rapid growth has placed severe strain on
the school system. In an attempt to address the impacts of
growth, the Town is building a new elementary school and
renovating the middle school. Despite these improvements, the
School Department reports that overcrowding will remain an
issue as long as rapid growth continues.
(d) Town Sewer: Hudson has an agreement with the City of
Nashua in which the Nashua Wastewater Treatment Plant
(WWTP) receives sewage flow from Hudson. Due to capacity
limitations and the provisions of the inter-municipal
agreement, the Nashua WWTP can only treat two million
gallons per day (mgpd) of Hudson wastewater. The Town of
Hudson is currently generating approximately 1.6 mgpd, which
is approaching the limits of the Nashua WWTP. Constraints on
the ability of the sewer system to expand results in a very
limited allocation for commercial development, which is
needed to sustain the tax rate.
(e) Hudson Recreation Department: In its FY 2002 capital
improvements submittal, the Town's Recreation Department
noted that "[t]his rapid growth has caused an outcry for more
(recreational / sports) fields." Additional sports fields are
needed to meet present and future demand brought on by
recent and anticipated growth. Many sports programs are at
capacity at the present time. A new indoor recreation center is
§ 334-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-110
1:579
§ 334-111. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply only to the growth management section
and shall not be affected by the provisions of any other Town ordinance.
BUILDING CERTIFICATE — A certificate obtained from the Planning Board
entitling the holder to obtain one building permit for one dwelling unit.
Dwelling units as defined in this article include single-family homes and
duplexes on individual lots, as well as individual condominium units and
apartments in multifamily structures shown on approved site plans. A
building certificate is valid for a period of two years from the date of
issuance, by which time it must be redeemed for a building permit, or
expire.
FAIR-SHARE REGION AVERAGE GROWTH RATE (FSRAGR) — Average
annual percentage increase in residential building permits issued in the
six adjacent municipalities of Litchfield, Londonderry, Nashua, Pelham,
Windham and Tyngsborough, MA, for the preceding five-year period.
HOUSING FOR OLDER PERSONS — Housing that qualifies as "Housing
for Older Persons" as defined in § 334-70 and developed according to the
provisions of § 334-71 of the Town of Hudson Zoning Ordinance.
LOT OF RECORD — Land designated as a separate and distinct parcel
prior to the date of posting (November 3, 2000) of this article either in a
legally recorded deed filed with the Hillsborough County Registry of Deeds
or lots or units described as part of a subdivision or site plan recorded
at the Hillsborough County Registry of Deeds prior to the date of posting.
For the purpose of this article, a lot of record shall also be defined to
include separately defined condominium units, as well as individual units in
duplexes and multifamily structures, shown on site plans and/or subdivision
plans accepted for review by the Hudson Planning Board prior to the date
of posting.
SUSTAINABLE RATE OF DEVELOPMENT — A target number of building
permits to be issued in Hudson in the current year equaling the fair-share
region average growth rate for the preceding five years times the total
number of dwelling units existing in Hudson in the preceding year. Round
any fraction calculated herein to the next whole number.
TOTAL DWELLING UNITS (DU) — The total number of dwelling units in
Hudson on December 31. This number includes single-family homes, as well
as dwelling units in duplexes, apartments, condominium developments and
other multifamily structures. Note: For 1999, the DU number is 7,965 based
on an estimated accounting of the number of dwelling units.
also needed, as the demand for many programs is now nearly
double the capacity of the existing facility.
(2) The above examples are intended to illustrate how rapid and
unchecked growth impacts many of the Town's services and
facilities.
§ 334-110 HUDSON CODE § 334-112
1:580
§ 334-112. Applicability and effect.
§ 334-113. Periodic review.
It shall be the responsibility of the Planning Board to monitor growth in the
Town and region and notify the Town of the findings.
§ 334-114. Calculation of annual certificate pool and annual
discretionary certificate allocation.
Data shall be collected for the previous five years on the number of new
dwelling units for the six adjacent regional towns. For the purposes of this
section, the yearly statistics to be utilized are based upon a calendar year
of January 1 to December 31. To calculate the certificate allocation for the
current year, Steps A, B and C must be completed as described below:
A. This article applies to all lots of record as defined in §§ 334-6 and
334-111, as well as to all future residential development. The
application of this article to lots of record is for tracking purposes only.
To receive a building permit, an applicant is required to possess a
building certificate (also referred to herein as a "certificate") from the
Planning Board or its designee for each approved dwelling unit. In
order to be eligible for the issuance of a building certificate, an
applicant must supply a properly completed application form to the
Planning Department Clerk.
B. This article does not apply to nonresidential buildings or to the
expansion, alteration, renovation, or replacement of existing dwelling
units. Beginning on the effective date of this article, no building permit
for a new dwelling unit shall be issued without possession of a building
certificate issued in accordance with the provisions of this article.
A. The Planning Board or its agent(s) shall assemble by the third Tuesday
in February such information necessary for assessing whether
unsustainable rates of development continue to exist, and, if so, to
determine the sustainable rate of development. Information should
include statistics on building permits issued and building certificates
issued and redeemed. Reliable information that may be used includes:
statistics provided by the local Building Inspector and "Permit
Authorized Construction in Permit-Issuing Places by State and County"
as reported by the Building Permits Branch of the U.S. Census.
B. The Building Inspector shall provide to the Planning Board information
describing the status of requests and issuance of residential building
permits on a semi-annual basis to aid in monitoring the issuance of
certificates and permits. The information provided shall include the
number of permits issued in each of the last four semi-annual periods.
For reporting purposes, periods conform to the calendar year January 1
- June 30, and July 1 - December 31. Information for each period shall be
submitted within 31 days of the end of December and June.
§ 334-112 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-114
1:581
§ 334-115. Procedures for distributing certificates.
Certificates shall be distributed according to the following allocation rules:
A. Calculate the fair-share region average growth rate. (See definitions.)
(1) Do not include statistics for Hudson in the calculation; otherwise,
local growth may influence regional growth statistics.
B. Calculate the sustainable rate of development. (See definitions.)
C. Calculate the current year certificates available for disbursement in
semi-annual allocations.
(1) Calculate the net available current year certificates (discretionary
allocation) by subtracting from B the number of building permits
issued to new dwelling units in the prior year.
(a) If the calculated net available current year certificates is less
than or equal to 10, then the number of discretionary
certificates for the current year shall be 10.
(b) If the calculated net available current year certificates are
greater than 10, then the number of discretionary certificates
for the current year shall be the calculated number.
A. No residential building permit may be issued except with the
possession of a certificate.
B. From January 1 through December 31, the Planning Department Clerk,
on a form prepared by the Planning Board, shall receive applications for
certificates for the current year. These applications shall be time and
date stamped when received. The basis for determining the priority
standing among all applications for the annual allotment of
discretionary certificates shall be the order of submission of the
applications as indicated by the Planning Department office stamp.
Except for lots of record, no application for certificates may be made
prior to recording an approved subdivision or site plan with the HCRD.
Note: All applications for certificates for a subdivision or site plan shall
be placed onto a single form provided by the Planning Board and must
list all lots or units.
C. Guaranteed allocation. So that all developments are assured an
allocation of certificates appropriate to the size of their subdivision or
site plan and investment, all subdivisions and site plans for multifamily
and condominium developments approved by the Planning Board and
recorded at the Hillsborough County Registry of Deeds shall receive
certificates according to the following schedule: subdivisions and site
plans of one to five lots or units shall be entitled to certificates equal to
the number of lots or units in the subdivision or site plan; subdivisions
and site plans with six to 10 lots or units shall receive at least five
certificates per year; subdivisions and site plans with 11 to 20 lots or
§ 334-114 HUDSON CODE § 334-115
1:582
units shall receive at least six certificates per year; subdivisions and site
plans with 21 to 30 lots or units shall receive at least seven certificates
per year; subdivisions and site plans with 31 to 40 lots or units shall
receive at least eight certificates per year; subdivisions and site plans
with 41 to 54 lots or units shall receive at least nine certificates per
year; subdivisions and site plans with 55 to 80 lots or units shall receive
at least 10 certificates per year; and subdivisions and site plans greater
than 80 lots shall receive certificates equal to 12.5% of their total
number of lots or units per year.
(1) Building lots that are planned for construction must obtain one
building certificate for each dwelling unit.
(2) Each subdivision or site plan may receive their minimum
guaranteed certificate allocation pursuant to § 334-115C at any
time during the year after subdivision or site plan recording at the
HCRD, and is not required to wait until annual certificate
allocations. In the year(s) following subdivision or site plan
recording, the full allotment of certificates specified in § 334-115C
shall be available, based on the total number of lots or units in the
approved and recorded subdivision or site plan.
(3) The number of guaranteed certificates available during the year of
recording shall be calculated on a pro-rata basis based on the
number of months remaining in the year from the date of
subdivision or site plan recording. For subdivisions or site plans
recorded in January, the full yearly allotment of guaranteed
certificates specified in § 334-115C shall be available, for February
11/12 of the yearly allotment shall be available, for March 10/12 of
the yearly allotment shall be available, and so on until December, in
which 1/12 of the allotment shall be available. The number
obtained by multiplying the allotment specified in § 334-115C by
the proportion of the year remaining in terms of months shall be
rounded up or down to the nearest whole number to determine the
number of certificates available.
(a) For example, a thirty-five-lot subdivision is eligible for eight
certificates according to § 334-115C. If the subdivision plan is
recorded in July, the subdivision is eligible for 6/12 (or 1/2 or
0.5) of the certificates that first year. One-half of eight equals
four certificates available to that subdivision in the year of
recording.
(b) If the same thirty-five-lot subdivision is recorded in September,
it is eligible for 4/12 (or 0.33) of the yearly allotment of
guaranteed certificates. Eight multiplied by 0.33 equals 2.6,
which is then rounded up to three, which equals the amount of
guaranteed certificates available.
D. Discretionary allocation. The remaining certificates shall be allocated
annually by the following system:
§ 334-115 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-115
1:583
§ 334-116. Exemptions.
(1) At the second Planning Board meeting in March, the Planning
Board shall conduct its annual discretionary certificate allocation.
(2) If a surplus of certificates is left over from distribution in the prior
year, the remaining certificates may, at the discretion of the
Planning Board, be added to the number of permits available in the
current year.
(3) When the number of certificate applications exceeds the number of
certificates available, the annual allocation is distributed among
applications using a priority based upon the order in which the
Planning Department Clerk received the applications.
(4) The procedure for allocating discretionary certificates on an annual
basis is as follows: Discretionary certificates shall be issued to
applicants one at a time based upon the order in which applications
have been received by the Planning Department Clerk. When there
are certificates remaining after each applicant has received their
first certificate, the process shall be repeated until all available
certificates are exhausted. Each application shall be specific to a
subdivision or development irrespective of the individual filing the
application. Only one application may be filed for a subdivision or
development in each calendar year. [Amended 3-14-2006 by
Amdt. No. 1]
(5) At the next annual allocation, the allocation commences with the
next applicant scheduled to receive a certificate that did not
receive any certificates in the prior allocation.
(6) The owners of lots allocated certificates may formally apply to the
Building Inspector for the issuance of a building permit.
(7) A certificate may be used for any dwelling unit within the
subdivision or site plan for which it was awarded. Certificates may
not be transferred to other subdivisions or site plans.
(8) A building certificate is valid and must be redeemed for a building
permit within two years of the date of issuance.
E. Disclaimer. Certificate issuance in no way ensures or guarantees
building permit issuance.
A. The following new dwelling unit types shall apply for and will be
granted building certificates, but are exempt from the certificate
allocation requirements outlined in §§ 334-114 and 334-115 of this
article. The requirement that a use exempt from allocation requires the
issuance of a certificate is a mechanism that will enable the Planning
Board to track and monitor all new residential development in Hudson.
Provisions for guaranteed minimum certificate allocations are found in
§ 334-115. Nonresidential buildings, including commercial, industrial,
§ 334-115 HUDSON CODE § 334-116
1:584
§ 334-117. Sunset.
If the number of building certificates requested for three consecutive years
is less than 75% of the prior year's sustainable rate of development, then
the Planning Board may consider the suspension of this growth
management article. At such time, if the Planning Board decides to keep
the ordinance in place, it shall provide findings as to why continued
implementation of the ordinance is necessary to address public service and
facility deficiencies and other impacts of rapid growth.
§ 334-118. Implementing regulations.
To the extent deemed appropriate, the Planning Board may adopt
administrative regulations to guide Planning Department staff and agents of
the Board in administration of this article, pursuant to RSA 674:36; 674:44,
674:4I(a) and (b), and 674:4, II to III.
§ 334-119. Severability.
Should any part of this article be held invalid or unconstitutional by a court,
such a holding shall not affect, impair, or invalidate any other part of this
article, and, to such end, all articles, sections and provisions are declared to
be severable.
and municipal buildings, are exempt from the provisions of this growth
management article and do not require the issuance of a building
certificate.
B. Lots of record as defined by § 334-111 are also exempt from the
provisions of this growth management article.
§ 334-116 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-119
1:585

ARTICLE XX
Small Wind Energy Systems
[Added 3-9-2010 by Amdt. No. 3]
§ 334-120. Purpose.
This small wind energy systems ordinance is enacted in accordance with
RSA 674:62 through 674:66, and the purposes outlined in RSA 672:1,
III-a. The purpose of this article is to accommodate small wind energy
systems in appropriate locations, while protecting the public's health, safety
and welfare. In addition, this article provides a permitting process for
small wind energy systems to ensure compliance with the provisions of the
requirements and standards established herein.
§ 334-121. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
METEOROLOGICAL TOWER (MET TOWER) — Includes the tower, base
plate, anchors, guy wires and hardware, anemometers (wind speed
indicators), wind direction vanes, booms to hold equipment for
anemometers and vanes, data loggers, instrument wiring, and any
telemetry devices that are used to monitor or transmit wind speed and wind
flow characteristics over a period of time for either instantaneous wind
information or to characterize the wind resource at a given location. For the
purpose of this article, "met towers" shall refer only to those whose purpose
is to analyze the environmental factors needed to assess the potential to
install, construct or erect a small wind energy system.
MODIFICATION — Any change to the small wind energy system that
materially alters the size, type or location of the small wind energy system.
Like-kind replacements shall not be construed to be a modification.
NET METERING — The difference between the electricity supplied to a
customer over the electric distribution system and the electricity generated
by the customer's small wind energy system that is fed back into the electric
distribution system over a billing period.
POWER GRID — The transmission system, managed by ISO New England,
created to balance the supply and demand of electricity for consumers in
New England.
SHADOW FLICKER — The visible flicker effect when rotating blades of the
wind generator cast shadows on the ground and nearby structures causing
a repeating pattern of light and shadow.
SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — A wind energy conversion system
consisting of a wind generator, a tower, and associated control or
conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity of 100 kilowatts or less
and will be used primarily for on-site consumption.
§ 334-120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-121
1:587
SYSTEM HEIGHT — The vertical distance from ground level to the tip of the
wind generator blade when it is at its highest point.
TOWER — The monopole, guyed monopole or lattice structure that supports
a wind generator.
TOWER HEIGHT — The height above grade of the fixed portion of the tower,
excluding the wind generator.
WIND GENERATOR — The blades and associated mechanical and electrical
conversion components mounted on top of the tower whose purpose is
to convert the kinetic energy of the wind into rotational energy used to
generate electricity.
§ 334-122. Procedure for review.
A. Building permit. Small wind energy systems and met towers are an
accessory use permitted in all zoning districts where structures of any
sort are allowed. No small wind energy system shall be erected,
constructed, or installed without first receiving a building permit from
the Building Inspector. A building permit shall be required for any
physical modification to an existing small wind energy system. Met
towers that receive a building permit shall be permitted on a temporary
basis not to exceed three years from the date the building permit was
issued. If an applicant plans to renew the met tower building permit, he/
she must apply for same at least four months prior to the
aforementioned three-year permit expiration.
B. Application. Applications submitted to the Building Inspector shall
include a certified plot plan, signed and stamped by a New Hampshire
licensed land surveyor, and said plan shall contain the following
information:
(1) Property lines and physical dimensions of the applicant's property.
(2) Location, dimensions, and types of existing major structures on the
property.
§ 334-121 HUDSON CODE § 334-122
1:588
§ 334-123. Standards.
The Building Inspector shall evaluate the application for compliance with
the following standards:
(3) Location of the proposed small wind energy system, foundations,
guy anchors and associated equipment.
(4) Tower foundation blueprints or drawings.
(5) Tower blueprints or drawings.
(6) Setback requirements as outlined in this article.
(7) The right-of-way of any public road that is contiguous with the
property.
(8) Any overhead utility lines.
(9) Small wind energy system specifications, including manufacturer,
model, rotor diameter, tower height, tower type, nameplate
generation capacity.
(10) Small wind energy systems that will be connected to the power grid
shall include a copy of the application for interconnection with their
electric utility provider.
(11) Sound level analysis prepared by the wind generator manufacturer
or qualified engineer.
(12) Electrical components in sufficient detail to allow for a
determination that the manner of installation conforms to the NH
State Building Code.
(13) Evidence of compliance or nonapplicability with Federal Aviation
Administration requirements.
(14) List of abutters to the applicant's property.
C. Abutter and regional notification. In accordance with RSA 674:66, the
Building Inspector shall notify all abutters and the local governing body
by certified mail upon application for a building permit to construct a
small wind energy system. The public will be afforded 30 days to submit
comments to the Building Inspector prior to the issuance of the building
permit. The Building Inspector shall review the application for regional
impacts per RSA 36:55. If the proposal is determined to have potential
regional impacts, the Building Inspector shall follow the procedures set
forth in RSA 36:57, IV. Note: Advertising and abutter mailing fees shall
be paid by the applicant at the time of application submission.
A. Setbacks. The setback shall be calculated by multiplying the minimum
setback requirement number by the system height as measured from
the center of the tower base to property line, public roads, or nearest
point on the foundation of an occupied building.
§ 334-122 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-123
1:589
Minimum Setback Requirements
Occupied
Buildings on
Participating
Landowner
Property
Occupied
Buildings on
Abutting
Property
Property Lines
of Abutting
Property and
Utility Lines Public Roads
0 1.5 1.1 1.5
(1) Small wind energy systems must meet all setbacks for principal
structures for the zoning district in which the system is located.
(2) Guy wires used to support the tower are exempt from the small
wind energy system setback requirements.
B. Tower. The maximum tower height shall not exceed 150 feet.
C. Sound level. The small wind energy system shall not exceed 60 decibels
using the A scale (dBA), as measured at the site property line, except
during short-term events such as severe wind storms and utility
outages.
D. Shadow flicker. Small wind energy systems shall be sited in a manner
that does not result in significant shadow flicker impacts. Significant
shadow flicker is defined as more than 30 hours per year on abutting
occupied buildings. The applicant has the burden of proving that the
shadow flicker will not have significant adverse impact on neighboring
or adjacent uses. Potential shadow flicker will be addressed either
through siting or mitigation measures.
E. Signs. All signs, including flags, streamers and decorative items, both
temporary and permanent, are prohibited on the small wind energy
system, except for manufacturer identification or appropriate warning
signs.
F. Code compliance. The small wind energy system shall comply with all
applicable sections of the New Hampshire State Building Code.
G. Aviation. The small wind energy system shall be built to comply with all
applicable Federal Aviation Administration regulations, including but
not limited to 14 CFR Part 77, Subpart B, regarding installations close
to airports, and the New Hampshire aviation regulations, including but
not limited to RSA 422-B and RSA 424.
H. Visual impacts. It is inherent that small wind energy systems may pose
some visual impacts due to the tower height needed to access wind
resources. The purpose of this subsection is to reduce the visual
impacts, without restricting the owner's access to the optimal wind
resources on the property.
(1) The applicant shall demonstrate through project site planning and
proposed mitigation that the small wind energy system's visual
§ 334-123 HUDSON CODE § 334-123
1:590
§ 334-124. Abandonment.
impacts will be minimized for surrounding neighbors and the
community. This may include, but not be limited to, information
regarding site selection, wind generator design or appearance,
buffering, and screening of ground-mounted electrical and control
equipment. All electrical conduits shall be underground, except
when the financial costs are prohibitive.
(2) The color of the small wind energy system shall either be the stock
color from the manufacturer or painted with a nonreflective,
unobtrusive color that blends in with the surrounding environment.
Approved colors include but are not limited to white, off-white or
gray.
(3) A small wind energy system shall not be artificially lit unless such
lighting is required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). If
lighting is required, the applicant shall provide a copy of the FAA
determination to establish the required markings and/or lights for
the small wind energy system.
I. Approved wind generators. The manufacturer and model of the wind
generator to be used in the proposed small wind energy system must
have been approved by the California Energy Commission or the New
York State Energy Research and Development Authority, or a similar list
approved by the State of New Hampshire, if available.
J. Utility connection. If the proposed small wind energy system is to be
connected to the power grid through net metering, it shall adhere to
RSA 362-A:9.
K. Access. The tower shall be designed and installed so as not to provide
step bolts or a ladder readily accessible to the public for a minimum
height of eight feet above the ground. All ground-mounted electrical
and control equipment shall be labeled and secured to prevent
unauthorized access.
L. Clearing. Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to that which is
necessary for the construction, operation and maintenance of the small
wind energy system and as otherwise prescribed by applicable laws,
regulations, and ordinances.
A. At such time that a small wind energy system is scheduled to be
abandoned or discontinued, the applicant will notify the Building
Inspector by certified U.S. mail of the proposed date of abandonment or
discontinuation of operations.
B. Upon abandonment or discontinuation of use, the owner shall
physically remove the small wind energy system within 90 days from
the date of abandonment or discontinuation of use. This period may be
extended at the request of the owner and at the discretion of the
§ 334-123 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 334-124
1:591
§ 334-125. Violations; preexisting systems.
It is unlawful for any person to construct, install, or operate a small wind
energy system that is not in compliance with this article. Small wind energy
systems installed prior to the adoption of this article are exempt from this
article except when modifications are proposed to the small wind energy
system.
§ 334-126. Violations and penalties.
Any person who fails to comply with any provision of this article or a
building permit issued pursuant to this article shall be subject to
enforcement and penalties as allowed by RSA 676:17.
Building Inspector. "Physically remove" shall include, but not be limited
to:
(1) Removal of the wind generator and tower and related above-grade
structures.
(2) Restoration of the location of the small wind energy system to its
natural condition, except that any landscaping, grading or belowgrade
foundation may remain in its same condition at initiation of
abandonment.
C. In the event that an applicant fails to give such notice, the system shall
be considered abandoned or discontinued if the system is out-of-service
for a continuous twelve-month period. After the 12 months of
inoperability, the Building Inspector may issue a notice of abandonment
to the owner of the small wind energy system. The owner shall have the
right to respond to the notice of abandonment within 30 days from
notice receipt date. After review of the information provided by the
owner, the Building Inspector shall determine if the small wind energy
system has been abandoned. If it is determined that the small wind
energy system has not been abandoned, the Building Inspector shall
withdraw the notice of abandonment and notify the owner of the
withdrawal.
D. If the owner fails to respond to the notice of abandonment or if, after
review by the Building Inspector, it is determined that the small wind
energy system has been abandoned or discontinued, the owner of the
small wind energy system shall remove the wind generator and tower at
the owner's sole expense within three months of receipt of the notice of
abandonment. If the owner fails to physically remove the small wind
energy system after the notice of abandonment procedure, the Building
Inspector may pursue legal action to have the small wind energy system
removed at the owner's expense.
§ 334-124 HUDSON CODE § 334-126
1:592
Appendix
Chapter A340
STREETS, INVENTORY OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Street numbering — See Ch. 281.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 284.
Streets in subdivisions — See Ch. 289.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 317.
§ A340-1. List of streets.
The following is a list of the streets in the Town of Hudson:
A Street
Abbott Street
Abbott Farm Lane
Able Street*
Adam Drive140
Adelaide Street
Allyson Drive141
Alpha Street
Alpine Avenue142
Alvirne Drive
Andrews Avenue
Anna Louise Drive143
Applewood Drive144
Ash Street
Aspen Street
Atwood Avenue
B Street
Baker Street
Balsam Way+
Bank Street
140. Editor's Note: Accepted 9-25-1990 by Res. No. R90-125.
141. Editor's Note: Accepted 11-11-2011.
142. Editor's Note: Accepted 3-12-1994 ATM by Art. 39.
143. Editor's Note: Accepted 9-25-1990 by Res. No. R90-112.
144. Editor's Note: Accepted 12-8-1998.
§ 334-126 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A340-1
1:593
Barretts Hill Road
Bay Street
Bear Path Lane145
Beaver Path*
Beech Street
Beechwood Road146
Belknap Road
Belknap Terrace
Birch Street
Birdie Lane
Blackfoot Lane+
Blackstone Street
Blueberry Lane
Bockes Road
Bolduc Way147
Bond Street
Bonnie Lane
Bonnie Heights Lane
Bosley Court+
Boulder Drive
Boyd Road
Bradford Circle148
Breakneck Road+
Brenton Avenue*
Bridle Bridge Road
Brightside Avenue*
Brightside Drive149
Brook Drive150
Brookfield Road
Bruce Street
Bungalow Avenue
145. Editor's Note: Accepted 2-8-2000.
146. Editor's Note: Accepted 8-28-1990 by Res. No. R90-93.
147. Editor's Note: Per Fire Department notice May 2018.
148. Editor's Note: Accepted 12-14-2004.
149. Editor's Note: Accepted 9-25-1990 by Res. No. R90-124.
150. Editor's Note: Accepted 10-9-1990 by Res. No. R90-122.
§ A340-1 HUDSON CODE § A340-1
1:594
Burnham Road
Burns Hill Road
Burton Street
Bush Hill Road
Buswell Street
Butternut Street
C Street
Caldwell Road
Campbell Avenue
Campbello Street151
Candy Lane152
Canna Path
Cape Drive
Cardinal Drive
Catalpa Drive153
Cathedral Lane154
Cayuga Street+
Cedar Street
Central Street
Chagnon Lane155
Chalifoux Road
Chapin Street
Charbonneau Drive
Charles Street
Chase Street
Chatham Street
Cheney Drive
Cherry Street156
Chestnut Street
Chippewa Lane+
Chiswick Road
151. Editor's Note: Accepted 4-14-1998.
152. Editor's Note: Accepted 12-11-1990 by Res. No. R90-152.
153. Editor's Note: Accepted 11-11-2011
154. Editor's Note: Accepted 3-12-1994 ATM by Art. 39.
155. Editor's Note: Designation amended 12-27-2011.
156. Editor's Note: Accepted 3-12-1994 ATM by Art. 39.
§ A340-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A340-1
1:595
Christine Drive157
Circle Drive
Clark Street
Clement Road
Cliff Avenue
Clifton Street
Coll Street
Colson Road
Comanche Lane+
Commercial Street
Connell Street
Constitution Drive158
Copeland Drive159
Copper Hill Road160
Cottonwood Drive
County Road
Cove Point Road+
Crestwood Drive161
Cross Street
Cummings Street
Cutler Road
D Street
Demery Road
Dana Drive+
Daniel Webster Drive
Davenport Road*
David Drive162
Daw Street
Deblo Drive163
157. Editor's Note: Accepted 12-30-1991 by Res. No. R91-113.
158. Editor's Note: A portion of said street was accepted 9-15-1998. Acceptance included only
the portion of Constitution Drive to the end of the lot on which the police station sits. The
remainder of the road was accepted 11-13-2007.
159. Editor's Note: Accepted 12-19-1995.
160. Editor's Note: Accepted 12-12-2006. The acceptance of Cottage Avenue, which
immediately followed this entry, was repealed 12-27-2011.
161. Editor's Note: Accepted 12-8-1998.
162. Editor's Note: Accepted 9-25-1990 by Res. No. R90-121.
163. Editor's Note: Accepted 9-25-1990 by Res. No. R90-123.
§ A340-1 HUDSON CODE § A340-1
1:596
Deerfield Avenue
Deer Run*
Delilah Way+
Dell Drive
Derek Way+
Derry Lane164
Derry Street 1 - 200 (State road from 120 - 200)
Derry Street 200 - 360 (State road)*
Dracut Road (State road)
Dugout Road
Dumont Road
E Street
Eagle Drive165
East Hill Drive*
Easy Street
Eayrs Pond Road 166
Edgar Centre
Edgewood Drive167
Edward Lane+
Elaine Street
Elder Street168
Elm Avenue
Empire Circle169
Essex Avenue170
Evergreen Drive171
Executive Drive172
F Street
Fairway Drive
Falcon Drive173
164. Editor's Note: The portion of said street between Elm Avenue North to the Town line was
renamed Derry Road 5-12-1998.
165. Editor's Note: Accepted 12-13-1985.
166. Editor's Note: Accepted 3-13-1993 ATM by Art. 22.
167. Editor's Note: Accepted 3-12-1994 ATM by Art. 39.
168. Editor's Note: Accepted 3-12-1994 ATM by Art. 39.
169. Editor's Note: Accepted 11-10-2014.
170. Editor's Note: Amended 12-22-2015.
171. Editor's Note: Accepted 3-12-1994 ATM by Art. 39.
172. Editor's Note: Accepted 11-28-1989 by Res. No. R89-92.
§ A340-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A340-1
1:597
Farmington Drive174
Federal Street
Ferry Avenue
Ferry Street
Fir Lane
First Street
Flagstone Drive 175
Flying Rock Road176
Forest Circle177
Forest Road178
Fox Hollow Drive+
Frenette Drive
Friars Drive179
Fuller Drive
Fulton Street
Gabrielle Drive180
Gambia Street
Garrison Farm Road181
Gates Lane182
George Street
Gibson Road
Gillis Street
Gillis Street Extension183
Glen Drive
Glenview Drive184
Gloria Avenue
Glover Brook Road185
173. Editor's Note: Accepted 3-12-1994 ATM by Art. 39.
174. Editor's Note: Accepted 8-28-2001.
175. Editor's Note: Accepted 3-13-1993 ATM by Art. 22.
176. Editor's Note: Accepted 11-23-2004.
177. Editor's Note: Accepted 9-17-1991 by Res. No. R91-78.
178. Editor's Note: Accepted 9-17-1991 by Res. No. R91-79.
179. Editor's Note: Accepted 1-26-1999.
180. Editor's Note: Accepted 11-12-2002.
181. Editor's Note: Accepted 4-14-1998.
182. Editor's Note: Accepted 12-13-2005.
183. Editor's Note: Accepted 9-25-1990 by Res. No. R90-113.
184. Editor's Note: Accepted 4-27-1992 by Res. No. R92-61.
§ A340-1 HUDSON CODE § A340-1
1:598
Gordon Street
Gowing Road
Grace Drive
Grand Avenue)
Granite Hill Road186
Greeley Street
Greenfield Drive
Greentrees Drive
Gregory Street*
Griffin Road
Grigas Street
Groves Farm Road
Gulf Street187
Hamblett Avenue
Hampshire Drive 188
Hardy Road+
Hartson Circle189
Harvest View Circle190
Harwood Road191
Haverhill Street
Hawkview Road
Hayley Court192
Hayward Place
Hazelwood Road
Hemlock Street
Henry Drive
Heritage Circle
Heron Pond Way+
Hickory Street
185. Editor's Note: Accepted 10-24-1995.
186. Editor's Note: Accepted 11-25-2003.
187. Editor's Note: Accepted 1978 ATM.
188. Editor's Note: Accepted 3-13-1993 ATM by Art. 22.
189. Editor's Note: Accepted 1983 ATM.
190. Editor's Note: Accepted 8-28-2001.
191. Editor's Note: Designation amended 12-27-2011.
192. Editor's Note: Hayley Court was accepted 9-25-2001, with the provision that the Town's
Highway Department will not maintain the green space in Pond View Estates.
§ A340-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A340-1
1:599
Highland Avenue
Highland Street
High Pine Drive193
Hilindale Drive194
Hillside Drive
Hill Street
Hilltop Drive*
Holly Lane
Hopkins Drive
Howard Drive+
Hudson Hills Drive195
Hummingbird Lane196
Hunter Lane
Hurley Street
Industrial Drive
Ireland Street197
Iris Path
Ironwood Road198
Jackson Drive
Jacqueline Street
James Way
James Way (Map 320/Lot 22)199
Jarry Way+
Jeanne Street
Jefferson Drive
Jeremy Lane
Jessica Lane200
Joan Avenue201
Joseph Avenue
193. Editor's Note: Accepted 10-27-1998.
194. Editor's Note: Accepted 3-13-1993 ATM by Art. 22.
195. Editor's Note: Accepted 10-28-2008.
196. Editor's Note: Accepted 10-23-2001.
197. Editor's Note: Accepted 3-12-1994 ATM by Art. 39.
198. Editor's Note: Accepted 8-28-1990 by Res. No. R90-96.
199. Editor's Note: Accepted 12-11-2007.
200. Editor's Note: Accepted 3-28-1995 pursuant to a public hearing held 2-14-1995.
201. Editor's Note: Accepted 11-25-1997.
§ A340-1 HUDSON CODE § A340-1
1:600
Julie Lane202
Jump Lane203
Juniper Street
Kara's Crossing Drive204
Kay Court205
Kenyon Street
Kestral Lane206
Kienia Road207
Kimball Hill Road 1 - 31 (State road)*
Kimball Hill Road 32 - 151
Kingston Way208
Kris Court209
Lakeside Avenue210
Lampron Road211
Lampron Street
Lawrence Road
Leaor Circle212
Ledge Road
Lemens Way*
Lenny Lane213
Leonard Avenue
Leslie Street
Library Street
Lilac Street214
Lily Center
202. Editor's Note: Accepted 9-23-1991 pursuant to Res. No. R91-29.
203. Editor's Note: Accepted 2-8-2000.
204. Editor's Note: Accepted 5-10-2011.
205. Editor's Note: Kay Court was accepted 9-25-2001, with the provision that the Town's
Highway Department will not maintain the green space in Pond View Estates.
206. Editor's Note: A portion of Kestral Lane was accepted 9-17-1991 by Res. No. R91-60.
207. Editor's Note: A portion of Kienia Road was accepted 9-23-1991 by Res. No. R91-30.
208. Editor's Note: Accepted 2-4-1991 by Res. No. R91-03.
209. Editor's Note: Kris Court was accepted 9-25-2001, with the provision that the Town's
Highway Department will not maintain the green space in Pond View Estates.
210. Editor's Note: Accepted 3-13-1993 ATM by Art. 22.
211. Editor's Note: Accepted 9-18-1990 by Res. No. R90-97.
212. Editor's Note: Accepted 11-13-2007.
213. Editor's Note: A portion of Lenny Lane was accepted 9-23-1991 by Res. No. R91-32.
214. Editor's Note: Accepted 3-13-1993 ATM by Art. 22.
§ A340-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A340-1
1:601
Linda Street
Linden Street215
Lindsay Street
Lions Avenue
Little Hale's Lane216
Locust Street
Lorraine Street
Lovewell Street
Lowell Road
Lucier Park Drive217
Lund Drive*
MacCann Road218
Madison Drive
Magnolia Street
Mallard Drive219
Manny Court220
Mansfield Drive+
Maple Avenue
Marie Lane221
Mark Street
Marsh Road
Marshall Street
Marshmallow Path
Maureen Lane222
Maywood Street
McCrady Drive
McKinney Drive223
Meadow Drive
Meadowlark Drive
215. Editor's Note: Accepted 5-13-1991 by Res. No. R91-38.
216. Editor's Note: Accepted 3-12-1994 ATM by Art. 39.
217. Editor’s Note: Adopted 11-13-2018.
218. Editor's Note: Accepted 11-23-2004.
219. Editor's Note: Accepted 3-12-1994 ATM by Art. 39.
220. Editor's Note: Manny Court was accepted 9-25-2001, with the provision that the Town's
Highway Department will not maintain the green space in Pond View Estates.
221. Editor's Note: A portion of Marie Lane was accepted 9-23-1991 by Res. No. R91-31.
222. Editor's Note: Accepted 3-13-1993 ATM by Art. 22.
223. Editor's Note: Accepted 12-30-1991 by Res. No. R91-115.
§ A340-1 HUDSON CODE § A340-1
1:602
Megan Drive224
Melba Drive225
Melendy Road
Memorial Drive
Merrill Street
Merrimack Street
Mockingbird Lane226
Monroe Street
Moose Hill Road227
Morrill Lane+
Mountain View Drive228
Muldoon Drive
Musquash Road
Nathanial Drive229
Navaho Lane+
Nellie Court230
Nevens Street
Newland Avenue
Newport Drive+
Newton Street
Nobby Lane231
Noel Street
North Ridge Road232
Nottingham Street
Oak Avenue
Oakwood Street
Oban Drive233
Old Coach Road234
224. Editor's Note: Accepted 12-14-1999.
225. Editor's Note: Accepted 1-8-1991 by Res. No. R90-157.
226. Editor's Note: Said street was renamed from Mockingbird Drive to Mockingbird Lane
5-12-1999.
227. Editor's Note: Accepted 9-12-2017.
228. Editor's Note: Accepted 9-17-1991 by Res. No. R91-59.
229. Editor's Note: Accepted 3-28-1995 pursuant to a public hearing held 2-14-1995.
230. Editor's Note: Accepted 11-24-2015.
231. Editor's Note: Accepted 3-13-1993 ATM by Art. 22.
232. Editor's Note: Accepted 11-25-2003.
233. Editor's Note: Accepted 12-17-1996.
§ A340-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A340-1
1:603
Old Derry Road
Old Landfill Road235
Oliver Drive
Page Road
Paget Drive*
Paradise Lane236
Park Avenue
Parker Drive
Parkhurst Drive*
Par Lane
Pasture Drive237
Patricia Drive238
Paula Circle239
Pelham Road
Philbrick Street
Phillips Drive
Pinedale Avenue
Pine Road
Pinewood Drive240
Pinewood Road241
Plaza Drive*
Plaza Avenue242
Pleasant Street
Ponderosa Drive
Porter Avenue
Potter Road243
Power Street
Prince Drive*
234. Editor's Note: Accepted 2-8-2005.
235. Editor's Note: Accepted 8-7-1990 by Res. No. R90-91.
236. Editor's Note: Accepted 2-8-2000.
237. Editor's Note: A portion of Pasture Drive was accepted 9-17-1991 by Res. No. R91-61.
238. Editor's Note: Accepted 9-17-1991 by Res. No. R91-77.
239. Editor's Note: Accepted 12-12-2006.
240. Editor's Note: Accepted 8-28-1990 by Res. No. R90-95.
241. Editor's Note: Accepted 3-13-1993 ATM by Art. 22.
242. Editor's Note: Accepted 3-13-1993 ATM by Art. 22.
243. Editor's Note: Accepted 3-13-1993 ATM by Art. 22.
§ A340-1 HUDSON CODE § A340-1
1:604
Pulpit Circle244
Putnam Road
Radcliffe Drive
Rangers Drive245
Raven Drive 246
Rayes Drive
Raymond Street
Rebel Road247
Redwood Drive*
Redwood Road248
Reed Street
Rega Avenue
Regina Avenue
Rena Avenue
Rhona Street
Richman Drive
Rickey Drive
Ridge Avenue
Ridgecrest Drive
Rita Avenue
River Road 1 – 34 (State road)*
River Road 35 – 100
Riverside Drive
Riverview Street
Robin Drive249
Robinson Pond Drive+
Robinson Road
Robo Drive*
Rolling Woods Drive250
Roosevelt Avenue
Rose Drive
244. Editor's Note: Accepted 3-28-1995 pursuant to a public hearing held 2-14-1995.
245. Editor's Note: Accepted 3-12-1994 ATM by Art. 39.
246. Editor's Note: Accepted 3-12-1994 ATM by Art. 39.
247. Editor's Note: Accepted 12-11-1990 by Res. No. R90-153.
248. Editor's Note: Accepted 11-14-1995.
249. Editor's Note: Accepted 3-12-1994 ATM by Art. 39.
250. Editor’s Note: Adopted 10-23-2018.
§ A340-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A340-1
1:605
Rosemary Court251
Roy Drive252
Ruskin Avenue*
Sagamore Bridge Road (State road)*
Sagamore Park Road
St. Anthony Drive253
St. Francis Place254
St. John Street
St. Laurent Drive 255
St. Mary Drive256
Sandalwood Road257
Sanders Road
Sand Hill Road
Savin Street
Scenic Lane258
Schaeffer Circle259
School Street
Second Street
Security Drive260
Senter Farm Road261
Serenity Circle262
Shawnee Lane+
Sheffield Street263
Shelley Drive264
Shelly Drive*
251. Editor's Note: Rosemary Court was accepted 9-25-2001, with the provision that the Town's
Highway Department will not maintain the green space in Pond View Estates.
252. Editor's Note: Accepted 3-13-1993 ATM by Art. 22.
253. Editor's Note: Accepted 11-25-1997.
254. Editor's Note: Accepted 11-25-1997.
255. Editor's Note: Accepted 3-13-1993 ATM by Art. 22.
256. Editor's Note: Accepted 11-25-1997.
257. Editor's Note: Accepted 3-13-1993 ATM by Art. 22.
258. Editor's Note: Accepted 10-28-2008.
259. Editor's Note: Accepted 9-25-1990 by Res. No. R90-111.
260. Editor's Note: Accepted 4-27-1992 by Res. No. R92-60.
261. Editor's Note: Accepted 11-10-2014.
262. Editor's Note: Accepted 12-12-2006.
263. Editor's Note: Accepted 11-14-2006.
264. Editor's Note: Accepted 1-27-1992 by Res. No. R91-130.
§ A340-1 HUDSON CODE § A340-1
1:606
Sheraton Drive265
Sherburne Road
Shingle Mill Road
Shoreline Drive266
Short Street
Sir Isaac Way267
Smith Road+
Somerset Drive268
Sousa Boulevard269
Speare Road
Spruce Street
Stable Drive270
Stanley Avenue
State Street
Steele Road
Stevens Drive
Stonemill Drive+
Stonewood Drive
Stonewood Lane271
Stoney Lane
Stuart Street
Sullivan Road
Summer Avenue
Sunflower Path
Sunland Drive
Sunrise Drive
Sunshine Drive272
Sutherland Drive273
265. Editor's Note: Accepted 9-23-1991 by Res. No. R91-90.
266. Editor's Note: Accepted 10-28-2008.
267. Editor's Note: Accepted 11-25-2003.
268. Editor's Note: Accepted 4-27-1992 by Res. No. R92-62.
269. Editor's Note: Sousa Boulevard was accepted 9-25-2001, with the provision that the Town's
Highway Department will not maintain the green space in Pond View Estates.
270. Editor's Note: Accepted 2-8-2005.
271. Editor's Note: Accepted 3-13-1993 ATM by Art. 22.
272. Editor's Note: Accepted 12-12-2006.
273. Editor's Note: Sutherland Drive was accepted 9-25-2001, with the provision that the
Town's Highway Department will not maintain the green space in Pond View Estates.
§ A340-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A340-1
1:607
Sycamore Street
Tamarack Street
Tate Street
Tear Drop Circle274
Telolian Drive*
Temple Street+
Terra Lane275
Tessier Street
Third Street
Thorning Road
Thurston's Drive276
Tiger Road+
Tiger Road277
Timber Lane278
Timothy Lane
Tolles Street
Towhee Drive
Tracy Lane279
Travers Street
Trigate Road
Twin Meadow Drive*
Underhill Street+
Vernon Street
Village Common Loop280
Vinton Street
Virginia Drive
Wade Road
Wagner Way
Walker Road+
Wall Street+281
274. Editor's Note: Accepted 1-26-1999.
275. Editor's Note: Accepted 8-28-1990 by Res. No. R90-94.
276. Editor's Note: Accepted 11-23-1999.
277. Editor's Note: Accepted 2-10-1992 by Res. No. R92-03.
278. Editor's Note: Accepted 3-12-1994 ATM by Art. 39.
279. Editor's Note: Accepted 12-11-1990 by Res. No. R90-151.
280. Editor's Note: Village Common Loop was accepted 9-25-2001, with the provision that the
Town's Highway Department will not maintain the green space in Pond View Estates.
§ A340-1 HUDSON CODE § A340-1
1:608
Walnut Street282
Washington Drive
Washington Street Extension283
Wason Road
Waterlily Path
Watersedge Drive284
Water Street
Watts Circle285
Wayne Street
Webster Street 1 - 177
Webster Street 177 - 301 (State road)*
Wende Drive
Wentworth Drive286
West Road
Whip-Poor-Will Drive
Williams Drive287
Wildwood Terrace288
Willow Creek Drive+
Willow Street
Windham Road289
Winding Hollow Road*
Winn Avenue
Winnhaven Drive
Winslow Farm Road 290
Wissahickson Drive291
281. Editor's Note: Approximately 600 feet of Wall Street, bordering lots 18-9 and 18-10, was
accepted as a Town Road by the Board of Selectmen 10-8-2013,
282. Editor's Note: The portion of Walnut Street, located from Eayers Pond Road heading
southeast approximately 750 linear feet to and including the T turnaround located within
Normand Street [as recorded in Hillsborough County Registry of Deeds (HCRD) Plan No.
23908], was accepted as a Town street 11-28-1989 by Res. No. R89-93.
283. Editor's Note: Accepted 10-14-1997.
284. Editor's Note: Accepted 3-13-1993 ATM by Art. 22.
285. Editor's Note: Designation amended 12-27-2011.
286. Editor's Note: The portion of Wentworth Drive from Executive Drive southeast 700 linear
feet was accepted 11-28-1989 by Res. No. R89-92; the entire length of said street was
accepted 3-13-1993 ATM by Art. 22.
287. Editor's Note: Accepted 3-13-1993 ATM by Art. 22.
288. Editor's Note: Accepted 9-23-1991 by Res. No. R91-89.
289. Editor's Note: Accepted 1983 ATM.
290. Editor's Note: Accepted 12-30-1991 by Res. No. R91-116.
291. Editor's Note: Accepted 3-12-1994 ATM by Art. 39.
§ A340-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A340-1
1:609
Woodcrest Avenue Extension292
Woodcrest Drive
Woodland Drive293
Woodridge Drive
Wyeth Drive
York Road294
Youngs Drive
NOTES:
*Unaccepted streets
+Class VI, private or proposed streets.
292. Editor's Note: Accepted 12-30-1991 by Res. No. R91-114.
293. Editor's Note: Accepted 2-11-2003.
294. Editor’s Note: Adopted 10-23-2018.
§ A340-1 HUDSON CODE § A340-1
1:610

ZONING
334 Attachment 4
Town of Hudson
Table of Minimum Dimensional Requirements
Zoning District
R-1 R-2 TR B I G G-1
Minimum lot area
(square feet)
With Town
water and
sewer
30,000 43,560 10,000 30,000
30,000 43,560 87,120
Without Town
water or sewer
43,560 60,000
(43,560
for singlefamily)
10,0001
43,560 43,560 43,560 87,120
Minimum lot
frontage (linear
feet)
Local
roadways with
Town water
and sewer
120 120 90 150 150 150 200
Arterial and
collector
150 150 90 150 150 150 200
Building setback
requirements
(front/side/rear, in
feet)
Arterial and
collector
roadways
50/15/15 50/15/15 30/15/15 50/15/15 50/15/15 50/15/15 50/15/15
Local
roadways
30/15/15 30/15/15 30/15/15 50/15/15 50/15/15 30/15/15 30/15/15
Notes:
1 Must obtain proper state/municipal permits.
2 Multifamily developments with both Town water and sewer shall require 53,560 square
feet of buildable lot area for the building of three attached dwelling units of a multifamily
complex, with each additional dwelling unit requiring a minimum of 5,000 square feet of
additional buildable lot area.
334 Attachment 4:1 11 - 01 - 2010