Chapter 1.04 General Provisions
Sections
1.04.010 Definitions
1.04.020 Interpretation of language
1.04.030 Grammatical interpretation
1.04.040 Acts by agents
1.04.050 Prohibited acts include causing and permitting
1.04.060 Computation of time
1.04.070 Construction
1.04.080 Repeal shall not revive any ordinances

1.04.010 Definitions
The following words and phrases, whenever used in the ordinances of the town of Milford, shall be construed as defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases:

“Town” means the town of Milford, or the area within the territorial limits of the city, and such territory outside the town over which the town has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision.
“Town Board” means the board of selectmen of the town of Milford.
“County” means the county of Hillsborough.
“Law” denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the state of New Hampshire, the ordinances of the town, and when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated there under.
“May” is permissive.
“Month” means a calendar month.
“Must” and “shall” are each mandatory.
“Oath” includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the words “affirm” and “affirmed.”
“Owner,” applied to a building or land, means and includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land.
“Person” means and includes a natural person, joint venture, Joint Stock Company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them.
“Personal property” means and includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt.
“Preceding” and “following” mean next before and next after, respectively.
“Property” means and includes real and personal property.
“Real property” means and includes lands, tenements and hereditament.
“Sidewalk” means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
“State” means the state of New Hampshire.
“Street” means and includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, or other public ways in the town which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state.
“Tenant” and “occupant,” applied to a building or land, mean and include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
“Written” means and includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed, multi-graphed, or otherwise reproduced in permanent visible form.
“Year” means a calendar year. (Ord. 4-23-01 (general provisions) §1)
1.04.020 Interpretation of language
All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and approve meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. (Ord. 4-23-01 (general provisions) § 2)

1.04.030 Grammatical interpretation
The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the city unless it is apparent from the context that a different construction is intended:

Gender. Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter genders.
Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular.
Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. (Ord. 4-23-01 (general provisions) § 3)
1.04.040 Acts by agents
When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent as the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent. (Ord. 4-23-0 1 (general provisions) § 4)

1.04.050 Prohibited acts include causing and permitting
Whenever in the ordinances of the town any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing the fact of such act or omission. (Ord. 4-23-01 (general provisions) § 5)

1.04.060 Computation of time
Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is Sunday or a holiday, in which case it shall also be excluded. (Ord. 4-23-01 (general provisions) § 6)

1.04.070 Construction
The provisions of the ordinances of the town, and all proceedings under them, are to be construed with a view to affect their objects and to promote justice. (Ord. 4-23-01 (general provisions) § 7)

1.04.080 Repeal shall not revive any ordinances
The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. (Ord. 4-23-01 (general provisions) § 8)

Chapter 1.08 Penalties for Planning & Zoning Violations
Sections:
1.08.010 Violation—Penalty [Repealed, January 10, 2011]
1.08.020 Recovery of costs [Repealed, January 10, 2011]
1.08.030 Additional civil penalty [Repealed, January 10, 2011]

1.08.010 Violation—Penalty
(Ord. 2010-015, 01-10-11 – repealed; Ord. 4-23-01 (planning/zoning penalty) § 1)

1.08.020 Recovery of costs
(Ord. 2010-015, 01-10-11 – repealed; Ord. 1-13-86 § 2)

1.08.030 Additional civil penalty
(Ord. 2010-015, 01-10-11 – repealed; Ord. 1-13-86 § 3)

Chapter 1.12 General Penalty
Sections:
1.12.010 General penalty

1.12.010 General penalty
Except in cases where a different punishment is prescribed by any ordinance of the town, any violation of a town by law or ordinance is punishable by a civil penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Ord. 4-23-01 (part))

Title 2 Administration and Personnel
Chapter 2.04 Office of Emergency Management
Sections
2.04.010       Short title
2.04.020       Intent and purpose
2.04.030       Definitions
2.04.040       Organization and appointments
2.04.050       Emergency powers and duties
2.04.060       Emergency management basic plan
2.04.070       No municipal or private liability
2.04.080       Violation of regulations
2.04.090       Penalty
2.04.100       Severability
2.04.110       Conflicting ordinances, orders, rules and regulations suspended
2.04.120       Effective date
2.04.130       Ordinance in force

2.04.010   Short title
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the “Emergency Management Ordinance of the Town of Milford.” (Ord. 5-1-03 § 1)

2.04.020  Intent and purpose

It is the intent and the purpose of this chapter to establish an office that will ensure the complete and efficient utilization of all of Milford’s facilities and resources to combat a disaster, as defined herein.
The Milford Office of Emergency Management will be the coordinating agency for all activity in connection with emergency planning. It will be the instrument through which the Town officials may exercise the authority and discharge the responsibilities vested in them in NH RSA, Chapter 21-P:39 Local Organization for Emergency Management, state of New Hampshire, Emergency Management Act, as amended, and this chapter.
This ordinance will not relieve any town department of the responsibilities or authority given to it in the town charter or by town ordinance; nor will it adversely affect the work of any volunteer agency organized for relief in disaster emergencies. (Ord. 5-1-03 § 2)
2.04.030  Definitions
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation of this chapter

“Attack” means a direct or indirect assault against the town of Milford, its government, its environs, its citizens, or its resources; or of the state of New Hampshire; or the United States of America, including but not limited to the use of, or threatened use of: explosives; radiological, biological or chemical agents; armed assault; or acts of sabotage.
“Chairperson” means the chairperson of the board of selectmen of the town of Milford.
“Director” means the director of the Milford Office of Emergency Management.
“Disaster” includes, but is not limited to, actual, perceived or threatened; attack, terrorism, sabotage, extraordinary fire, flood, storm, epidemic, or other impending or actual calamity which may endanger, or threaten to endanger the health, life, property, resources, or government of the town of Milford, the state of New Hampshire, or the United States of America.
“Emergency management” means, in its broad connotation, to carry out the basic government functions of maintaining the public peace, health, and safety during a disaster. This shall include the plans, preparations, and resources for protection, relief, recovery and rehabilitation from, such incidents as are outlined in this chapter. Emergency management shall not however, include any activity that is the primary responsibility of the military forces of the United State of America.
“Emergency management basic plan” means a comprehensive plan, including annexes, prepared by the Office of Emergency Management and designed to provide guidelines for the carrying out of emergency management activities. Herein referred to as “the Plan”.
“Emergency response resources” means the employees, equipment, and facilities of all of the town departments, boards, institutions, and commissions; and, in addition, it shall include all volunteer personnel, equipment, and facilities contributed by, or obtained from, volunteer persons, companies, or agencies
“Emergency volunteer” means any person duly registered, identified, and appointed by the Director of the Office of Emergency Management and assigned to participate in the emergency management effort.
“Epidemic” refers to a prevalent and rapidly spreading illness or disease, regardless of cause, which affects, or threatens to affect, a significant number of citizens.
“The plan” refers to the Emergency Management Basic Plan.
“Regulations” include all of the plans, programs, and other procedures as may be deemed essential to the function of emergency management and the Office of Emergency Management.
“Terrorism” means any act, whether actual or threatened, and whether committed by one or more persons acting alone or in connection with any group or organization, wherein, the unlawful use of force or violence; against persons or property; to intimidate or coerce a government, the civilian population, or any segment thereof; in furtherance of political or social objectives.
“Terrorist” means the actor(s) of terrorism, as defined in this chapter, including the supporters of, by whatever means, such acts or actor(s).
“Volunteer” Shall mean contributing a service, equipment, or facilities to the emergency management effort, without remuneration. (Ord. 5-1-03 § 3)
2.04.040  Organization and appointments

The Chairperson of the Board of Selectmen is hereby authorized and directed to create an organization for Emergency Management utilizing to the fullest extent the existing agencies and resources from within the community. The Chairperson, as executive head of the municipal government, shall be responsible for the organization, administration, and operation of the Town’s Emergency Response Resources.
 The organization shall consist of the following:
An Office of Emergency Management within the executive branch of the town government and under the direction of the chairperson. There shall be an executive head of the Office of Emergency Management who shall be known as the director, as well as such assistants and other employees and volunteers as are deemed necessary for the proper functioning of the organization.
The employees, volunteers, equipment and facilities of Milford’s departments, boards, institutions and commissions will cooperate and participate in emergency management activity. Duties assigned to a town entity shall be the same, or similar thereto, the normal duties and functions of such entity, to the extent deemed reasonable and possible.
Volunteers, as defined, who are accepted by the town to provide services, equipment, or facilities.
The Board of Selectmen shall appoint a Director of the Office of Emergency Management who shall be a person well versed and trained in planning and organizing operations involving the activities of many different agencies which will operate in concert to protect the public health, safety and welfare in the event of disaster, as defined by this Chapter.
The Chairperson shall designate and appoint a person or persons to assume the emergency duties of the Chairperson in the event of his/her absence or inability to act. The intent being a representative of the Board of Selectmen will always and at all times be in charge of the Town. (Ord. 5-1-03 § 4)
2.04.050  Emergency powers and duties
A. Chairperson

The chairperson may exercise the emergency power and authority necessary to fulfill his/her general powers and duties. The judgment of the chairperson shall be the sole criteria necessary to invoke the emergency powers provided in the town charter, the ordinance code, and other appropriate authorities.
During any period when disaster threatens to strike or has struck the town, within the definition of this chapter, the board of selectmen may promulgate such regulations as they deem necessary to protect life and property, preserve critical resources, and provide protection, relief, recovery and rehabilitation from such disaster. Such regulations may include, but are not limited to, the following:
a. Prohibiting, restricting, or directing the movement of vehicles in order to facilitate the work of emergency management, or to facilitate the mass movement of persons from or to critical areas within or without the town.

b. Prohibiting, restricting, or directing the movement of persons as may be deemed necessary.

c. Such other regulations as may be deemed necessary to affect the emergency management effort.

d. Regulations promulgated in accordance with the provisions of this section will be given widespread circulation by proclamations, published and uttered, by all reasonable means, to include as available and timely; television, radio, newspapers, internet, mailing, and public posting. These regulations shall have the force of ordinance upon filing with the town clerk, and violations will be subject to the appropriate penalties by law.

The chairperson, or his/her designee in the event of his/her absence or inability to act, shall order the Office of Emergency Management to the aid of other communities when required in accordance with the statutes of the state of New Hampshire. The chairperson, or his/her designee in the event of his/her absence or inability to act, through the Office of Emergency Management, may request of the state, or a political subdivision of the state, to send aid to the town of Milford in case of disaster when conditions in the town are beyond the control and/or resources of the town’s emergency response resources.
The chairperson, or his/her designee in the event of his/her absence or inability to act, may obtain vital supplies, equipment, personnel and other resources found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property, preserving critical resources, and providing protection, relief, recovery and rehabilitation of the people, and may bind the town for the fair value thereof.
The chairperson, or his/her designee in the event of his/her absence or inability to act, may require the emergency services of any town officer or employee. If regular town forces are deemed inadequate, the chairperson, or his/her designee in the event of his/her absence or inability to act, may require the services of such other personnel as can be obtained, including citizen volunteers. All duly authorized persons rendering emergency services shall be entitled to the privileges and immunities as are provided by state law, the town charter and other ordinances for regular town employees and other registered and identified emergency management and disaster workers and, upon demand, may receive appropriate compensation for their emergency employment.
The board of selectmen will cause to be prepared the basic emergency management plan. The board of selectmen will exercise all of their ordinary powers as the board of selectmen, all of the special powers conferred upon them by any statute or ordinance or any other lawful authority.
B.Director

The director, or his/her designee in the event of his/her absence or inability to act, shall be responsible to the chairperson, or his/her designee in the event of his/her absence or inability to act, in regard to all phases of the emergency management activity. Under the direction of the chairperson, or his/her designee in the event of his/her absence or inability to act, the director shall be responsible for the planning, training, coordination, implementation, and operation of all emergency management activity in the town.
Under the direction of the chairperson, the director shall maintain a liaison with the state and federal authorities, the authorities of other nearby political subdivision of the state, and local department heads as to ensure the most effective implementation of the plan.
The director’s duties shall include, but not be limited to the following:
a. Coordinate the recruitment and training of volunteer personnel and agencies to augment the personnel and resources of the town for emergency management; and

b.Develop and coordinate plans for the immediate use of facilities and resources for the protection of life and property, preserving critical resources, and providing protection, relief, recovery and rehabilitation of the people for the public health, safety, and welfare; and

c. Negotiate and conclude agreements with owners or persons in control of facilities and resources for the use of such facilities and resources, as may be deemed necessary, for the purposes of emergency management, and to designate such facilities as may be suitable as public shelters, reception centers, and rehabilitation centers; and

d. Perform public information activities to inform and educate the civilian population of the town as to the actions necessary and required for the protection of their persons and property in case of disaster, as defined herein; and

e.Conduct training and practice exercises to ensure the efficient operation of the emergency response resources and to familiarize the emergency response resources and the public with emergency management regulations, responsibilities, procedures and operations; and

f. Coordinate the activities of all other public and private agencies engaged in emergency management activity; and

g. Assume such authority and conduct such activity as the chairperson may direct to promote and exercise the Plan. (Ord. 5-1-03 § 5)

2.04.060   Emergency management basic plan

A comprehensive emergency management basic plan, herein the “plan”, shall be adopted and maintained by the resolution of the board of selectmen upon the recommendation of the chairperson and the director. In preparing this plan for the town of Milford, it is the intent that the services, equipment, facilities, personnel, and resources of all departments and agencies shall be utilized to the fullest extent. When approved, it shall be the duty of all of the town’s departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned to them by the plan. It shall also be the responsibility of all of the town’s departments and agencies to maintain their respective departments and agencies in a current state of readiness at all times. Each department and agency shall review, modify, and update as necessary, their respective sections of the Plan annually. The plan shall be considered a supplement of this chapter and, is hereby proclaimed.
The chairperson shall prescribe in the plan, those positions within the disaster organization, in addition to his/her own, for which lines of succession are necessary. In each instance, the responsible person will designate and keep on file with the selectmen’s office and the Office of Emergency Management, a current list of three (3) persons as successors to his/her position. The list will be in order of succession and will as nearly as possible, designate persons best capable of carrying out all of the assigned duties and functions.
Each service chief, department head, and individual assigned responsibility in the plan shall be responsible for carrying out all duties and functions assigned therein. Duties will include the organization and training of assigned employees and volunteers. Each service chief, department head, and individual assigned responsibility in the plan shall formulate the operational plan for their respective function which, when approved, shall be made an annex to, and a part of, the plan.
Amendments to the plan shall be submitted to the board of selectmen. If approved, such amendments shall take effect immediately upon approval. In the event an amendment is pending at the time that a disaster is proclaimed, under provisions of this chapter, the amendment will be considered approved immediately, and will remain in effect unless specifically revoked.
When a required competency or skill for a disaster function is not available within the emergency response resources, the chairperson, or his/her designee in the event of his/her absence or inability to act, is authorized to seek assistance from persons, companies or agencies outside of the emergency response resources. The assignment of duties to outside persons, companies or agencies, when of a supervisory nature, shall also grant authority to the persons so assigned to carry out such duties prior to, during, and after the occurrence of a disaster. The chairperson, or his/her designee in the event his/her absence or inability to act, may accept such services by persons outside of government on a volunteer basis. Such persons shall be enrolled as emergency volunteers in cooperation with the heads of the affected town departments.
Some of the duties ascribed to the chairperson in this chapter will ordinarily be handled as a matter of routine by the director, but the responsibility and authority stem from and remain with the chairperson.
As its title so clearly denotes, the emergency management plan, is a vital tool to the mitigation, response, and recovery of a disaster within and without the town of Milford. Therefore, in accordance with the provisions of NH RSA Chapter 91-A:5 VI(link is external), the plan will be restricted in distribution and availability. Only those persons having a legitimate “need-to-know” shall have access to the plan, in whole or in part. (Ord. 5-1-03 § 6)
2.04.070  No municipal or private liability

This chapter is an exercise by the town of Milford of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health, and safety, and neither Milford, nor its agents and representatives of said town, or any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, or any of the agents thereof, in good faith and carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons or property as the result of said activity.
Any person who owning or controlling real estate or other premises or private property who grants a license or privilege or otherwise permits the designation or use of the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises or private property for the purpose of compliance or attempting to comply with this chapter during an actual or impending emergency or training exercise, together with his or her successors in interest, if any, shall not be civilly liable for negligently causing the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises or private property or loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. (Ord. 5-1-03 § 7)
2.04.080  Violation of regulations
It shall be unlawful for any persons to violate any of the provisions of this chapter or of the regulations or plans issued pursuant to the authority contained herein, or to willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the Office of Emergency Management as herein defined, in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter or any regulation or plan issued there under. (Ord. 5-1-03 § 8)

2.04.090  Penalty
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter, or any rule or regulation promulgated there under, upon conviction of such violation, shall be punished by a fine as further described in Milford Municipal Code Appendix B – Fines, for each violation; costs of prosecution, or imprisonment in the Hillsborough county jail for a period of not more than ninety (90) days; or both such fine and imprisonment, at the discretion of the court. (Ord. 5-1-03 § 9)

2.04.100  Severability
Should any provision of this chapter be declared invalid for any reason, such declaration shall not affect the validity of other provisions, or of the chapter, as a whole, it being the legislative intent that the provisions of the chapter shall be severable and remain valid notwithstanding such declaration. (Ord. 5-1-03 § 10)

2.04.110  Conflicting ordinances, orders, rules and regulations suspended
At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article shall be in effect, they shall supersede all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. (Ord. 5-1-03 § 11)

2.04.120  Effective date
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage. (Ord. 5-1-03 § 12)

2.04.130  Ordinance in force
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval, recording, and publications as provided by law. (Ord. 5-1-03 § 13)

Title 3 Business Licenses and Regulations

Chapter 3.04 Cable Television
Sections
3.04.010 Review and evaluation of basic service and equipment rates
3.04.020 Cable television rate regulations adopted

3.04.010  Review and evaluation of basic service and equipment rates

Upon certification of the town by the FCC to regulate rates for basic service and equipment pursuant to the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 (“Cable Act of 1992”) the board of selectmen, as franchising authority, shall notify all cable operators providing service within the town of such certification and shall direct each cable operator to file with the franchising authority its current schedule of rates and supporting FCC forms and worksheets for basic service and equipment.
The cable operator(s) shall file all such schedules and supporting documents within thirty (30) days after receiving the notice referred to in subsection A of this section. The filing date for all such rate-related materials shall be the date of actual receipt by the franchising authority.
If a cable operator elects to use a cost-of-service showing, the operator shall submit cost-of- service accounts, in detail sufficient to support such a showing.
Each cable operator shall submit such number and form of copies as the franchising authority shall determine in its notice to the cable operator.
Upon receipt of any rate schedule referenced in subsection A of this section, or of any rate schedule proposing any change in such rates, the franchising authority shall schedule, give public notice and give notice to the cable operator of a period during which the franchising authority will receive written comments from the public and the cable operator in the reasonableness of the cable operator’s rates.
At its discretion, the franchising authority may also schedule and preside at a public hearing for the receipt of oral comments. If such a public hearing is scheduled, the franchising authority shall give notice of such hearing to the cable operator and the general public. The public hearing for oral comments shall normally be held, and the close of the period for written comments shall be scheduled, within thirty (30) days of the receipt by the franchising authority of the cable operator’s written rate filing.
The franchising authority shall review the rate filing and comments received and shall make an evaluation of such rates within thirty (30) days of receipt of such rate filing. If the franchising authority determines that the initial thirty (30) day period is insufficient to review and evaluate the filing, the franchising authority shall extend the period for such review and evaluation as permitted by the FCC’s regulations, and notify the cable operator of such fact during the initial thirty (30) day period.
The franchising authority shall send a copy of its written evaluation and decision to the cable operator within the time frame permitted by federal law. (Ord. 1-17-94 § 100)
3.04.020  Cable television rate regulations adopted
The board of selectmen of Milford, as franchising authority, adopts these rate regulations. Pursuant to the FCC’s regulations, the franchising authority will ensure that a copy of these regulations are forwarded to the cable operator, with a request that the rate filing be submitted to the town. (Ord. 1-17-94 § 1(111))

Chapter 3.08 Hawkers, Peddlers, and Vendors
Sections
3.08.010         Definition.
3.08.020         Times activities are prohibited.
3.08.030         Registration required.
3.08.040         Identification required.
3.08.050         Where hawking, peddling and vending prohibited.
3.08.060         Exemptions and Non-Exemptions.
3.08.070         Penalty.

3.08.010 Definition.
“Hawkers, Peddlers and Vendors” as used in this chapter means and includes itinerant vendors, hawkers, peddlers, traders, farmers, merchants, or other persons who sell, offer to sell, or take orders for merchandise from temporary or transient sales locations within the town or who go from town to town or place to place within the town for such purposes.  The phrase specifically does not include or affect any person or organization who undertakes activities involving any nonconsensual entry upon private property for the purposes of espousing any political, social, charitable or economic organization or cause, not for profit, or for the purpose of seeking or giving information, or of seeking financial contributions, on behalf of such organization or cause. (Ord. 9-14-92 § 1(1))

3.08.020  Times activities are prohibited.
The activities of hawkers, peddlers and vendors is prohibited on any day after the hour of nine p.m. and prior to nine a.m. and all day on Sundays and legal holidays. The board of selectmen may, however, allow different hours of operations. Further, there should be no activities by the previously mentioned groups of individuals on any town-owned property, town right-of-way, or any otherwise-described town property without the expressed, written consent of the Milford board of selectmen or their duly authorized agent. (Ord. 5-24-04: Ord. 9-14-92 § 1(2))

3.08.030  Registration required.
Any person or organization intending to engage in any hawking, peddling or vending activities shall not do so unless such person or organization has first registered with the chief of police of Milford as provided in this section. Registration with the chief of police shall identify:

All persons who will be engaging in the hawking, peddling or vending activity by name, birthdate, sex, residential and business address, and driver’s license number;
The organization, if any, on behalf of which the hawking, peddling or vending activity is intended, including name, principal address, state of organization, if applicable, and directors and principal officers, as applicable;
The intended dates, location(s) and hours of hawking, peddling or vending; and
Upon presentation to the chief of police of such data, the chief shall issue a permit which shall state the name and address of the person, firm or organization to whom the permit is granted, the purpose for which the permit is given, the hours and days during which the permit is valid, and the length of time for which the permit is current. No permit shall be valid for a period of more than one year from the date of issue. Each applicant for a permit shall be charged a fee as further described in Milford Municipal Code Appendix A - Fees upon issuance of such permit. The permit shall be shown to any person requesting to see such permit to whom the party named on the permit sells or attempts to sell merchandise. (Ord. 2009-004 § D Amended 09-28-09; Ord. 9-14-92 § 1(3))
3.08.040  Identification required. Every person engaging in hawking, peddling or vending shall carry on his or her person, at all times, some form of personal identification document with a photograph affixed to it. (Ord. 9-14-92 § 1(4))

3.08.050  Where hawking, peddling and vending prohibited.

Hawking, peddling and vending shall not take place in any residence or other establishment bearing on its exterior a sign plainly visible to visitors indicating “No Trespassing,” “No Solicitation,” or any equivalent language. No hawker, peddler or vendor shall enter upon or remain on any private property at any time after any owner or occupant of such property has communicated to such hawker, peddler or vendor that he or she is not welcome on the premises. (Ord. 2009-004 - Amended 09-28-09; Ord. 9-14-92 § 1(5))
3.08.060  Exemptions and Non-Exemptions

Types of persons or organizations that may request exemption. Certain persons or organizations may make a written request to the Administration Office for exemption from this chapter if they are one or more of the following:
Any person selling the product of his own labor or the labor of his family or the product of his own farm or the one he tills.
Any person conducting sales of personal household goods on his own property.
Any nonprofit organization, community chest, fund or foundation organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific, literary, or educational purposes when no part of the entity's earnings benefit any private shareholder or individual.
Persons involved in elementary and secondary schools conducting such solicitations under the direction and guidance of a local school or other charitable organization
For profit organizations soliciting on behalf of a non-profit organization when the entire proceeds are in turn given to the non-profit organization.
Form of exemption request.  Written request for exemption shall identify and/or provide:
All persons who will be engaging in the hawking, peddling or vending activity by name;
The organization, if any, on behalf of which the hawking, peddling or vending activity is intended, including name, principal address, state of organization, if applicable, and directors and principal officers, as applicable;
The type of organization that permits them to be exempt as written above
The intended dates, location(s) and hours of hawking, peddling or vending;
Hard copy of a certificate of insurance that the applicant has been issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state, protecting the licensee and the town from all claims for damages to property and bodily injury, including death which may arise from operations under or in connection with the license, and naming the town of Milford as additionally insured.  Such insurance shall provide combined primary and excess coverage which meet a $1,000,000 per occurrence limit and $2,000,000 general aggregate; such policy shall provide for automobile liability insurance for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles as applicable; and such policy shall provide that the policy shall not be terminated or be cancelled prior to the expiration date except with 30 days' advance written notice to the town.  Exceptions to certificates of insurance may be considered on a case by case basis by the Administration Office with consultation with the risk management agent to modify parameters to meet the exposures presented in a specific activity, and;
Written exemption process. Upon presentation to the Administration Office of such data, the Town Administrator shall issue written exemption which shall state the name and address of the person, firm or organization to whom the exemption is granted, the purpose for which the permit is given, the hours and days during which the permit is valid, and the length of time for which the exemption is current. No exemption shall be valid for a period of more than one year from the date of issue. The written exemption letter shall be shown to any person requesting to see such letter to whom the party named on the permit sells or attempts to sell merchandise. (Ord. 9-14-92 § 1(3))
Types of persons or organizations that are not eligible for an exemption. Certain persons or organizations are not eligible for exemption from this chapter if they are one or more of the following:
Itinerant vendors as defined in NH RSA 321:1
Any person conducting business in any industry or association trade show.
Any person who sells exclusively antiques, used goods, or vintage items.
Application requirements for non-exempt persons or organizations.  Non-exempt persons or organization are required to supply the Milford Police Department with a valid and current Criminal Background Check in addition to any other requirements of the Milford Hawkers and Peddlers Permit process.
(Ord. 2009-004 § A, D & E – Amended 09-28-09)
3.08.070  Penalty.  Any person who violates this chapter shall be fined in accordance with Milford Municipal Code Appendix B - Fines. (Ord. 4-23-01 (part); Ord. 9-14-92 § 2

Chapter 3.12 Mechanical Amusement Devices
Sections
3.12.010       Definition [Repealed, September 13, 2010]
3.12.020       License fee [Repealed, September 13, 2010]
3.12.030       Issuance [Repealed, September 13, 2010]
3.12.040       Minors [Repealed, September 13, 2010]
3.12.050       Devices to be kept in plain view [Repealed, September 13, 2010]
3.12.060       Inspection [Repealed, September 13, 2010]
3.12.070       Hours of operation [Repealed, September 13, 2010]
3.12.080       Penalty—Revocation [Repealed, September 13, 2010]

Chapter 3.16 Non-Commercial Canvassing
Sections
3.16.010       Definition [Repealed, September 13, 2010]
3.16.020       Noncommercial canvassing and soliciting—When prohibited [Repealed, September 13, 2010]
3.16.030       Registration required [Repealed, September 13, 2010]
3.16.040       Identification required [Repealed, September 13, 2010]
3.16.050       Noncommercial canvassing and soliciting—Where prohibited
3.16.060       Violation—Penalty [Repealed, September 13, 2010]

Chapter 3.20 Taxicabs
Sections
3.20.010       Definition
3.20.020       Licenses for vehicles
3.20.030       Permit to drive a taxicab required
3.20.040       Liability insurance compulsory
3.20.050       Display of license and rates
3.20.060       Transferability of license
3.20.070       License for Operation
3.20.080       Identification card
3.20.090       Care of passengers
3.20.100       Effect of revocation of regular driver’s license
3.20.110       Violations and penalties

3.20.010   Definition
“Taxicab” means any rubber-tire motor vehicle having a manufacturer’s rated capacity of not more than seven passengers; and in the call and demand of transportation of passengers. No vehicle over seven years old, dated from the date of manufacture, shall be used as a taxicab. The Milford police department shall approve vehicles prior to issuance of license. (Ord.4-1-89 §1.l; Ord.4-l-86 § 1.1)

3.20.020   Licenses for vehicles

It is unlawful to operate a taxicab for hire or permit such taxicab to be operated for picking up persons within the town without first securing a license from the board of selectmen.
No taxicab shall be licensed or solicit business on the streets or highways of Milford unless it is registered in the state of New Hampshire.
No taxicab shall be operated on the streets or highways of Milford unless it is inspected by the state of New Hampshire.
The board of selectmen may from time to time at its discretion grant licenses upon such terms and to such persons as it may deem expedient.
Applications for licenses shall be made on forms provided by the police department and all information required by such forms shall be completely furnished by the licensee.
The fee for each vehicle licensed shall be as further described in Milford Municipal Code Appendix A – Fees.
No license shall be granted until the requirements of Section 3.20.040 have been satisfied.
Licenses shall be numbered in order as granted.
A record of licenses shall be kept by the chief of police.
Licenses may be revoked at any time for any violation of the provisions of this chapter.
All licenses issued under this section shall expire on April 30th of each year. (Ord. 2009-002 (E) & (I) 09-06-08, Ord. 4-1-86 § 1.2)
3.20.030   Permit to drive a taxicab required

A letter of intent to hire is submitted by the person wishing to obtain a permit to drive a taxi in Milford. Upon receipt of the “intent to hire” the applicant shall fill out a permit to operate a taxi; sign the small license card; have his or her picture taken by the Milford police department; and submit the application along with a taxicab driver permit fee as further described in Milford Municipal Code Appendix A – Fees.
The Milford police department then requests verification of driver’s license. Upon receiving a hard copy of the motor vehicle and criminal records provided by each applicant, the chief or his or her designee shall review all documents associated with said applicant as required and then complete the reverse side of the application and make a recommendation for approval or denial on such permit.
The complete file on the applicant is forwarded to the selectmen’s office for finalization by the board. Upon finalization, the police department will contact the applicant with the decision and information as to where he or she may pick up the actual permit.
Applicants should be cautioned that until they have all the necessary paperwork approving them for the permit; and the permit in hand, they cannot be driving and accepting fares. The only exception to this is if the chief of police grants temporary permit to such applicant. Any temporary permit is to be in writing; and, all permits whether temporary or permanent are to be kept readily accessible.
Questions on the permit process for taxi drivers may be obtained either at the police department or at the selectmen’s office. (Ord. 2009-002 (B) & (C) 09-06-08, Ord. 4-1-89 (part))
3.20.040  Liability insurance compulsory

Each applicant for a license under this chapter shall deposit with the  police department a policy or certificate of insurance, for each taxicab for which a license is sought indemnifying the applicant in an amount not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($ 100,000.00) for injury to one person or three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for injury to more than one person and twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) property damage in any one accident, arising out of the operation of the taxicab of the applicant. Such policy or certificate shall be in a form approved by the corporation counsel and signed by a New Hampshire resident agent. Such policy or certificate shall further provide that it will not be changed or canceled except upon (10) days written notice to the police department.
The insurance coverage shall specifically cover the taxicab license provision of this chapter. The license for the operation of such taxicab shall expire upon the lapse or termination of the policy or bond and must be returned to police department within twenty-four (24) hours. (Ord. 2009-002 (A) & (B) 09-06-08)
3.20.050  Display of license and rates
Every taxicab licensed shall be marked as a public taxicab with an approved medallion permanently affixed to the lower left hand corner of the trunk deck or tailgate, in such fashion as it shall be clearly visible from the rear of the vehicle. The name of the owner, and the rates of fare duly established by the taxicab owner, shall be conspicuously posted on a printed card in every taxicab. This section shall not apply to vehicles used at funerals, weddings or public parades. (Ord. 4-1-86 § 1.4)

3.20.060 Transferability of license
No license shall be sold, transferred or assigned without the consent of the board of selectmen. The license granted shall apply only to the taxicab owner or driver designated in such license. (Ord. 4-1-86 § 1.5)

3.20.070 License for operation

No person shall drive a taxicab unless licensed under this chapter.
No license shall be granted to any person unless he or she is eighteen (18) years of age or older, and holds a valid driver’s license issued to him or her by the Director of Motor Vehicles.
[NH DOT Health Card Requirement – Repealed, August 9, 2010]
No license shall be granted to any person who has been convicted or forfeited bail to any of the following when it involves crimes pertaining to controlled substances, alcohol, prostitution, gambling, physical violence, or crimes directly related to the applicant's honesty and integrity (such as, but not limited to, fraud, larceny, extortion):
Felony within ten (10) years preceding date of application. If said felony involved a sexual offense, no time limit will be considered.
Misdemeanor within three (3) years preceding date of application.
Moving violation within one (1) year preceding date of application
No License shall be granted to a person who, for other good cause stated in writing, is not fit for the safe operation of a taxicab.
Application for license to drive taxicabs shall be made on forms provided by the police department and all information required by such forms shall be furnished by the applicant. The fee for such license is as further described in Milford Municipal Code Appendix A – Fees, and a record for such application for licenses shall be kept by the police department and chief of police.
All licenses issued under this section shall expire on April 30th of each year.  
Any person denied a license may appeal the decision to the Board of Selectmen. (Ord. 2010-003 (C) repealed 8-9-10; Ord. 2009-002 (C), (D), (E), (F), (G), & (H) 09-06-08, Ord. 4-1-86 § 1.6)
3.20.080 Identification card

The police department shall deliver to the licensee an identification card setting forth the number and terms of the license, photo, the name and personal description of the licensee, including his or her age, weight, height, complexion, color of hair and color of eyes.
The licensee shall, when driving or in charge of a taxicab, display conspicuously the card in a holder in his or her taxicab.
The licensee shall show the card whenever so requested by a member of the board of selectmen, the Director of Motor Vehicles, any police officer, or any passenger. (Ord. 2009-002 (A) 09-06-08, Ord. 4-1-86 § 1.7)
3.20.090 Care of passengers

No taxicab shall stop to take or discharge passengers at any place or on any street, square, or public place except at the curb or as near to such curb as possible. Passengers shall be permitted to enter or leave the vehicle only from the side nearest the curb or side of the road.
No person may sit or ride upon any fender, dash, step, top or door of any taxicab.
No operator of a taxicab shall, during business operation, carry any person other than paying passengers. Exceptions shall be allowed in the case of training and/or evaluation of a taxicab operator.
No operator shall take on any other passenger without the consent of the first passenger employing his or her taxicab; nor shall the direction or destination be charged without the consent of the first passenger or passengers. (Ord. 2009­002 (C) 09-06-08, Ord. 4-1-86 § 1.8)
3.20.100 Effect of revocation of regular driver’s license
The suspension or revocation of any driver’s license by the Director of Motor Vehicles shall automatically suspend a license to operate taxicabs issued by the town of Milford. A suspended or revoked license may be restored in the same manner and following the same form used in the issuance of a new license. Restoration may not be made until the Director of Motor Vehicles has restored the license issued by his or her office. (Ord. 4-1-86 § 1.9)

3.20.110 Violations and penalties
The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine as further described in Milford Municipal Code Appendix B – Fines, or by the revocation of license or both. (Ord. 4-1-86 § 2.0)

Title 4 Animals
Chapter 4.04 DOGS
Sections
4.04.010     Authority [Amended, November 22, 2010]
4.04.020     Definitions [Amended, November 22, 2010]
4.04.030     Dogs a Menace, a Nuisance or Vicious [Amended, November 22, 2010]
4.04.040     Impoundment [Amended, November 22, 2010]
4.04.050     Notice To Owner, Redemption [Amended, November 22, 2010]
4.04.060     Removal of Excrement [Amended, November 22, 2010]
4.04.070     Control of Dogs in Public Parks [Amended, November 22, 2010]
4.04.080     Registration and Licensing [Amended, November 22, 2010]
4.04.090     Restraint Required [Amended, November 22, 2010]
4.04.100     Examination of Dog [Amended, November 22, 2010]
4.04.110     Violations and Penalties [Amended, November 22, 2010]

Dog Control - Generally
4.04.010  Authority
At a general town meeting in March 1972, the Town of Milford, New Hampshire, enacted the following ordinance in accordance with NH RSA 31:39 and any other applicable chapters or amendments thereto of the New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated 1955. (Ord. 2010-011 amended 11-22-10)

4.04.020 Definitions
As used in this chapter, the following words have the following meanings:

“Accompanied” The owner or custodian must be able to see and hear the dog, or have reasonable knowledge of where the dog is, and shall be able to immediately recall the dog by hand or voice command.
“Animal” Every non-human species of animal, both domestic and wild.
“Animal Control Officer: Any person designated by the State of New Hampshire as a person who is qualified to perform such duties under the laws of this state and this ordinance.
“At Large” Off the premises of the owner or keeper, unless accompanied by the owner or keeper.  At no time, shall any dog be permitted on the private property of another landowner, without permission of said landowner or person.
“Dog” Both male and female dogs.
“Owner” Shall mean any person keeping, harboring or having charge or control of, or being lodged or fed within such person’s residence, yard or premises.  This term shall not apply to veterinarians or kennel operators temporarily maintaining on their premises dogs owned by others.
“Nuisance” As defined in NH RSA 466:31 II (a), (b), (c), or (d)
“Menace” As defined in NH RSA 466:31 II (e), or (f)
“Vicious” As defined in NH RSA 466:31 II (g)
(Ord. 2010-011 amended 11-22-10; Ord. 3-7-72 (D, E, & F))
4.04.030 Dogs a Nuisance, a Menace or Vicious

Under this section, a dog is considered to be a nuisance, a menace, or vicious to persons or to property under any or all but not limited to the following conditions: 
Nuisance Offense - If a dog is "at large,'' which means it is off the premises of the owner or keeper and not under the control of any person by means of personal presence and attention as will reasonably control the conduct of such dog, unless accompanied by the owner or keeper. This subparagraph shall not include a dog which is being used for hunting, supervised competition, exhibition, or training for such activities if accompanied by the owner or keeper or a dog which is guarding, working, or herding livestock, as defined in NH RSA 21:34-a, II(a)(4), meaning that the owner or keeper must be able to see or hear the dog, or have reasonable knowledge of where the dog is hunting or herding, or where training is being conducted or where trials are being held, provided that such dog does not have to be within sight at all time;
Nuisance Offense - If it barks for sustained periods of more than 1/2 hour, or during the night hours so as to disturb the peace and quiet of a neighborhood or area, not including a dog which is guarding, working, or herding livestock, as defined in NH RSA 21:34-a, II(a)(4);
Nuisance Offense - If it digs, scratches, or excretes, or causes waste or garbage to be scattered on property other than its owner's;
Nuisance Offense - If any female dog in season (heat) is permitted to run at large or be off the premises of the owner or keeper during this period except when being exercised on a leash by a responsible adult. At all other times such dog shall be confined within a building or enclosure in such manner that she will not come in contact (except for intentional breeding purposes) with a male dog. A female dog in heat shall not be used for hunting;
Menace Offense - If it growls, snaps at, runs after, or chases any person or persons not on the premises of the owner or keeper;
Menace Offense - If it runs after, or chases bicycles, motor vehicles, motorcycles, or other vehicles being driven, pulled or pushed on the streets, highways, or public ways;
Vicious Offense - If, whether alone or in a pack with other dogs, it bites, attacks, or preys on game animals, domestic animals, fowl or human beings.
a.If the skin of a person has been punctured by a dog and the incident was reported, including the identity of the dog and its owner, to the animal control officer, if any, or law enforcement officer, they shall, within 24 hours, notify the injured person, or, in the case of a minor, the minor's parent or guardian, whether, according to town records, the dog has been appropriately immunized against rabies.
Any person who fails, by appropriate action including but not limited to restraining an animal from running at large, or otherwise effectively abating a nuisance found such under the provisions of this section, or who fails to comply with any other provisions of this section after being so ordered, shall have the person's dog taken into custody by a law enforcement officer of the town, or other person authorized by the town and such disposition made of the dog as the Milford District court may order.
Notwithstanding NH RSA 466:31-a, if a law enforcement officer does not witness the nuisance behavior, the name of the complainant may be released as public information before any fine under NH RSA 466:31-a shall be levied. (Ord. 2010-011 amended 11-22-10; Ord. 3-7-72 (I & IV))
4.04.040 Impoundment
It shall be the duty of every law enforcement officer or animal control officer so designated, to apprehend any dog running at large contrary to the provisions of Chapter
4.04.030 I (a) and to impound such dog at the Bedford Animal Rescue League. (Ord. 2010-011 amended 11-22-10)

4.04.050 Notice To Owner, Redemption
If such dog shall be impounded, the owner thereof shall be notified forthwith.  The owner of any dog so impounded may reclaim such dog upon payment of all costs and charges incurred by the Town of Milford for the impounding and maintenance of such dog, including a pickup and transportation fee as defined in Milford Municipal Code Appendix A – Fees. Any dog so impounded which is not licensed and whose owner is unknown after a seven day period may be surrendered to an appropriate agency capable of assessing the dog for adoption or other appropriate actions suitable to its temperament and/or physical condition. Any dog which appears to be suffering from rabies or affected with hydrophobia or other infections or dangerous disease, shall not be released, but may be forthwith destroyed. (Ord. 2010-011 amended 11-22-10)

4.04.060 Removal of Excrement
It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in control of any dog to allow that dog to appear in any public place or upon the property of any other person, unless said owner or person in control has in his or her possession a mechanical or other device for the removal of excrement (i.e., a plastic bag, excrement scooper, etc.); nor shall said owner or person in control, fail to expeditiously remove any such excrement deposited by said dog in any such place.  This ordinance shall not apply to a blind person while walking his or her guide dog.  Violations of this Section shall be subject to penalties as prescribed under Section 4.04.110 - Violations and Penalties. (Ord. 2010-011 amended 11-22-10)

4.04.070 Control of Dogs in Public Parks & Other Places

Leash Only Parks - It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in control of any dog to allow that dog to appear in the public lands of Adams Field (M/L 42-10), Emerson Park (M/L 25-28), Kaley Park (M/L 31-32), Keyes Park (M/L 25-133), and Shepard Park (M/L 31-33), unless said owner or person in control has the dog securely and physically attached via a leash or other sturdy tether no longer than 16 feet and capable of restraining said dog.
Cemeteries - Dogs are not permitted in public cemeteries except for guide dogs leading blind persons, hearing ear dogs and other service dogs as provided in NH RSA 167-D.
Conservation Lands/Areas - Dogs, and other pets, are allowed on Conservation Lands (i.e., Hitchiner Town Forest; which includes open fields (M/L 46-2), Mayflower Hill Town Forest (M/L 8-92), Mile Slip Town Forest (M/L 55-5) unless otherwise posted, with the following restrictions; pets must be under the control of the owner or handler at all times (on or off leash) and pet waste must be removed from the conservation area as further described in 4.04.060. 
Parks Where Dogs Are Not Allowed - It shall be unlawful for any dog to appear in the public lands of MCAA Fields on North River Road (Russ Monbleau Athletic Complex) (M/L 8-11) except for guide dogs leading blind persons, hearing ear dogs and other service dogs as provided in NH RSA 167-D.
All Other Public Areas – On all other public lands not listed in 4.04.070 (A), (B), & (C) (i.e., Bicentennial Park (M/L 25-33), BROX Property (M/L 38-58) it shall be permissible for the owner or person in control of any dog to allow that dog to appear in the public on or off lead, leash, or tether provided they remain under the control of said person by means of personal presence, and or mechanical means (i.e., leash, electronic remote control device) and are able to provide attention as will reasonably control the conduct of such dog, unless otherwise posted in specific areas within a park.
Enforcement and Penalties – Enforcement of section 4.04.070 shall be primarily undertaken by Park Rangers, Recreation Department, Department of Public Works, or Administration Department employees, and law enforcement officers as available, Violations of this Section shall be subject to penalties as prescribed under Section 4.04.110.
(Ord. 2010-011 amended 11-22-10)
Miscellaneous Regulations
4.04.080 Registration

Procuring License; Tag – Every owner or keeper of a dog 4 months old or over shall annually, cause it to be registered, numbered, described, and licensed for one year in the town clerk’s office, and shall cause it to wear around its neck a collar to which shall be attached a metal tag with the following information thereon: designation that the dog is registered in Milford, year of issue of license and its registered number. Regardless of when the license is obtained, the license shall be effective from May 1 of each year to April 30 of the subsequent year as further detailed in NH RSA 466.
Vaccination Required – Before a license is issued under the provisions of this subdivision, the owner or keeper of a dog shall furnish to the clerk verification from a licensed veterinarian that the dog has been vaccinated against rabies in accordance with the provisions of NH RSA 436. Persons applying for a group license under NH RSA 466:6 shall also furnish to the clerk verification from a licensed veterinarian that the dogs have been vaccinated against rabies in accordance with NH RSA 436. If a valid rabies certificate is on file with the clerk in accordance with NH RSA 436:102, the owner shall not be required to produce such verification at time of licensure.
Rabies Certificate. – Upon receipt of a copy of a rabies certificate from a veterinarian pursuant to NH RSA 436:102, the clerk of the town or city shall send written notice to the owner or keeper of any unlicensed dog relative to the licensing requirements provided for in NH RSA 466:1. If the owner or keeper of the unlicensed dog fails to license the dog in a timely manner, the town or city clerk may notify the local law enforcement officer of a violation of NH RSA 466:1.
Fees. – The registration fees for dogs are regulated by NH RSA 466.
(Ord. 2010-011 amended 11-22-10)
4.04.090 Restraint Required
Any person upon learning that a dog owned by them or kept in their custody has bitten any person shall forthwith confine and restrain said dog from running at large for a period of ten (10) days and shall, as soon as possible, notify the Milford Police Department. (Ord. 2010-011 amended 11-22-10)

4.04.100 Examination of Dog
It shall be unlawful for any person to kill or dispose of a dog owned by them or kept in their custody which has bitten a person until they have notified the Milford Police Department or the Health Officer and until these officials have had an opportunity to examine the dog. (Ord. 2010-011 amended 11-22-10)

4.04.110 Violations and Penalties

Any person who violates any provision of Chapter 4.04.030 shall be guilty of a violation; provided that if such person chooses to pay the civil forfeiture specified in 4.04.110-A:I the person shall be deemed to have waived the right to have the case heard in the Milford District Court and shall not be prosecuted or found guilty of a violation of Chapter 4.04.030. Any person who does not pay the civil forfeiture specified in 4.04.110-A:I shall have the case disposed of in the Milford District Court.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of Chapter 4.04 shall be liable for a civil forfeiture, which shall be paid to the Milford Town Clerk within 96 hours of the date and time notice is given by any law enforcement officer or other person authorized by the town to the owner or keeper of a dog in violation of Chapter 4.04. If the forfeiture is paid, said payment shall be in full satisfaction of the assessed penalty. The forfeiture shall be in the amount as specified for the following violations: 
For the first nuisance offense under Chapter 4.04.030-A:I, II, III or IV the fine shall be as defined in Milford Municipal Code Appendix B – Fines; for the second or subsequent nuisance offense committed within 12 months of the first nuisance offense under Chapter 4.04.030-A:I, II, III or IV the fine shall be as defined in Milford Municipal Code Appendix B – Fines.
For the first menace offense under Chapter 4.04.030-A:V or VI the fine shall be as defined in Milford Municipal Code Appendix B – Fines; for the second or subsequent menace offense committed within 12 months of the first menace offense under Chapter 4.04.030-A:V or VI the fine shall be as defined in Milford Municipal Code Appendix B – Fines.
For the first vicious offense under Chapter 4.04.030-A:VII the fine shall be as defined in Milford Municipal Code Appendix B – Fines. For the second or subsequent vicious offense committed within 12 months of the first vicious offense under Chapter 4.04.030-A:VII the fine shall be as defined in Milford Municipal Code Appendix B – Fines.
Any person who pays a civil forfeiture specified in 4.04.110-A:I two times in any 12-month period according to the records of the town clerk, may not pay a civil forfeiture for subsequent violations Chapter 4.04 in that 12­month period, but shall have those cases disposed of in Milford District Court. In the case of a vicious dog, as described by Chapter 4.04.030­A:VII, where its behavior presents a threat to public safety, immediate Milford District Court proceedings may be initiated in lieu of the civil forfeiture.
any person who does not pay the civil forfeiture specified above shall have the case disposed of in the Milford District Court.
(Ord. 2010-011 amended 11-22-10; Ord. 3-7-72 (part))

Title 5 Health and Safety

Chapter 5.04 Regulation of Alarm Systems
Sections
5.04.010     Short Title [Amended, March 14, 2011]
5.04.020     Purpose [Repealed, March 14, 2011]
5.04.030     Definitions [Amended, March 14, 2011]
5.04.040     Permit Application Required [Amended, March 14, 2011]
5.04.050     Absence of Permit [Amended, March 14, 2011]
5.04.060     Installation of Alarm System [Amended, March 14, 2011]
5.04.070     Existing Alarm Systems [Amended, March 14, 2011]
5.04.080     Issuance of Permit [Amended, March 14, 2011]
5.04.090     Permit Fee [Amended § A – B, and D; Repealed § C, March 14, 2011]
5.04.100     Failure to Pay Registration or Renewal Fee [Amended, March 14, 2011]
5.04.110      Denial or Revocation of Alarm Users Permit [Amended, March 14, 2011]
5.04.120     False Alarms: Prevention and Payment of Costs [Amended, March 14, 2011]
5.04.130     Liability of Town Limited [Amended, March 14, 2011]
5.04.140     Operating an Alarm System After Revocation; Penalty [Amended, March 14, 2011]
5.04.150     Alarm Verification [Amended, March 14, 2011]

5.04.010     Short Title
This code shall be known and may be cited as “an Ordinance Regulating Alarm Systems.” (Ord. 2011-001 5.04.010 amended 03-14-11; Ord. 6-27-89)

5.04.020     Purpose [Repealed, March 14, 2011]

5.04.030     Definitions
For the purpose of this code, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include plural number.  The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory.

“Alarm System” is an assembly of equipment and devices, or a single device, arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which Police and/or Fire Departments are expected to respond.  In this ordinance, the term Alarm System shall include the terms “Dial Alarm” and “Local Alarm”, as those terms area hereinafter defined.
“Alarm Installation” is the design, installation, repair, alteration and maintenance of systems causing an alarm to be sounded in the event of a burglary, holdup, fire or the occurrence of a predetermined inimical event.
“Alarm User” is any person on whose premises an alarm system is maintained within the Town of Milford, except for alarm systems on motor vehicles or proprietary alarm systems. If, however, an alarm system is on a motor vehicle other than a proprietary system (which does not include a signal line connected directly or indirectly to a Police Communication Center, a central station or answering service) the person using such system is an alarm user.
“Answering Service” is a telephone  answering service providing among its services the service of receiving emergency signals from alarm systems and thereafter relaying the message by voice or otherwise to the Communications Center of the Police/Fire Department.
“Central Alarm Station” is any facility which is privately owned that owns or leases alarm systems, whose facility is staffed by employees who receive, record or validate alarm signals and relay information about such signals to Police/Fire Headquarters, by any means.
“Dial Alarm” is an alarm system which automatically selects a telephone line connected to a Headquarters and reproduces a prerecorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of the emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect. Unless specifically authorized by the Police/Fire Chief, no dial alarms will be allowed to dial any government maintained telephone number.
“Direct Alarm” is any alarm system which transmits a signal over a telephone line to an alarm monitoring facility, either public or private.
“False Alarm” is any activation of any alarm system to which the Police or Fire Department respond which is not the result of a robbery, burglary, attempted robbery/burglary, or fire. “False Alarms” do not include alarms caused by electrical storms, floods, hurricanes or other violent events of nature.
“Local Alarm” is any alarm system not connected to the Police/Fire Alarm Monitoring Facility or to a private central alarm station or answering service that is designed to activate at the premises within which the alarm system is installed, an audible and/or visual signaling device.
“Manual Alarm” is any alarm system in which activation of the alarm is initiated by the direct action of the alarm user or his agents or employees with a purpose to elicit a police response to a burglary, robbery or attempted robbery or a Fire Department response.
“Person” is any natural person, legal entity, corporation or incorporated association.
 “Proprietary System” is all alarm systems sounding and/or recording alarm and supervisory signals at a control center located within the protected premises, the control center being under the supervision of the proprietor of the protected premises or his employees or agents. If a proprietary alarm system included a signal line connected directly or by means of a dialing device to a Police/Fire Communication Center, a central station or answering service, it thereby is deemed to be an Alarm System as defined in this ordinance.
5.04.040 Permit Application Required
The Chief of Police or Fire Chief of the Town is hereby authorized to issue a permit to any applicant for burglar, intrusion or panic or fire alarms respectively, as to property within the Town of Milford, to install, maintain and operate thereon an alarm system upon application to him, and subject to the following provisions:

Such application shall describe the premises on which such alarm system is to be located, and
Shall state the name, address and telephone number of the applicant and the person who is responsible for the upkeep, maintenance and operation of the alarm system, and
Shall describe the system and shall give the name, address and telephone number of the legal entity who is responsible to the owner for the maintenance of such alarm system, and any State of New Hampshire license issued to such legal entity.
(Ord. 2011-001 5.04.030amended 03-14-11; Ord. 6-27-89)
5.04.050 Absence of Permit
No person (including a natural person and/or legal entity) shall install, maintain or operate within the Town, an alarm system without a permit issued hereunder. (Ord. 2011-001

5.04.040 amended 03-14-11; Ord. 6-27-89)

5.04.060 Installation of Alarm System
No alarm system, as herein defined, shall be installed and activated, without a permit issued pursuant to this ordinance. (Ord. 2011-001 amended 03-14-11; Ord. 6-27-89)

5.04.070 Existing Alarm Systems
Alarm systems presently operating shall conform to this ordinance prior to continued operation thereof. (Ord. 2011-001 amended 03-14-11; Ord. 6-27-89)

5.04.080 Issuance of Permit
The Chief of Police or Fire Chief upon application to him for a permit shall, in his judgment, determine whether the application conforms to the requirements of this ordinance; that the facts stated therein are true and accurate.  The Chief of Police or Fire Chief upon receipt of the fee required hereunder and review of the application for compliance by the applicant of this ordinance shall issue to the applicant a permit to install, maintain and operate the proposed alarm system. The Permit once issued shall be effective till February 28th of the following year and renewed ever year after as long as the alarm system remains in service. (Ord. 2011-001 amended 03-14-11; Ord. 6-27­89)

5.04.090 Permit Fee

Each applicant shall pay to the Town of Milford a permit fee as further detailed in Appendix – A Fees.
There shall be an annual renewal fee as further detailed in Appendix – A Fees.
Senior Citizen Fee Waiver [Repealed, March 14, 2011]
Federal, State, County or local government agencies who operate alarm systems shall be exempt from the payment of a fee.
Ord. 2011-001 amended 03-14-11; Ord. 6-27-89)
5.04.100 Failure to Pay Registration or Renewal Fee
The alarm user shall be required to pay the alarm registration and or renewal fee within thirty (30) days of receipt of the alarm permit or renewal application.

If after due notice by the Chief of Police or Fire Chief the alarm user fails to pay the registration and or renewal fee, the alarm user will be assessed a fine as further detailed in Appendix B – Fines.

If the alarm user fails to pay the required fees after three (3) written notices, the alarm user will be summonsed to court for a violation level offense. (Ord. 2011-001 amended 03-14-11; Ord. 6-27-89)

5.04.110 Denial or Revocation of Alarm Users Permit
The Chief of Police or Fire Chief upon notification to him or her that the department has received four (4) false alarms within the calendar year, the alarm user’s permit shall be revoked.

An alarm user, whose permit has been revoked, may reapply for a new permit.  Upon such re-application the alarm user shall demonstrate to the Police Chief or Fire Chief that the cause of prior revocation has been eliminated and or corrected or is not likely to re-occur. (Ord. 2011-001 amended 03-14-11; Ord. 6-27-89)

5.04.120 False Alarms: Prevention and Payment of Costs

When emergency messages are received by the Police or Fire Department that are the result of a failure to comply with the requirements of the ordinance, the Chief of Police or Fire Chief is authorized to demand that the owner or lessee of such device, or his representative, disconnects such device until it is made to comply with said requirements.
Any alarm user having an alarm system on his or its premises, and any user of alarm services or equipment designed and installed with the intent of eliciting a police or fire department response, shall pay to the Town of Milford a charge for each and every false alarm to which the police or fire department respond in each calendar year as follows:
The alarm user of any alarm system shall be assessed a service charge for each false alarm transmitted by such system after three (3) false alarms in a calendar year period, where such false alarm results in a response by the Police or Fire Department, in accordance with the following:
The fourth (4th) false alarm in any calendar year period shall be assessed a service fee as further detailed in Appendix – A Fees.  
Failure to pay such false alarm service fee in thirty (30) calendar days shall subject such alarm user to a fine as further detailed in Appendix B - Fines.
An alarm user may appeal false alarm service charges in writing to the Board of Selectmen within ten (10) days after receipt of the notice of penalty.(Ord. 2011-001 amended 03-14-11; Ord. 6-27-89)
5.04.130 Liability of Town Limited
The Police and Fire Departments of the Town of Milford shall take every reasonable precaution to assure that the alarm signals received are given appropriate attention and are acted upon with dispatch. Nevertheless, the Police and Fire Departments of Milford shall not be liable for any defects in operation of alarm devices, for any failure or neglect to respond appropriately upon receipt of an alarm from such a source, nor for the failure or neglect of any person in connection with the installation and operation of alarm devices or their components, the transmission of alarm signals, or the relaying of such signals and messages.  The Police/Fire departments shall incur no liability for failure to respond to an alarm activation at a location in which a permit has not been issued, or a permit has been suspended or revoked. (Ord. 2011-001 amended 03-14-11; Ord. 6-27­89)

5.04.140 Operating an Alarm System After Revocation; Penalty
Any alarm user who, after having a permit revoked fails to disconnect his alarm system, or who knowingly operates an alarm system without first obtaining a permit, shall be guilty of a violation, and upon conviction, shall be fined as further detailed in Appendix – B Fines. (Ord. 2011-001 amended 03-14-11; Ord. 6-27-89)

5.04.150 Alarm Verification
It shall be unlawful for any agency and or business other than the Milford Police and Fire Departments to respond to an alarm activation for the purpose of verifying the cause of the alarm. (Ord. 2011-001 amended 03-14-11; Ord. 6-27-89)

Chapter 5.08 Alarm Systems and Alarm Monitoring
Sections
5.08.010     Short Title [Amended, March 14, 2011]
5.08.020     Purpose [Amended, March 14, 2011]
5.08.030     Definitions [Amended, March 14, 2011]
5.08.040     Permit Required [Amended, March 14, 2011]
5.04.050     Construction standards [Repealed, March 14, 2011]
5.08.060     Existing Alarm Systems [Amended, March 14, 2011]
5.04.070     Issuance of permits/fees [Repealed, March 14, 2011]
5.08.080     User Fee Required [Amended, March 14, 2011]
5.08.090     Failure to Obtain Permits and Pay User Fees [Amended, March 14, 2011]
5.04.100     False alarms [Repealed, March 14, 2011]
5.04.110     Penalties for violations of these regulations [Repealed, March 14, 2011]
5.08.120     Liability of Town Limited [Amended, March 14, 2011]
5.08.130     Adoption and Amendments [Repealed, March 14, 2011]

5.08.010 Short Title
These regulations shall be known and may be cited as “Alarm Systems & Monitoring Regulations.” (Ord. 2011-002 amended 03-14-11; Ord. 6-27-89 § 1)

5.08.020 Purpose
These regulations are adopted pursuant to NHRSA 154:18 for the purpose of guarding against fires; protecting life and property from fire; providing efficient and cost-effective fire prevention services by the town, including but not limited to maintenance and upgrade of hard wire transmission lines, monitoring systems, and alarm systems; and carrying out the chapter regulating alarm systems. (Ord. 2011-002 amended 03-14-11; Ord. 6-27-89 § 2)

5.08.030 Definitions
For the purpose of these regulations, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings given in this section. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the masculine gender include the feminine gender or non-gender. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory.

“Alarm installation” means the design,     installation, repair, alteration and maintenance of systems causing an alarm to be sounded in an emergency situation as specified in the ordinance regulating alarm systems.
“Alarm monitoring facility” means a facility located at the Milford fire department headquarters or central communications center for the town, which is monitored by the fire chief or his or her agents who receive, record, and validate alarm signals transmitted from alarm systems.
“Alarm system” means an assembly of equipment and devices, or a single device, arranged to signal the presence of an emergency situation requiring urgent attention by the town, its employees, or agents. As used in these regulations, the term “alarm system” includes the terms “box alarm,” “dial alarm,” “fire alarm call box,” “fire alarm street box,” “local alarm,” “manual alarm,” and “master fire alarm box” as those terms are defined in this section.
“Alarm user” means any person on whose premises an alarm system is maintained within the town and is connected directly or indirectly to the alarm monitoring facility, except for alarm systems on motor vehicles or proprietary alarm systems.
“Answering service” means a telephone answering service among its services the service of receiving emergency signals from alarm systems and thereafter relaying the message by voice or otherwise to the alarm monitoring facility.
“Central alarm station” means any facility which is privately owned that owns or leases alarm systems, whose facility is staffed by employees who receive, record, or validate alarm signals and relay information about such signals to the alarm monitoring facility by any means.
“Dial alarm” means an alarm system which automatically selects a telephone line connected to the alarm monitoring facility and reproduces a prerecorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of the emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect.
“Digital Dialer” means a device that electronically dials the phone to the alarm monitoring facility, ensures that it has made contact with the receiving unit and send an electronic message indicating an alarm activation, low battery, arming/disarming of an alarm etc.  
“Direct alarm” means any alarm system which transmits a signal over a telephone line to the alarm monitoring facility.
“False alarm” means any activation of any alarm system to which the town, its employees or agents respond, which is not the result of an emergency situation. Such terminology does not include alarms caused by electrical storms, floods, hurricanes, or other violent events of nature.
“Fire alarm call box” means a private alarm system which automatically transmits an alarm over a municipal hard wire system to the alarm monitoring facility, upon dialing the telephone in the box.
“Fire alarm street box” means a municipal alarm system which automatically transmits an alarm over a municipal hard wire system to the alarm monitoring facility, upon pulling the alarm in the box.
 “Local alarm” means any alarm system not connected to the alarm monitoring facility or to a private central alarm station or answering service, which is designed to activate at the premises within which the alarm system is installed, an audible and/or visual signaling device.
“Manual alarm” means any alarm system in which activation of the alarm is initiated by the direct action of the alarm user or such user’s agents or employees, installed with a purpose to elicit a response and action from the alarm monitoring facility.
“Master fire alarm box” means a private alarm system located on a building or structure, which upon activation of the internal alarm system or sprinkler system located within the building or structure will automatically transmit an alarm over a municipal hard wire system to the alarm monitoring facility.
“Ordinance Regulating Alarm Systems” is the town of Milford’s ordinance which regulates the installation of all alarm systems in the town of Milford.
“Owner” means any person who alone, or jointly or severally with others, shall have legal title to any building, structure or premises on which an alarm system is located within the town, with or without accompanying actual possession of such title, and shall include the duly authorized agent or attorney, a purchaser, devisee, fiduciary and any person having a vested or contingent interest in the property in question.
“Person” means any corporation, including a municipality, and any firm, partnership, association, organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as individuals. It also includes an executor, administrator, trustee, receiver or other representative appointed according to law. Whenever the word “person” is used in any section of these regulations prescribing a penalty or fine, as to partnerships or associations, the word shall include the partners or members of such partnership or association, and as to corporations, shall include the officer, agents or members of such corporation who are responsible for any violation of these regulations.
“Proprietary systems” means all alarm systems sounding and/or recording alarm and supervisory signals at a control center located within the protected premises, the control center being under the supervision of the proprietor of the protected premises or such proprietor’s employees or agents. If a proprietary alarm system includes a signal line connected directly or by means of a dialing device to the alarm monitoring facility, it thereby is deemed to be an alarm system as defined in these regulations.
“Town” means the town of Milford, New Hampshire.
“User” means any person who alone, or jointly or severally with others, shall have legal tide to any building, structure or premises on which an alarm system is located within the town with or without accompanying actual possession of such title and shall include the duly authorized agent or attorney, a purchaser, devisee, fiduciary and any person having a vested or contingent interest in the property in question.
(Ord. 2011-002 amended 03-14-11; Ord. 6-27-89 § 3)
5.08.040 Permit Required
Each owner, person or user who desires to utilize the alarm monitoring facility, with respect to any alarm system located in the town, shall apply for a permit from the Milford fire chief or his or her agent. The application shall be on a form prescribed by the fire chief and shall contain the following information (see Exhibit A):

A description of the premises on which such alarm system is to be located;
The name, address, and telephone number of the person who is responsible for the upkeep, maintenance, and operation of the alarm system;
A description of the system, including the name, address and telephone number of the legal entity responsible for the upkeep, maintenance, and operation of the alarm system;
[List of licenses issued – Repealed, March 14, 2011]
(Ord. 2011-002 amended 03-14-11; Ord. 6-27-89)
5.04.050 [Construction standards - Repealed, March 14, 2011]

5.08.060 Existing Alarm Systems
All owners or users of alarm systems operating at the date of adoption of these regulations shall file an application in conformance with these regulations and pay the application fee and annual user fee no later than February 28 of each year, or such owner or user shall be subject to the penalties as provided in Appendix B - Fines. (Ord. 2011-002 amended 03-14-11; Ord. 6-27-89 § 6)

5.04.070 [Issuance of permits/fees - Repealed, March 14, 2011]

5.08.080 User Fee Required
The owner or user of an alarm system connected to a master fire alarm box, or a fire alarm street box, or a digital dialer which is directly wired to the alarm monitoring facility shall pay to the order of Milford fire department an annual user fee as further described in Appendix A – Fees. The fee shall be due and payable yearly on the second day of each year. New systems installed during the year shall be charged a pro rata amount as further described in Appendix A – Fees per month or part of such month until December 31st of the year of installation. The full annual user fee shall be paid after the year of installation, unless such installation is disconnected by the owner, in which case the town shall refund a pro rata amount as further described in Appendix A – Fees per month or part of such month from the time of disconnection until December 31st of the year of disconnection. (Ord. 2011-002 amended 03-14-11; Ord. 6-27-89 § 8)

5.08.090 Failure to Obtain Permits and Pay User Fees
Any owner or alarm user who fails to obtain a renewal permit and pay user fees required by these regulations may be disconnected from the alarm monitoring facility at the discretion of the fire chief. Prior to such disconnection, the fire chief or his or her agent shall send a written notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner, and to the alarm user, if different from the owner, stating that such disconnection shall take place within ten (10) days from the date of the notice, unless the permits are obtained and/or the application and user fees plus costs of the notice are paid. If such disconnection takes place, the owner or alarm user shall be responsible to the town and shall pay to the order of the Milford fire department all costs related to any reconnection, once the permits are issued and/or the application and user fees are paid, and reconnection is permitted by the town’s fire chief or his or her agent. (Ord. 2011-002 amended 03-14-11; Ord. 6-27-89 §9)

5.08.100  [False alarms - Repealed, March 14, 2011]

5.08.110  [Penalties for violations of these regulations - Repealed, March 14, 2011]

5.08.120  Liability of Town Limited
The town and its employees and agents shall take every reasonable precaution to ensure that the alarm signals received at the alarm monitoring facility are given appropriate attention and are acted upon with dispatch. Nevertheless, the town and its employees and agents shall not be liable for any defects in operation of alarm systems for any failure or neglect to respond appropriately upon receipt of an alarm from such defective source, or for the failure or neglect of any person in connection with the improper installation and operation of alarm systems. In the event that an alarm system is disconnected from the alarm monitoring facility, as provided in these regulations, the town and its employees and agents shall incur no liability by such action. (Ord. 2011­002 amended 03-14-11; Ord. 6-27-89 § 12)

5.08.130 [Adoption and Amendments - Repealed, March 14, 2011]
Exhibit A - Alarm Permit

Chapter 5.11 Explosives and Blasting Regulations
Sections
5.11.010     Short title [Repealed, August 23, 2010]
5.11.020     Applicability [Repealed, August 23, 2010]
5.11.021     Exceptions [Repealed, August 23, 2010]
5.11.030     Definitions [Repealed, August 23, 2010]
5.11.040     Forms and procedures [Repealed, August 23, 2010]
5.11.050     Violations and penalties [Repealed, August 23, 2010]
5.11.060     Licenses and permits [Repealed, August 23, 2010]
5.11.061     Applicability of chapter [Repealed, August 23, 2010]
5.11.062     Dealers, wholesale/retail sale of explosives [Repealed, August 23, 2010]
5.11.063     Blaster’s license required [Repealed, August 23, 2010]
5.11.064     Permit required [Repealed, August 23, 2010]
5.11.065     Permit applications – Fees - Preblasting conference - Renewal [Repealed, August 23, 2010]
5.11.066     Permit restrictions [Repealed, August 23, 2010]
5.11.067     Denial, revocation or suspension of permit [Repealed, August 23, 2010]
5.11.068     Licenses and permits available for public inspection; protection of permits [Repealed, August 23, 2010]
5.11.069     Recordkeeping and reporting [Repealed, August 23, 2010]
5.11.070     General regulations [Repealed, August 23, 2010]
5.11.080     Notification [Repealed, August 23, 2010]
5.11.090     Preblast surveys [Repealed, August 23, 2010]
5.11.100     Blasting operations [Repealed, August 23, 2010]
5.11.101     Warning required [Repealed, August 23, 2010]
5.11.102     Supervision of operations [Repealed, August 23, 2010]
5.11.103     Seismographic monitoring [Repealed, August 23, 2010]
5.11.110     Complaints [Repealed, August 23, 2010]
5.11.111     Nuisances [Repealed, August 23, 2010]
5.11.112     Damage complaints [Repealed, August 23, 2010]
5.11.120     Manufacture of explosives [Repealed, August 23, 2010]

Chapter 5.12 Fireworks
Sections:
5.12 Fireworks

5.12 Fireworks
Pursuant to NH RSA 160.C:6(link is external) the Milford Board of Selectmen deem that there shall not be any permits granted, except to the town of Milford, or the town’s agent, for programs and displays under its control, for the sale, purchase, possession, use or explosion of Permissible Fireworks. (Ord. 2010-006 amended September 2, 2010; Ord. 5-16-88)

Chapter 5.16 Food Service Establishments
Sections
5.16.010     Definitions
5.16.020     Sanitary Food Code
5.16.030     License [Amended, January 24, 2011]
5.16.040     Issuance of Licenses and Fees [Amended, January 24, 2011]
5.16.050     Suspension of Licenses and Temporary Closing of Operations or Violators [Amended, January 24, 2011]
5.16.060     Reinstatement of Suspended Licenses
5.16.070     Revocation of License
5.16.080     Hearing
5.16.090     Inspection of Food Service Establishments [Repealed, January 24, 2011]
5.16.100     Inspection Report [Repealed, January 24, 2011]
5.16.110     Access To Establishments
5.16.120     Issuance of Notices
5.16.130     Service Of Notices
5.16.140     Food from Outside Jurisdiction of Town
5.16.150     Plan Review of Future Construction
5.16.160     Penalties
5.16.170     Payment for Health Authority Services [Repealed, January 24, 2011]
5.16.180     Change in Ownership of a Food Establishment [Enacted, January 24, 2011]
5.16.190     Change in Name of a Food Establishment [Enacted, January 24, 2011]
5.16.200     Change in Location of a Food Establishment [Enacted, January 24, 2011]

5.16.010  Definitions

“Board of health” means the board of selectmen of the town and the health officer, in accordance with NH RSA 128:3.
“Food service establishments” means any fixed or mobile restaurant, pushcart, coffee shop, soda fountain, tavern, bar, cocktail lounge, night club, roadside stand, industrial feeding establishment, food vending operation, whether attended or unattended, private, public or nonprofit organization or institution serving food, catering kitchen, commissary or similar place in which food or drink is prepared for sale or for service on the premises or elsewhere, and any other eating or drinking establishment or operation where food is served or provided for public with or without charge. A food-service establishment also means a grocery store, meat market, bakery or any establishment where food is stored, manufactured and/or processed or packaged.
“Health authority” means the health officer of the town and/or his or her designated representative, whose appointment is under the jurisdiction of NH RSA 128:1. He or she shall have such police powers as may be designated by NH RSA 147-4 and NH RSA 147-5.
“Sanitary food code” means He-P23 00 “New Hampshire Rules for the Sanitary Production and Distribution of Food” as adopted and amended from time to time by the state of New Hampshire, Department of Health and Human Services, Division of Public Health Services.
“Temporary food service establishment” means any food service establishment which operates at a fixed location for a temporary period of time, not to exceed fourteen (14) days, in connection with a fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition or similar transitory gathering.(Ord. 2-4-86 § 1)
5.16.020 Sanitary food code
Every restaurant and food service establishment within the town shall comply with the provisions of the sanitary food code which is incorporated by reference in this chapter and made a part of these regulations. (Ord. 24-86 § 2)

5.16.030 License
It is unlawful for any person, entity or corporation to operate a food service establishment within the town without a valid license issued by the licensing health authority. No license shall be issued to nor retained by any applicant who shall fail to comply with the requirements of the regulations set forth in this chapter. No license shall be transferable to any other person, entity or corporation, nor from one location to another. A valid license shall be posted in every restaurant and food service establishment. A license for temporary food service establishments shall be issued for a period of time not to exceed fourteen (14) days. (Ord. 2010-018, 01-24-11; Ord. 2-4-86 § 3)

5.16.040 Issuance of licenses

Any person desiring to operate a restaurant or other food service establishment shall make written application for a license on forms provided by the licensing health authority. Upon receipt of such an application and the designated license administrating fee, and after inspection reveals that the applicable requirements of the regulations have been met, a license shall be issued to the applicant by the licensing health authority.
[License Expiration Date – Repealed, January 24, 2011]
[License Fee Schedule – Repealed, January 24, 2011]
5.16.050 Suspension of licenses and temporary closing of operations or violators

Any restaurant or other food service establishment within the town which fails to comply with the requirements of this sanitary and health code may be closed by the health authority without a hearing for a period not to exceed ten (10) days or until the violation is corrected and the sanitary condition is approved by the health authority.
When a licensee has failed to comply with a notice or order to remedy the health authority under the provisions of these regulations, may petition the Commissioner of the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) that the license be immediately suspended. (Ord. 2010-018 5.16.050 § A & B, 01-24-11; Ord. 24-86 § 3b)
(Ord. 2010-018 § 5.16040 A, B & C, 01-24-11; Ord. 2-4-86 § 3a)
5.16.060 Reinstatement of suspended licenses
Any person whose license had been suspended may, at any time, make application for a re-inspection for the purpose of reinstatement of the license. Within ten (10) days following receipt of a written request, including a statement signed by the applicant that in his or her opinion the conditions causing the suspension of the license have been corrected, the health authority shall make a re-inspection. If the applicant shall be in compliance with the requirements of these regulations, the license shall be reinstated. (Ord. 2-4-86 § 3c)

5.16.070 Revocation of license
For serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of these regulations, or for interference with the health authority in the performance of his or her duties, the health authority shall petition the Commissioner of the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) that the license be permanently revoked or withheld after a hearing has been provided by the board of health. Prior to such action, the health authority shall notify the licensee in writing stating the reasons for which the license is subject to revocation and date, time and place of such hearing. (Ord. 2010-018, 01-24-11; Ord. 2­4-86 § 3d)

5.16.080 Hearing
The hearings provided for in this section shall be conducted by the board of health at a time and place designated by them. Based upon the record of such hearing, the board of health shall make a finding and shall sustain, modify, or rescind any official notice or order considered in the hearing. Written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the license holder by the board of health. Hearings shall be conducted within fourteen
(14) days of notification to the licensee. (Ord. 24-86 § 3e)

5.16.090 Inspection of food service establishments [Repealed, January 24, 2011] (Ord. 2010-018, 01-24-11; Ord. 2-4-86 § 4)

5.16.100 Inspection report [Repealed, January 24, 2011] (Ord. 2010-018, 01-24­11; Ord. 2-4-86 §4a)

5.16.110 Access to establishments
The health authority, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter at any reasonable time, any restaurant or food service establishment within the town for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with these regulations. He or she shall be permitted to examine the records of the establishment to obtain pertinent information pertaining to food and supplies purchased, received, or used, and persons employed. (Ord. 2-4-86 § 4b)

5.16.120 Issuance of notices

Whenever the health authority shall make an inspection of a restaurant or food service establishment, and discover that any of the requirements of the sanitary food code have been violated, he or she shall notify the license holder or operator of such violations by means of an inspection report form or other written notice. In such notification, the health authority shall:
Set forth the specific violations found;
Establish a specific and reasonable period of time for the correction of the violations found.
In the case of temporary food service establishments, violations must be corrected within a specified period of time not to exceed twenty-four (24) hours. Failure to comply with such notice shall result in immediate suspension of the license. (Ord.2-4-86 § 4c)
5.16.130 Service of notices

Notices provided for under this section shall be deemed to have been properly served when the original of the inspection report for or other notice has been delivered personally to the license holder or person in charge, or such notice has been sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the licensee. A copy of such notice shall be filed with the records of the health authority.
Nothing herein shall preclude a suspension of license and temporary closing of violators as set forth in Section 5.16.050 of this chapter. (Ord. 2-4-86 § 4d)
5.16.140 Food from outside jurisdiction of town
Food from food service establishments outside the jurisdiction of the health authority of the town may be sold within the town if such food service establishments conform to the provisions of these regulations. To determine the extent of compliance with such provisions, the health authority may accept reports from responsible authorities in other jurisdictions where such food service establishments are located. (Ord. 2-4-86 § 5)

5.16.150 Plan review of future construction
When a restaurant or food service establishment is hereafter constructed or extensively remodeled, or when an existing structure is converted for use as a food service establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling or alteration, showing layout, arrangement and construction materials or work areas, and the location, size and type of fixed equipment and facilities shall be submitted to the health authority for approval before such work is begun, in order that the health authority may determine that the proposed construction will comply with all applicable health codes and regulations. No building permit shall be issued by the building inspector until such approval has been given by the health authority. (Ord. 2-4­86 § 6)

5.16.160 Penalties
Any person willfully violating such regulations shall be guilty of a violation. (Ord. 24-86 § 7

5.16.170 Payment for health authority services [Repealed, January 24, 2011] (Ord. 2010-018, 01-24-11; Ord. 2-4-86 § 8)

5.16.180 Change in Ownership of a Food Establishment

When there is a change of ownership of a food establishment, the new owner shall make application to the health authority at least fourteen (14) days prior to the change of ownership.
Upon receipt and processing of the items required by (a) above, and after an inspection conducted in accordance with these regulations which shall also determine compliance with the Sanitary Food Code, the health authority shall issue a Compliance Certificate reflecting the change in ownership.  
The issuance of a Compliance Certificate due to a change in ownership shall void the license of the previous owner on the date the change of ownership occurs.
(Ord. 2010-018 5.16.180 § A, B, & C, 01-24-11)
5.16.190 Change in Name of a Food Establishment

When a license holder intends to change the name of a food establishment, that license holder shall make application to the health authority at least fourteen (14) days prior to the intended date of change in name.  
The application shall include: 
The reason for requesting a new license;
The name of the food establishment as it appears on the existing license;  
The name of the food establishment as the license holder requests it to appear on the new license; and  
The date upon which the change in name is intended to occur.
Following receipt and processing of the items required by (a) and (b) above, and after an inspection conducted in accordance with these regulations which shall also determine compliance with Chapters 4, 5, and 6 of the Food Code, the health authority shall issue a Compliance Certificate reflecting the name change.  
(Ord. 2010-018 5.16.180 § A, B, & C, 01-24-11)
5.16.200 Change in Location of a Food Establishment

When there is a change of location of a food establishment, the license holder shall make application to the health authority at least fourteen (14) days prior to the intended date for change of location.
Upon receipt and processing of the items required by (a) above, and after an inspection conducted in accordance with these regulations which shall also determine compliance with the Sanitary Food Code, the health authority shall issue a Compliance Certificate reflecting the change of location.
The issuance of a Compliance Certificate due to a change in location shall void the previous license on the date the change of location occurs.
This section shall not apply to mobile food units, pushcarts or vehicles used to sell retail food.
(Ord. 2010-018 5.16.180 § A, B, C & D, 01-24-11)

Chapter 5.20 Recycling/Solid Waste
Sections
5.20.010    Establishment of Recycling - Passage of Ordinance
5.20.020    Permits
5.20.030    Compliance
5.20.040    Origin of Material
5.20.050    Recycling Center/Transfer Station
5.20.060    Penalties
5.20.100    No-Cost Recyclable Material
5.20.110    Aluminum Cans
5.20.120    Batteries
5.20.130    Corrugated Cardboard
5.20.140    Glass
5.20.150    Light Bulbs
5.20.160    Metal Food Cans
5.20.170    Mixed Metals
5.20.180    Mixed Paper
5.20.190    Oil
5.20.200    Plastic Bottles
5.20.210    Printer Ink Cartridges
5.20.220    Yard Waste
5.20.400    Fee-Based Recyclable Material
5.20.410    Automotive Batteries
5.20.420    Electronics
5.20.430    Tires
5.20.600    Solid Waste
5.20.610    Household Trash
5.20.620    Demolition Materials
5.20.630    Bulky Waste
5.20.640    Wood
5.20.650    Commercial Solid Waste Haulers - Agreements and Fees
5.20.700    Unacceptable Materials
5.20.710    Hazardous Waste

5.20.010 Establishment of Recycling - Passage of Ordinance
Passed by majority voice vote at the March 14, 1989 Milford Town Meeting.
A by-law establishing mandatory recycling in the Town of Milford; establishing the rules and regulations for the separation of specific materials from the solid waste stream for the purpose of recycling, promulgating rules and regulations for the collection of said specific materials and prescribing penalties for the violation thereof:
WHEREAS, pursuant to the authority vested in the Town of Milford by RSA 31:39 and 149-M:13 (II).
WHEREAS, the separation and removal of certain designated materials for the purpose of recycling, will serve the public interest by reducing solid waste and conserving our material resources; WHEREAS, it is necessary to establish the rules and regulations for the separation, collection and disposal of said designated acceptable materials; and directives of the Town Meeting as well as the responsibility of the Town under RSA 149-M:13; and NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Town of Milford, in the County of Hillsborough and state of New Hampshire that Mandatory Recycling is hereby established as a program for the separation of certain recyclable materials from garbage or rubbish by the residents of the Town of Milford and the collecting of these recyclables.
(Ord. 7-10-06)

Definitions
“recycling” as used herein shall mean the process by which designated materials, which otherwise would become solid waste, are collected, separated, processed, and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or products.
“commercial and industrial establishments” as used herein shall be deemed to include all public and private establishments including, but not limited to, those manufacturing, retailing, and/or service establishments; food establishments in business for the purpose of consumption, on or off premises, as well as food distribution and/or processing; and professional and/or corporate entities.
“dwelling unit” as used herein shall be deemed to include any one-family, two-family or multi-family home; apartments and high rises; condominiums and/or cooperatives.
“public or private institutions” as used herein shall be deemed to include all municipal and state government facilities; all religious, educational and healthcare facilities; and all public and/or private civic organizations.
“commercial hauler” as used herein shall mean any business that picks up solid waste and recyclable materials from homes, businesses, or institutions for the purpose of disposal at the Recycling Center/Transfer Station and has a written agreement with the Town.
(Ord. 2012-006, 12-07-23; Ord. 5-23-94 (part); Ord. 3-14-89 § 1)

5.20.020  Permits

Permits are required for the use of the Recycling Center/Transfer Station. Proof is required of a valid vehicle registration in the town for every permit issued. Except for temporary permits, permits will be issued on a biennial basis and will expire on June 30th every other year. These biennial solid waste permits must be attached to the driver’s side of the vehicle’s windshield. Permits may be obtained at the Recycling Center/Transfer Station scale house at no cost.
Temporary permits are available for residents/property owners utilizing the services or vehicles of others for the disposal of their (the residents/property owner’s) solid waste. They may obtain temporary permits at no cost, which shall be valid for a single day at a time provided he or she presents a letter of request for the same duly signed by the resident/property owner. This temporary permit is subject to the requirements in the town’s Recycling/Solid Waste Ordinance.
(Ord. 5-23-94 (part))

5.20.030  Compliance
All owners, lessees and occupants of dwelling units, business, commercial and/or industrial establishments, private, public and governmental institutions and facilities shall separate recyclable materials from the solid waste and shall recycle all recyclable materials.
(Ord. 2012-006, 12-07-23)

5.20.040  Origin of Material
Only material collected within the limits of the town, or such other towns as approved by the Milford Board of Selectmen in an annual agreement, shall be disposed of at the Recycling Center/Transfer Station. Failure to adhere to this shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 5-23 -94 (part))

5.20.050  Recycling Center/Transfer Station

Supervision: The director of public works or his or her designee, shall have the right to refuse the use of the solid waste transfer station to any person, corporation, or other user, who in the judgment of the director or his or her designee, is misusing the transfer station, violating this chapter, or who does not have a proper permit. Any such user who refuses to obey these legitimate orders shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter.
Location, Hours of Operation, and Miscellaneous Provisions
The Recycling Center/Transfer Station is located on North River Road.
The hours of this facility’s operation are posted on the gate and with the Town Hall and Department of Public Works.  The hours are subject to change.
Hours of closure will be determined through a collaborative effort of the Town Administrator, Department of Public Works Director, and the Recycling Center/Transfer Station manager, with the approval of the Board of Selectmen.
Attendants will be present during operational hours. They have the authority to direct the proper placement of both solid waste and recyclable materials, and they may deny use of the facility to any person violating this regulation.
Dumping is strictly prohibited when the Recycling Center/Transfer Station is closed. Persons leaving trash and/or recyclables at the gate or along the roadway when the Recycling Center/Transfer Station is closed will be subject to prosecution for trespassing and/or littering as the case may be.
Trespass: The gate shall be locked at all times when the Recycling Center/Transfer Station is not open to the public. Anyone entering the site when the gate is locked shall be trespassing and shall be charged with violating the terms of this chapter.
Burning: No burning shall be allowed except at the discretion of the fire chief. Recycling Center/Transfer Station brush burning is regulated by New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services rules and guidelines.
Disposal: Unless otherwise indicated in the specific recyclable category, recycled items shall be disposed of in the designated recycling area at the Recycling Center/Transfer Station.
Disposal Fees: Fees are accessed for certain items.  These include vehicle tires; vehicle rims; automotive batteries; Freon-containing refrigerators, air conditioners, and dehumidifiers; propane cylinders; mattresses; computer monitors, CPUs and printers, TVs, VCRs, demolition waste and bulky household waste.  Fees are also assessed to commercial trash haulers.  The fees are posted at the Recycling Center/Transfer Station.  See the attendant for weigh-in before disposing of material subject to a disposal fee, and after disposal of the material to pay the disposal fee.
Disposal Fee Exemption: In special circumstances, fees may be waived by the Board of Selectmen.
(Ord. 2012-006, 12-07-23; Ord. 7-10-06 (part); Ord. 5-23-94 (part))

5.20.060  Penalties
Failure to abide by any term or provision of this chapter shall be considered a violation as defined by NH RSA 625:9 and shall be administered as follows:

A first violation will result in a written warning being given to the violator.
A second violation shall be prosecuted as an offense under the criminal code of the state of New Hampshire and on conviction, a fine shall be levied as further described in Milford Municipal Appendix B – Fines.
A third violation shall be prosecuted as an offense under the criminal code of the state of New Hampshire and on conviction, a fine shall be levied as further described in Milford Municipal Appendix B – Fines, and future admission to the Recycling Center/Transfer Station denied.
In accordance with NH RSA 31:39 III all fines so collected shall inure to the town to defray the costs of solid waste management programs.
Any individual accessing the Recycling Center/Transfer Station after revocation of their access rights to the facility and before instatement of those rights shall be guilty of trespassing.
(Ord. 2012-006, 12-07-23; Ord. 5-23-94 (part))

5.20.100  No-Cost Recyclable Material

Definition - “no-cost recyclable material” as used herein shall include all materials designated by the municipality to be separated from the solid waste stream for the purpose of recycling, which may be recycled at no cost to the individual or business recycling such material, and shall include the following:
Aluminum cans
Batteries
Corrugated cardboard
Glass
Light bulbs
Metal food cans
Mixed paper
Mixed metals
Oil
Plastic bottles
Printer ink cartridges
Yard waste
5.20.110  Aluminum Cans

Definition – “aluminum cans” as used herein shall mean soda or juice beverage containers made entirely of aluminum.
Exclusions - Aluminum cans shall not include:
 Aerosol cans
Aluminum foil
Food trays
5.20.120  Batteries

Definition - “batteries” as used herein shall include the following:
Non-rechargeable batteries
Rechargeable batteries
Exclusions - Batteries shall not include:
Automotive batteries
5.20.130  Corrugated Cardboard

Definition - “corrugated cardboard” as used herein shall mean non-waxed, non-glossy corrugated cardboard boxes and brown paper bags.
5.20.140  Glass

Definition - “glass” as used herein shall include the following:
All glass bottles and jars with no metal attached
Household glass from windows
Broken glass (except auto glass)
Ceramics and porcelain items (without fixtures),
Opaque glass, Pyrex, crystal
Crockery
Exclusions - Glass shall not include:
Auto glass or headlights
Preparation
Glass bottles shall be rinsed clean of all residues and shall have all caps removed.
Labels do not have to be removed from glass bottles
Household glass from windows shall have all wood and/or metal frames removed.
Ceramics and porcelain toilets and sinks shall have all metal fixtures removed.
Disposal - Glass shall be deposited in the glass recycling bins at the recycling drop-off.
5.20.150  Light Bulbs

Definition - “light bulbs” as used herein shall include the following:
Incandescent (household) light bulbs
Fluorescent tube lights
Compact Fluorescent Light (CFL) bulbs
Light-emitting-diode (LED) bulbs
Exclusions - Light bulbs shall not include:
Automotive headlights
Flood lights
5.20.160  Metal Food Cans

Definition - “metal food cans” as used herein shall mean cans made entirely of steel or tin.
Exclusions – Metal food cans shall not include:
Aerosol cans
Aluminum foil
Metal food trays
Preparation
Metal food cans shall be rinsed clean of all residues and shall have all labels removed.
5.20.170  Mixed Metals

Definition - “mixed metals” as used herein shall mean items made entirely of aluminum, brass, copper, cast iron or other metals, or items made entirely of a combination of these metals.
5.20.180  Mixed Paper

Definition - “mixed paper” as used herein shall include the following:
Catalogs
Cereal boxes and outside food cartons
Color printed boxes and cartons
Drawing paper
Envelopes (with and without windows)
Junk mail
Manila folders
Newspapers and inserts
Non-corrugated and printed cardboard, including paper tubes
Notebook paper
Office and fax paper of all colors
Paperback books
Phone books
Exclusions - Mixed paper shall not include:
Blueprints
Carbon paper
Foil or foil-lined boxes
NCR paper
Mylar
Plastic coated paper
Plastic laminated paper
Self-sealing envelopes
Tissues or napkins
Tyvek
Wax coated paper
Food soiled containers
5Definition - “oil” as used herein shall mean new or used automotive oil that has not been mixed with any other substance (i.e. anti-freeze).

Disposal - Oil shall be left in a container at the Recycling Processing Building. Recycling Center/Transfer Station staff shall be responsible for subsequently disposing of the oil.
5.20.200  Plastic Bottles

Definition - “plastic bottles” as used herein shall mean only #1 and #2 plastic bottles whose opening is smaller than the body.  Plastic bottles shall be clean and dry and not include bottle caps.
Preparation
Plastic bottles shall be rinsed clean of all residues
Labels do not have to be removed from plastic bottles
5.20.210  Printer Ink Cartridges

Definition - “printer ink cartridges” as used herein shall include all new or recycled printer ink cartridges.
Disposal - Printer ink cartridges shall be placed in a plastic bag and deposited at the designated area of the Recycling Center & Transfer Station.
5.20.220  Yard Waste

A.  Definition - “yard waste” as used herein shall include:
Leaves
Grass clippings
Garden vegetables
Coffee grinds
Exclusions - Yard waste shall not include:
Woody brush
Disposal - Yard waste shall be deposited at the designated composting area of the Recycling Center/Transfer Station.
(Ord. 2012-006, 12-07-23; Ord. 5-23-94 (part))
5.20.400  Fee-Based Recyclable Material

Definition - “fee-based recyclable material” as used herein shall include all materials designated by the municipality to be separated from the solid waste stream for the purpose of recycling which may be recycled at a cost to the individual or business recycling such material, and shall include the following:
Automotive batteries
Electronics
Tires
5.20.410  Automotive Batteries

Definition - “automotive batteries” as used herein shall include the following:
New or used automotive batteries
Disposal - Automotive batteries shall be deposited in the designated recycling area after the appropriate disposal fee has been paid.
5.20.420  Electronics

A.  Definition - “electronics” as used herein shall include the following:
Computer monitors
Computer CPUs
TVs
VCR and DVD players
Printers
Disposal - Electronics shall be deposited in the electronics recycling storage container after the appropriate disposal fee has been paid.
5.20.430  Tires

Definition - “tires” as used herein shall include the following:
New or used automotive tires made of rubber, on or off the rim
New or used equipment tires (i.e. riding lawn mower, snowblower) made of rubber, on or off the rim
Exclusions - Tires shall not include tires made of non-rubber material.
Disposal - Tires shall be deposited in the designated recycling area after the appropriate disposal fee has been paid.
(Ord. 2012-006, 12-07-23; Ord. 5-23-94 (part))
5.20.600  Solid Waste

Definition - “solid waste” as used herein shall include all non-recyclable material accepted by the contractor that receives Milford’s solid waste.
Exclusions - Solid waste shall not include:
Hazardous waste as defined in NH RSA 147-A:2, including a solid waste which the generator formally declares in accordance with Env-Wm 502.01(c)(2) to be a hazardous waste and which is subsequently managed as a hazardous waste pursuant to the requirements of NH RSA 147-A
Solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows
Cut or uprooted stumps buried on-site with local approval, if required, provided that such burial locations are not located within 75 feet of any drinking water supply
Municipal and industrial discharges which are point sources subject to permits under section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended
Radioactive materials as defined and regulated by the New Hampshire rules for the control of radiation, He-P 2000 and He-P 4000
Septage as defined in NH RSA 485-A:2, IX-a
Sludge as defined in NH RSA 485-A:2, XI-a, namely “the solid or semi-solid material produced by water and wastewater treatment processes, excluding domestic septage; provided, however, sludge which is disposed of at solid waste facilities permitted by the department shall be considered solid waste and regulated under NH RSA 14Yard waste
Bodies of deceased persons
Waste-derived products which are certified for distribution and use pursuant to Env-Sw 1500 and actively managed
(Ord. 2012-006, 12-07-23; Ord. 5-23-94 (part))
5.20.610  Household Trash

Definition - “household trash” as used herein shall mean all non-recyclable, non-hazardous waste material accepted by the contractor that receives Milford’s solid waste.
5.20.620  Demolition Materials

Definition - “demolition materials” as used herein shall include:
Glued, painted, varnished, stained or treated wood
Pressed board
Plywood
Shingles
Sheet rock
Disposal - Demolition materials shall be deposited in the designated demolition materials disposal bin after the vehicle with materials has been weighed at the Recycling Center/Transfer Station scale house. Subsequent to disposing of the material, the vehicle shall be re-weighed at the scale house to determine the disposal fee.
5.20.630  Bulky Waste

Definition - “bulky waste” as used herein shall include:
Insulation
Large plastic items
Mattresses and box springs
Padding
Rugs and carpeting
Upholstered furniture
Disposal - Bulky waste shall be deposited in the designated bulky waste disposal bin after the vehicle with materials has been weighed at the Recycling Center/Transfer Station scale house. Subsequent to disposing of the material, the vehicle shall be re-weighed at the scale house to determine the disposal fee.
5.20.640  Wood

Definition – “wood” as used herein shall mean natural brush not exceeding 5” in diameter, unpainted, unstained or unvarnished lumber, and clean pallets.
Exclusions - Wood shall not include plywood or pressboard. (see Demolition Materials)
5.20.650  Commercial Solid Waste Haulers - Agreements and Fees
Commercial haulers as defined in Section 5.20.010 A, 5 shall execute an agreement with the Town of Milford to allow them to dispose of solid waste at the Milford Recycling Center/Transfer Station.  The disposal fee shall be set by the Board of Selectmen and may change from time to time as conditions dictate.
(Ord. 2012-006, 12-07-23; Ord. 5-23-94 (part))

5.20.700  Unacceptable Materials

Definition - “unacceptable materials” as used herein shall mean those materials that are not accepted at the Recycling Center/Transfer Station and shall include:
Cement, bricks, concrete and cement blocks
Sludge or septic water
Stumps
Trees, and limbs greater than five inches in diameter
Veterinary dead animals
Any items precluded by the contactor that accepts Milford’s solid waste
Any material which in the opinion of the director of public works or his or her designee, constitutes a serious hazard to other users of the facility, to the property of the town or to the operation of the solid waste transfer station
(Ord. 5-23-94 (part))
5.20.710  Hazardous Waste

Definition - “hazardous waste” as used herein means any solid, semi-solid, liquid or contained gaseous waste, or any combination of these wastes, which (a) May cause or contribute to an increase in irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; (b) Poses a present or potential threat to human health or the environment if improperly managed: (c) Has been identified as a hazardous waste by the DES Waste Management Division. Hazardous materials include but are not limited to the following:
Anti-freeze, gasoline
Asbestos
Asphalt and driveway sealer
Creosote
Explosives and fireworks
Infectious waste as defined by New Hampshire Code of Administrative Rules, Chapter Env-Sw 900, Management of Certain Wastes, Statutory Authority: NH RSA 149-M:7
Containers of lead/oil base paint, wood preservatives, and varnish
Pathological wastes and any wastes that have had contact with body parts or fluids generated by the care of patients by hospitals, nursing homes, doctors/dentists’ offices, laboratories and health care facilities of any nature. These require certified contractors for disposal.
Pesticides, insecticides, and herbicides
Organic chemicals
Pool chemicals and acids
Propane and gas cylinders
Radioactive waste

Chapter 5.26 Private Septage Disposal Systems
Sections
5.26.010 Private Septage Disposal Systems
 
5.26.010 Private Septage Disposal Systems
All private septic systems in the town shall comply with the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Service, Subsurface Code of Administrative rules, Env-Wq 1000, which can be found here.(Ord. 2010-017, 01-24-11)

Chapter 5.28 Surface and Groundwater Protection
Sections
5.28.010     Authority
5.28.020     Purpose
5.28.030     Inventory of potential contamination sources (PCSs)
5.28.040     Local groundwater and surface water protection management program [Amended, January 10, 2011]
5.28.050     Other regulations

5.28.010  Authority
The health ordinance codified in this chapter was recommended by the health officer and approved by the board of health of Milford under the authority granted in NH RSA 147:1, entitled “Local Regulations.” (Ord. 9-20-99, § I)

5.28.020  Purpose
To provide for the prevention of groundwater pollution of the town’s only remaining municipal source of drinking water and protection of other potential sources of drinking water. (Ord. 9-20-99, § II)

5.28.030  Inventory of potential contamination sources (PCSs)
An inventory of potential contamination sources that are located within the stratified drift aquifer and potential drainage to all surface waters was prepared prior to the adoption of the health ordinance codified in this chapter.

Place of Filing. The inventory, which is on file in the office of the health officer, is available for public review during regular business hours.
Inventory Update. The health officer shall update the inventory of potential contamination sources at least once every three years. (Ord. 9-20-99, § III)
5.28.040 Local groundwater and surface water protection management program

Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all land uses that are referenced in Section 5.28.030 as potential contamination sources located within the following areas in the town.
 The Wellhead Protection District is delineated on a map that is available for public viewing in the Office of Community Development, Town Hall.
Best Management Practices (BMPs) Required. Best Management Practices described in NH Department of Environmental Services Environmental Fact Sheet WD-DWGB22-4 2009 or as subsequently amended of this Health Code and State Administrative Rules ENV-WS 421, or as subsequently amended shall be utilized by all potential contamination sources in New Hampshire inaccordance with the Groundwater Protection Act of 1991, including those located within the area delineated for protection in Milford.
Notification of Potential Contamination Sources Landowners. Each potential contamination source owner shall receive a notification letter from the health officer at least once every three years which indicates:
The date when the health officer will perform the next site inspection;
The purpose of that inspection; and
A statement that activities performed on site are subject to the Best Management Practices required by subsection B of this section.
Site Inspection Required.
The local health officer shall inspect all potential contamination sources located within areas of groundwater and surface waters in order to insure compliance with Best Management Practices at intervals not to exceed once every three years.
The health officer shall fill out an inspection form upon completion of each inspection. The health officer, at no cost to the owner, shall perform the initial inspection. One copy of the form shall be provided to the potential contamination source owner and one copy shall be kept in the official records of the health officer.
Determination of compliance with or violation of Best Management Practices.
Certificate of Compliance.
A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the health officer, if the potential contamination source is found to employ Best Management Practices, based upon a site inspection performed in accordance with subsection D of this section. The certificate shall be good for a period of three years.
A certificate of compliance, issued in accordance with this chapter, is not intended in any way to limit the powers of the health officer to enter property to perform additional inspections for the purpose of administration of this chapter.
Written warning of violation.
A written warning of violation shall be issued by the health officer:
If the potential contamination source is found not to employ Best Management Practices, in accordance with subsection B of this section; and
The violation is not an immediate threat to public health and safety in the opinion of the health officer.
The written warning shall:
Specify the actions or conditions which violate Best Management Practices;
Identify what needs to be done to correct the violation(s); and
Specify a reasonable timeframe within which the violation shall be corrected.
One copy of the written warning shall be provided to the potential contamination source owner and one shall be kept in the official records of the health officer.
Removal Order.
A removal order shall be issued by the health officer:
If the potential contamination source is found not. to employ Best Management Practices in accordance with subsection B of this section and an immediate threat to public health and safety exists, in the opinion of the health officer; or
If a violation is not corrected within the timeframe specified in a written warning issued by the health officer.
The removal order shall:
Specify the actions or conditions which violate Best Management Practices;
Identify what needs to be done to correct the violation(s); and
Specify the timeframe within which the violation shall be corrected, based on the degree of threat to public health and safety.
One copy of the removal order shall be provided to the potential contamination source owner and one shall be kept in the official records of the health officer.
Enforcement of Best Management Practices.
The board of health of the town shall be responsible for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
In the event that the owner or operator of a facility fails to comply with a removal order issued under subsection (E)(III) of this section within the specified time period, the health officer shall have the authority to cause the nuisance to be removed or destroyed.
In the event that the owner or operator of a facility fails to comply with a removal order issued under subsection (E)(III) of this section within the specified time period, the health officer shall have the authority to commence an action for collection of nuisance abatement costs in accordance with NH RSA 147:7-b.
Fee for Site Re-inspection. There shall be a fee for re-inspection of noncompliant potential contamination sources, to be determined by the board of health. The owner or operator of the facility will pay the fee. A fee schedule shall be established by the board of health, which reasonably represents the cost of performing an inspection on various types of facilities. The procedure for adoption of the fee schedule shall be as provided for in NH RSA 41-9:a. (Ord. 2010-016, 01-10-11 – amended Art. A:I, A:II, & B; Ord. 9-20-99, § IV)
5.28.050 Other regulations
When the provisions specified in this chapter for groundwater and surface water protection conflict with those of other ordinances or regulations, the most stringent requirements shall apply. (Ord. 9-20-99, § V)

Chapter 5.32 Stormwater Management and Erosion Control
Sections
5.32.010     Purpose and Objectives
5.32.020     Authority
5.32.030     Jurisdiction
5.32.040     Severability
5.32.050     Amendments
5.32.060     Applicability
5.32.070     Abbreviations/Definitions
5.32.080     Design Standards
5.32.090     Application, Approval and Review
5.32.100     Responsibility for Installation/Construction/Inspection
5.32.110     Maintenance and Inspection
5.32.120     Other Required Permits
5.32.130     Post-Construction Operation
5.32.140     Enforcement and Penalties
5.32.150     Mandatory Regulated MS4s in Urbanized Areas – Map Map 1: Town of Milford “Urbanized Areas”

5.32.010 Purpose and Objectives
The purpose of this Regulation is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the Town of Milford through the regulation of discharges into the Town’s Stormwater Drainage System, waterbodies, streams, and wetlands in a manner compliant with the requirements of State and federal law, including the provisions of the Federal StormwaterManagement legislation for Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems (MS4’s), as amended.
The objective of this Regulation shall be to:

Prohibit unpermitted discharges into the Stormwater Drainage System;  
To set forth the legal authority and procedures to carry out all inspection, monitoring, and enforcement activities necessary to ensure compliance with this Regulation and applicable State and federal law; and
To establish, for new construction, design and construction standards for stormwater drainage systems that will result in the construction of systems that will be compliant with this Regulation and State and federal laws and to have such standards incorporated into the existing standards and review processes governing new construction in site plan and subdivision review, as well as building permits that implicate the requisite disturbance of the site.
5.32.020 Authority
This Regulation is adopted pursuant to the authority vested in:

The authority vested in the Selectmen pursuant to RSA 41:11, RSA 47:17, VII, VIII, and XVIII; and
The Planning Board pursuant to RSA 674:35 and RSA 674:36, and RSA 674:44; and, RSA 155-E:11; and
The authority vested in the Health Officer and Board of Health pursuant to RSA
147:1 and RSA 147:14; and . The authority vested in the Water and Sewer Commissioners pursuant to RSA
38:26 and RSA 149:I:6, respectively.

The Regulation shall become effective upon adoption by the Town of Milford Planning Board, Health Officer/Board of Health, the Board of Selectmen, Water and Sewer Commissions, in accordance with the statutory sections identified above.
5.32.030 Jurisdiction

This Regulation shall pertain to all land within the boundaries of the Town of Milford, New Hampshire.
In any case where a provision of the Regulation is found to be in conflict with a provision of any other Ordinance, regulation, code, or covenant in effect in the Town of Milford or with any State Statute with particular reference to NH RSA 676:14 and RSA 674:16 and RSA 674:17 and the relevant sections therein, the provision which is the more restrictive shall prevail.
5.32.040 Severability
The invalidity of any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this Regulation shall not be held to invalidate any other section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this Regulation.

5.32.050 Amendments
This Regulation may be amended by the approval of the several boards identified in Section 5.32.020 above, provided that each such agency complies with any applicable statutory or local procedures governing their authority to adopt such regulations. Amendments to zoning aspects must be approved at Milford Town Meeting.

5.32.060 Applicability
This Regulation shall apply to any action that will hinder, interfere with, alter, or modify the existing stormwater flow, drainage, or infrastructure constructed for such purpose unless and until this Regulation has been complied with.  It shall apply to any discharges into the Town’s Stormwater Drainage System, waterbodies, streams, and wetlands.

Permit and SWMP.
Permit Required. Except as permitted by this Regulation, no person shall alter land or engage in any activity which causes or contributes to stormwater runoff discharge without first having obtained a StormwaterManagement Permit (SMP) for land proposed to be altered or which will be affected by such activity. The owner shall be required to apply to the Director of Community Development and obtain such permit from the Planning Board, Health Officer, DPW Director, Water and/or Sewer Commissioners, or their designees, as their jurisdiction warrants, prior to undertaking any such action.  This requirement shall apply to any activity that will disturb or impact a land area greater than 5,000 cumulative square feet unless noted as an exclusion in a. through e. below.
Normal maintenance and improvement of land in agricultural use provided Best Management Practices as established by NHDES Regulations are being observed.
Maintenance of existing landscaping, gardens, or lawn areas associated with a single-family dwelling.
The construction of any fence that will not alter existing terrain or drainage patterns.
Construction of utilities (gas, water, electric, telephone, etc.) other than drainage, disturbing less than 20,000 contiguous square feet, within the limits of an existing paved roadway, which will not permanently alter terrain, groundcover, or drainage patterns, where trenches are paved at the end of each working day.
Emergency repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice that poses a threat to public health or safety, or as deemed necessary by the Health Officer.
Requirement of Construction Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Plan. The applicant for a permit required under Section 5.32.060.A.I. above, shall be required, additionally, as part of the application review process, to design and submit a Construction Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Plan (unique to the site) to the Director of Community Development for distribution to the Planning Board and Town Engineer for any tract of land being developed, redeveloped, or subdivided within the boundaries of Milford, where one or more of the following conditions are proposed:
A cumulative disturbed area exceeding 20,000 square feet, unless the disturbance is solely related to construction or reconstruction of a street or road, which will allow up to one (1) acre of disturbance prior to requiring a complete Construction Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Plan.
A subdivision of more than three building lots. 
Proposed work adjacent to a wetlands or wetlands buffer.
Phasing of greater than three lots per year of an existing or proposed subdivision.
Construction of utilities (gas, water, electric, telephone, etc.) requiring contiguous ground disturbance of greater than 20,000 square feet unless the disturbance is proposed within the limits of an existing paved roadway utilizing a contractor with no history of erosion concerns.
Disturbed critical areas (see Definitions).
Standards and Requirements of Plan Submission. Such plans shall be submitted to the Director of Community Development for distribution to the Planning Board, Health Officer, DPW Director, Water and/or Sewer Commissioners, or their designees, for review and approval to the extent that the proposed use involves areas of their jurisdiction.  The Planning Board, Health Officer, DPW Director, Water and/or Sewer Commissioners, or their designees may, if in their judgment they deem it necessary or helpful to assist them in their review of such plan, require that the plan be reviewed by a Registered Professional Engineer or other professional consultant acceptable to them, the cost of which shall be borne by the applicant. The Plan, which shall be unique to the site, shall contain all information required by Sections 5.32.080 and 5.32.090, below.
5.32.070 Abbreviations/Definitions
“Best Management Practice (BMP)” A proven or accepted structural, non-structural, or vegetative measure; the application of which reduces erosion, sediment, or peak storm discharge, or improves the quality of stormwater runoff.
“BMP” Best Management Practice.
“Cease and Desist” Document issued related to a parcel or activity in violation of the Town of Milford StormwaterManagement and Erosion Control Regulations and/or the Town of Milford Site Plan, Subdivision, other Land Use Regulations or Ordinances, or plans approved there under.   
“Certified Soil Scientist” A person qualified in soil classification and mapping that is certified by the State of New Hampshire Board of Natural Scientists.
“Critical Areas” Disturbed areas of any size

I. Within 25 feet of a permanent or intermittent vernal pool, stream, bog, water body; or
II. Within 25 feet of poorly or very poorly drained soils; floodplain; or
III. Disturbed areas exceeding 2,000 square feet in highly erodible soils; or  
IV. Disturbed areas containing slope lengths exceeding 25 feet on slopes greater than 15 percent

“Development” Any construction or land disturbance or grading activities other than for agricultural and silviculturalpractices.  
“Disturbed Area” An area where the natural vegetation has been removed exposing the underlying soil or where vegetation has been covered.
“Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)” The Federal agency of the United States responsible for implementing the Clean Water Act, including the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) program.
“EPA” (United States) Environmental Protection Agency.
“Erosion” The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice, or gravity.
“Highly Erodible Soils” Any soil with an erodibility class (K factor) greater than or equal to 0.43 in any layer as found in Table 3-1 of the Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Urban and Developing Areas in New Hampshire.
“National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System” An EPA Clean Water Act Permit program.
“NOI” Notice of Intent.  
“NOPV” Notice of Probable Violation.
“NOT” Notice of Termination.
“Notice of Intent (NOI)” Document to apply for coverage under the EPA’s Construction General Permit for stormwaterdischarges from construction activities.
“Notice of Probable Violation (NOPV)” Document describing nonconformance with the Town of Milford StormwaterManagement and Erosion Control Regulations.
“Notice of Termination (NOT)” Document to end coverage of a construction activity under EPA’s Construction General Permit.
“NPDES” National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.   
“Project Area” The area within the subdivision or site plan boundaries plus any areas with associated off-site improvements.
“Sediment” Solid material, either mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by erosion.
“Stabilized” When the soil erosion rate approaches that of undisturbed soils. Soils which are disturbed will be considered protected when covered with a healthy, mature growth of grass, or a good covering of straw mulch or other equivalent (seedless) mulch (2 tons/acre).  Mulch is only a temporary measure; ultimately, the site needs vegetation.
“Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Plan (SWMP)” A plan which may be required by the Town which outlines project features, proposed temporary and permanent erosion control features, maintenance schedules and practices, and design basis used to establish temporary and permanent stormwater design features.  If a SWPPP is required under Federal law, the applicant may completely incorporate SWMP requirements into the SWPPP and request that the SWPPP cover both the SWPPP and SWMP requirements.
“Stormwater Permit (SWP)” A permit issued by the Town of Milford per the requirements outlined in this Regulation.
“Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP)” A plan required by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) that clearly describes appropriate pollution control measures that include a description of all pollution control measures (i.e., BMP’s) that will be implemented as part of the construction activity to control pollutants in stormwater discharges and describes the interim and permanent stabilization practices for the site.
“Stormwater Runoff” The water from precipitation that is not absorbed, evaporated, or otherwise stored within the contributing drainage area.  
“Stream” Areas of flowing water occurring for sufficient time to develop and maintain defined channels but which may not flow during dry portions of the year. Includes but is not limited to all perennial and intermittent streams located on U.S. Geological Survey Maps.
“SWMP” Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Plan.  
“SWP” Stormwater Permit.
“SWPPP” Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan.
“Town” The Town of Milford, New Hampshire.
“Town Engineer” It is understood that there is no official position in the Town of Milford identified as the “Town Engineer”.  Thus, the term “Town Engineer’” when contained in this Regulation, is intended to refer to and identify any qualified engineering consultant which the Selectmen, Town Administrator, Planning Board, Health Officer, DPW Director, Water and/or Sewer Commissioners, or their designees engage(s) for the purpose of reviewing any application or plan submitted in accordance with this Regulation or determining compliance herewith, when, in their judgment, such review is appropriate or necessary in order to insure compliance with this Regulation or determine if the provisions hereof have been violated.   
“UA” Urbanized Area.
“Urbanized Area (UA)” An area as defined by the EPA (based upon data collected from the US Census Bureau) serving a population of 10,000 or greater and a population density of 1,000 people per square mile.

5.32.080 Design Standards

Temporary/Construction Stormwater Management Design. The following standards shall be applied in planning for stormwater management and erosion control as related to construction: (These standards are in addition to requirements that may be found in this and other sections of the Site Plan, Subdivision, other Land Use Regulations or Ordinances.)
All measures in the Plan shall meet as a minimum the Best Management Practices set forth in the StormwaterManagement and Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Urban and Developing Areas in New Hampshire, Rockingham County Conservation District, NH Department of Environmental Services, Soil Conservation Service (now the Natural Resources Conservation Service), August 1992, as amended.Additional BMP’s are available at the following locations:
www.des.state.nh.us/(link is external)factsheets/wqe/wqe-6.htm -NHDES Environmental Fact Sheet WD-WQE-6, (Soil Erosion and Sediment Control on Construction Sites, 1996)
http://cfpub.epa.gov/(link is external)npdes/stormwater/menuofbmps/index.cfm EPA National Pollution Discharge Elimination System, (NPDES) (Stormwater Menu of Best Management Practices (BMP's) and Construction Site Stormwater Runoff Control)).
Whenever practical, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected, or supplemented. The stripping of vegetation shall be done in a manner that minimizes soil erosion
Appropriate erosion and sediment control measures shall be installed. The Town Engineer or his designee shall review and approve installation of the measures prior to land disturbance.  
The area of disturbance shall be kept to a minimum.  Disturbed areas remaining idle for more than 30 days shall be stabilized.
Measures shall be taken to control erosion within the project area. Sediment in runoff water shall be trapped and retained within the project area using approved measures. Wetland areas and surface waters shall be protected from sediment.
Off-site surface water and runoff from undisturbed areas shall be diverted away from disturbed areas where feasible or carried non­erosively through the project area.  Integrity of downstream drainage systems shall be maintained. 
Measures shall be taken to control the post-development peak rate of runoff so that it does not exceed pre-development runoff for the two-year, 24-hour storm event and for additional storm event frequencies as specified in the design criteria of the Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Urban and Developing Areas in New Hampshire.
Priority should be given to preserving natural drainage systems including perennial and intermittent streams, wetlands, swales, and drainage ditches for conveyance of runoff leaving the project area.
All temporary erosion and sediment control measures shall be maintained in functioning condition until final site stabilization is accomplished.
All temporary erosion and sediment control measures shall be removed after final site stabilization.  Trapped sediment and other disturbed soil areas resulting from the removal of temporary measures shall be permanently stabilized within 30 days unless conditions dictate otherwise.
Naturally occurring streams, channels, and wetlands shall be used for conveyance of runoff leaving the project area only after appropriate sedimentation control measures have been employed.
Permanent Stormwater Management General Design Criteria. The following standards shall be applied in planning for stormwater management and erosion control as related to long-term management of municipal water quality (Note: See Section 5.32.150 for the EPA map of the Urbanized Area):
I. Under One Acre of Total Disturbance (includes non-contiguous areas):
Within the urbanized area (UA) will require a basic stormwater quality management system. At a minimum, all stormwater must pass through basic pretreatment (beyond catch basin sumps) prior to leaving the site.
Outside of the UA, water quality measures will be required on a case-by-case basis.
Over One Acre of Total Disturbance (includes non-contiguous areas):
Within the UA requires a well thought out, systematic permanent stormwater quality management system.  Latest technology and most up-to-date performance data must be considered when selecting permanent control measures.  As noted above, catch basin sumps alone are not considered a valid water quality control measure. Mechanical devices may be required to supplement any proposal. Maintenance programs and schedules will be required as part of the proposal. In addition to the one-time maintenance bond at the time of road acceptance, off-site water quality control measures may require long-term escrow funds to cover future maintenance expenses (including removal of erosion control measures not removed as part of the project).  Sites with appropriate separation to the seasonal high groundwater table must also consider groundwater recharge.  All groundwater recharge systems will require on-site test pit and percolation test data to be submitted as part of the review.
Outside the UA requires a basic systematic permanent stormwater quality management system. Catch basin sumps alone are not considered a valid water quality control measure.
Adjacent to the Wetlands Buffer (Any Size Disturbance):
Any new project adjacent to the wetlands buffer will require permanent water quality control measures.
Projects involving redevelopment or expansion will be considered on a case-by-case basis.
Municipal Projects:
All municipal projects will comply with water quality control measures defined in this Regulation.  Nothing regarding municipal projects is intended to impose any greater requirement than is already required by RSA 674:54.
Permanent Stormwater Management Technical Design Criteria
All measures in the plan shall, as a minimum, meet the Best Management Practices set forth in the Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Urban and Developing Areas in New Hampshire, Rockingham County Conservation District, NH Department of Environmental Services, Soil Conservation Service (now the Natural Resources Conservation Service), August 1992, as amended.
The design of proposed features must consider the following:
Existing and proposed methods of handling stormwater runoff so that there will be no increase in the amount of runoff that leaves the boundaries of the site.  (The Planning Board may permit an increase in off-site stormwater runoff on submission of a detailed downstream study and on the recommendation of the Town Engineer.)
Engineering calculations used to determine drainage requirements based upon 25-year storm frequency, 24-hour duration shall be provided if the project will significantly alter the existing drainage patterns due to such factors as the amount of new impervious surfaces (such as pavement and building areas) being proposed. All closed drainage systems, culverts, major ditches, swales, and detention facilities must be sized for the 25-year storm frequency. All structural measures such as detention/retention facilities must be reviewed for 50-year storm impacts.
If the project will affect drainage flow to an existing roadway culvert, or if a detention or retention area is proposed, a minimum of a 25­year storm shall be used to evaluate potential off-site effects.  If a State-owned or maintained culvert is affected by the development, State of New Hampshire Department of Transportation (NHDOT) Guidelines shall be used for evaluation of the culvert.  Written approval from the NHDOT must be submitted before final approval is granted.
Access for maintenance of stormwater facilities must be included as part of the design, where necessary.  Access easements may be required.
All temporary erosion and sediment control measures shall be removed after final site stabilization.  Trapped sediment and other disturbed soil area resulting from the removal of temporary measures shall be permanently stabilized within thirty (30) days unless conditions dictate otherwise.  If local, State, or Federal authorities determine that the trapped sediment contains pollutants, trapped sediment must be removed and disposed of in a manner which satisfies Federal, State, and local regulations.
Velocities of less than ten feet per second (10 fps) are required prior to entering a sedimentation swale.  The maximum design velocity within the swale shall be 1.0 feet per second during passage of the 25-year storm.
Flows less than ten cubic feet per second (10 cfs) are required prior to entering a sedimentation swale.
All slopes equal to or steeper than 2:1 adjacent to a public right-of­way must have special stabilization details provided with the submission.
Forebays for stilling and sediment trapment must be included in all basin and swale designs.
Velocities of ten feet per second (10 fps) or less are desirable within a closed drainage system. Higher velocities may be allowed provided special design criteria have been used.
A minimum velocity of two feet per second (2 fps) is required within a closed drainage system.
Proposed riprap within a public right-of-way shall be placed a minimum of twelve inches deep.
Seasonal high water table elevations must be accounted for in all BMP design criteria.
Drainage design should follow the guidelines presented in the Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Urban and Developing Areas in New Hampshire, as published by the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services, Rockingham County Conservation District and the USDA Soil Conservation Service, and additional guidelines published in the Manual on Drainage Design for Highways, as published by the State of New Hampshire Department of Transportation.
5.32.090 Application, Approval and Review

Initial Application Requirements. The following minimum requirements apply to all demolition or construction projects subject to 5.32.060.A.1 or 5.32.060.A.2. Additional requirements may be found in this and other sections of the Site Plan, Subdivision, or Other Land Use Regulations.  If the project is part of a formal Planning Board Approval process, documents must be submitted for consideration as part of Final Approval.
Site drawing of existing and proposed conditions including:
Locus map showing property boundaries.
North arrow, scale, and date.
Property lines.
Easements.
Structures, utilities, roads, and other paved areas.
Topographic contours.
Critical areas, as defined herein.
Surface water and wetlands, drainage patterns, and watershed boundaries.
Vegetation.
Limits of work.
Soils information for design purposes or for determining highly erodible soils shall be determined from a National Cooperative Soil Survey (NCSS) soil series map.  A High Intensity Soil Map of the site, prepared in accordance with the Society of Soil Scientists of Northern New England (SSSNNE) Special Publication No. 1, can only be used for design purposes and not for determining highly erodible soils.
Construction details and/or application procedures for temporary and permanent stormwater management and erosion and sediment control BMP's.
Areas and timing of soil disturbance.
A schedule for self-inspection and maintenance of all BMP's.  (The schedule must be included within the plan set.)
Narrative section including discussion of each measure, its purpose, construction sequence, and installation timing as they apply to the site.
If infiltration or exfiltration is proposed as part of the drainage solution, test pit information including estimated seasonal high water table elevations shall be provided at the location and approximate elevation of the proposed infiltrating or exfiltrating device.   
Calculations for the infiltration or exfiltration system. These calculations should also account for frozen ground conditions, when the devices may not function at their optimal design.
 Any other specific study, calculation, or investigation as requested by the Town.
The drainage plans and calculations portion of the SWMP or SWPPP shall be certified by a Licensed Professional Engineer, registered in the State of New Hampshire.
Final Application Requirements. The following additional requirements shall be required (in paper and electronic form) as part of the final plan unless the project is deemed of sufficiently minimal impact to qualify for the minimum requirements specified in Section 5.32.080 (Design Standards) of this Regulation as determined by the Public Works Director or Town Engineer.  Applicants with projects approved prior to the effective date of this Regulation, whose submission(s) included an Erosion Control Plan and a Stormwater Management Plan as a component of such submission(s) may present such submission(s) in lieu of the requirements of Section 5.32.090.A and Section 5.32.090.B.
Construction Drawings/Supporting Documents:
A project narrative including a description of the development.
Locus map showing property boundaries.
North arrow, scale, date.
Property lines.
Structures, roads, and utilities.
Topographic contours at two-foot (2’) intervals.
Critical areas.
Within the project area and within 200 feet of project boundary surface waters, wetlands, and drainage patterns and watershed boundaries.  
Vegetation.  
Extent  of  100-year  floodplain  boundaries if published or determined.
Soils information for design purposes from a National Cooperative Soil Survey (NCSS) soil series map or a High Intensity Soil Map of the site, prepared in accordance with Society of Soil Scientists of Northern New England (SSSNNE) Special Publication No. 1. Highly erodible soils shall be determined by soil series.
Easements.
Areas of soil disturbance.
Areas of cut and fill.
Locations of earth stockpiles.
Locations of equipment storage and staging.
Locations of proposed construction and/or permanent vehicle or equipment fueling.
Stump disposal plan.
Highlighted areas of poorly and very poorly drained soils.
Highlighted areas of poorly and/or very poorly drained soils proposed to be filled.
Construction and earth movement schedule including project start and completion dates, sequence of grading and construction activities, sequence for installation and/or application of soil erosion and sediment control measures, and the sequence for final stabilization of the project site.v. Locations, descriptions, details, and design criteria and calculations for all structural, non-structural, permanent, and temporary erosion and sedimentation control measures and BMP’s.
Identification of all permanent control measures.
Identification of permanent snow storage areas.
Identification of snow management measures during construction.
Description of the combination of sediment and erosion control measures which are required to achieve maximum pollutant removal such as:
Sediment Basins: For common drainage that serves an area with 10 or more acres disturbed at one time, a temporary (or permanent) sediment basin must provide storage for a calculated volume of runoff from a drainage area from a 2-year, 24-hour storm, or equivalent control measures, must be provided, where attainable, until final stabilization of the site. Where no such calculation has been performed, a temporary (or permanent) sediment basin providing 3,600 cubic feet of storage per acre drained, or equivalent control measures, must be provided where attainable until final stabilization of the site. When computing the number of acres draining to a common location, it is not necessary to include flows from off-site areas and flows from on-site areas that are either undisturbed or have undergone final stabilization where such flows are diverted around both the disturbed areas and the sediment basin.  In determining whether a sediment basin is attainable, the operators may consider such factors as site soils, slope, available area on-site, etc. In any event, the operator must consider public safety, especially as it relates to children, as a design factor for the sediment basin and alternative sediment controls must be used where site limitations would preclude a safe design.
Drainage locations which serve 10 or more disturbed acres at one time and where temporary sediment basins or equivalent controls are not attainable, smaller sediment basins and/or sediment traps should be used. At a minimum, silt fence, vegetative buffer strips, or equivalent sediment controls are required for all downslope boundaries (and for those side slope boundaries deemed appropriate as dictated by individual site conditions).
Drainage locations serving less than 10 acres may utilize smaller sediment basins and/or sediment traps. At a minimum, silt fence, vegetative buffer strips, or equivalent sediment controls are required for all downslope boundaries (and for those side slope boundaries deemed appropriate as dictated by individual site conditions) of the construction area unless a sediment basin providing storage for a calculated volume of runoff from a 2-year, 24-hour storm or 3,600 cubic feet of storage per acre drained is provided.
Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Plan (SWMP) shall include the following:
Design calculations for all temporary and permanent structural control BMP measures.
A proposed schedule for the inspection and maintenance of all measures for the site prior to achieving final site stabilization. Inspections must be conducted at least once every 7 calendar days, or once every 14 calendar days and within 24 hours of the end of a storm event of 0.5 inches or greater.  
Identification of all permanent control measures and responsibility for continued maintenance.
Drainage report with calculations showing volume, peak discharge, and velocity of present and future runoff for the 25-year, 24-hour storm event.
Plans showing the entire drainage area affecting or being affected by the development of the site.  Proposed lot boundaries and drainage areas shall be clearly shown on the plan.
The direction of flow of runoff through the use of arrows shall clearly be shown on the plan.
The location, elevation, and size of all existing and proposed catch basins, drywells, drainage ditches, swales, retention basins, and storm sewers shall be shown on the plan.
When detention structures are planned to reduce future condition peak discharge, the soil cover complex method shall be used to compute the runoff volume and peak discharge for designing the structure. The design will conform to the criteria outlined for those types of structures given in the Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Urban and Developing Areas in New Hampshire.  
Copies of pertinent State and Federal Permits.
An example SWMP table of contents is as follows:
Project overview.  
Owner.  
Address of development.  
Location of the site.  
Description of receiving waters.  
Nature and purpose of the land disturbing activity.  
Limits of disturbance.  
Construction schedule.  
Existing conditions summary.  
Definition of topography, drainage patterns, soils, groundcover, critical areas, adjacent areas, upstream areas draining through site, existing development, existing stormwater facilities, on- and  off-site utilities, construction limitations, buffers, wetlands, streams, sensitive areas, and other pertinent features.  
Include an existing conditions plan (drawing) showing the above existing conditions and labeled per the narrative above.  
Off-site analysis.  
Description of the tributary area (include at least ¼-mile downstream), drainage channels, conveyance systems, and downstream receiving waters.  
Summary of a review of existing or potential problems resulting from the development including, but not limited to, sedimentation, erosion, water quality issues, and chemical spills.  
Demonstration that development of the site will not negatively affect the downstream systems.  
Demonstrate adequate capacity of the downstream system to handle flow conditions after development.  
As applicable, include an off-site drainage plan (the plan may be part of the existing conditions plan).  
Special reports, studies, and maintenance information.  
As applicable, include test pit log forms, soil conditions data, and wetland delineation information.  
As applicable,  include  information  regarding  long-range maintenance  of  any  closed  drainage  systems, detention/retention facilities, etc.
Appendix (include copies of all tables, graphs, charts, and test pit and percolation test data used in any of the above calculations).
Plan Approval and Review.
The Planning Board or other agency having jurisdiction (per 5.32.060.B.) shall indicate approval of the SWMP, as filed, if it complies with the requirements and objectives of this Regulation. As applicable, such approval shall be a component of subdivision or site plan approval.
Final SWMP approval shall be contingent upon collection of any required fees or escrow amounts related to technical review of any SWMP prepared under this Regulation.
5.32.100 Responsibility for Installation/Construction/Inspection

The applicant and the applicant’s engineer (or technical representative) shall schedule and attend a mandatory preconstruction meeting with the Town Engineer or his designee at least two weeks prior to commencement of construction. All required escrow deposits and bonding must be in place prior to the scheduled meeting. Three copies of the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) and Notice of Intent (NOI) (if required), the SWMP, up-to-date construction schedule, and associated construction documents must be provided at that time. The SWMP must bear the seal and signature of the New Hampshire Registered Professional Engineer preparing the documents.  The SWMPmay be combined with the SWPPP if labeled as both, meeting the requirements of both. Prior to commencement of construction, the Department of Community Development will confirm that the documents submitted meet the conditions of plan approval. An appropriate notation will be made on the “official” construction set used by the Code Enforcement and Public Works Departments.  (Note: Preconstruction conferences will typically not be required for construction of one single-family home or one residential duplex, not part of a larger plan of construction.)
The Department of Community Development and/or Department of Public Works reserve the right to prepare and request the applicant’s acknowledgement of a preconstruction checklist.
The applicant shall bear final responsibility for the installation, construction, inspection, and disposition of all stormwater management and erosion control measures required by the provisions of this Regulation.
The Department of Community Development may require a bond or other security with surety conditions in an amount satisfactory to the Town, providing for the actual construction, installation, and removal of such measures within a period specified by the Town and expressed in the bond or the security.
The Department of Community Development and/or Code Enforcement may require the owner or his authorized agent to deposit in escrow with the Town an amount of money sufficient to cover the Town’s costs for inspection and any professional assistance required for site compliance monitoring.
Site development shall not begin before the SWMP and SWPPP (if required) have been reviewed and approved by the Town, a NOI has been acknowledged by the EPA, and NHDES has been contacted regarding impaired waters in accordance with a NOI (if applicable). Best Management Practices shall be installed as designed and scheduled as a condition of final approval of the SWMP.
Commercial and Industrial Development and/or Redevelopment. The applicant, owner, and owner’s legally designated representative (if any) shall all hold responsibility for implementing the SWMP and SWPPP (if required).
Residential Development and Redevelopment. The applicant is responsible for implementing the SWMP and SWPPP (if required).  Excluding any post-development requirements of plan implementation, there are two ways for the Town to consider an applicant to be removed as the responsible party (the applicant may also be required to comply with other regulating entities’ additional requirements):
The applicant completes the project in a manner satisfactory to the Town and files a Notice of Termination (NOT) with the EPA in accordance with the terms of the Federal requirements.
The applicant passes legal responsibility for the plan to another competent party. In the case of a new subdivision where lots may be transferred to a different entity for construction of the buildings, it is the applicant’s responsibility to ensure that the applicant has a legal basis to require compliance by the new entity.
Individual Homeowner Development. The homeowner or a homeowner who has taken control of a subdivided property bears responsibility for compliance with the approved SWMP and SWPPP (if required).  If the homeowner is contracting building services to another person or entity, the homeowner may choose to pass legal responsibility of compliance to the contracted entity.  If the responsibility is not passed, the homeowner remains the responsible party and must comply with the terms of the original plan.
5.32.110 Maintenance and Inspection

 Maintenance and Inspection – Planning Board Approved Projects. The following provisions shall pertain and be applicable only to those plans which come under the jurisdictional purview of the Planning Board, (site plan/subdivision review).
A narrative description of ongoing construction and operational maintenance requirements for water quality measures required by the SWMP after final Planning Board approval shall be incorporated into the final plan and supporting documentation or development agreement of the property on which such measures are located and recorded at the Hillsborough County Registry of Deeds.  The narrative shall be in the form of a typical site plan management or development agreement, or as otherwise set forth by the Planning Board.  
If the applicant is unable to adequately provide the required maintenance activities during construction, work may be stopped and the Town may require additional escrow funding to be used by either the applicant or the Town solely to repair, replace, and/or maintain the required measures.  
The Town may require periodic compliance inspections to verify ongoing maintenance of water quality protection measures.  Such inspections shall be performed by the Town or their designee at reasonable times to the landowner.  
As a condition of Planning Board approval, the owner, his successor, and assigns shall consent to periodic compliance inspections by the Planning Board or their designee for compliance with this Regulation. 
Self-inspections are to be performed in accordance with the SWMP and SWPPP (if required).
Self-inspection reports are to be filed on-site in a location readily accessible to the Town Inspector.
Maintenance and Inspection – Other Projects. The following provisions shall pertain and be applicable only to those plans which come under the jurisdictional purview of the Planning Board, (site plan/subdivision review).
I. Right to inspect.  The Code Enforcement Officer, Health Officer, and/or DPW Director or their designee, are authorized to conduct inspections of any site that is the subject of a permit issued hereunder, irrespective of whether such permit also required the approval of a Plan in accordance with Section 5.32.060.A.2, above, in order to insure that any conditions of the issuance of such permit are being maintained and that no violation of any of the provisions of this Regulation are taking place.
II. Confirmation by Registered Professional Engineer. Upon such inspection, when the circumstances of any suspected breach of condition or violation of this Regulation involve standards that implicate technical engineering criteria either included in this Regulation or as a condition of such permits, the Code Enforcement Officer, Health Officer, and/or DPW Director or their designee shall seek confirmation that such circumstances constitute a violation of such criteria prior to taking any enforcement action under Section 5.32.140 of this Regulation.
III. Enforcement. Upon such confirmation by a Registered Professional Engineer, or when such confirmation is not required due to the fact that the circumstances of such violation do not implicate technical engineering criteria either included in this Regulation or as a condition of such permit, the Code Enforcement Officer, Health Officer, and/or DPW Director or their designee may proceed to enforce the provisions of this Regulation or conditions of the permit in accordance with applicable statutes, rules or regulations.
5.32.120 Other Required Permits
In addition to local approval, copies of the following permits shall be required if applicable:

Terrain Alteration (Site Specific Permit).     RSA 485-A:17 requires a permit from the Department of Environmental Services for “…any person proposing to significantly alter the characteristic of the terrain, in such a manner as to impede natural runoff or create an unnatural runoff …”.  Regulations require this permit for any project involving more than 100,000 contiguous square feet of disturbance or 50,000 contiguous square feet in the protected shoreland.
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge Permit. A permit issued by the EPA or by the State under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC, section 1342 (b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States. For a cumulative disturbance of one acre of land that EPA considers “construction activity”, which includes, but is not limited to clearing, grading, excavation, and other activities that expose soil typically related to landscaping, demolition, and construction of structures and roads, a Federal Permit will be required.  Consult EPA for specific rules.  This EPA Permit is in addition to any State or local permit required. To apply, the entity or individual responsible for construction site operations shall file a NOI with the EPA at least 7 days prior to work beginning.  Discharge is authorized when the application status is listed as “authorized” in the EPA public NOI database or when the applicant receives an EPA authorization letter by mail.   
Wetlands Permit. RSA 482-A requires a permit from the Department of Environmental Services for any person desiring to “…excavate, remove, fill, dredge or construct any structures in or on any bank, flat, marsh, or swamp in and adjacent to any waters of the State . . .”.
5.32.130 Post-Construction Operation

Stormwater Discharges Associated with Commercial/Industrial Activities. Each commercial and industrial facility approved under this Regulation is required to perform annual site inspections (at a minimum).  The site inspection must be documented and at a minimum should include:  review of stormwater flow paths, condition of any sediment or contaminant control devices, water quality notations, corrective actions and time frames if unacceptable water quality runoff is noted, and the name and position of the inspector.  All records of the inspections must be made available to the Town or authorized agent upon request.
Notification for Spills or Other Non-Stormwater Discharges. As soon as any person responsible for a facility, site, activity, or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the Town of Milford’s municipal storm system, State waters, or waters of the United States, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release as to minimize the effects of the discharge. (If said individual is not competent to assess, contain, or clean up, that person shall immediately notify another competent individual or firm.) If the substance poses an immediate health or safety concern, the Town of Milford Emergency Services must immediately be notified.  If the substance does not pose an immediate concern, the Town of Milford Code Enforcement, Health Officer, and Department of Public Works should be notified.  This notification should be made as soon as possible; however, no later than 24 hours post event.  This notification does not preclude and must be made in addition to any Federal or State required notifications. The site operator/owner must be aware that discharges such as treated swimming pool water are not allowed discharges unless appropriate measures have been taken to reduce the treatment chemical concentrations in the water.
5.32.140 Enforcement and Penalties
The Code Enforcement Officer, DPW Director, Health Officer, or their designee, as the case may be and subject to the provisions below, shall be responsible for enforcement of all aspects of this Regulation.  In that regard, said official(s) shall be empowered hereby to invoke any and all statutory enforcement prerogatives that may be applicable to the purported violation as it relates to the plan submitted hereunder or activity regulated hereby. By way of illustration and not by way of limitation, it is contemplated that the following statutory enforcement prerogatives would apply: Click here.

he Code Enforcement Officer, DPW Director, Health Officer, or their designee is authorized by means of this Regulation to take any action to enforce the conditions hereof and to act on behalf of the various boards or agencies identified above, depending on the nature or form of the conduct constituting the alleged violation.  It is intended that said Code Enforcement Officer, DPW Director, Health Officer, or their designee shall have the authority to seek individual specific remedies, including, where appropriate, injunctive relief, the issuance of Notices of Violation, the pursuit of civil and/or criminal sanctions, or, without limitation, any other sanction as authorized by applicable law, regulation or statute, and said Officer(s) are hereby designated as the appropriate designee of any board or agency having jurisdiction, whenever there is reason to believe that a violation of any of the provisions of this Regulation or any permit issued hereunder has taken place.  Nothing herein shall be interpreted to limit or otherwise curtail any statutory authority which such board or agency is entitled to exercise independent of this Regulation.  

Further, nothing in this section is intended to limit, in any way, the Code Enforcement Officer, DPW Director, Health Officer, or their designee from exercising any authority that State law allows them to exercise on behalf of any State agency which has preemptive or concurrent jurisdiction over any conduct that would be considered a violation of this Regulation.

5.32.150 Mandatory Regulated MS4s in Urbanized Areas – Map
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems (MS4s) within “urbanized areas” (UA), as defined by the Bureau of Census, fall under mandatory regulation under EPA Phase II Stormwater Management Regulations. Within the UA, all roads and streets and associated drainage systems, both open and closed fall under regulation.  Map 1 depicts the two urbanized areas in Milford. The northern area is within the Nashua, New Hampshire UA and the southern area is within the Boston, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and Rhode Island UA.  All land in Milford shall comply with this Regulation.

Map 1: Town of Milford “Urbanized Areas”

Title 6 Vehicles and Traffic

Chapter 6.04 General Provision and Definitions
Sections
6.04.010 Terms, words and phrases

6.04.010 Terms, words and phrases
Definition of terms; words and phrases, except when inconsistent with definitions established by New Hampshire Revised Laws, the following words and phrases when used in this title, shall for the purpose of this title have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this chapter:
“Authorized emergency vehicle” means vehicles of the fire department (fire patrol), police vehicles, and such ambulances and emergency vehicles as are designated or authorized by the chief of police.

“Bicycle” means every device which is propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two tandem wheels either of which is over twenty (20) inches in diameter, and including any device generally recognized as a bicycle though equipped with two front or two rear wheels.

“Crosswalk” means that portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the prolongation or connection of curb and property lines at intersections, or any portion of a roadway clearly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.

“Driver” means every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.

“Intersection” means the area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines, or, if none, then of the lateral boundary lines of two or more streets or highways which join one another at an angle, whether or not one such street or highway crosses the other.

“Motor vehicle” means every vehicle which is self propelled.

“Motorcycle” means every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor.

“Official time standard.” Whenever certain hours are named in this title, they mean standard time or daylight-saving time as may be in current use in this town.

“Official traffic signals” means all signals, not inconsistent with this title, placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of directing, warning or regulating traffic.

“Official traffic signs” means all signs, markings and devices, other than signals, not inconsistent with this title, placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of directing , warning or regulating traffic.

“Park” when prohibited, means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading.

“Pedestrian” means any person afoot.

“Person” means every natural person, firm, copartnership, association or corporation.

“Police officer” means every officer of the municipal police department or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.

“Private road or driveway” means every road or driveway not open to the use of the public, for purposes of vehicular travel.

“Right-of-way” means the privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.

“Roadway” means that portion of a street or highway between the regularly established curb lines or that part improved and intended to be used for vehicular travel.

“Safety zone” means the area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone.

“Sidewalk” means that portion of a street between the curb lines and the adjacent property lines.

“Stop” when required, means complete cessation of movement.

“Stopping or standing” when prohibited, means any stopping or standing of a vehicle whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control sign or signal.

“Street or highway” means every way or place of whatever nature open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for the purpose of vehicular travel.

“Through highway” means every street or highway or portion of street or highway at the entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting streets or highways is required by law to stop before entering or crossing such street or highway and when stop signs are erected.

“Traffic” means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, bicycles and other conveyances either singly or together while using any street for the purposes of travel.

“Traffic control signal” means any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and proceed.

“Vehicle” means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power. (Ord. 2­1-54, Art.I)

Chapter 6.08 Administration and Enforcement
Sections
6.08.010    Authority of police and fire department officials
6.08.020    Required obedience to traffic ordinance
6.08.030    Obedience to police and fire department officials
6.08.040    Persons propelling pushcarts or riding animals
6.08.050    Use of coasters, roller skates, and similar devices restricted
6.08.060    Public employees to obey traffic regulations
6.08.070    Exemptions to authorized emergency vehicles
6.08.080    Report of accidents
6.08.090    Parking fines
6.08.100    Emergency lanes established
6.08.110    Emergency lane requirements
6.08.120    Violation of emergency lane — Penalty

6.08.010  Authority of police and fire department officials

It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police to enforce all street traffic laws of this town and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this town.
Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with the traffic laws, provided that, in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require not withstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.
Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. (Ord. 2-1-54, Art. II § 1)
6.08.020 Required obedience to traffic ordinance
It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this title. (Ord. 2-1-54, Art. II § 2)

6.08.030  Obedience to police and fire department officials
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer or fire department official. (Ord. 2-1-54, Art. H § 3)

6.08.040  Persons propelling pushcarts or riding animals
Every person propelling any pushcart or riding an animal upon a roadway, and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the provisions of this title except those provisions which by their verynature can have no application. (Ord. 2-1-54, Art. II § 4)

6.08.050  Use of coasters, roller skates, and similar devices restricted
No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle, sled, or similar device, shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a sidewalk and when so crossing such person shall be granted all of the rights, and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. (Ord. 2-1-54, Art. II § 5)

6.08.060  Public employees to obey traffic regulations
The provisions of this title shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the federal, state, county or town governments and it is unlawful for any such driver to violate any of the provisions of this title, except as otherwise permitted in this title. (Ord. 2-1-54, Art. II § 6)

6.08.070  Exemptions to authorized emergency vehicles
The provisions of this title regulating the movement, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles as defined in this title while the driver of such vehicle is operating the vehicle in an emergency in the necessary performance of public duties. This exemption shall not, however, protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of a reckless disregard of the safety of others. (Ord. 2-1-54, Art. II § 7)

6.08.080  Report of accidents
The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury or death of any person or property damage to an apparent extent of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more, shall immediately by the quickest means of communication, either verbal or written, give notice of such accident to the police department if such accident occurs within this town, and shall within forty-eight (48) hours thereafter, file with the chief of police, a written report of such accident on a form provided for that purpose. (Ord. 4-23-01 § 1; Ord. 2-1-54,Art. II § 8)

6.08.090  Parking fines

Any person who parks a vehicle within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant shall, upon conviction of such violation, be subject to a fine as further described in Milford Municipal Code Appendix B – fines.
Any person who parks a vehicle on the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street, upon conviction of such violation, shall be subject to a fine as further described in Milford Municipal Code Appendix B – fines.
Any person who parks a vehicle over a white line, indicating the travel portion of a public way shall, upon conviction of such violation, be subject to a fine as further described in Milford Municipal Code Appendix B – fines.
Any person who parks a vehicle on a crosswalk shall, upon conviction of such violation, be subject to a fine as further described in Milford Municipal Code Appendix B – fines.
Any person who parks a vehicle in front of a private driveway, shall, upon conviction of such violation, be subject to a fine as further described in Milford Municipal Code Appendix B – fines.
Any person who parks a vehicle in a zone restricting parking shall, upon conviction of such violation, be subject to a fine as further described in Milford Municipal Code Appendix B – fines.
Any person who parks a vehicle all night on any street, highway, or town parking lot during a period prohibiting such parking shall, upon conviction of such violation, be subject to a fine as further described in Milford Municipal Code Appendix B – fines.
Any person who parks a vehicle, in a parking space that is reserved for persons who are handicapped without having a handicapped parking permit from the Motor Vehicle Department of the state in which he or she resides, shall, upon conviction of such violation, be subject to a fine as further described in Milford Municipal Code Appendix B – fines.
Any person who parks a vehicle so the vehicle’s left wheels are against the left side of the roadway or curbing, shall, upon conviction of such violation, be subject to a fine as further described in Milford Municipal Code Appendix B – fines. (Ord. 9-29-86)
6.08.100  Emergency lanes established
Emergency lanes shall be established and maintained for all places of public assembly, or any nonresidential structure with a gross first floor area of over three thousand (3,000) square feet, any condominium complex, any building containing more than seven dwelling units, or any other building or assembly area, upon a joint determination by the fire chief and the police chief that a hazardous or potentially hazardous condition exists or may exist. That upon such joint determination emergency lanes shall be established within any private way or private parking lot which prohibits parking at all times within thirty (30) feet of the above-described buildings, and that henceforth, it is unlawful to park any vehicle within such emergency lanes. Any vehicle so unlawfully parked within any emergency lane shall be towed at the owner’s expense. These provisions shall apply to both new and existing buildings and the width of the emergency lanes may be reduced by the fire chief and police chief in the event a lesser distance is all that is reasonably required or feasible for the provisions of access by emergency vehicles. (Ord.3-23-87 § 1)

6.08.110  Emergency lane requirements
Within established emergency lanes prohibiting parking, the fire chief and police chief may require the words “No Parking - Fire Lane” be painted and maintained by the owner of the macadam of the way or lot in standard traffic safety-size letters. In conjunction with the painting, the police chief and the fire chief may require the owner to install and maintain signs reading “No Parking - Fire Lane -Tow Zone” in conspicuous places, but at a distance of no closer than fifty (50) feet. Such markings and sign installations shall be accomplished not later than sixty (60) days of written notification by the police chief and fire chief that they are required; and the specifications which are to be followed. (Ord. 3-23-87 § 2)

6.08.120  Violation of emergency lane — Penalty
Any person, firm or corporation failing to comply with the provisions detailed in Sections 6.08.100 and 6.08.110 dealing with fire lanes, shall be guilty of a violation for each offense and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during, or on which a violation occurs or continues. The fine for each separate offense is as further described in Milford Municipal Code Appendix B – fines. (Ord. 3-23-87 3)

Chapter 6.12 Traffic Sign and Signals
Sections
6.12.010    Traffic signs and signals authorization
6.12.020    Obedience to traffic signs and signals
6.12.030    Traffic control signal legend
6.12.040    Display of unauthorized signs and signals prohibited
6.12.050    Interference with signs and signals prohibited
6.12.060    Authority of board of selectmen
6.12.070    State traffic signal erection
6.12.080    Stop sign erection

6.12.010  Traffic signs and signals authorization

The board of selectmen shall determine and designate the character or type of all traffic signs and signals required by this title and will authorize the placement and maintenance of all traffic signs and signals.  The signs and signals shall, so far as practicable be uniform as type and location.
No provision of this title for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violation, if the sign required is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective without signs being erected to give notice thereof. (Ord. 2-1-54, Art. III § 1)
6.12.020  Obedience to traffic signs and signals
It is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to disobey the instructions of any official traffic sign or signal placed in accordance with the provisions of this title, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. (Ord. 2-1-54, Art. III § 2)

6.12.030  Traffic control signal legend
Whenever traffic at an intersection is controlled by traffic control signals or by a police officer the driver of a vehicle shall proceed to make either such turn with proper care to avoid accident and only upon the “GO” signal, unless otherwise directed by a police officer or by official traffic signs or special signals. (Ord. 2-1-54, Art. III § 3)

6.12.040  Display of unauthorized signs and signals prohibited
It is unlawful for any person to place or maintain or to display upon or in view of any street, any unofficial sign, signal or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic sign or signal or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official sign or signal. Every such prohibited sign, signal or device is empowered to remove the same, or cause it to be removed. (Ord. 2-1-54, Art. III § 4)

6.12.050  Interference with signs and signals prohibited
It is unlawful for any person to willfully deface, injure, move, obstruct or interfere with any official traffic sign or signal. (Ord. 2-1-54, Art.III § 5)

6.12.060  Authority of board of selectmen

The board of selectmen shall designate, establish and cause to be maintained by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the highways, crosswalks at intersections where in its opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians, and at such other places as it may deem necessary.
The board of selectmen shall designate, establish and cause to be maintained, such lanes for traffic, and safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as it may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians and safety of traffic.
The board of selectmen shall determine those intersections at which operators of vehicles shall not make a left or right turn, and shall cause proper signs to be placed at such intersections. (Ord. 2-1 -54, Art. III § 6)
6.12.070  State traffic signal erection
The state of New Hampshire has erected a traffic signal at the following location:

S-303-02 NH 101 and NH 101 A (Elm Street). (State memo dated 7-3-97)
6.12.080  Stop sign erection
See Milford Municipal Code section 6.32.050 for complete list of erected stop signs.

Chapter 6.16 Pedestrian Rights and Duties
Sections
6.16.010      Pedestrians’ right-of-way
6.16.020      Pedestrians’ rights and duties at controlled intersections
6.16.030      Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalks
6.16.040      Pedestrians soliciting rides
6.16.050      Driving through safety zone prohibited

6.16.010 Pedestrians’ right-of-way

A. The driver of any vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within any marked crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk at the end of a block, except at intersections where the movement of traffic is being regulated by police officers or traffic control signals.
B. Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, it is unlawful for the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear to overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
C. Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles upon the roadway, provided that this provision shall not relieve the driver of a vehicle from the duty to exercise due care for the safety of pedestrians. (Ord. 2-1-54, Art. 4 § 1)

6.16.020 Pedestrians’ rights and duties at controlled intersections
At intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals or by police officers, pedestrians shall cross at designated crosswalks on red or amber, or when signaled by the officer in charge, and in all other cases pedestrians shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles lawfully proceeding directly ahead on a green or “Go” signal. (Ord. 2-1-54, Art. 4 § 2)

6.16.030 Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalks
Pedestrians when crossing highways, shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of crosswalks. (Ord. 2-1-54, Art. 4 § 3)

6.16.040 Pedestrians soliciting rides
It is unlawful for any person to stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the operator of any private vehicle. (Ord. 2-1-54, Art. 4 § 4)

6.16.050 Driving through safety zone prohibited

 It is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle or rider of a bicycle to drive or propel the vehicle or bicycle upon, over or through a safety zone.
Milford NH Municipal Code • 6.16 • Pedestrian Rights and Duties • Page 1 of 2
It is unlawful to drive upon or to the left of any line placed upon the highway to designate traffic lanes.
It is unlawful to disregard or fail to comply with any directional sign or marker. (Ord. 2-1-54, A § 5)

Chapter 6.20 Operation of Vehicles
Sections
6.20.010    Town speed limit
6.20.020    Stopping at signs and signals at through streets
6.20.030    Placement of stop signs
6.20.040    Yielding
6.20.050    Vehicles to stop at stop signs
6.20.060    Emerging from alley or private driveway
6.20.070    Vehicle noise
6.20.080    Miscellaneous driving rules

6.20.010  Town speed limit
All roads, streets, and avenues within the town shall be designated as having a maximum speed limit of thirty (30) miles per hour unless the road, street or avenue is otherwise posted. (Ord. 10-29-90 § 1)

6.20.020  Stopping at signs and signals at through streets
Every driver of a vehicle of other conveyance traveling on any street intersecting any through street and where stop signs are erected, shall stop such vehicle or other conveyance at the place where such street meets the prolongation of the nearest property line of such street, subject however, to the direction of any traffic control, sign or signal or any police officer at such intersection. (Ord. 2-1-54, Art. VI § 2)

6.20.030  Placement of stop signs
The board of selectmen shall cause to be erected and maintained at each intersection specified in this title and at such other intersections as it may deem advisable appropriate signs (and in addition to such signs may cause to be placed and maintained marks or signs on the surface of the highway) such signs to bear the word “Stop.” Stop signs shall be located in such position and be provided with lettering of a size to be clearly visible and legible from a distance of at least one hundred (100) feet from the intersection. (Ord. 2-1-54, Art. VI § 3)

6.20.040  Yielding
The driver of any vehicle who has stopped as required by law in obedience to a stop sign at an intersection shall yield to other vehicles within the intersection or approaching so closely on the intersecting street as to constitute an immediate hazard, but such driver having yielded may proceed, and other vehicles approaching the intersection on the intersecting street shall yield to the vehicle so proceeding into or crossing the intersecting street. (Ord. 2-1-54, Art. VI § 4)

6.20.050  Vehicles to stop at stop signs
When stop signs are erected as provided in this title at or near the entrance of any intersection, every driver of a vehicle shall stop such vehicle at such sign or at a clearly marked stop line before entering the intersection except when directed to proceed by a policeman or traffic control signal. (Ord. 2-1-54, Art. VI § 9)

6.20.060   Emerging from alley or private driveway
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across the alleyway, yielding the right-of-way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such roadway. (Ord. 2-1-54, Art. VI § 10)

6.20.070  Vehicle noise

Unnecessary Noise. No person shall operate any vehicle on any way in Milford so as to make any loud, unusual or other unnecessary noise as defined in subsection B of this section.
Definitions:
“Loud, unusual or other unnecessary noise,” means and includes any noise occasioned by any one or more of the following actions of the operator of any vehicle:
Misuse of power exceeding tire traction limits in acceleration, sometimes known as “laying down rubber” or “peeling rubber,” or
Misuse of braking power exceeding tire traction limits in deceleration where there is no emergency, or
Rapid acceleration by means of quick up-shifting of transmission gears with either a clutch and manual transmission, or automatic transmission, or
Rapid deceleration by means of quick downshifting or transmission gears with either a clutch or manual transmission or an automatic transmission, or
Racing of engines by manipulation of the accelerator, gas pedal, carburetor, or gear selection whether the vehicle is either in motion or standing still, or
The blowing of any horn except as a warning signal or the use of any other noise-making device whether the vehicle is either in motion or standing still, or
The operation of a refrigeration unit or other types of compressors, between the hours of eight p.m. and seven a.m., while the vehicle is not in motion except for emergency use or while actually loading or unloading,
No sound reproduction systems operated within a motor vehicle shall be used in such a manner as to create unnecessary noise for any person other than the driver and passengers in such vehicle.
“Vehicle,” means and includes bus, highway equipment, motorcycle, motor truck, motor vehicle, semi-trailer, sidecar, tractor, trailer, or other vehicle as defined by NH RSA 259:1.
“Way,” means and includes crosswalk, intersecting way or other public highway, or other way, all as defined by NH RSA 259:1.
Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a violation and upon conviction of such violation shall be liable as further described in Milford Municipal Code Appendix B – fines. (Ord. 6-11-90)
6.20.080  Miscellaneous driving rules

Operation of Vehicles on Approach of Authorized Emergency Vehicles. Upon the approach of any authorized emergency vehicle or vehicles giving signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle, the driver of every vehicle shall immediately drive to a position as near as possible and parallel to the right hand edge or curb of the street, clear of any intersection, and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicles shall have passed, unless directed otherwise by a police officer.
Following Fire Apparatus Prohibited. It is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, other than one on official business to follow closer than three hundred (300) feet from any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm, or to drive into or stop any vehicle within five hundred (500) feet from where any fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
Crossing Fire Hose. No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the fire department when laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire chief or fire department official in command.
Driving Through a Procession. It is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion, provided that such vehicles are conspicuously so designated, unless they are directed so to do by a police officer.
Limitations on Turning Around. It is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction unless such movement can be made in safety and without otherwise interfering with other traffic.
Limitations on Backing. The driver of a vehicle shall not back the vehicle unless such movement can be made in safety.
Emerging From Alley or Private Driveway or Building. The driver of a vehicle shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway.
Driving on Sidewalk. The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area extending across the alleyway.
Obstruction to Driver’s View of Driving Mechanism.
It is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to drive the vehicle when such vehicle is so loaded, or when there are in the front seat of such vehicle such number of persons, as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides, or to interfere with the operator’s control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle;
It is unlawful for any passenger in a vehicle to ride in such a position as to interfere with the driver’s view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with the driver’s control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
Boarding or Alighting From Vehicles. It is unlawful for any person to board or alight from any bus, public conveyance or other vehicle while such vehicle is in motion.
Unlawful Riding. It is unlawful for any person to ride on any portion or part of any vehicle which was not designed or intended for the use of passengers when the vehicle is in motion. This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. (Ord. 4.23-01 § 3; Ord. 2-1.54, Art. VII § § —11)

Chapter 6.24 Stopping, Standing and Parking
Sections
6.24.010    Stopping prohibited in specified areas
6.24.020    Bus stops, taxicab stands and no parking areas
6.24.030    Prohibited parking
6.24.040    Buses, taxicabs prohibited from parking except in designated stands
6.24.050    Blocking roadway
6.24.060    All night parking prohibited - [Repealed, November 5, 2012]
6.24.070    Standing or parking close to curb and in designated stalls
6.24.080    Parking vehicle for sale prohibited
6.24.090    Using vehicle for primary purpose of displaying advertising prohibited
6.24.100    Stopping or parking in parking meter zones.
6.24.110    Winter parking hours
6.24.111    Restricted Parking Ordinance Exemption
6.24.115    Street sweeping parking hours
6.24.120    Violation of parking hours— Penalty - [Repealed, November 5, 2012]
6.24.130    No parking area: VFW Way— Penalty
6.24.131    No parking area: High Street— Penalty
6.24.132    No parking area: Forest Street—Penalty
6.24.133    No parking area: West Street— Penalty
6.24.140    No parking area: South Street— Penalty
6.24.160    Penalty for cruiser parking space violation
6.24.170    Parking against traffic flow— Penalty
6.24.180    Parking on sidewalk—Penalty
6.24.190    Parking within fire lane— Penalty
6.24.195    Handicapped parking spaces
6.24.200    Parking on crosswalk—Penalty
6.24.210    Restricted parking zones— Fines

6.24.010  Stopping prohibited in specified areas
It is unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control sign or signal:

Within an intersection;
On a crosswalk;
Within twenty (20) feet from the intersections of curb lines, or, if none, then within fifteen (15) feet of the intersection of property lines at an intersection, except at alleys;
Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant;
Within fifteen (15) feet of the driveway en¬trance to any fire station;
In front of a private driveway;
On a sidewalk;
Alongside or opposite any street excavation or construction, or at any time when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street;
At any place where official traffic signs have been erected, prohibiting standing and parking.
Each such owner or operator of a vehicle who violates the provisions of this section, shall within seventy-two (72) hours of the time when such notice of violation was attached to such vehicle, pay at the Milford Police Station as a penalty for and in full satisfaction of such violation, a fine as further described in Milford Municipal Code Appendix B - fines. Failure to make said payment within seventy-two (72) hours shall subject the owner or operator to the issuance of a court summons to appear in the court hav¬ing jurisdiction. (Ord. 6-23-01 § 4; Ord. 2)

6.24.020  Bus stops, taxicab stands and no parking areas
The board of selectmen shall establish, subject to the approval of the New Hampshire State Highway Commissioner, bus stops, taxicab stands and no parking areas on such public streets in such places and in such manner as it shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public, and every bus stop, taxicab stand or no parking area shall be marked and designated by an appropriate sign. (Ord. 2-1-54, Art. V § 2)

6.24.030   Prohibited parking
It is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle other than a bus to stand or park in an officially designated bus stop, or any vehicle other than a taxicab to stand or park in any officially designated taxicab stand or for any vehicle to stand or park in an officially designated no parking area, except that the driver of any passenger vehicle may temporarily stop in any such stop or stand or no parking area for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the loading or unloading of passengers. (Ord. 2-1-54, Art. V § 3)

6.24.040   Buses, taxicabs prohibited from parking except in designated stands
It is unlawful for the driver of any bus or taxicab to stand or park upon any street or in any business district at any place other than a bus stop or taxicab stand respectively, except that this provision shall not prevent the driver of any such vehicle from temporar¬ily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers. (Ord. 2-1-54, Art. V § 4)

6.24.050  Blocking roadway
It is unlawful for any driver to stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic, except that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading or unloading of passenger or when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals or a police officer. Police, however, may remove or require to be moved any vehicle which may constitute a road hazard. (Ord. 2-1-54, Art. V § 5)

6.24.060  All night parking prohibited
[Repealed]
(Ord. 2012-009 12-11-5; Ord. 2-1-54, Art.V § 6)

6.24.070  Standing or parking close to curb and in designated stalls
Except when necessary, in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals, the driver of a vehicle shall not stop, stand or park such vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of traffic and with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within twelve (12) inches of the edge of roadway, or in a parking district where stall parking has been established, in a manner whereby such vehicle will occupy not more than one stall, unless vehicle is of such length as to require an additional stall or stalls, except as provided in the following:

Upon those streets which have been marked or signed for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by such marks or signs, and in such manner whereby they will not occupy more than one stall in districts where stall park¬ing has been established;
In places where, and at hours when stopping for the loading or unloading of merchandise or materials is permitted, vehicles used for the transportation of merchandise or materials may, when it is absolutely necessary, back into the curb to take on or discharge loads when the owner of such vehicle holds a specific permit granting him or her such special privileges at the location designated in such permit and provided further that such permit shall be either in the possession of the driver or on the vehicle at the time such is backed against the curb to take on or discharge a load, and it is unlawful for any owner or driver to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such special permit;
The chief of police is authorized to issue to any owner of a vehicle used to transport merchandise or materials, a special permit covering a specific store or business establishment and to state in such permit the terms and conditions of such permit, allowing the driver of such vehicle the privilege of loading and unloading while the vehicle is backed against the curb, if in the opinion of the chief of police such privilege is reasonably necessary in the conduct of the owner’s business and will not seriously interfere with the traffic. (Ord. 2-1-54, Art. V § 7)
6.24.080  Parking vehicle for sale prohibited
It is unlawful for any person to park upon a street, any vehicle displayed for sale. (Ord. 2-1-54, Art. V § 8)

6.24.090  Using vehicle for primary purpose of displaying advertising prohibited
It is unlawful for any person to operate or to park on any street such vehicle for the primary purpose of displaying advertising except by permit from chief of police. (Ord. 2-1-54, Art. V § 9)

6.24.100  Stopping or parking in parking meter zones
No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle on any highway, within the areas designated as parking meter zones by the special parking meter ordinance except within the specified and marked spaces for meter parking. (Ord. 2-1-54, Art. VII § 15)

6.24.110  Winter parking hours

When the Snow Removal Parking Ban is in effect it is unlawful for any vehicle to be parked upon any town-owned/maintained public parking lot (i.e., on Putnam Street, Middle Street and at the Wadleigh Library), in the town of Milford between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. from November 15th and the following April 15th. Whoever shall violate this code shall be guilty of a violation and subject to a parking fine as described in Milford Municipal Code Appendix B – fines. In addition, any vehicle in violation of this code may be towed by the Town of Milford without notice at the owner’s expense.
When the Snow Removal Parking Ban is in effect it shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be parked upon or adjacent to the streets, in the town of Milford between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. from November 15th and the following April 15th.  Whoever shall violate this code shall be guilty of a violation and subject to a parking violation as described in Milford Municipal Code Appendix B – fines.  In addition, any vehicle in violation of this code may be towed by the Town of Milford without notice at the owner’s expense.
Between November 15th and the following April 15th by 4:00 pm each day weather conditions shall be evaluated by appropriate municipal personnel to determine if the Snow Removal Parking Ban needs to be in effect. If it is determined that it is appropriate for the Snow Removal Parking Ban to be in effect, the public shall be notified via information posted on the town web site, via a phone/email based information service (please go to http://www.milford.nh.gov/departments/fire-department/nixle for details to sign up to receive these messages free of charge), and by means of a visual/physical signal in a prominent public location(s) (the details of which shall be communicated to the public via public notices/communications annually prior to November 15th). While the Snow Removal Parking Ban is in effect these communication streams shall maintain/display the Snow Removal Parking Ban notice.  Once it is determined that snow removal has been completed the notice will be removed from the web site, notification will be sent via the phone/email based information service, and the indication light on Town Hall will be shut off. Although weather conditions may be fair, the Snow Removal Parking Ban may be in effect between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on consecutive nights to allow for clean-up of a prior storm.
The municipal parking lot located on Garden Street is specifically exempt from the Snow Removal Parking Ban and overnight parking during the Snow Removal Parking Ban will be allowed. (Ord. 2012-009 12-11-5 (A & B); Ord. 07-10-06 (A); 04-02-05 (A); 01-26-04 § 1Ord. Ord. 99-12-27 (B))
6.24.111  Restricted Parking Ordinance Exemption
Extended parking of "vehicles" or any part thereof (as defined in the New Hampshire Motor Vehicle Code Annotated, RSA 259:122) shall be permissible within the designated parking spaces adjacent to the easterly side of the "Oval" interior (Map 25 - Lot 32). Said vehicle(s) parked in these designated areas shall be exempt from all other parking restrictions pertaining to locations, dates and times, except said vehicles shall not park for a duration in excess of one (1) hour.
The Town of Milford shall maintain parking signage allowing said extended parking locations so that it is visible to the general public.
Each such owner or operator of a vehicle who violates the provisions of this ordinance which governs and regulates the extended parking of vehicles, shall within seventy-two hours of the time when such notice of violation was attached to such vehicle, pay at the police station as a penalty for and in full satisfaction of such violations the sum as described in Milford Municipal Code Appendix B – fines. The failure of such owner or operator to make such payment within said seventy-two hours shall be subject to the issuance of a court summons to appear in the court having jurisdiction. Upon the finding of guilty, the amount of the fine may be determined by the court.
If any vehicle is found upon a street or highway in violation of any provision of this Ordinance regulating the extended parking provision of this Ordinance and the identity of the driver cannot be determined, the owner or person, in which name such vehicle is registered, shall be held prima facie responsible for such violation.
All fees, forfeits and monies collected under this ordinance shall be administered by the Board of Selectmen. (Ord. 08-11-04)

6.24.115  Street sweeping parking hours
There shall be no parking between the hours of two-thirty a.m. to five-thirty a.m. on Thursdays and Fridays, from April 1st to November 1st, of each year in the area of Union Square specifically designated as follows: from the intersection of School Street and Nashua Street - west, to the site of Centennial Park; from the intersection of Union Street and Union Square - southwest, to the corner of Garden Street; from the intersection of South Street and High Street - north, to the stone bridge; from the stone bridge -southwest, to the intersection of Union Square and Union Street; from the intersection of Union Square and Bridge Street - east, to the intersection of Bridge Street and School Street; from the intersection of Union Square and Middle Street - east, to the intersection of Middle Street and School Street; from the intersection of Nashua Street and School Street - north, to the intersection of School Street and Bridge Street; from the intersection of Middle Street and Putnam Street - north, to the intersection of Putnam Street and Bridge Street; and all parking spaces around and abutting the oval, so-called. (Ord. 7-10-06; Ord. August 4, 1975)

6.24.120  Violation of parking hours— Penalty
[Repealed]
(Ord 2012-009 12-11-5; Ord. 1-26-04 § 2)

6.24.130  No parking area: VFW Way— Penalty
There shall be no parking of vehicles (as defined in the New Hampshire Motor Vehicle Code Annotated, RSA 259:122), on the east side of VFW Way, from the intersection of Adams Street and Perkins Street in a southerly direction for a distance of one hundred twenty-five (125) feet. The town shall maintain “no parking” signage so that it is visible to the general public.
Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a violation and subject to a parking fine as described in Milford Municipal Code Appendix B – fines.  (Ord. 12-13-2000 § 1,2: Ord. 11-13-2000 §1)

6.24.131  No parking area: High Street— Penalty
There shall be no parking of vehicles (as defined in the New Hampshire Motor Vehicle Code Annotated, RSA 259:122), on the south side of High Street, from the intersection of South Street and High Street eastbound to the intersection of Nashua Street and High Street. The town shall maintain “no parking” signage so that it is visible to the general public.  Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a violation and subject to a parking fine as described in Milford Municipal Code Appendix B – fines.  (Ord. 6-22-2001 § 1,2)

6.24.132  No parking area: Forest Street— Penalty

There is no parking of “vehicles” or any part thereof (as defined in the New Hampshire Motor Vehicle Code Annotated, RSA 259:122), on Forest Street from the intersection of Amherst Street in a northerly direction to the end of Forest Street. The town maintains “no parking” signage so that it is visi¬ble to the general public.
Each such owner or operator of a vehicle who violates the provisions of this section which governs and regulates stopping, standing and parking of vehicles, shall within seventy-two (72) hours of the time when the notice of violation was attached to the vehicle, pay at the police station a fine as described in Milford Municipal Code Appendix B – fines.  The fail¬ure of the owner or operator to make such payment within the seventy-two (72) hours is subject to the issuance of a court summons to appear in the court having jurisdiction. Upon the finding of guilty, the amount of the fine may be determined by the court.
If any vehicle is found upon a street or highway in violation of any provision of this section regulating the stopping, standing or parking provision of this section and the identity of the driver cannot be determined, the owner or person, in which name the vehicle is registered, is held prima facie responsible for the violation.
All fees, forfeits and moneys collected under this section are administered by the board of selectmen. (Ord. 1-24-04 § 1,2)
6.24.133  No parking area: West Street— Penalty

There is no parking of “vehicles” or any part thereof (as defined in the New Hampshire Motor Vehicle Code Annotated, RSA 259:122), on the west side of West Street from the intersection of West Street and the southernmost exit/entrance of the Milford High School in a southerly direction to the intersection of West Street and Osgood Road. The town maintains “no parking” signage so that it is visible to the general public.
Each owner or operator of a vehicle who violates the provisions of this section which governs and regulates stopping, standing and parking of vehicles, shall within seventy-two (72) hours of the time when the notice of violation was attached to the vehicle, pay at the police station a fine as described in Milford Municipal Code Appendix B - fines. The failure of the owner or operator to make the payment within the seventy-two (72) hours is subject to the issuance of a court summons to appear in the court having jurisdiction. Upon the finding of guilty, the amount of the fine may be determined by the court.
If any vehicle is found upon a street or highway in violation of any provision of this section regulating the stopping, standing or parking provision of this section and the identity of the driver cannot be determined, the owner or person, in which name the vehicle is registered, is held prima facie responsible for the violation.
All fees, forfeits and moneys collected under this section are administered by the board of selectmen. (Ord. 1-26-04 § 1,2)
6.24.134  No parking area: Highland Avenue— Penalty

There is no parking of “vehicles” (as defined in the New Hampshire Motor Vehicle Code Annotated, RSA 259:122), upon the pavement portion of Highland Avenue intersection of Grove Street and Highland Avenue 300 feet northbound on both the east side and the west side along said Highland Avenue. The town of Milford shall maintain “No Parking” signage so that it is visible to the general public.
Whoever shall violate this ordinance shall be guilty of a violation and subject to a parking fine as described in Milford Municipal Code Appendix B – fines. The failure of the owner or operator to make the payment within the seventy-two (72) hours is subject to the issuance of a court summons to appear in the court having jurisdiction. Upon the finding of guilty, the amount of the fine may be determined by the court.
If any vehicle is found upon a street or highway in violation of any provision of this section regulating the stopping, standing or parking provision of this section and the identity of the driver cannot be determined, the owner or person, in which name the vehicle is registered, is held prima facie responsible for the violation.
6.24.140  No parking area: South Street— Penalty
There shall be no parking of vehicles or any part thereof (as defined in the New Hampshire Motor Vehicle Code Annotated, RSA 259:122), on the west side of South Street, from the intersection of Union Square in a southerly direction to the intersection of South Street and Clinton Street.

In addition, there shall be no parking of vehicles, or any part thereof, on the east side of South Street, from the intersection of South Street and High Street in a southerly direction to the intersection of South Street and Clinton Street. The town shall maintain “no parking” signage so that it is visible to the gen¬eral public.

Each such owner or operator of a vehicle who violates the provisions of this section which governs and regulates stopping, standing and parking of vehicles, shall within seventy-two (72) hours of the time when such notice of violation was attached to such vehicle, pay at the police station as a penalty for and in full satisfaction of such violation, a fine as described in Milford Municipal Code Appendix B – fines. The failure of such owner or operator to make such payment within seventy-two (72) hours shall be subject to the issuance of a court summons to appear in the court having jurisdiction. Upon a finding of guilty, the amount of the fine may be determined by the court.

If any vehicle found upon a street or highway is in violation of any provision of this section, regulating stopping, standing or parking, and the identity of the driver cannot be determined, the owner or person, in whose name such vehicle is registered, shall be held prima facie responsible for such violation.
All fees, forfeits and moneys collected under this section shall be administered by the board of selectmen. (Ord. 7-9-2001 § 1,2)

6.24.170  Parking against traffic flow— Penalty
There shall be no parking of vehicles (as defined in the New Hampshire Motor Vehicle Code Annotated, RSA 259:122), upon any way in the town in a manner that causes the vehicle, while parked, to be facing in the opposite direction of the normal flow of traffic.

Each owner or operator of a vehicle who violates the provisions of this section, which governs and regulates stopping, standing and parking of vehicles, shall within seventy-two (72) hours of the time when such notice of violation was attached to such vehicle, pay a fine as described in Milford Municipal Code Appendix B – fines.  Failure to make said payment within seventy-two (72) hours shall subject the owner or operator to the issuance of a court summons to appear in the court hav¬ing jurisdiction.
If any vehicle found upon a street or highway is in violation of any provision of this section, regulating stopping, standing or parking, and the identity of the driver cannot be determined, the owner or person, in whose name such vehicle is registered, shall be held prima facie responsible for such violation.
All fees, forfeits and moneys collected under this section shall be administered by the board of selectmen. (Ord. 7-11-2001 § 1,2)

6.24.180  Parking on sidewalk—Penalty
There shall be no parking of vehicles, or any part thereof (as defined in the New Hampshire Motor Vehicle Code Annotated, RSA 259:122), upon any town-maintained sidewalk in the town.

Each such owner or operator of a vehicle who violates the provisions of this section, shall within seventy-two (72) hours of the time when such notice of violation was attached to such vehicle, pay at the Milford Police Station as a penalty for and in full satisfaction of such violation, a fine as described in Milford Municipal Code Appendix B - fines. Failure to make said payment within seventy-two (72) hours shall subject the owner or operator to the issuance of a court summons to appear in the court having jurisdiction.
If any vehicle found upon a street or highway is in violation of any provision of this section, regulating stopping, standing or parking, and the identity of the driver cannot be determined, the owner or person, in whose name such vehicle is registered, shall be held prima facie responsible for such violation.
All fees, forfeits and moneys collected under this section shall be administered by the board of selectmen. (Ord. 7-11-2001 § 1,2)

6.24.190  Parking within fire lane—Penalty
There shall be no parking of vehicles, or any part thereof (as defined in the New Hampshire Motor Vehicle Code Annotated, RSA 259:122), within any designated fire lane. Such fire lanes, both private and public property, shall be subject to the provisions of this section. The town shall maintain “no parking” signage so that it is visible to the general public.
Each owner or operator of a vehicle who violates the provisions of this section, which governs and regulates stopping, standing and parking of vehicles, shall within seventy-two (72) hours of the time when such notice of violation was attached to such vehicle, pay at the Milford Police station as a penalty for and in full satisfaction of such violation, a fine as described in Milford Municipal Code Appendix B –fines.  Failure to make such payment within seventy-two (72) hours shall be subject to the issuance of a court summons to appear in the court having jurisdiction.

If any vehicle found upon a street or highway is in violation of any provision of this section, regulating stopping, standing or parking, and the identity of the driver cannot be determined, the owner or person, in whose name such vehicle is registered, shall be held prima facie responsible for such violation.
All fees, forfeits and moneys collected under this section shall be administered by the board of selectmen. (Ord. 7-9-2001 § 1,2)

6.24.195  Handicapped parking spaces
“Handicapped parking only” signs are to be erected and maintained on the following parking spaces:
On Middle Street for the last two eastbound-facing parking spaces on the north side of the Milford town hall. (Ord. 06-01-23)

6.24.200  Parking on crosswalk—Penalty
There shall be no parking of vehicles, or any part thereof (as defined in the New Hampshire Motor Vehicle Code Annotated, RSA 259:122), upon any town-maintained pedestrian crosswalk in the town. Each such owner or operator of a vehicle who violates the provisions of this section, which governs and regulates stopping, standing and parking of vehicles, shall within seventy-two (72) hours of the time when such notice of violation was attached to such vehicle, pay at the police station as a penalty for and in full satisfaction of such violation, a fine as described in Milford Municipal Code Appendix B – fines.   The failure of such owner or operator to make such payment within seventy-two (72) hours shall be subject to the issuance of a court summons to appear in the court having jurisdiction. Upon a finding of guilty, the amount of the fine may be determined by the court. If any vehicle found upon a street or highway is in violation of any provision of this section, regulating stopping, standing or parking, and the identity of the driver cannot be determined, the owner or person, in whose name such vehicle is registered, shall be held prima facie responsible for such violation. All fees, forfeits and moneys collected under this section shall be administered by the board of selectmen. (Ord.7-9-2001 § 1,2)

6.24.210  Restricted parking zones—Fines
The following locations shall be known as re¬stricted parking zones within the town. “Restricted parking zone” signage will be posted to prohibit parking in these areas. Fines and Fees

Each such owner or operator of a vehicle who violates the provisions of this section, which governs and regulates stopping, standing and parking of vehicles, shall within seventy-two (72) hours of the time when such notice of violation was attached to such vehicle, pay at the Milford Police Station as a penalty for and in full satisfaction of such violation fine as described in Milford Municipal Code Appendix B – fines.  Fail¬ure to make said payment within seventy-two (72) hours shall be subject to the issuance of a court summons to appear in the court having jurisdiction.

If any vehicle found upon a street or highway is in violation of any provision of this section, regulating stopping, standing or parking, and the identity of the driver cannot be determined, the owner or person, in whose name such vehicle is registered, shall be held prima facie responsible for such violation.
All fees, forfeits and moneys collected under this section shall be administered by the board of selectmen. (Ord. 7-9-200 1 § 1,2)

Title 7 Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places
Chapter 7.04 Streets, Sidewalks and Bridges Generally
Chapter 7.08 Use of Bicycles, Roller Skates Rollerbaldes, Skateboards and Go Peds on Town Street and Sidewalks
Chapter 7.16 Commons, Playgrounds, Town Buildings, Pools and Other Public Areas
Chapter 7.20 Conservation Lands
Chapter 7.28 Private Recreation Areas
Chapter 7.30 Depositing Trash or Refuse

Title 8 Public Services

Title 9 Building and Construction

Chapter 9.04 Building Permit Fees
Sections
9.04.010  Method of fee calculation [Amended, April 25, 2011]  
9.04.020  Fee schedule [Amended, April 25, 2011] 

9.04.010  Method of fee calculation 

Fees are based on square footage, total of all floor area and are detailed in Milford Municipal Code Appendix A - Fees.
The horizontal dimensions shall be determined by the exterior dimensions and number of floors, to include decks, porches, breezeways, attached garages, dormers and carports.
Determine the sum of the gross horizontal area of each floor, including the interior mezzanine, a balcony, cellar, basement, usable attic area in the dwelling. Attic floors shall not be included unless they are used for habitable space such as a kitchen, bathroom, playroom or similar use, only the actual areas to be occupied shall be included in the calculation.
Building on a slab with a crawl space only the gross horizontal area shall be calculated.
Work requiring a permit that commences PRIOR to obtaining an approved permit shall be subject to the fees listed in Appendix A.
Additional fees for building systems; chimneys, demolition, driveway, electrical, gas piping, mechanical, plumbing, re-inspection, sign, stormwater and swimming pools, etc are detailed in Milford Municipal Code Appendix A - Fees.
(Ord. 2011-003, 04-25-11; Ord. 1-1-99 (part))
9.04.020 Fee Schedule [Repealed, April 25, 2011 – All fees are now contained in Appendix A]

Chapter 9.08 Building Code Reference
Sections
9.08.01 State Building Code; RSA 155-A [Enacted, April 25, 2011 – Formerly Development Regulations – which was Repealed, April 25, 2011]
9.08.02 Comprehensive Shoreland Protection; RSA 483:B [Enacted, April 25, 2011 – Formerly Commercial and Industrial Development – which was repealed, April 25, 2011]
9.08.03 Manufactured Housing; [Enacted, April 25, 2011 – Formerly Purpose - which was repealed, April 25, 2011]

9.08.01 State Building Code; RSA 155-A
Click here

9.08.02 Comprehensive Shoreland Protection; RSA 483:B
Click here

9.08.03 Manufactured Housing
Click here
Installation Rules (Ord. 2011-004, 04-25-11; Ord. 4-13-88)

Chapter 9.12 Off Street Parking Requirements
Sections
9.12.010     Off-street parking [Repealed, April 25, 2011]
9.12.020     Location [Repealed, April 25, 2011]
9.12.030     Dimensions and general regulations [Repealed, April 25, 2011]
9.12.040     Municipal lot substations [Repealed, April 25, 2011]
9.12.050     Increase or change of use [Repealed, April 25, 2011]
9.12.060     Prior nonconforming uses [Repealed, April 25, 2011]
9.12.070     Table of number of required off-street parking spaces [Repealed, April 25, 2011]

9.12.010     Off-street parking [Repealed, April 25, 2011] (Ord. 2011-005, Repealed ­04-25-11; Ord. 9-5-84 (part))

9.12.020     Location [Repealed, April 25, 2011] (Ord. 2011-005, Repealed - 04-25­11; Ord. 9-5-84 (part))

9.12.030     Dimensions and general regulations [Repealed, April 25, 2011] (Ord. 2011-005, Repealed - 04-25-11; Ord. 9-5-84 (part))

9.12.040     Municipal lot substations [Repealed, April 25, 2011] (Ord. 2011-005, Repealed - 04-25-11; Ord. 9-5-84 (part))

9.12.050     Increase or change of use [Repealed, April 25, 2011] (Ord. 2011-005, Repealed - 04-25-11; Ord. 9-5-84 (part))

9.12.060     Prior nonconforming uses [Repealed, April 25, 2011] (Ord. 2011-005, Repealed - 04-25-11; Ord. 9-5-84 (part))

9.12.070     Table of number of required off-street parking spaces [Repealed, April 25, 2011] (Ord. 2011-005, Repealed - 04-25-11; Ord. 4-13-88)

Chapter 9.16 Floodplain Management
Sections
9.16.010      Purpose [Repealed, April 25, 2011]
9.16.020      Area of applicability [Repealed, April 25, 2011]
9.16.030      Requirement [Repealed, April 25, 2011]
9.16.040      Other restrictions [Repealed, April 25, 2011]
9.16.050      Interpretation [Repealed, April 25, 2011]
9.16.060      Warning and disclaimer of liability [Repealed, April 25, 2011]
9.16.070      Definitions [Repealed, April 25, 2011]
9.16.080      Standards [Repealed, April 25, 2011]
9.16.090      Administration [Repealed, April 25, 2011]
9.16.100      Appeals and variances [Repealed, April 25, 2011]

Town Of Milford
Zoning Ordinance
Adopted March 11, 1969
2020 Edition
Office of Community Development
Revised 3/2020
Revised 3/2020 Page 2 of 187
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE I: INTRODUCTION5
1.01.0 PURPOSE . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
1.02.0 AUTHORIZATION. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
1.03.0 AMENDMENTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
1.04.0 EFFECTIVE DATE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
1.05.0 OTHER REGULATIONS, ORDINANCES AND STATUTES. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
1.06.0 SEVERABILITY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
ARTICLE II: GENERAL PROVISIONS. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
2.01.0 LOT OF RECORD (2012) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
2.02.0 NON-CONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES (2013) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
2.03.0 NON-CONFORMING USE AND STRUCTURES – CONTINUANCE,
DISCONTINUANCE OR CHANGE (2013) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
2.04.0 PUBLIC NUISANCE (2008) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
2.05.0 USES/STRUCTURES NOT PERMITTED . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
2.06.0 EQUITABLE WAIVER (2012) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
ARTICLE III: ZONING MAP – ZONING DISTRICT CHANGES (2014) . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
3.01.0 DISTRICTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
ARTICLE IV: DEFINITIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
4.01.0 PURPOSE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
ARTICLE V: ZONING DISTRICTS AND REGULATIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
5.01.0 (INTENTIONALLY BLANK) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
5.02.0 RESIDENCE “A” DISTRICT (1995) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
5.03.0 RESIDENCE “B” DISTRICT (1995) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5.04.0 RESIDENCE “R” DISTRICT (2001) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.05.0 COMMERCIAL “C” DISTRICT (1995) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.06.0 INDUSTRIAL “I” DISTRICT (1995) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5.07.0 LIMITED COMMERCIAL-BUSINESS “LCB” DISTRICT (1988) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5.08.0 INTEGRATED COMMERCIAL-INDUSTRIAL “ICI” DISTRICT (1995) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
5.09.0 INTEGRATED COMMERCIAL-INDUSTRIAL 2 “ICI2” DISTRICT (2007) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
ARTICLE VI: OVERLAY DISTRICTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
6.01.0 GROUND WATER PROTECTION DISTRICT (2003) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
6.02.0 WETLAND CONSERVATION DISTRICT (2017) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
6.03.0 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT DISTRICT (2020) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
6.04.0 OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION DISTRICT (2018) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
6.05.0 NASHUA AND ELM STREETS CORRIDOR DISTRICT (2012) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. .. . . 75
6.06.0 COMMERCE AND COMMUNITY DISTRICT (DELETED 2020). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
Revised 3/2020 Page 3 of 187
6.07.0 WEST ELM STREET GATEWAY DISTRICT (2012) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
ARTICLE VII: SUPPLEMENTARY STANDARDS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97
7.01.0 GRAVEL AND EARTH REMOVAL (2014) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97
7.02.0 ON-SITE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 98
7.03.0 CLUSTER OPEN SPACE DEVELOPMENT (DELETED 2000) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 98
7.04.0 PRIVATE WAYS (DELETED 2001) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 98
7.05.0 EXISTING MANUFACTURED MOBILE HOME PARKS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
7.06.0 SIGN ORDINANCE (2019) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
7.07.0 SENIOR HOUSING DEVELOPMENT (DELETED 2014) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
7.08.0 STANDARDS FOR ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES (2000) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
7.09.0 TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES (2013) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
7.10.0 SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 137
7.11.0 SOLAR COLLECTION SYSTEMS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 143
7.12.0 HOME BASE BUSINESS (2019) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 152
7.13.0 SELF STORAGE FACILITIES (2019) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 156
7.14.0 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 158
ARTICLE VIII: ADMINISTRATION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 160
8.01.0 ENFORCEMENT (2012) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 160
8.02.0 BUILDING PERMITS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 160
8.03.0 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 160
8.04.0 DRIVEWAY ENTRANCE PERMIT (2008) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 161
8.05.0 2009 INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE (2010) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 161
ARTICLE IX: BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT (1986) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... 164
9.01.0 AUTHORIZATION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 164
9.02.0 MEMBERS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 164
9.03.0 DUTIES & POWERS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 164
9.04.0 MEETINGS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 164
9.05.0 RULES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 164
ARTICLE X: ADMINISTRATIVE RELIEF. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 165
10.01.0 VARIANCES (2012) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 165
10.02.0 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 165
10.03.0 APPEALS TO THE BOARD (2008). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 169
10.04.0 APPEAL FROM ORDER OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT (2008). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 169
10.05.0 PLANNING BOARD REVIEW NECESSARY (2008) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 169
10.06.0 EXPIRATION (2015) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 169
10.07.0 EQUITABLE WAIVER (2012) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 169
APPENDIX I. 676:5 APPEALS TO BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 170
APPENDIX II. 674:33 POWERS OF ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 171
APPENDIX III. RSA 674:33-A EQUITABLE WAIVER OF DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENT. . . . . . . . . . . . .. 173
Revised 3/2020 Page 4 of 187
ARTICLE XI: IMPACT FEES (2003) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 174
11.01.0 GENERAL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 174
11.02.0 OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 176
11.03.0 IMPOSITION OF IMPACT FEES FOR NEW DEVELOPMENT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 176
11.04.0 ADDITIONAL ASSESSMENTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 178
11.05.0 PREMATURE AND SCATTERED DEVELOPMENT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 179
11.06.0 ESTABLISHMENT, CALCULATION, REVIEW & TERMINATION OF IMPACT FEES . . . . . . .. . . . . 179
11.07.0 SEVERABILITY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 180
11.08.0 EFFECTIVE DATE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . 180
ARTICLE XII: GROWTH MANAGEMETN AND INNOVATIVE LAND USE. . . . . . . . . . . . 181
CHANGES / AMENDMENTS TO ZONING ORDINANCE BY YEAR. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 182
Town of Milford Article I
Introduction Zoning Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 5 of 187
ARTICLE I: INTRODUCTION
1.01.0 PURPOSE
The regulations set down in this Ordinance are for the purpose of promoting the public health, safety,
morals, general welfare and civil rights of the inhabitants of the Town of Milford as provided by Title 64
of the NH RSA, Chapters 672-677 inclusive and, as such may be amended from time to time. (1986)
1.02.0 AUTHORIZATION
1.02.1 The Planning Board is hereby authorized to make such textual revisions as may be necessary
and appropriate to correctly restate statutory citations throughout the remainder of the Ordinance so as
to achieve consistency with the purpose and authority, provided that such changes result in no
contradictions within the Ordinance or with state law, and further provided that no substantive changes
shall occur as a result of any such correction. (1985)
1.02.2 The Planning Board has the authority to assign such section numbers to the Zoning Ordinance
as it may deem appropriate provided that no substantive change to the Ordinance shall occur as a
result of this renumbering. (1985)
1.02.3 Provisions of this Ordinance are activated by “shall” when required, “should” when
recommended and “may” when optional. (2012)
1.03.0 AMENDMENTS
This Ordinance may be amended by a majority vote of any legally constituted Town vote when such
amendment has received public notices and hearings in accordance with the procedure established in
Chapter 31, NH RSA, 1955 as amended.
1.04.0 EFFECTIVE DATE
This Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon its passage.
1.05.0 OTHER REGULATIONS, ORDINANCES AND STATUTES
In addition to complying with the regulations established herein, the applicant shall comply with all other
applicable regulations, Ordinances and Statutes of the Town, the State of New Hampshire, and the
United States Government, particularly but not limited to the Zoning Ordinance, Open Space and
Conservation Zoning District, Wetland Conservation District, Flood Plain Management Ordinance,
Development Regulations, Road Specifications, Building Codes and Permits, and the State of New
Hampshire Statutes and Regulations relating to land sales and pollution.
1.06.0 SEVERABILITY
If any section, clause, provision, portion or phrase of this Ordinance shall be held to be invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect, impair or invalidate
any other section, clause, provision, portion or phrase of this Ordinance.
Town of Milford Article II
General
Zoning Ordinance Provisions
Revised 3/2020 Page 6 of 187
ARTICLE II: GENERAL PROVISIONS
2.01.0 LOT OF RECORD (2012)
Lot of record shall be considered to meet the minimum lot size and frontage requirements of the
Ordinance if it was in existence prior to the adoption of the Zoning Ordinance (3/11/69) as long as the
lot of record has fifteen (15) feet of frontage on a Class V or better road.
2.02.0 NON-CONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES (2013)
A use or structure lawfully existing prior to the enactment of the Zoning Ordinance (3/11/69), and that is
maintained after the effective date of the Ordinance, although it does not comply with the zoning
restrictions applicable to the district in which it is situated.
2.03.0 NON-CONFORMING USE AND STRUCTURES – CONTINUANCE, DISCONTINUANCE, OR
CHANGE (2013)
2.03.1 INTENT: The intent of this section is to allow for the lawful continuance of non-conforming uses,
and/or structures and to allow a certain reasonable level of alteration, expansion or change that will not
change the nature of the use and unduly impact the neighborhood.
A. Continuance: A non-conforming use or structure may be continued, although such use or structure
does not conform to the current provisions of this Ordinance.
B. Discontinued use: Whenever a non-conforming use has been discontinued for more than one (1)
year for any reason, such non-conforming use shall not thereafter be reestablished, and the future
use of the property shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance.
C. Alteration, Expansion, or Change: Alterations, expansion or change of a non-conforming use or
structure shall only be permitted by Special Exception by the Zoning Board of Adjustment if it finds
that:
1. The proposed alteration, expansion or change shall not change the nature of the original use or
structure and the proposed alteration, expansion, or change shall involve no substantially
different effect on the neighborhood; or, (2013)
2. In the case of Home Based Businesses (Article VII, Section 7.12.0), Accessory Dwelling Units
(ADU) (Article X, Sec. 10.02.6) and Office in the Residence A and B Districts (Article X Sec.
10.02.7), the proposed alteration, expansion, or change to a non-conforming use or structure
complies with those specific Special Exception criteria governing those uses.
2.04.0 PUBLIC NUISANCE (2008)
No residential, business, commercial or industrial use shall be permitted which could cause any undue
hazard to health or safety or which is offensive to the public because of noise, vibration, noxious odor,
smoke or other similar reason.
Town of Milford Article II
General
Zoning Ordinance Provisions
Revised 3/2020 Page 7 of 187
2.05.0 USES/STRUCTURES NOT PERMITTED
Any uses of land and/or structures not specifically included in each zoning district as either acceptable
or acceptable by special exception shall be considered as not permitted within that zoning district.
(1997)
2.06.0 EQUITABLE WAIVER (2012)
Entire section moved to Section 10.7.0
Town of Milford Article III
Zoning Map -
District
Zoning Ordinance Changes
Revised 3/2020 Page 8 of 187
ARTICLE III: ZONING MAP - ZONING DISTRICT CHANGES (2014)
3.01.0 DISTRICTS
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the Town of Milford is hereby divided into districts located and
bounded as shown on the map entitled “Official Zoning Map, Town of Milford, New Hampshire”, as
amended to reflect most current zoning districts per town vote, copies of which are on file and may be
obtained in the Town offices. The Official Zoning Map, as amended from time to time, with all
accompanying explanatory material, is hereby made a part of this Ordinance. The Official Zoning Map
shall be revised by the Planning Board to incorporate such amendments as may be made by Town
vote. This Official Zoning Map shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land in the
Town. (2010)
RE-ZONING OF THE FOLLOWING LOTS:
1996 Rezone the following parcels on Elm St. from Industrial to ICI (Integrated Commercial-
Industrial): Map 11, Lots 11 and 12; Map 12, Lot 15, also, Map 12, Lot 14 on Elm St. from
Commercial to ICI (Integrated Commercial-Industrial).
1996 Rezone the following parcels on Nashua St. from Industrial to ICI (Integrated Commercial-
Industrial): Map 44, Lots 12, 13 and 13-1.
1996 Rezone the following parcels on Nashua St. from Residence "B" to Limited Commercial-
Business: Map 32, Lots 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6; Map 43, Lots 51, 52 and 53; and Map 44, Lot 3.
1997 Rezone the following parcels on Emerson Rd. from Residence "R" to ICI (Integrated
Commercial-Industrial): Map 48, Lots 35, 35-1, 35-2, 37, 38 and 39.
2003 Rezone the following parcels on Emerson Rd. from ICI (Integrated Commercial-Industrial) to "C"
Commercial: Map 48, Lots 35, 35-1, 35-2, 37, 38 and 39.
2003 Rezone the following parcels on Emerson Rd. from Residence "R" to "C" - Commercial: Map 48,
Lots 36, 36-1, and that portion of Lot 52 lying westerly of a line beginning at a point on the
southerly right-of-way line of Emerson Road, said point being 223.67 feet westerly of the
northeasterly corner of Lot 52; said line extending in a southeasterly direction to a point on the
southerly boundary line of Lot 52 lying 234.52 feet southwest of the southeast property corner of
said lot.
2003 Rezone the following parcels on Emerson Rd. and Federal Hill Rd. from Residence "A" to "C" -
Commercial: Map 48, Lot 42, and that portion of Map 48, Lot 41 lying northerly of a line
extended from the southeasterly corner of Map 48, Lot 44 to the southwesterly corner of Map
48, Lot 52.
Town of Milford Article III
Zoning Map -
District
Zoning Ordinance Changes
Revised 3/2020 Page 9 of 187
2005 Rezone the following parcels of land on: Bear Court, Bobby Lane, Colburn Road, Dear Lane,
Federal Hill Road, Foster Road, Fox Run Road, Heritage Way, Mountain View Court, Ponemah
Hill Road, Settlement Lane, Stone Court, Tarry Lane, Wallingford Road, and Wildflower Way
from Residence “A” to Residence “R”: Map 48, Lot 15-1 (that portion zoned “A” only), Lots 20,
20-1, 21, 22, 23, 23-1, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 46, 47, 51; Map 53, Lots 1, 2, 2-1, 2-2, 2-3, 3,
3-1, 4, 5, 6, 6-1, 6-2, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 21-1, 21-2, 21-3, 21-
4, 22, 22-A, 23, 23-1, 24, 25, 29, 30, 30-1, 30-2, 31, 32, 33, 33-1, 34, 34-1, 34-2, 34-3, 34-4, 34-
5, 34-6, 35, 35-1, 35-2, 35-3, 35-4, 35-5, 35-6, 35-7, 35-8, 35-9, 35-10, 35-11, 35-12, 35-13, 35-
14, 35-15, 35-16, 35-17, 35-18, 35-19, 35-20, 35-21, 35-22, 35-23, 35-24, 35-25, 35-26, 35-27,
35-28, 35-29, 35-30, 35-31, 35-32, 35-33, 35-34, 35-35, 35-36, 35-37, 35-38, 35-39, 35-40, 35-
41, 35-42, 35-43, 35-44, 35-45, 35-46, 35-47, 35-48, 35-49, 36, 37, 37-1, 37-2, 38, 38-1, 38-2,
39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63,
64, 65, 66, 67, 67-1, 67-2, 68, 69, 70, 70-1, 71, 72, 79-1, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92,
PSNH R.O.W, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106; Map 56, Lots: 14,
15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, PSNH R.O.W., 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36,
37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43.
2007 From Industrial (I) to Integrated Commercial-Industrial 2 (ICI-2): Map 7, Lots 16, 16-1, 18, 19,
20, 21, 22, 23, 25, 26, 27, and 28; Map 14, Lots 4 and 5; Map 38, Lots 3,4,5,5-1, 6,9,10,11,12,
13 and 14; from Residence “R” to Integrated Commercial-Industrial 2 (ICI-2) that portion of Map
38, Lot 9 currently zoned “R”; and from Industrial “I” to Residence “R” that portion of Map 38, Lot
50 currently zoned “I”.
2014 Rezone the following parcels of land: a portion of Map 43, Lot 20 from Residence A to Limited
Commercial Business “LCB”, and a portion from Residence A to Commercial “C”; a portion of
Map 43, Lot 69 from Residence “B” to Limited Commercial Business “LCB” and a portion from
Residence B to Commercial “C”.
Town of Milford Article IV
Definitions Zoning Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 10 of 187
ARTICLE IV: DEFINITIONS
4.01.0 PURPOSE
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the word "shall" is mandatory, the word "may" is permissive, and the
following terms shall have the following meanings.
Abutter: Any person whose property is located in New Hampshire and adjoins or is directly across the
street or stream from the land under consideration by the local land use Board. For purposes of
receiving testimony only, and not for purposes of notification, the term “abutter” shall include any
person who is able to demonstrate that his/her land will be directly affected by the proposal under
consideration. For purposes of receipt of notification by a municipality of a local land use Board
hearing, in the case of an abutting property being under a condominium or other collective form of
ownership, the term abutter means the officers of the collective or association, as defined in NH RSA
356-B:3, XXIII. For purposes of receipt of notification by a municipality of a local land use Board
hearing, in the case of an abutting property being under a manufactured housing park form of
ownership defined in NH RSA 205-A:1, the term “abutter” includes the manufactured housing park
owner and the tenants who own manufactured housing which adjoins or is directly across the street or
stream from the land under consideration by the local land use Board. (2007)
Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU): A residential living unit that is within or attached to a single-family
dwelling, or its detached accessory structure, or as a stand-alone dwelling unit subordinate to the
principal single-family dwelling unit, and that provides independent living facilities for one or more
persons, including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel of land as
the principal dwelling unit it accompanies. For the purpose of this Ordinance, an accessory dwelling
unit is not considered an accessory use or structure(s). (2017)
Accessory Use or Structure: A use or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature incidental and
subordinate to, the principal use or structure. For the purpose of this Ordinance an accessory dwelling
unit is not considered an accessory use or structure(s). (2013)
Agriculture: (Deleted 2010)
Agriculture and Farming: As defined in NH RSA 21:34-a, and as amended from time to time, shall
mean all operations of a farm, including: the cultivation, conservation, and tillage of the soil; the
storage, use of, and spreading of commercial fertilizer, lime, wood ash, sawdust, compost, animal
manure, septage, and, where permitted by municipal and state rules and regulations, other lawful soil
amendments; the use of and application of agricultural chemicals; the raising and sale of livestock,
which shall include, but not be limited to, dairy cows and the production of milk, beef animals, swine,
sheep, goats, as well as domesticated strains of buffalo or bison, llamas, alpacas, emus, ostriches,
yaks, elk (Cervus elephus Canadensis), fallow deer (Dama dama), red deer (Cervus elephus), and
reindeer (Rangifer tarandus); the breeding, boarding, raising, training, riding instruction, and selling of
equines; the commercial raising, harvesting, and sale of fresh water fish or other aquaculture products;
the raising, breeding, or sale of poultry or game birds; the raising of bees; the raising, breeding, or sale
of domesticated strains of fur-bearing animals; the production of greenhouse crops; the production,
cultivation, growing, harvesting, and sale of any agricultural, floricultural, viticultural, forestry, or
horticultural crops including, but not limited to, berries, herbs, honey, maple syrup, fruit, vegetables,
Town of Milford Article IV
Definitions Zoning Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 11 of 187
tree fruit, grapes, flowers, seeds, grasses, nursery stock, sod, trees and tree products. Christmas trees
grown as part of a commercial Christmas tree operation, trees grown for short rotation tree fiber,
compost, or any other plant that can be legally grown and harvested extensively for profit or
subsistence.
Agriculture and farming shall also mean any practice on the farm incident to, or in conjunction with
such farming operations, including, but not necessarily restricted to: preparation for market, delivery to
storage or to market, or to carriers for transportation to market of any products or materials from the
farm; the transportation to the farm of supplies and materials; the transportation of farm workers;
forestry or lumbering operations; the marketing or selling at wholesale or retail, on-site and off-site,
products from the farm; irrigation of growing crops from private water supplies or public water supplies
where not prohibited by State or local regulation; the use of dogs for herding, working, or guarding
livestock as allowed above; the production and storage of compost and the materials necessary to
produce compost, whether such materials originate, in whole or in part, from operations of the farm.
(2010)
Animal feedlot: Deleted. (2015)
Aquifer: Geological formation composed of rock or sand and/or gravel that contains significant
amounts of potentially recoverable potable water.
Assisted Living Facility: An Assisted Living Facility shall include, but not be limited to, a facility where
rooms, meals, personal care and supervision of self-administered medication are provided pursuant to
NH RSA 151:9, VII(a) and He-P 804.3 or as amended. Other services may be provided as an
accessory use only, such as recreational activities, financial services, and transportation. (2011)
Bed & Breakfast: A building for transient occupancy which also provides breakfast to registered guests
only and is owner occupied. (1997)
Building: Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. (1992)
Church: A building or structure, or groups of buildings or structures that by design and construction are
primarily intended for conducting organized religious services. See also House of Worship (1996)
Community Center: A building used for recreational, social, educational and cultural activities, open to
the public or a designated part of the public, usually owned and operated by a public or non-profit group
or agency. (1996)
Congregate Care Facility: A Congregate Care Facility shall include, but not be limited to, a facility
where communal dining facilities and services such as housekeeping, organized social and recreational
activities, transportation services, and other support services appropriate for the residents are provided
pursuant to NH RSA 151:9, VII(a) and He-P 814.3 or as amended. (2011)
Day Care Facility: Those facilities, as licensed by the State of New Hampshire, and defined by NH
RSA 170-E:2 as providing child care under one or more of the following categories: (2007)
A. Pre-School Program - A facility regularly providing a structured program up to five (5) hours per
day for seven (7) or more children who are three (3) years of age or older and who are not attending a
full-day school program. The number of children shall include all children present during the period of
the program.
Town of Milford Article IV
Definitions Zoning Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 12 of 187
B. Group Pre-School Center - A facility regularly providing full-day or half-day child care for thirteen
(13) or more pre-school children, whether or not the service is known as a day nursery, nursery school,
kindergarten, cooperative, child development center, day care center, center for the developmentally
disabled, progressive school, Montessori school, or by any other name.
C. After-School Program - A facility in which child care is regularly provided up to five (5) hours per
school day, before and/or after regular school holidays, for six (6) or more children who are enrolled in
a full day program.
Day Care facility, for the purposes of this Ordinance, does not include "family day care home" as
defined in NH RSA 170-E:2.
Density: For the purposes of this Ordinance, density is used to define residential dwelling units per
acre, and is based on the allowable units per acre in each residential district. High density refers to
allowable densities in the Residence "B" District, medium density refers to allowable densities in the
Residence "A" District; and low density refers to allowable densities in the Residence "R" District.
(1997)
Distribution and Mailing Facilities: Uses which constitute the temporary storage and/or shipping of
goods, including mail order processing, package distribution and mailing. (1995)
Drive Aisle: The traveled passageway by which vehicles enter and depart parking spaces. (2002)
Driveway: A vehicular passageway providing access between a road and a parcel of land. (2002)
Driveway, common commercial/industrial: A single driveway that provides access between a road
and two (2) or more conforming commercial and industrial lots. (2002)
Driveway, common residential: A single driveway that provides access between a road and not more
than two (2) conforming residential lots. (2002)
Dwelling Unit: One room or rooms connected together, constituting a separate, independent
housekeeping establishment physically separated from any other dwelling units in the same structure,
and containing independent cooking and sleeping facilities.
Dwelling, Single-family: A detached residential dwelling unit, other than a mobile home, designed for
one family only.
Dwelling, Two-family: A structure which contains two (2) separate dwelling units, each provided with
complete and independent living facilities for one or more persons, including provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation as well as independent access and egress to and from each
dwelling unit. (2013)
Dwelling, Multi-family: A structure consisting of three (3) or more dwelling units designed for
occupancy by three or more families. (1995)
Dwelling, Mixed-use: One room or rooms connected together and designed for use as a dwelling unit;
located in a non-residential building with no more than two (2) dwelling units that are in addition to the
primary non-residential use. (2012)
Town of Milford Article IV
Definitions Zoning Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 13 of 187
Family: One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single non-profit housekeeping
unit.
Family Day Care Home: An occupied residence in which child care is regularly provided for less than
twenty-four (24) hours per day, except in emergencies, for one (1) to six (6) children from one or more
unrelated families. The six (6) children shall include any foster children residing in the home and all
children who are related to the caregiver except children who are (ten) 10 years of age or older. In
addition to the six (6) children, one (1) to three (3) children attending a full-day school program may
also be cared for up to five (5) hours per day on school days and all day during school holidays. (1994)
Farm: As defined in NH RSA 21:34-a, and as amended from time to time, shall mean any land,
buildings, or structures on or in which agriculture and farming activities are carried out or conducted
and shall include the residence or residences of owners, occupants, or employees located on such
land. Structures shall include all farm outbuildings used in the care of livestock, and in the production
and storage of fruit, vegetables, or nursery stock; in the production of maple syrup; greenhouses for the
production of annual or perennial plants; and any other structures used for ‘agriculture’ and ‘farming’ as
defined in this Ordinance. A Farm may include a ‘Farm roadside stand’ as defined by this Ordinance. A
farm may include wholesale and retail sale of feed and grain products, incidental and subordinate to
agriculture and farming activities, produced either on-site or off-site, along with accessory structures
utilized for feed and grain product storage. (2010)
Farm roadside stand: An agricultural operation, and not be considered commercial, where at least
thirty-five percent (35%) of the product sales in dollar volume is attributable to products produced on
the farm or farms of the farm roadside stand owner. Product sales not attributable to the farm or farms
of the farm stand owner or farm stand operator shall be agriculturally related and may include, but not
necessarily limited to, the sale of garden accessories, cheese, home crafts, cut flowers, dried flowers,
value added products such as jams, jellies and baked goods from a licensed kitchen. Proof of farm
income may be required to determine conformity with these provisions. (2010)
Farmer’s market: A seasonal outdoor event or seasonal outdoor series of events, subject to applicable
Town health and safety codes, at which two (2) or more vendors of agricultural commodities gather for
purposes of offering for sale such commodities to the public. Commodities offered for sale must
include, but are not limited to, products of agriculture as defined in this Ordinance. A ‘farmer’s market’
shall not include any event held upon the premises owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by any
individual vendor selling therein. (2010)
Filling Station: A building or structure, or part thereof, or any premises used in connection with tanks,
pumps, and other appliances for supplying motor vehicles with gasoline, oil, water, compressed air and
similar supplies, but not used for the purpose of making repairs. (1995)
Floor Area, Gross: The floor area within the inside perimeter of the exterior walls of the building under
consideration, exclusive of vent shafts and courts, without deduction for corridors, stairways, closets,
the thickness of interior walls, columns or other features. The gross floor area shall not include shafts
with no openings or interior courts. (2016)
Frontage, minimum: That continuous portion of a lot bordering on a road(s) from which access can be
taken, that meets the minimum requirements of the underlying zoning district. (2006)
Town of Milford Article IV
Definitions Zoning Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 14 of 187
Funeral Home: A building used for the preparation of the deceased for burial and the display of the
deceased and rituals connected therewith before burial or cremation. (1996)
Groundwater: Subsurface water that occurs beneath the water table in soils and geologic formations.
[NH RSA 485-C, Groundwater Protection Act] (2015)
Groundwater Recharge Areas: Areas composed of permeable stratified sand and/or gravel and
certain wetlands, which collect precipitation surface water and carry it to aquifers.
Harvesting of Natural Resources: the removal of natural resources, such as timber, freshwater, and
earth materials from their existing natural state on-site. (2011)
Hazardous or Toxic Materials or Liquids: Materials or liquids that pose a threat present or future to
the environment whether in use, storage or transit, including without exception hazardous waste
identified and listed in accordance with Section 3001 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
of 1976 as amended. (1993)
Health Service Facilities: A Health Service Facility shall include but not be limited to a facility
providing clinically related outpatient diagnostic, treatment, or rehabilitative services, as well as
preventative services, and includes, without limitation, alcohol, drug abuse, and mental health services.
(2011)
Height: The height of a building or structure shall mean the vertical distance from the average elevation
of the finished grade within five feet of the building or structure to the highest point of the building or
structure. (2005)
Home Based Business: A business use conducted on a property within a dwelling or an accessory
building that is secondary and incidental to a primary residential use. (2019)
Hospice house: A Hospice House shall include but not be limited to free standing 24-hour residential
setting licensed under NH RSA 151 as a supported residential care facility for terminally ill individuals
with less than one year to live who no longer have a home or cannot remain safely there. Palliative care
such as room, meals, personal care, medication monitoring and emotional support, is provided.
Additional health care services may be provided to residents through arrangements with outside
organizations as is currently available if the resident was in his/her home. (2011)
Hospital: A Hospital shall include but not be limited to an institution licensed by the State of New
Hampshire which is engaged in providing to patients, under supervision of physicians, inpatient and
outpatient diagnostic and therapeutic services for medical diagnosis, treatment and care of injured,
disabled, or sick persons, or rehabilitation services for the rehabilitation of such persons. The term
hospital includes psychiatric and substance abuse treatment facilities. (2011)
Hotel: A facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the general public supervised by a person
in charge at all hours, and which may include additional facilities and services such as restaurants,
bars, meeting and function rooms, entertainment, personal services, and recreational facilities. (2011)
Hotel/Motel: Deleted. (2011)
Town of Milford Article IV
Definitions Zoning Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 15 of 187
House of Worship: A building or structure, or groups of buildings or structures, that by design and
construction are primarily intended for conducting organized religious services. See also Church
(2001)
Independent Senior Housing Units: Deleted. (2015)
Junkyard: An establishment or place of business which is maintained, operated, or used for storing
and keeping, or storing and selling, trading or otherwise transferring old or scrap copper, brass, rope,
rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber debris, waste or junked, dismantled or wrecked motor vehicles, or
parts thereof, iron, steel or other old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous material. Junkyard shall also include
any place of business for the maintenance or operation of an automotive recycling yard, and includes
garbage dumps and sanitary fills. Also includes any business and any place of storage or deposit,
whether in connection with another business or not, which has stored or deposited two (2) or more
unregistered motor vehicles which are no longer intended or in condition for legal use on the public
highways, or used parts of motor vehicles or old iron, metal, glass, paper, cordage, or other waste or
discarded or second-hand material which has been a part, or intended to be a part, of any motor
vehicle, the sum of which parts or material shall be equal in bulk to two (2) or more motor vehicles.
Junkyard shall also include any place of business or storage or deposit of motor vehicles purchased for
the purpose of dismantling the vehicles for parts or for use of the metal for scrap and where it is
intended to burn material, which are parts of a motor vehicle or cut up the parts thereof. Also, includes
any yard or field used as a place of storage in which there is displayed to the public view, junk
machinery or scrap metal that occupies an area of five hundred (500) square feet and as amended by
NH RSA 236:112. (2009)
Kennel: Deleted. (2012)
Leachable Wastes: Deleted. (2015)
Lot: The whole area of a single parcel of land, with assertable boundaries in single or joint ownership
undivided by a street and established by deeds of record. (1999)
Lot line, front: The lot line of record separating a lot from a road. (2002)
Lot of Record: Lot of record shall be considered to meet the minimum lot size and frontage
requirements of the Ordinance if it was in existence prior to the adoption of the Zoning Ordinance
(3/11/1969) as long as the lot of record has fifteen feet (15’) of frontage on a Class V or better road.
(2012)
Lot Use: A parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by a building(s) or use(s), and the
buildings or uses accessory thereto, including such open spaces and yards as are required by this
Ordinance. (2007)
Manufactured Housing: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to
the required utilities. The term manufactured housing does not include a recreational vehicle.
Generally, manufactured homes must meet the same requirements as stick built or conventional
housing. Because they are usually residential buildings, they must be elevated so that the lowest floor
is above the Base Flood Elevation (BFE). (2015)
Town of Milford Article IV
Definitions Zoning Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 16 of 187
Manufactured Housing Park: A parcel of land upon which two (2) or more manufactured homes are,
or are intended to be, placed and occupied as dwellings. (1995)
Manufacturing: The making of goods or materials from raw materials or unfinished products, includes
assembling and processing. (1997)
Mining of Land: The removal or relocation of geological materials such as topsoil, sand, gravel,
metallic ores or bedrock.
Motor Vehicle Repair Facility: A building or structure or part thereof, or any premises used for making
changes, adjustments or repairs to motor vehicles, may also include structural repairs, painting and
work involving use of machinery. May also include retail sale of motor vehicle parts and accessories
and retail sale of petroleum products. (1995)
Motorized Vehicles Sales Facility: A building or structure, or part thereof, or any premises used for
the commercial display, sale, lease, or rental of new or used internal combustion engine vehicles in
operable condition and where no repair work is done. (2007)
Net Tract Area: Deleted. (2007)
Nursery: Deleted. (2012)
Nursery Stock: Deleted. (2012)
Nursing home or facility: A Nursing Home or Facility shall include but not be limited to a facility,
licensed by the State of New Hampshire, which shall provide, for two (2) or more persons, basic
domiciliary services (room, board, and laundry), continuing health supervision under competent
professional medical and nursing direction, and continuous nursing care as may be individually
required. (2011)
Office: The building, room or series of rooms in which the affairs of a business, profession or branch of
government are conducted. (1995)
Open space: Permeable surface on a lot that is unoccupied by buildings, unobstructed to the sky, not
devoted to service driveways or off-street parking that is available to all occupants of the premises.
(1995)
Parking Space: An off-street space sufficient in size to accommodate the parking of one motor vehicle
exclusive of the area necessary for internal access driveways and passageways on any site. The
Planning Board shall develop such standards and requirements regulating the size and arrangement of
parking spaces, as it may deem necessary and appropriate. (1985)
Person: Any individual, firm, co-partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association
or body politic, trustee, receiver, assignee, or other similar representative thereof.
Portable Sign: Deleted. (2013)
Pre-site Built Housing: Any structure designed primarily for residential occupancy which is wholly or in
substantial part made, fabricated, formed or assembled in off-site manufacturing facilities in
conformance with the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development minimum property
Town of Milford Article IV
Definitions Zoning Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 17 of 187
standards and local building codes, for installation, or assembly and installation on the building site.
For the purposes of this definition, pre-site built housing does not include manufactured housing. (See
manufactured housing) (1995)
Principal Route of Access: Deleted. (2009)
Private Way: A driveway which the Town has no duty to maintain which provides access to no more
than two (2) building lots but not including any Class VI Highway as defined by NH RSA and subject to
Section 7.040 Private Ways. (See Driveway; Driveway, Common) (1995)
Processing and Warehousing: The storage of materials in a warehouse or terminal where such
materials may be combined, broken down, or aggregated for distribution or storage and where the
original material is not chemically or physically changed. Processing and warehousing is considered to
be storage and shipment as opposed to manufacturing. (1997)
Processing of Natural Resources: A series of operations, usually in a continuous and regular action
or succession of actions, performed to create products from materials supplied by nature. (1997)
Public Utility: Deleted (2014)
Recreation, active: Leisure time activities, usually of a formal nature and often performed with others,
requiring equipment and taking place at prescribed places, sites, or fields. (2002)
Recreation, passive: Leisure time activities that involve relatively inactive or less energetic activities
such as walking, sitting, picnicking, card games, chess, checkers, or similar table games. (2002)
Recreational Facility, Commercial: A place designed and equipped for the conduct of leisure-time
activities, operated as a business for profit and open to the public for a fee. This includes, but is not
limited to, places of amusement such as bowling alleys, miniature golf courses, movie theaters, health
and fitness clubs, sports fields, golf courses, accessory food service and concessions, and similar types
of establishments. (1997)
Recreational Facility, Not-for-Profit: A place designed and equipped for the conduct of leisure-time
activities open to the general public, owned and operated by a not-for-profit organization. (1996)
Recreational Vehicle: A temporary dwelling for travel, recreation, and vacation use including but not
limited to, camping trailer, travel trailer, pick-up coach to be mounted on a truck chassis, or a selfpropelled
motor home.
Research and Development: A place devoted to activities engaged in refinement, investigation or
experimental study of methods to improve processes or products. Manufacturing of products is not
included within this definition. (1994)
Retail Businesses: Uses which constitute the sale of goods or the delivery of service and/or repair.
(1994)
Right-of-way: A section of land acquired by easement, reservation, dedication, prescription, or
condemnation, duly recorded in the Hillsborough County Registry of Deeds, and intended to be
occupied by a road, crosswalk, railroad, utility lines, and/or other similar uses; and furthermore, the right
to pass over the property of another. (2002)
Town of Milford Article IV
Definitions Zoning Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 18 of 187
Road: Any vehicular right-of-way that: (1) is an existing federal, state, Town, or privately owned and
maintained roadway; (2) is shown upon a plan approved pursuant to NH RSAs; (3) is shown on a plan
duly filed and recorded in the Office of the Hillsborough County Registry of Deeds; or (4) is approved by
any other official action of the Town of Milford. A road contains all the land within the right-of-way.
(2002)
Roadway: The traveled portion of a road within a right-of-way. (2002)
Self-Storage Facility: A building, group of buildings or other facility having compartments, rooms,
spaces, containers or other type of units that are individually leased, rented, sold or otherwise
contracted for, by customers solely for the storage of personal or business goods or property. Items
prohibited from being stored include: flammable liquids, hazardous or toxic chemicals or explosives
(including fireworks) and/or items that would create noxious or offensive odors, dust, noise, or vibration.
Self-storage facilities are those where the facility owner/operator has limited access to the units. For
purposes of this Ordinance, "self-storage facility" shall be considered synonymous with self-storage
warehouse, self-service storage facility, mini-warehouse or mini-storage, and/or portable storage
containers. (2019)
Setback: That horizontal distance measured between the right-of-way of a road or a side or rear lot line
and the closest point of any building or structure contained on the lot.
Schools: Any building, part thereof, or group of buildings, the use of which meets State requirements
for elementary, secondary, vocational or higher education. (1996)
Sign: Any device for visual communication that is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof
to the attention of the public, but not including any flag.
Small Wind Energy Systems (SWES): A wind energy conversion system consisting of a wind turbine,
a generator, a tower and associated control or conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity of
100 kilowatts or less and will be used primarily for onsite consumption. (2009)
Solid Waste Disposal Sites: Areas for disposal of any matter consisting of putrescible material,
refuse, or residue from an air pollution control facility; and other discarded or abandoned material. It
includes solid, liquid, semi-solid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial,
mining, and agricultural operations and from community activities. For the purpose of this Chapter,
namely NH RSA 149-M and the rules specified in ENV-WM 101.01 Applicability, "it does not include
hazardous wastes as defined in NH RSA 147-A:2; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows;
cut or uprooted tree stumps incident to clearing of land depicted on a site plan showing burial locations
and mailed to the director, provided that such burial locations are not located within seventy-five (75)
feet of any well as defined in NH RSA 485:37; municipal and industrial discharges which are point
sources subject to permits under Section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended;
source, special nuclear or by-product materials as defined by the atomic energy act of 1954, as
amended, or septage or sludge as defined in NH RSA 485-a:2, IX-a and XI a" ("Solid Waste" shall not
include deceased persons). (1995)
Solid Wastes: Useless, unwanted, or discarded solid material with insufficient liquid content to be free
flowing including, but not limited to rubbish, garbage, scrap materials, junk refuse, inert fill material and
landscape refuse.
Town of Milford Article IV
Definitions Zoning Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 19 of 187
Structure: A combination of materials for occupancy or use, such as, but not limited to, a building,
bridge, trestle, tower, tunnel, pier, wharf, fences and retaining walls over six (6) feet in height above
grade, and swimming pools. (1992) (amended 2001)
Structure, Non-conforming: A structure which is lawfully maintained at the time this Ordinance
became effective and which does not conform with the regulations of the district in which it is located.
Usable land: Land that does not consist of wetland and slopes over fifteen (15) percent. (2002)
Use, Non-conforming: A use existing prior to the enactment of the Zoning Ordinance (3/11/69) and
that is maintained after the effective date of the Ordinance, although it does not comply with the zoning
restrictions applicable to the district in which it is situated. (2012)
Utility, public or private: Any agency that, under public franchise or private ownership, or under
certificate of convenience or necessity, or by grant of authority by a government agency, provides the
public, or itself with electricity, gas, heat, steam, communication, transportation, water, sewerage
collection, stormwater collection, or similar service. (2017)
Veterinary Clinics: A structure in which animals are given medical or surgical treatment and are cared
for during the time of treatment only. (1994)
Warehouse: A building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials. (1997)
Wetland: An area that is inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency or duration
sufficient to support, and under normal conditions, does support a prevalence of vegetation typically
adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands include, but are not limited to, swamps, marshes,
bogs and similar areas. (1996)
Wholesale Businesses: Uses which constitute the sale of goods in quantity, usually for resale. (1994)
Yard: A required open space parallel to the lot lines which is open to the sky and unoccupied and
unobstructed by a building or buildings.
Yard, Front: A yard between the building and front lot line, extending the full width of the lot or, in case
of a corner lot extending along all streets.
Yard, Rear: A yard extending between side lot lines across the rear of the lot.
Yard, Side: A yard extending from the rear line of the required front yard to the front line of the required
rear yard.
Town of Milford Article V
5.02
Residence A
Zoning Ordinance District
Revised 3/2020 Page 20 of 187
ARTICLE V: ZONING DISTRICTS AND REGULATIONS
5.01.0 (Intentionally Blank)
5.02.0 RESIDENCE "A" DISTRICT (1995)
INTENT: The intent of the Residence "A" District is to provide for low-density or low-intensity uses,
primarily single-family residential on individual lots.
5.02.1 ACCEPTABLE USES
A. Single-family dwellings and their accessory uses and structures
B. Telecommunication facilities (2000)
C. Farm roadside stands (2010)
D. Solar Collection Systems in accordance with Section 7.11.0 (2019)
E. Home Based Business in accordance with Section 7.12.0 (2019)
5.02.2 ACCEPTABLE USES AND YARD REQUIREMENTS BY: (2009)
A. Special Exception
1. Home Based Business in accordance with Section 7.12.0 (2019)
2. Recreational facility, not-for-profit (1997)
3. Day care facilities
4. Family day care homes
5. Churches or Houses of Worship (2011)
6. Deleted (2014)
7. Schools
8. Reduced front, side and rear setbacks (2001)
9. Bed & breakfast (1997)
10. Recreational facility, commercial (1997)
11. Building and structure height greater than allowed in 5.02.6:A and 5.02.6:B (2005)
12. Deleted (2015)
13. Accessory Dwelling Units (2008)
14. Utility, public or private (2011)
15. Office in accordance with Section 10.02.7 (2011)
B. Conditional Use Permit (2009)
1. Small Wind Energy Systems (2009)
5.02.3 USES NOT SPECIFIED (2010)
Any uses of land and/or structures not specifically included in the "A" District as acceptable, acceptable
by Special Exception, or acceptable by Conditional Use Permit shall be considered as not permitted.
Town of Milford Article V
5.02
Residence A
Zoning Ordinance District
Revised 3/2020 Page 21 of 187
5.02.4 LOT SIZES AND FRONTAGES (2009)
The minimum lot size and frontage for single-family residence and all other acceptable uses in the
Residence "A" District shall be:
A. Those areas serviced by both municipal sewerage and water systems shall have lots not less than
fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in area with one hundred (100) feet of frontage on a Class V
or better road.
B. Those areas not serviced by both municipal sewerage and water systems shall have single-family
lots not less in area than forty thousand (40,000) square feet, or larger depending on soil and slope
conditions, as may be suitable to sustain development according to State standards, with one
hundred fifty feet (150') of frontage on a Class V or better road.
5.02.5 YARD REQUIREMENTS (1996)
A. Each structure shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from the front property line.
B. Each structure shall be at least fifteen (15) feet from the side and rear property lines. In case of a
corner lot, the side distance shall be increased to thirty (30) feet on the side bordering the street,
lane or public way.
C. Accessory structures, one hundred-twenty (120) square feet or less, shall have a minimum setback
from the side and rear property lines of six (6) feet. (2011)
5.02.6 HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS (2005)
A. The maximum height of a building or structure in the Residence “A” District shall be thirty-five (35)
feet, except as noted in B. below.
B. The maximum height of school and municipal buildings or structures in the Residence “A” District
shall be forty-five (45) feet.
C. A Special Exception shall be required for heights greater than allowed in either A or B above.
Town of Milford Article V
5.03
Residence B
Zoning Ordinance District
Revised 3/2020 Page 22 of 187
5.03.0 RESIDENCE "B" DISTRICT (1995)
INTENT: The intent of the Residence "B" District is to provide areas for increased residential density
and other uses which are compatible with these residential densities.
5.03.1 ACCEPTABLE USES
A. Single-family dwellings and their accessory uses and structures
B. Two-family dwellings and their accessory uses and structures
C. Multi-family dwellings with municipal sewerage and water systems and their accessory uses and
structures
D. Telecommunication facilities (2000)
E. Deleted (2015)
F. Farm roadside stands (2010)
G. Solar Collection Systems in accordance with Section 7.11.0 (2019)
H. Home Based Business in accordance with Section 7.12.0 (2019)
5.03.2 ACCEPTABLE USES AND YARD REQUIREMENTS BY: (2009)
A. Special Exception
1. Hospital and/or related facilities licensed by the State of NH
2. Schools
3. Funeral homes
4. Home Based Business in accordance with Section 7.12.0 (2019)
5. Day care facilities
6. Family day care homes
7. Recreational facility, commercial (1997)
8. Recreational facility, not-for-profit (1997)
9. Deleted (2014)
10. Bed & breakfast (1997)
11. Reduced front, side and rear setbacks (amended 2001)
12. Building and structure height greater than allowed in 5.03.8:A and 5.03.8:B (2005)
13. Accessory Dwelling Units (2008)
14. Hospice House (2011)
15. Nursing home or facility (2011)
16. Utility, public or private (2011)
17. Office in accordance with Section 10.02.7 (2011)
B. Conditional Use Permit (2009)
1. Small Wind Energy Systems (2009)
5.03.3 USES NOT SPECIFIED (2010)
Any uses of land and/or structures not specifically included in the "B" District as acceptable, acceptable
by Special Exception or acceptable by Conditional Use Permit shall be considered as not permitted.
Town of Milford Article V
5.03
Residence B
Zoning Ordinance District
Revised 3/2020 Page 23 of 187
5.03.4 ALLOWABLE DENSITY
Multi-family residences in the Residence "B" District shall adhere to the following conditions for
development:
A. Multi-family dwellings shall be served by both municipal sewerage and water systems and may
have a maximum of five (5) units per acre. The maximum density may be reduced by the Planning
Board based on recommendations of other qualified consultants.
1. Section Deleted. (2007)
B. In the conversion of an existing house to apartments or multi-family dwellings, a maximum of five
(5) units per acre of land associated with the existing house shall be permitted, given the following
conditions:
1. The proposal meets the standards set forth for maximum density 5.03.4, yard requirements
5.03.6 and usable open space 5.03.7. (1996)
5.03.5 LOT SIZES AND FRONTAGES
A. The following provisions shall apply to all other acceptable uses in this District, except single-family
residences. (2009)
1. In those areas serviced by both municipal sewerage and water systems, the minimum lot size in
Residence "B" shall have as a minimum, twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in area with one
hundred fifty (150) feet of frontage on a Class V or better road.
2. In those Residential "B" areas not serviced by both municipal sewerage and water systems, the
minimum lot size shall be sixty thousand (60,000) square feet in area or larger, depending on
soil and slope conditions, as may be necessary to sustain development according to state
standard with two hundred, twenty-five (225) feet of frontage on a Class V or better road.
3. The minimum lot size and frontage for a single-family residence in this District shall be the same
as those set forth for the Residence "A" District in section 5.02.4 of this article.
5.03.6 YARD REQUIREMENTS (2011)
A. Each structure shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from the front lot line.
B. Each structure shall be at least fifteen (15) feet from side and rear property lines. In case of a
corner lot, the side distance shall be increased to thirty (30) feet on the side bordering the street,
lane or public way.
C. Accessory Structures, one hundred-twenty (120) square feet or less shall have a minimum setback
from the side and rear property lines of six (6) feet.
5.03.7 OPEN SPACE
Open space shall be provided for all uses, other than single-family and two-family dwellings in an
amount equal to not less than thirty (30) percent of the total lot area.
5.03.8 HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS (2005)
A. The maximum height of a building or structure in the Residence “B” District shall be thirty-five (35)
feet, except as noted in B. below.
Town of Milford Article V
5.03
Residence B
Zoning Ordinance District
Revised 3/2020 Page 24 of 187
B. The maximum height of school and municipal buildings or structures in the Residence “B” District
shall be forty-five (45) feet.
C. A Special Exception shall be required for heights greater than allowed in either A or B above.
Town of Milford Article V
5.04
Residence R
District Zoning Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 25 of 187
INTENT: The intent of the Residence "R" District is to provide for low-density residential and
agricultural land uses, and other compatible land uses, that are sensitive to the rural character and
environmental constraints existing in the district.
5.04.1 ACCEPTABLE USES
A. One single-family dwelling and its accessory uses and structures, per lot
B. Agriculture and Farming (2010)
C. One single-family manufactured housing unit, per lot
D. Harvesting of natural resources
E. Telecommunication facilities (2000)
F. Deleted (2011)
G. Farm Roadside Stands (2010)
H. Solar Collection Systems in accordance with Section 7.11.0 (2019)
I. Home Based Business in accordance with Section 7.12.0 (2019)
5.04.2 ACCEPTABLE USES AND YARD REQUIREMENTS BY: (2009)
A. Special Exception
1. One two-family dwelling per lot (2001)
2. Veterinary clinics
3. Home Based Business in accordance with Section 7.12.0 (2019)
4. Day care facilities
5. Family day care home
6. Schools
7. Reduced front, side and rear setbacks (2001)
8. Bed & breakfast (1997)
9. Processing of natural resources on parcels of a minimum five (5) acres in size (2011)
10. Recreational facility, not-for-profit (1997)
11. Recreational facility, commercial (1997)
12. Churches or Houses of Worship (2011)
13. Building and structure height greater than allowed in 5.04.7:A or 5.04.7:B (2005)
14. Accessory Dwelling Units (2008)
15. Hospice house (2011)
16. Nursing home or facility (2011)
17. Utility, public or private (2011)
B. Conditional Use Permit (2009)
1. Small Wind Energy Systems (2009)
2. Solar Collection Systems in accordance with Section 7.11.0 (2019)
3. Home Based Business in accordance with Section 7.12.0 (2019)
5.04.0 RESIDENCE "R" DISTRICT (2001)
Town of Milford Article V
5.04
Residence R
District Zoning Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 26 of 187
5.04.3 USES NOT SPECIFIED (2010)
Any uses of land and/or structures not specifically included in the "R" District as acceptable, acceptable
by Special Exception or acceptable by Conditional Use Permit shall be considered as not permitted.
5.04.4 LOT SIZES AND FRONTAGES (2009)
A. The minimum lot size and frontage for a single-family dwelling or a single-family manufactured
housing unit and all other permitted uses, unless stated otherwise, in the residence "R" District shall
be two (2) acres (87,120 SF), or greater, depending on soil and slope conditions, with a minimum
two hundred (200) feet of frontage on a Class V or better road.
B. The minimum lot size and frontage for a two-family dwelling as allowed by Special Exception in the
Residence "R" District shall be four (4) acres (174,240 SF), or greater, depending on soil and slope
conditions, with a minimum three hundred (300) feet of frontage on a Class V or better road.
5.04.5 YARD REQUIREMENTS (2011)
A. Each structure shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from the front lot line.
B. Each structure shall be at least fifteen (15) feet from side and rear property lines. In case of a
corner lot, the side distance shall be increased to thirty (30) feet on the side bordering the street,
lane or public way.
C. Accessory Structures, one hundred-twenty (120) square feet or less shall have a minimum setback
from the side and rear property lines of six (6) feet.
5.04.6 OPEN SPACE
Open space shall be provided for all uses, other than single-family and two-family dwellings, in an
amount equal to not less than thirty (30) percent of the total lot area.
5.04.7 HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS (2005)
A. The maximum height of a building or structure in the Residence “R” District shall be thirty-five (35)
feet, except as noted in B. below.
B. The maximum height of school and municipal buildings or structures in the Residence “R” District
shall be forty-five (45) feet.
C. A Special Exception shall be required for heights greater than allowed in either A or B above.
Town of Milford Article V
5.05
Commercial
Zoning Ordinance District
Revised 3/2020 Page 27 of 187
INTENT: The intent of this District is to provide areas for those businesses, institutional, financial,
governmental and compatible residential uses which constitute the commercial requirements of the
Town.
5.05.1 ACCEPTABLE USES
A. Retail businesses
B. Wholesale businesses
C. Restaurants
D. Filling stations (2011)
E. Offices
F. Banks and financial institutions
G. Hospitals (2011)
H. Schools
I. Hotels (2011)
J. Churches or Houses of Worship (2011)
K. Bed & breakfast (1997)
L. Deleted (2011)
M. Newspaper and job printing
N. Funeral homes
O. Single-family dwellings and their accessory uses and structures, with their respective related
conditions set forth in Residence "A" District
P. Two-family and multi-family dwellings and their accessory uses and structures, with their respective
related conditions set forth in Residence "B"
Q. Deleted (2019)
R. Recreational facility, not-for-profit (1997)
S. Recreational facility, commercial (1997)
T. Telecommunication facilities (2000)
U. Motor vehicles sales facilities (2011)
V. Deleted (2015)
W. Farm roadside stands (2010)
X. Farmer’s market (2010)
Y. Day care facilities (2011)
Z. Motor vehicle repair facilities (2011)
AA. Health services facilities (2011)
BB. Hospice house (2011)
CC. Veterinary clinics (2011)
DD. Nursing home or facility (2011)
EE. Agriculture and farming (2011)
FF. Utility, public or private (2011)
GG. Dwelling, Mixed-use (2012)
HH. Solar Collection Systems in accordance with Section 7.11.0 (2019)
5.05.0 COMMERCIAL “C” DISTRICT (1995)
Town of Milford Article V
5.05
Commercial
Zoning Ordinance District
Revised 3/2020 Page 28 of 187
5.05.2 ACCEPTABLE USES AND YARD REQUIREMENTS BY: (2009)
A. Special Exception
1. Deleted (2011)
2. Family day care homes
3. Reduced front, side and rear setbacks
4. Manufacturing (2011)
5. Building and structure greater than allowed in 5.05.8:A and 5.05.8:B (2005)
6. Accessory Dwelling Units (2008)
7. Distribution and mailing facilities (2011)
8. Research and development (2011)
B. Conditional Use Permit (2009)
1. Small Wind Energy Systems (2009)
5.05.3 USES NOT SPECIFIED (2010)
Any uses of land and/or structures not specifically included in the Commercial District as acceptable,
acceptable by Special Exception or acceptable by Conditional Use Permit shall be considered as not
permitted.
5.05.4 LOT SIZES AND FRONTAGES (2009)
A. In those areas serviced by both municipal sewerage and water systems, the minimum lot size in
Commercial District shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, together with one hundred and
fifty (150) feet of frontage on Class V or better road.
B. In those commercial areas not serviced by municipal sewerage and water systems, the minimum lot
size shall be sixty thousand (60,000) square feet, together with two hundred twenty-five (225) feet
of frontage on a Class V or better road.
5.05.5 YARD REQUIREMENTS (1995)
A. Each structure shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from the front lot line.
B. Each structure shall be at least fifteen (15) feet from side and rear property lines. In case of a
corner lot, the side distance shall be increased to thirty (30) feet on the side bordering the street,
lane or public way.
5.05.6 OPEN SPACE
Open space shall be provided for all uses, other than single-family and two-family dwellings, in an
amount equal to not less than thirty (30) percent of the total lot area.
Town of Milford Article V
5.05
Commercial
Zoning Ordinance District
Revised 3/2020 Page 29 of 187
5.05.7 OVAL SUBDISTRICT:
EXEMPTION FROM YARD AND OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS (2007)
The following area shall be exempt from the open space and yard requirements for all allowable uses in
the Commercial District except multi-family residences: bounded by and beginning at the intersection of
Great Brook and the Souhegan River, proceeding East along the southern bank of the Souhegan River
to the Swinging Bridge, proceeding south along the west line of Pine Street to the intersection with
Nashua Street, continuing south along the west line of Franklin Street to its intersection with High
Street, then proceeding west along the north line of High Street and continuing west along the south
line of Lot 39 on Tax Map 25 to the southwest corner of that parcel intersection with Great Brook and
then proceeding north along the east bank of Great Brook to the beginning.
5.05.8 HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS (2005)
A. The maximum height of a building or structure in the Commercial District shall be forty (40) feet,
except as noted in B. below.
B. The maximum height of school and municipal buildings or structures in the Commercial District shall
be forty-five (45) feet.
C. A Special Exception shall be required for heights greater than allowed in either A or B above.
Town of Milford Article V
5.06
Industrial
Zoning Ordinance District
Revised 3/2020 Page 30 of 187
INTENT: The intent of the Industrial District is to provide areas for manufacturing, processing,
assembly, wholesaling, research and development.
5.06.1 ACCEPTABLE USES
A. Harvesting of natural resources (2011)
B. Manufacturing (from Light manufacturing 2003)
C. Offices (2011)
D. Research and development
E. Distribution and mailing facilities
F. Processing and warehousing
G. Telecommunication facilities (2000)
H. Farm roadside stands (2010)
I. Processing of natural resources (2011)
J. Newspaper and job printing (2011)
K. Agriculture and farming (2011)
L. Utility, public or private (2011)
M. Solar Collection Systems in accordance with Section 7.11.0 (2019)
N. Home Based Business in accordance with Section 7.12.0 (2019)
5.06.2 ACCEPTABLE USES AND YARD REQUIREMENTS BY: (2009)
A. Special Exception
1. Building and structure greater than allowed in 5.06.7:A and 5.06.7:B (2005)
2. Accessory Dwelling Units for existing single-family dwellings (2008)
3. Reduced front, side and rear setbacks (2009)
4. Hotels (2011)
B. Conditional Use Permit (2009)
1. Small Wind Energy Systems (2009)
2. Solar Collection Systems in accordance with Section 7.11.0 (2019)
5.06.3 USES NOT SPECIFIED (2010)
Any uses of land and/or structures not specifically included in the Industrial District as acceptable,
acceptable by Special Exception or acceptable by Conditional Use Permit shall be considered as not
permitted.
5.06.4 LOT SIZES AND FRONTAGES
A. In those areas serviced by both municipal sewerage and water systems, no minimum lot size and
frontage shall be required, other than those requirements that relate to usable open space so long
as access to sewer and water is obtained.
5.06.0 INDUSTRIAL “I” DISTRICT (1995)
Town of Milford Article V
5.06
Industrial
Zoning Ordinance District
Revised 3/2020 Page 31 of 187
B. In those areas not serviced by municipal sewerage and water systems, a minimum of forty
thousand (40,000) square feet shall be required, depending on soil and slope. No minimum
frontage shall be required.
5.06.5 YARD REQUIREMENTS
A. Each structure shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from the front lot line.
B. Each structure shall be at least fifteen (15) feet from side and rear property lines. In case of a
corner lot, the side distance shall be increased to thirty (30) feet on the side bordering the street,
lane or public way.
5.06.6 OPEN SPACE
Open space shall be provided for all uses in an amount equal to not less than thirty (30) percent of the
total lot area.
5.06.7 HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS (2005)
A. The maximum height of a building or structure in the Industrial District shall be forty (40) feet,
except as noted in B. below.
B. The maximum height of school and municipal buildings or structures in the Industrial District shall
be forty-five (45) feet.
C. A Special Exception shall be required for heights greater than allowed in either A or B above.
Town of Milford Article V
5.07
LCB
Zoning Ordinance District
Revised 3/2020 Page 32 of 187
INTENT: The intent of the Limited Commercial-Business District is to provide areas for those business
activities which are compatible with surrounding residential neighborhoods.
5.07.1 ACCEPTABLE USES
A. Offices
B. Health service facilities (2011)
C. Schools
D. Bed and breakfast
E. Churches or Houses of Worship (2011)
F. Funeral homes
G. Single-family dwellings and their accessory uses and structures, with their respective related
conditions set forth in the Residence "A" District
H. Two-family and multi-family dwellings and their accessory uses and structures, with their related
conditions set forth in the Residence "B" District
I. Deleted (2019)
J. Telecommunication facilities (2000)
K. Deleted (2015)
L. Farm roadside stands (2010)
M. Day care facilities (2011)
N. Hospice house (2011)
O. Utilities, public or private (2011)
P. Dwelling, Mixed-use (2012)
Q. Solar Collection Systems in accordance with Section 7.11.0 (2019)
5.07.2 ACCEPTABLE USES AND YARD REQUIREMENTS BY: (2009)
A. Special Exception
1. Deleted (2011)
2. Family day care homes
3. Recreational facility, not-for-profit (1997)
4. Reduced front, side and rear setbacks
5. Building and structure height greater than allowed in 5.07.7:A and 5.07.7:B (2005)
6. Accessory Dwelling Units (2008)
B. Conditional Use Permit (2009)
1. Small Wind Energy Systems (2009)
5.07.3 USES NOT SPECIFIED (2010)
Any uses of land and/or structures not specifically included in the Limited Commercial-Business District
as acceptable, acceptable by Special Exception or acceptable by Conditional Use Permit shall be
considered as not permitted.
5.07.0 LIMITED COMMERCIAL-BUSINESS “LCB” DISTRICT
Town of Milford Article V
5.07
LCB
Zoning Ordinance District
Revised 3/2020 Page 33 of 187
5.07.4 LOT SIZES AND FRONTAGES (2009)
A. In those areas serviced by both municipal sewerage and water systems, the minimum lot size in
Limited Commercial-Business District shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, together with
one hundred and fifty (150) feet of frontage on a Class V or better road.
B. In those Limited Commercial-Business areas not serviced by municipal sewerage and water
systems, the minimum lot size shall be sixty-thousand (60,000) square feet, together with two
hundred twenty-five (225) feet of frontage on a Class V or better road.
5.07.5 YARD REQUIREMENTS
A. Each structure shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from the front lot line.
B. Each structure shall be at least fifteen (15) feet from the side and rear property lines. In case of a
corner lot, the side distance shall be increased to thirty (30) feet on the side bordering the street,
lane or public way.
5.07.6 OPEN SPACE
Open space shall be provided for all uses, other than single-family and two-family dwellings, in an
amount equal to not less than thirty (30) percent of the total lot area.
5.07.7 HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS (2005)
A. The maximum height of a building or structure in the Limited Commercial-Business District shall be
thirty-five (35) feet, except as noted in B. below.
B. The maximum height of school and municipal buildings or structures in the Limited Commercial-
Business District shall be forty-five (45) feet.
C. A Special Exception shall be required for heights greater than allowed in either A or B above.
Town of Milford Article V
5.08
ICI
Zoning Ordinance District
Revised 3/2020 Page 34 of 187
5.08.0 INTEGRATED COMMERCIAL-INDUSTRIAL “ICI” DISTRICT (1995)
INTENT: The intent of the Integrated Commercial-Industrial District is to provide an area for sales and
service activities, both wholesale and retail, as well as industrial activities. This District is intended to
be the area in which vehicular oriented business can occur.
5.08.1 ACCEPTABLE USES
A. Wholesale businesses
B. Retail businesses
C. Restaurants
D. Offices
E. Hotels (2011)
F. Day care facilities (2011)
G. Utility, public or private (2011)
H. Manufacturing (from Light manufacturing 2003)
I. Distribution and mailing facilities
J. Research and development (2011)
K. Motor vehicle repair facilities
L. Harvesting of natural resources
M. Banks and financial institutions
N. Processing and warehousing (1997)
O. Adult Entertainment Businesses (2000)
P. Telecommunication facilities (2000)
Q. Motor vehicle sales facilities (2011)
R. Farm roadside stands (2010)
S. Farmer’s market (2010)
T. Bed and breakfast (2011)
U. Churches or Houses of Worship (2011)
V. Processing of natural resources (2011)
W. Hospitals (2011)
X. Health services facilities (2011)
Y. Newspaper and job printing (2011)
Z. Veterinary clinics (2011)
AA. Nursing home or facility (2011)
BB. Agriculture and farming (2011)
CC. Dwelling, Mixed-use (2012)
DD. Filling Station (2012)
EE. Solar Collection Systems in accordance with Section 7.11.0 (2019)
FF. Home Based Business in accordance with Section 7.12.0 (2019)
Town of Milford Article V
5.08
ICI
Zoning Ordinance District
Revised 3/2020 Page 35 of 187
5.08.2 ACCEPTABLE USES AND YARD REQUIREMENTS BY: (2009)
A. Special Exception
1. Schools
2. Recreational facility, not-for-profit (1997)
3. Recreational facility, commercial (1997)
4. Deleted (2011)
5. Building and structure height greater than allowed in 5.087.A and 5.087.B (2005)
6. Deleted (2015)
7. Accessory Dwelling Units for existing single-family dwellings (2008)
8. Reduced front, side and rear setbacks (2009)
B. Conditional Use Permit (2009)
1. Small Wind Energy Systems (2009)
2. Solar Collection Systems in accordance with Section 7.11.0 (2019)
5.08.3 USES NOT SPECIFIED (2010)
Any uses of land and/or structures not specifically included in the ICI (Integrated Commercial-Industrial)
District as acceptable, acceptable by Special Exception or acceptable by Conditional Use Permit shall
be considered as not permitted.
5.08.4 LOT SIZES AND FRONTAGES (2009)
A. In those areas serviced by both municipal sewerage and water systems, the minimum lot size in the
Integrated Commercial-Industrial District shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, together
with a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet of frontage on a Class V or better road.
B. In those areas not serviced by municipal sewerage and water systems, a minimum of forty
thousand (40,000) square feet shall be required, depending upon soil and slope conditions,
together with a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet of frontage on a Class V or better road.
5.08.5 YARD REQUIREMENTS
A. Each structure shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from the front lot line.
B. Each structure shall be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from side and rear property lines. In the
case of a corner lot, the side distance shall be increased to thirty (30) feet on the side bordering the
public way.
5.08.6 OPEN SPACE
Open space shall be provided in an amount equal to not less than thirty (30) percent of the total lot
area.
5.08.7 HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS (2005)
A. The maximum height of a building or structure in the Integrated Commercial-Industrial District shall
be forty (40) feet, except as noted in B. below.
Town of Milford Article V
5.08
ICI
Zoning Ordinance District
Revised 3/2020 Page 36 of 187
B. The maximum height of school and municipal buildings or structures in the Integrated Commercial-
Industrial District shall be forty-five (45) feet.
C. A Special Exception shall be required for heights greater than allowed in either A or B above.
Town of Milford Article V
5.09
ICI-2
Zoning Ordinance District
Revised 3/2020 Page 37 of 187
5.09.0 INTEGRATED COMMERCIAL-INDUSTRIAL 2 “ICI-2” DISTRICT (2007)
Intent: The intent of the Integrated Commercial-Industrial 2 District is to provide an area for mixed
commercial and industrial development in commercial and industrial park-like settings.
5.09.1 ACCEPTABLE USES
A. Wholesale businesses
B. Retail businesses
C. Restaurants
D. Offices
E. Hotels (2011)
F. Day care facilities (2011)
G. Utilities, public or private (2011)
H. Manufacturing
I. Distribution and mailing facilities
J. Research and development
K. Motor vehicle repair facilities
L. Harvesting of natural resources
M. Processing and warehousing
N. Telecommunication facilities
O. Recreational facility, commercial
P. Farm roadside stands (2010)
Q. Farmer’s market (2010)
R. Banks and financial institutions (2011)
S. Bed and breakfast (2011)
T. Churches and Houses of Worship (2011)
U. Hospitals (2011)
V. Health services facilities (2011)
W. Processing of natural resources (2011)
X. Filling stations (2011)
Y. Nursing home or facility (2011)
Z. Newspaper and job printing (2011)
AA. Veterinary clinics (2011)
BB. Hospice house (2011)
CC. Agriculture and farming (2011)
DD. Solar Collection Systems in accordance with Section 7.11.0 (2019)
5.09.2 ACCEPTABLE USES AND YARD REQUIREMENTS BY: (2009)
A. Special Exception
1. Schools
2. Deleted (2011)
3. Building and structure height greater than allowed in 5.09.7:A and 5.09.7:B
4. Accessory Dwelling Units for existing single-family dwellings (2008)
Town of Milford Article V
5.09
ICI-2
Zoning Ordinance District
Revised 3/2020 Page 38 of 187
5. Reduced front, side and rear setbacks (2009)
B. Conditional Use Permit (2009)
1. Small Wind Energy Systems (2009)
2. Solar Collection Systems in accordance with Section 7.11.0 (2019)
5.09.3 USES NOT SPECIFIED
Any uses of land and/or structures not specifically included in the ICI-2 (Integrated Commercial-
Industrial 2) District as acceptable, acceptable by Special Exception or acceptable by Conditional Use
Permit shall be considered as not Permitted.
5.09.4 LOT SIZES AND FRONTAGES (2009)
A. In those areas serviced by both municipal sewerage and water systems, the minimum lot size in the
ICI-2 (Integrated Commercial-Industrial 2) District shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet,
together with a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet of frontage on a Class V or better road.
B. In those areas not serviced by municipal sewerage and water systems, a minimum of forty
thousand (40,000) square feet shall be required, depending upon soil and slope conditions,
together with a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet of frontage on a Class V or better road.
5.09.5 YARD REQUIREMENTS
A. Each structure shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from the front lot line.
B. Each structure shall be set back at least (15) feet from side and rear property lines. In the case of a
corner lot, the side distance shall be increased to thirty (30) feet on the side bordering the public
way.
5.09.6 OPEN SPACE
Open space shall be provided in an amount equal to not less than thirty (30) percent of the total lot
area.
5.09.7 HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS
A. The maximum height of a building or structure in the Integrated Commercial-Industrial 2 (ICI-2)
District shall be forty (40) feet, except as noted in B. below.
B. The maximum height of school and municipal buildings or structures in the Integrated Commercial-
Industrial 2 (ICI-2) District shall be forty-five (45) feet.
C. A Special Exception shall be required for heights greater than allowed in either A or B above.
Town of Milford Article VI
6.01
Groundwater
Zoning Ordinance Protection
Revised 3/2020 Page 39 of 187
ARTICLE VI: OVERLAY DISTRICTS
6.01.0 GROUNDWATER PROTECTION DISTRICT (2003)
6.01.1 GENERAL
A. Purpose: In the interest of public health, safety, and general welfare, the purpose of this Ordinance
is to preserve, maintain, and protect from contamination existing and potential groundwater supply
areas.
This is to be accomplished by regulating land uses that could contribute pollutants to existing and/or
planned public and/or private wells and/or ground water resources identified as being needed for
present and/or future public water supply.
B. Definitions:
Groundwater: subsurface water that occurs beneath the water table in soils and geologic
formations. [NH RSA 485-C, Groundwater Protection Act]
Impervious: (with respect to stormwater infiltration) not readily permitting the infiltration of water.
Impervious surface: (with respect to containment of regulated substances) a surface through
which regulated substances cannot pass when spilled. Impervious surfaces include concrete unless
unsealed cracks or holes are present. Asphalt, earthen, wooden, or gravel surfaces; or other
surfaces which could react with or dissolve when in contact with the substances stored on them are
not considered impervious surfaces. [Env-Ws 421.03(c)]
Junkyard: An establishment or place of business which is maintained, operated, or used for storing
and keeping, or storing and selling, trading or otherwise transferring old or scrap copper, brass,
rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber debris, waste or junked, dismantled or wrecked motor
vehicles, or parts thereof, iron, steel or other old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous material. Junkyard
shall also include any place of business for the maintenance or operation of an automotive recycling
yard, and includes garbage dumps and sanitary fills. Also includes any business and any place of
storage or deposit, whether in connection with another business or not, which has stored or
deposited two (2) or more unregistered motor vehicles which are no longer intended or in condition
for legal use on the public highways, or used parts of motor vehicles or old iron, metal, glass, paper,
cordage, or other waste or discarded or second-hand material which has been a part, or intended to
be a part, of any motor vehicle, the sum of which parts or material shall be equal in bulk to two (2)
or more motor vehicles. Junkyard shall also include any place of business or storage or deposit of
motor vehicles purchased for the purpose of dismantling the vehicles for parts or for use of the
metal for scrap and where it is intended to burn material, which are parts of a motor vehicle or cut
up the parts thereof. Also, includes any yard or field used as a place of storage in which there is
displayed to the public view, junk machinery or scrap metal that occupies an area of five hundred
(500) square feet and as amended by NH RSA 236:112. (2013)
Town of Milford Article VI
6.01
Groundwater
Zoning Ordinance Protection
Revised 3/2020 Page 40 of 187
Liquid Petroleum Products: Any petroleum product that maintains a liquid state when exposed to
ambient temperature and atmospheric pressure. Such as but not limited to: gasoline, diesel, home
heating fuel, motor oil, etc. (2011)
Outdoor storage: storage of materials where they are not protected from the elements by a roof,
walls, and a floor with an impervious surface.
Public water system: a system for the provision to the public of piped water for human
consumption, if such system has at least fifteen (15) service connections or regularly serves an
average of at least twenty-five (25) individuals daily at least sixty (60) days out of the year. [NH RSA
485:1-a, XV]
Regulated substance: petroleum, petroleum products, and substances listed under 40 CFR 302,
7-1-90 edition or as amended, excluding the following substances: (1) ammonia, (2) sodium
hypochlorite, (3) sodium hydroxide, (4) acetic acid, (5) sulfuric acid, (6) potassium hydroxide, (7)
potassium permanganate, and (8) propane and other liquefied fuels which exist as gases at normal
atmospheric temperature and pressure. [1-7 are used in the treatment of water supplies and are
not considered to pose a significant risk to groundwater]
Sanitary protective radius: The area around a well, which must be maintained in its natural state
as required by Env-Ws 378 or 379 (for community water systems) and Env-Ws 372.13 (for other
public water systems).
Secondary containment: a structure such as a berm or a dike with an impervious surface that is
adequate to hold at least one hundred ten (110) percent of the volume of the largest regulated
substance container that will be stored. [Env-Ws 421.03(g)]
Snow dump: a location where snow, which is cleared from roadways and/or motor vehicle parking
areas, is placed for disposal.
Stratified-drift aquifer: A geologic formation of predominantly well-sorted sediment deposited by or
in bodies of glacial meltwater including gravel, sand, silt, or clay, which contains sufficient saturated
permeable material to yield significant quantities of water to wells. [NH RSA 485-C:2, XIV]
Surface water: streams, lakes and ponds, including marshes, watercourses and other bodies of
water, natural or artificial. [NH RSA 485-A:2 XIV]
Temporary Storage: means storage for less than six months.
Wellhead protection area: The surface and subsurface area surrounding a water well or well-field
supplying a community water system, through which contaminants are reasonably likely to move
toward and reach such water well or well-field. [NH RSA 485-C:2, XVIII]
C. Location: The Groundwater Protection District includes all land areas designated as Level I and/or
Level II Protection Areas on the map entitled “Groundwater Protection District - Milford, NH”, dated
October 24, 2002 or as amended. A copy of the map is located in the offices of the Town of Milford
Town of Milford Article VI
6.01
Groundwater
Zoning Ordinance Protection
Revised 3/2020 Page 41 of 187
Planning Department. The Groundwater Protection District is an overlay district which is
superimposed over the existing underlying zoning.
D. Applicability: The Groundwater Protection District applies to all uses in the District, except for those
uses exempt under 6.01.3:E. (2010)
1. The Groundwater Protection District is an overlay district which imposes additional requirements
and restrictions to those of the underlying base district established under the powers granted
under NH RSA 674:21. In case of conflict between the requirements of Section 6.01.0 and the
requirements presented elsewhere in the Milford Zoning Ordinance, the provisions of 6.01.0
shall apply.
6.01.2 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
The following Performance Standards apply to all uses in the Groundwater Protection District unless
exempt under 6.01.3:E.
A. For any use that will render impervious more than fifteen (15) percent or more than two thousand
five hundred (2,500) square feet of any lot, whichever is greater, a stormwater management plan
shall be prepared which the Planning Board determines is consistent with Town of Milford
Regulations;
B. Stormwater management plans prepared pursuant to paragraph A shall demonstrate that
stormwater recharged to groundwater will not result in violation of Ambient Groundwater Quality
Standards (Env-Wm 1403.05) at the property boundary;
C. All stormwater discharges to surface waters must be in compliance with EPA Phase II regulations;
D. Post development stormwater discharges must be no greater than predevelopment stormwater
discharges;
E. Animal manures, fertilizers, and compost must be stored in accordance with Manual of Best
Management Practices for Agriculture in New Hampshire, NH Department of Agriculture, Markets,
and Food, August 1998, and any subsequent revisions;
F. All regulated substances stored in containers with a capacity of five (5) gallons or more must be
stored in product-tight containers on an impervious surface designed and maintained to prevent
flow to exposed soils, floor drains, and outside drains;
G. Facilities where regulated substances are stored must be secured against unauthorized entry by
means of a door and/or gate which is locked when authorized personnel are not present;
H. Outdoor storage areas for regulated substances must be protected from exposure to precipitation
and must be located at least one hundred (100) feet from surface water or storm drains, at least
seventy-five (75) feet from private wells, and outside the sanitary protective radius of wells used by
public water systems;
Town of Milford Article VI
6.01
Groundwater
Zoning Ordinance Protection
Revised 3/2020 Page 42 of 187
I. Secondary containment must be provided for outdoor storage of regulated substances if an
aggregate of three hundred thirty (330) gallons or more of regulated substances are stored
outdoors on any particular property;
J. Containers in which regulated substances are stored must be clearly and visibly labeled and must
be kept closed and sealed when material is not being transferred from one container to another.
6.01.3 USES
A. Permitted Uses
All uses permitted by Milford Zoning Ordinance in the underlying district or allowed by special exception
in the underlying district are permitted in the Groundwater Protection District unless they are Prohibited
Uses, 6.01.3:B or Uses Requiring a Permit, 6.01.3:C. All uses must comply with 6.01.2 Performance
Standards unless specifically exempt under section 6.01.3:E.
B. Prohibited Uses
The following uses are prohibited in the Groundwater Protection District Level I Protection Area:
1. The siting or operation of a hazardous waste disposal facility as defined under NH RSA 147-A;
2. The siting or operation of a solid waste landfill;
3. The outdoor storage of road salt or other deicing chemicals in bulk;
4. The siting or operation of a junkyard;
5. The siting or operation of a snow dump;
6. The siting or operation of a wastewater or septage lagoon;
7. Storage of liquid petroleum products, except the following:
a. That product necessary for the private business use occupying the lot, subject to all
applicable State and Federal requirements. The aggregate tank capacity on each lot shall
not exceed five thousand (5,000) gallons. No wholesale or retail sale of petroleum
products.
b. Normal household use and heating of a structure;
c. Waste oil retention facilities required by statute, rule, or regulation;
d. Emergency generators required by statute, rule, or regulation;
e. Treatment works approved by NHDES for treatment of ground or surface waters;
Provided that such storage, listed in items a. through e. above, is in free-standing containers
within buildings or above ground with secondary containment adequate to contain a spill one
hundred ten (110) percent the size of the aggregate capacity of the stored containers.
C. Uses Requiring a Permit in Level I and/or Level II
1. The Code Administrator may grant a Permit for a use which is otherwise permitted within the
underlying district, if the permitted use is or is involved in the storage, handling and/or use of a
regulated substance in quantities exceeding five (5) gallons or forty (40) pounds dry weight at
any one time. Prior to issuing a permit, a containment plan shall be provided or in place to
prevent, contain, and/or minimize releases from a spill, which may cause large releases of
regulated substances.
Town of Milford Article VI
6.01
Groundwater
Zoning Ordinance Protection
Revised 3/2020 Page 43 of 187
2. Planning Board approval is required for any use that will render impervious more than fifteen
(15) percent or two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of any lot, whichever is greater.
a. Prior to the granting of such approval, the Code Administrator must first determine that the
proposed use is not a prohibited use.
b. The Planning Board shall determine that the use will be in compliance with all the
Performance Standards as well as all applicable local, state and federal requirements. The
Planning Board may, at its discretion, require a performance guarantee or bond, in an
amount and with surety conditions satisfactory to the Board, to be posted to ensure
completion of construction of any facilities required for compliance with the Performance
Standards.
D. Existing Non-Conforming Uses
Existing nonconforming uses may continue without expanding or changing to another nonconforming
use, but must be in compliance with all applicable state and federal requirements, including NH Code of
Administrative Rules Env-Ws 421, Best Management Practices.
E. Exemptions
The following uses are exempt from the specified provisions of this Ordinance as long as they are in
compliance with all applicable local, state, and federal requirements:
1. All private residences are exempt from the provisions of this Ordinance provided no portion of
the residence is part of a home business that violates the standards or conditions set forth in
sections 6.01.2 and 6.01.3 of this Ordinance;
2. Any business or facility where regulated substances are not stored in containers with a capacity
of five (5) gallons or more is exempt from Performance Standards G through J;
3. Storage of heating fuels for on-site use or fuels for emergency electric generation, provided that
storage tanks are indoors on an impervious concrete floor or have corrosion control, leak
detection, and secondary containment in place, is exempt from Performance Standard G;
4. Storage of motor fuel in tanks attached to vehicles and fitted with permanent fuel lines to enable
the fuel to be used by that vehicle is exempt from Performance Standards G through J;
5. Storage and use of office supplies is exempt from Performance Standards G through J;
6. Temporary storage of construction materials on a site where they are to be used is exempt from
Performance Standards G through J;
7. The sale, transportation, and use of pesticides as defined in NH RSA 430:29 XXVI. are exempt
from all provisions of this Ordinance;
8. Household hazardous waste collection projects regulated under NH Code of Administrative
Rules Env-Wm 401.03(b)(1) & 501.01(b) are exempt from Performance Standards G through J.
6.01.4 ADMINISTRATIVE
A. Relationship Between State and Local Requirements
Where both the State and the municipality have existing requirements the more stringent shall
govern.
B. Maintenance and Inspection
Town of Milford Article VI
6.01
Groundwater
Zoning Ordinance Protection
Revised 3/2020 Page 44 of 187
1. For uses requiring Planning Board approval for any reason, a narrative description of
maintenance requirements for structures required to comply with 6.01.2 Performance
Standards, shall be recorded so as to run with the land on which such structures are located, at
the Town of Milford Planning Department. All maintenance required is the responsibility of the
owner and as such shall be maintained by the owner. The description so prepared shall comply
with the requirements of NH RSA 478:4-a.
2. Inspections may be required to verify compliance with 6.01.2 Performance Standards. Such
inspections shall be performed by the Code Administrator at reasonable times with prior notice
to the landowner.
3. All properties within the Groundwater Protection District known to the Code Administrator as
using or storing regulated substances in containers with a capacity of five (5) gallons or more,
except for facilities where all regulated substances storage is exempt from this Ordinance under
section 6.01.3:E, shall be subject to inspections under this section.
4. The Board of Selectmen may require a fee for compliance inspections. The fee shall be paid by
the property owner. A fee schedule shall be established by the Board of Selectmen as provided
for in NH RSA 41:9-a.
5. Underground storage tank systems and above-ground storage tank systems that are in
compliance with applicable state rules are exempt from inspections under 6.01.4:B of this
Ordinance.
C. Enforcement Procedures and Penalties
Any violation of the requirements of this Ordinance shall be subject to the enforcement procedures and
penalties in NH RSA 676.
D. Saving Clause
If any provision of this Ordinance is found to be unenforceable, such provision shall be considered
separable and shall not be construed to invalidate the remainder of the Ordinance.
Town of Milford Article VI
6.02
Wetland
Zoning Ordinance Conservation
Revised 3/2020 Page 45 of 187
6.02.0 WETLAND CONSERVATION DISTRICT (2017)
6.02.1 GENERAL
A. The Wetland Conservation District shall be considered as overlaying any other district established
by this Ordinance. Any use permitted in the portions of the district so overlaid shall only be
permitted subject to all provisions of this section.
B. Except for the permitted uses as listed in 6.02.5 of this section, there shall be no impact of wetlands
or surface waters, unless all federal, state and local permits are in place.
C. All impacts to wetlands shall be regulated in accordance with NH Code of Administrative Rules, Wt.
Env-Wt 100-900 as may be amended from time to time and require the receipt of the appropriate
permit from the State of New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services Wetlands Bureau.
The state process requires a review by the Milford Conservation Commission. (2017)
D. The Milford Conservation Commission, established under NH RSA 36-A, has statutory standing
before the Department of Environmental Services under NH RSA 482-A:11, III and provides a local
source of assistance to both the department and the applicants for Dredge & Fill Permits.
E. A special exception approved by the Milford Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be required for any
use within the wetland except for those listed in 6.02.5. Note that state and/or federal permits may
be required for uses not requiring a special exception under this Ordinance.
F. The Wetland Conservation District is an overlay district which imposes additional requirements and
restrictions to those of the underlying base district established under the powers granted under NH
RSA 674:21. In case of conflict between the requirements of Section 6.02.0 and the requirements
presented elsewhere in the Milford Zoning Ordinance, the provisions of 6.02.0 shall apply. (2010)
6.02.2 PURPOSE
By the authority granted in NH RSA 674:16-17 and 674:20-21, the purpose of the Wetlands
Conservation District is to protect the values and functions of wetlands, surface waters and their
associated buffer zones. It is further intended, but shall not be limited to, the following:
A. Protect the public health, safety, general welfare and property;
B. Reduce sedimentation of wetlands and surface waters;
C. Aid in the control of non-point source pollution; (2017)
D. Provide a vegetative cover in the case of the buffer zones for filtration of runoff and the prevention
of erosion;
E. Protect fish spawning grounds, aquatic life, and bird and other wildlife habitats;
F. Conserve natural beauty and open spaces;
G. Preserve ponds, rivers and streams in their natural state,
H. Protect persons and property from flood damage by preserving the natural flood storage areas,
I. Control the development of structures and land uses which contribute to the pollution of surface and
groundwater by sewerage, hazardous substances or siltation;
Town of Milford Article VI
6.02
Wetland
Zoning Ordinance Conservation
Revised 3/2020 Page 46 of 187
J. Protect aquifers, which serve as existing or potential water supplies as well as the aquifer recharge
system;
K. Prevent unnecessary or excessive expenses to the Town to provide and maintain essential services
and utilities which arise because of the inharmonious use of wetlands;
6.02.3 LOCATION OF THE WETLAND CONSERVATION DISTRICT
The areas within the town of Milford to which this section applies are as follows:
A. Streams: This includes both perennial and intermittent streams wherever fresh water flows for
sufficient time to develop and maintain a defined channel. The area of the stream shall lie within the
banks as defined by the ordinary high water mark established by the fluctuations of water and
indicated by physical characteristics such as a clear natural line impressed on the immediate bank,
or shelving, or changes in the character of the soil, destruction of terrestrial vegetation, the
presence of litter and debris, or other appropriate means that consider the characteristics of the
surrounding areas.
B. Ponds: The pond area shall be the extent of water at the full pond as determined by the top of the
impoundment structure in artificial ponds or by the natural high water mark in natural ponds.
C. Wetlands: A wetland area shall be delineated based on hydrophytic vegetation, hydric soils and
wetland hydrology in accordance with techniques outlined in the Corps of Engineers wetlands
Delineation Manual, Technical Report Y-87-1 (January 1987) and defined by NH RSA 482-A:2.X
(as amended). (2017)
D. Buffers: The buffer area shall be measured from the edge of any stream, pond, or wetland in a
horizontal plane. The buffer is the area adjacent to a wetland and/or open water which should be
kept free of uses that may introduce or facilitate pollution, sedimentation or other harmful effects to
the wetland. The buffer shall include the area within twenty-five (25) feet from any wetland, stream,
or pond area, or vernal pool. For the water bodies named in 6.02.3:E, the buffer shall be fifty (50)
feet from the edge of any stream, pond, or wetland in a horizontal plane. (2017)
E. Surface waters with 50 foot buffer area: The following water bodies together with any adjacent
very poorly drained wetlands are protected by a fifty (50) foot buffer. These 2nd Order and higher
streams are described in the Conservation Plan, an Appendix of the Town Master Plan. (2017)
1. Birch Brook: from its commencement at the wetland lying between Whitten Road and Chappell
Drive to its junction with Great Brook,
2. Compressor Brook: from its commencement as follows:
a. Compressor Brook, East Branch: from its entry into Milford at the Milford/Brookline Town
Line in the southeast portion of Milford to its junction with Compressor Brook south of
Melendy Road and east of Ruonala Road,
b. Compressor Brook, West Branch: from its beginning at a wetland on the west side of Ball
Hill Road to its junction with Compressor Brook, East Branch, as described in a. above,
Town of Milford Article VI
6.02
Wetland
Zoning Ordinance Conservation
Revised 3/2020 Page 47 of 187
c. Compressor Brook: from the junction of the East Branch and the West Branch south of
Melendy Road and east of Ruonala Road to its junction with Great Brook,
3. Great Brook: from its commencement at Mile Slip Road, approximately one thousand five
hundred (1,500) feet south of Mason Rd. to Railroad Pond, and from Railroad Pond to the
Souhegan River, including its passage through said pond,
4. Hartshorn Brook: from the Mont Vernon/Milford Town line, through Hartshorn Pond to its
junction with the Souhegan River,
5. Mitchell Brook: from its entrance into Milford at the Milford/Mason Town line to its junction with
Spaulding Brook,
6. Ox Brook: from its beginning in a wetland west of Melendy Road to its junction with
Compressor Brook,
7. Purgatory Brook: from its entrance into Milford at the Milford/Lyndeborough Town line, to its
junction with the Souhegan River,
8. Spaulding Brook: from its entrance into Milford at the Milford/Mason Town line to its exit from
Milford at the Milford/Brookline Town line,
9. Tucker Brook: from its entrance into Milford in the vicinity of the granite bound on the
Milford/Wilton Town line, to its junction with the Souhegan River,
10. Compressor Pond,
11. Hartshorn Pond,
12. Railroad Pond,
13. Osgood Pond,
14. Souhegan River, see 6.02.3.G.
F. Surface waters with one hundred (100) foot buffer:
Peatlands: Due to their rarity and fragility, these unique wetlands shall be protected by a one
hundred (100) foot buffer.
G. Shoreland Water Quality Protection Act (2017)
Osgood Pond and the Souhegan River with the exception of the Urbanized Exemption Parcels are
subject to the Shoreland Water Quality Protection Act, NH RSA 483-b as may be amended from
time to time. The Shoreland Water Quality Protection Act addresses activities within two hundred
and fifty (250) feet of great ponds and fourth order streams. The Souhegan River is a fourth order
stream.
6.02.4 DEFINITIONS
Bank/Edge of Wet: The transitional slope immediately adjacent to the edge of a surface water body,
the upper limit of which is usually defined by a break in slope, or, for a wetland, where a line delineated
in accordance with New Hampshire Code of Administrative Rules Chapter Env-Wt 301.01 indicates a
change from wetland to upland. (2017)
Town of Milford Article VI
6.02
Wetland
Zoning Ordinance Conservation
Revised 3/2020 Page 48 of 187
Buffer: An upland area adjacent to a wetland and/or surface water which serves to filter surface water
flowing into the wetland.
Bog: A wetland distinguished by stunted evergreen trees and shrubs, peat deposits, poor drainage,
and/or highly acidic soils and/or water conditions.
Great Pond: Any natural water body having an area of ten (10) acres or more.
Fen: Unique wetlands characterized by saturated organic soils (well-decomposed peat) fed by neutral
to somewhat alkaline groundwater.
Marsh: A wetland that is distinguished by the absence of trees and shrubs, which is dominated by softstemmed
herbaceous plants such as grasses, reeds, and sedges; and where the water table is at or
above the surface throughout the year, but can fluctuate seasonally.
Peatlands: Wetlands with thick organic soil, often with a characteristic floating mat of mosses, sedges,
shrubs, and/or trees in very acidic conditions, includes bogs and fens.
Stream, Intermittent: A place where water flows for sufficient duration and/or in sufficient quantity to
maintain a channel.
Stream, Perennial: Any channel, natural or manmade, which has water present for twelve (12) months
of a normal year but which may dry up during a period in which the rainfall is less than sixty (60) per
cent of average for more than three consecutive months.
Surface water: Streams, lakes and ponds, including marshes, watercourses and other bodies of water,
natural or artificial. [NH RSA 485-A:2 XIV]. (2015)
Vernal Pool: A surface water or wetland, including an area intentionally created for purposes of
compensatory mitigation, which provides breeding habitat for amphibians and invertebrates that have
adapted to the unique environments provided by such pools and further defined in New Hampshire
Code of Administrative Rules Chapter Env-Wt 101.108 (as amended). (2017)
Very poorly drained: Water is removed from the soil so slowly that free water remains at or on the
surface during most of the growing season.
Wetland: An area that is inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and
duration sufficient to support and that under normal conditions does support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions.
Town of Milford Article VI
6.02
Wetland
Zoning Ordinance Conservation
Revised 3/2020 Page 49 of 187
6.02.5 ACCEPTED USES: (2017)
A. Wetlands: Any of the following uses, the execution, construction or placement of which do not
permanently and significantly alter the natural flow of ground or surface water, and that are
otherwise permitted by the Zoning Ordinance. (2011)
1. Projects that fall under the Wetland Bureau’s Minimum Impact Expedited Permit Application.
These projects, however, must be approved by the Conservation Commission prior to approval
by the Wetlands Bureau. (2017)
2. Repair or reconstruction of an existing legal structure that meets the following conditions:
a. Where the size, location and configuration remain the same
b. The work shall not require the utilization of tracked or wheeled equipment in the water or
wetland; (2017)
c. The work shall not require the utilization of tracked or wheeled equipment in the water or
wetland;
d. The structure has not been abandoned. Failure to maintain an existing structure in a state
so that it is functional, and intact, for a period of five (5) years shall be prima facie evidence
of abandonment or non-use.
3. Mowing or cutting of vegetation in a wet meadow, red maple swamp, hemlock swamp, spruce/fir
swamp, or white pine swamp, provided that the roots of the vegetation are not disturbed, and
that the ground is frozen or sufficiently dry to avoid making ruts and that the area is stabilized
once thawed and that the project is not located in prime wetlands.
4. Hand raking of leaves or other organic debris from the shoreline or lake bed provided that:
a. At the time raking is done, the area is exposed by draw down, or
b. Raking does not disturb vegetative roots and is limited to less than nine-hundred (900)
square feet of area.
5. Management of a beaver dam as provided in NH RSA 210:9 (as amended). (2017)
6. Removal of a beaver dam by hand or machine provided:
a. Machinery does not enter the water or create any impact by filling or dredging to adjacent
surface waters, wetlands, or their banks;
b. All dredged materials are placed out of wetlands and out of the defined buffer area, and
c. Removal of the dam is done in a gradual manner that does not allow a sudden release of
impounded water to cause erosion or siltation.
7. Addition of native vegetation to enhance wetlands, but not the removal of wetlands vegetation
except as provided in 6.02.5:A.3.
8. Drilling of test wells by a public agency for purposes of exploring for public water supplies or
hazardous materials.
9. Other activities as noted in NH Wetlands Bureau Code of Administrative Rules Wt. 303.05.
B. Buffer Zones: Any of the following uses that do not alter the surface configuration by the addition
of fill, removal of soil, or obstruct in any manner the natural flow of ground or surface water, or
disturb in any manner the ground itself to any depth and that are otherwise permitted by the Zoning
Ordinance.
Town of Milford Article VI
6.02
Wetland
Zoning Ordinance Conservation
Revised 3/2020 Page 50 of 187
1. Forestry, subject to the provisions of RSA 227-J:6, as amended, and tree farming in accordance
with good silvicultural practices, outlined in Good Forestry in the Granite State: Recommended
Voluntary Management Practices for New Hampshire, as amended. (2017)
2. Agriculture, as defined in NH RSA 21:34-a, as amended, including growing and harvesting of
crops using best management practices detailed in best Management Wetland Practices for
Agriculture in NH, as amended. (2017)
3. Buildings and structures not to exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet and without
sanitary plumbing and raised above-ground on concrete or similar blocks placed on the ground
surface in such a manner as to permit the natural flow of any surface water,
4. Decks raised above the ground so as to permit the natural flow of any surface waters,
5. Potable water supply wells and their associated water lines and associated power lines,
provided there are adequate erosion control measures in place during work and repair of any
disturbance,
6. Monitoring wells for observation purposes, provided there are adequate erosion control
measures in place during work and there is repair of any disturbance,
6.02.6 A SPECIAL EXCEPTION IS REQUIRED FOR:
A. Wetlands: A Special Exception Permit from the Board of Adjustment is required for any project
not listed in 6.02.5:A that is located within a wetland and is not in the right-of-way of a public road.
(2017)
B. Buffer: A Special Exception from the Board of Adjustment is required for any project not listed in
6.02.5 that is located within a wetland buffer and not in the right-of-way of a public road. (2011)
C. The Board of Adjustment, in acting on an application for a special exception in the Wetlands
Conservation District, shall take into consideration the conditions as noted in 10.02.1.
D. The Board of Adjustment may grant a Special Exception for such projects after the application for
the Special Exception has been reviewed and reported upon by the Milford Conservation
Commission and forwarded to the Board of Adjustment within forty (40) days of a public meeting at
which the Conservation Commission first received detailed plans on the project.
E. The Planning Board may also be required to submit a report to the Board of Adjustment, if
requested by the Board of Adjustment. The Planning Board shall submit its report within the above
specified forty (40) day period.
6.02.7 CRITERIA FOR EVALUATION
A. For all projects requiring a Special Exception the applicant shall demonstrate by plan or example
that the following factors have been considered in their design:
1. The need for the proposed project;
2. The plan proposed is the alternative with the least impact to the wetlands, surface waters and/or
their associated buffers;
3. The impact on plants, fish and wildlife;
4. The impact on the quantity and/or quality of surface and ground water;
Town of Milford Article VI
6.02
Wetland
Zoning Ordinance Conservation
Revised 3/2020 Page 51 of 187
5. The potential to cause or increase flooding, erosion, or sedimentation;
6. The cumulative impact that would result if all parties owning or abutting a portion of the affected
wetland, wetland complex and/or buffer area were also permitted alterations to the wetland and
buffer proportional to the extent of their property rights;
7. The impact of the proposed project on the values and functions of the total wetland or wetland
complex.
B. The Town of Milford shall place emphasis in preserving peatlands and marshes. This priority shall
be based upon the rarity of those environments and the difficulty in restoration of the value and
function of those environments.
Town of Milford Article VI
6.03
Floodplain
Zoning Ordinance Management
Revised 3/2020 Page 52 of 187
6.03.0 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT DISTRICT (2020)
6.03.1 PURPOSE
A. This ordinance, adopted pursuant to the authority of RSA 674:16, RSA 674:17, and 674:56,
shall be known as the Town of Milford Floodplain Management Ordinance (“Ordinance”). The
regulations in this Ordinance shall overlay and supplement the regulations in the Town of Milford
Zoning Ordinance, and shall be considered part of the Zoning Ordinance for purposes of
administration and appeals under state law.
B. The purpose of this Ordinance is to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare;
minimize hazards to persons and property from flooding; to protect watercourses from
encroachment; and to maintain the capability of floodplains to retain and carry off floodwaters.
6.03.2 FINDINGS OF FACT AND APPLICABILITY
A. Certain areas of the Town of Milford are subject to periodic flooding, causing serious damages
to properties within these areas. Relief is available in the form of flood insurance as authorized by
the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968. Therefore, the Town of Milford chosen to become a
participating community in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), and agrees to comply with
the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended) as
detailed in this Ordinance.
B. The following regulations in this Ordinance shall apply to all lands within Town of Milford and
designated as special flood hazard areas by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
in its “Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Town of Milford, NH” dated September 25, 2009 together
with the associated Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) panels 33011C0451D, 33011C0452D,
33011C0453D, 33011C0454D, 33011C0456D, 33011C0457D, 33011C0458D, 33011C0459D,
33011C0465D, 33011C0470D, 33011C0478D, 33011C0486D dated September 25, 2009 and
associated amendments and revisions, which are declared to be a part of this Ordinance and are
hereby incorporated by reference.
C. This Ordinance establishes a permit system and review procedure for development in a special
flood hazard area of the Town of Milford.
6.03.3 ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
A. If any provision of this Ordinance differs or appears in conflict with any other ordinance or
regulation, the provision imposing the greater restriction or more stringent standard shall be
controlling.
B. Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole, or
any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
Town of Milford Article VI
6.03
Floodplain
Zoning Ordinance Management
Revised 3/2020 Page 53 of 187
C. In accordance with RSA 676, the Floodplain Administrator shall enforce and administer the
provisions of this Ordinance.
D. The degree of flood protection required by this Ordinance is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can
and will occur, and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This Ordinance
does not imply that land outside of a special flood hazard area or uses that are permitted within
such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage.
6.03.4 DEFINITIONS
The following definitions shall apply only to this Floodplain Management Ordinance, and shall not be
affected by the provisions of any other Ordinance.
Accessory Structure means a structure which is: 1) detached from and clearly incidental and
subordinate to the principal use or structure on a lot, 2) located on the same lot as the principal
structure or use, 3) clearly and customarily related to the principal structure or use, and 4) only
used for vehicle parking, storage, or primarily building access. Examples include garages,
garden and tool sheds, and playhouses.
Base Flood or 1 Percent Annual Chance Flood means the flood having a one-percent
possibility of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Base Flood Elevation (BFE) means the elevation of the base (one-percent annual chance)
flood referenced to a specified vertical datum (National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 or
North American Vertical Datum of 1988).
Basement means any area of a structure having its floor subgrade (below ground-level) on all
sides.
Building - see "Structure".
Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) means FEMA's comment on a proposed project
that would, upon construction, affect the hydrologic and/or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding
source and thus result in the modification of the existing floodway, base flood elevation, or the
special flood hazard area. CLOMRs do not revise an effective FIRM since they do not reflect asbuilt
conditions.
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including
but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavating or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
Elevation Certificate means a form developed by FEMA to collect surveyed elevations and
other information about a building, which can be used for the purposes of compliance with a
community’s floodplain regulations, flood insurance rating, and Letters of Map Amendment
applications.
Town of Milford Article VI
6.03
Floodplain
Zoning Ordinance Management
Revised 3/2020 Page 54 of 187
Enclosed Area means an area created by a crawlspace or solid walls that fully enclose an area
below an elevated building.
FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Flood or Flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from:
a. the overflow of inland or tidal waters, or
b. the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood Damage-Resistant Materials means any building product (material, component or
system) capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters without
sustaining significant damage. See FEMA “Technical Bulletin 2, Flood Damage- Resistant
Materials Requirements.”
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means the official map incorporated with this Ordinance, on
which FEMA has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community. The FIRM is a graphic representation of the data contained in the
accompanying Flood Insurance Study.
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) means a compilation and presentation of flood risk data for
specific watercourses, lakes, and coastal flood hazard areas within a community. The FIS report
contains detailed flood elevation data in flood profiles and data tables.
Flood Opening means an opening in a foundation or enclosure wall that allows automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters. See FEMA “Technical Bulletin 1, Openings in Foundation Walls and
Walls of Enclosures.”
Floodplain or Flood-prone Area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water
from any source (see definition of "Flooding").
Floodplain Administrator means a person responsible for administering and implementing the
community’s local floodplain ordinance and ensuring that the community is complying with
minimum NFIP standards and enforcing any locally imposed higher standards.
Floodproofed or Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures that reduce or eliminate flood damage to real
estate or improved real property, water and sanitation facilities, structures and their contents.
Floodproofing Certificate for Non-Residential Structures means the form developed by
FEMA for use in the certification of non-residential dry floodproofing designs.
Floodproofing, Dry means making a structure watertight below the level that needs flood
protection to prevent floodwaters from entering.
Town of Milford Article VI
6.03
Floodplain
Zoning Ordinance Management
Revised 3/2020 Page 55 of 187
Floodproofing, Wet means permanent or contingent measures applied to a structure and/or its
contents that prevent or provide resistance to damage from flooding by allowing flood waters to
enter the structure.
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that
must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than a designated height Highest Adjacent Grade means the
highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls
of a structure.
Historic Structure means any structure that is:
a. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by
the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
b. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to
the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily
determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
c. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic
preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
d. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either:
(i) by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(ii) directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Letter of Map Change means an official document issued by FEMA that revises or amends the
flood hazard information shown on the FIRM without requiring the FIRM to be physically revised
and/or re-published. Letters of Map Change can include Letters of Map Amendment, Letters of
Map Revision, and Letters of Map Revision Based on Fill.
Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) means FEMA's modification to an effective FIRM, usually as a
result of physical changes to the flooding source and floodplain that result in the modification of
the existing Regulatory floodway, base flood elevations, or special flood hazard area. LOMRs
are a cost effective way to keep FIRMs up to date without republishing an entire map panel or
panels. The LOMR is generally accompanied by an annotated copy of the affected portions of
the FIRM and/or FIS report.
Lowest Floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An
unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor;
provided, that such an enclosure is built in compliance with the applicable non-elevation design
requirements in this Ordinance.
Town of Milford Article VI
6.03
Floodplain
Zoning Ordinance Management
Revised 3/2020 Page 56 of 187
Manufactured Home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built
on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when
connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes the term "manufactured
home" includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on site for greater
than 180 consecutive days. This includes manufactured homes located in a manufactured home
park or subdivision.
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean Sea Level means the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other vertical datum to which base flood elevations shown
on a community’s FIRMs are referenced.
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) means the program created by the Congress of the
United States in 1968 through the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-448). The
program enables property owners in participating communities to purchase insurance
protection, administered by the government, against losses from flooding.
Natural Grade means the grade unaffected by construction techniques such as fill, landscaping
or berming.
New Construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after
the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures.
Recreational Vehicle means a vehicle:
a.built on a single chassis;
b. 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
c. designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
d. designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters (less than 180 consecutive days) for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal
use.
Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) means the land in the floodplain subject to a one-percent
or greater possibility of flooding in any given year. The area is designated on the FIRM as
Zones A, AO, A1-30, AE, or VE.
Start of Construction includes substantial improvements, and means the date the building
permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement,
or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
Town of Milford Article VI
6.03
Floodplain
Zoning Ordinance Management
Revised 3/2020 Page 57 of 187
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction
does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on
the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
part of the main structure.
State Building Code means the current codes adopted by the state of New Hampshire.
State NFIP Coordinating Agency means the agency of the state government (or other office
designated by the Governor of the state or by state statute) that, at the request of the Federal
Insurance Administrator, assists in the implementation of the National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP) in that state.
Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is
principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
Substantial Damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of
restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred. The market value of the structure
should equal the appraised value of the structure prior to the damage occurring.
Substantial Improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value
of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes
structures which have incurred “substantial damage”, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
a. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or
local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the
local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe
living conditions; or
b. Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a “historic structure”.
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the
community’s floodplain management regulations.
6.03.5 FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
A. The Building Inspector is hereby appointed to administer and implement these regulations
and is referred to herein as the “Floodplain Administrator.”
Town of Milford Article VI
6.03
Floodplain
Zoning Ordinance Management
Revised 3/2020 Page 58 of 187
B. The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but are not
limited to:
1. Ensure that permits are obtained for proposed development in a special flood hazard
area.
2. Review all permit applications for completeness and accuracy, and coordinate with the
applicant for corrections or further documentation, as needed.
3. Interpret the special flood hazard area and floodway boundaries and determine whether
a proposed development is located in a special flood hazard area, and if so, whether it is
also located in a floodway.
4. Provide available flood zone and base flood elevation information pertinent to the
proposed development.
5. Make the determination as to whether a structure will be substantially improved or has
incurred substantial damage as defined in this Ordinance and enforce the provisions of this
Ordinance for any structure determined to be substantially improved or substantially
damaged.
6. Issue or deny a permit based on review of the permit application and any required
accompanying documentation.
7. Ensure prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse that the required submittal
and notification requirements in this Ordinance are met.
8. Review all required as-built documentation and other documentation submitted by the
applicant for completeness and accuracy and verify that all permit conditions have been
completed in compliance with this Ordinance.
9. Notify the applicant in writing of either compliance or non-compliance with the provisions
of this Ordinance.
10. Ensure the administrative and enforcement procedures detailed in RSA 676 are followed
for any violations of this Ordinance.
11. Submit to FEMA, or require applicants to submit to FEMA, data and information
necessary to maintain FIRMs, including hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses
prepared by or for the Town of Milford, within six months after such data and information
becomes available if the analyses indicate changes in base flood elevations, special flood
hazard area and/or floodway boundaries.
12. Maintain and permanently keep and make available for public inspection all records that
are necessary for the administration of these regulations, including: local permit documents,
flood zone and base flood elevation determinations, substantial improvement and damage
Town of Milford Article VI
6.03
Floodplain
Zoning Ordinance Management
Revised 3/2020 Page 59 of 187
determinations, variance and enforcement documentation, and as-built elevation and dry
floodproofing data for structures subject to this Ordinance.
13. Delegate duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations to qualified technical
personnel, inspectors, or other community officials as needed.
6.03.6 FLOOD ZONE AND FLOODWAY DETERMINATIONS
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall determine whether any portion of a proposed development
is located in a special flood hazard area and if so, whether it is also located in a floodway, using
the effective FIRM. If the development is located wholly or partially in a special flood hazard
area, the Floodplain Administrator shall determine the flood zone and the applicable
requirements in the Ordinance that shall apply to the development.
B. Where it is unclear whether a site is in a special flood hazard area and/or in a floodway, the
Floodplain Administrator may require additional information from the applicant to determine the
development’s location on the effective FIRM.
C. If any portion of a development including a structure and its attachments (e.g., deck posts,
stairs) is located in multiple flood zones, the flood zone with the more restrictive requirements
documented in this Ordinance shall apply.
D. Where a conflict exists between the floodplain limits illustrated on the FIRM and actual
natural ground elevation, the base flood elevation(s) in relation to the actual natural ground
elevation shall be the governing factor in locating the regulatory floodplain limits.
E. Within a riverine special flood hazard area designated as Zone A, the Floodplain
Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any floodway data available from
Federal, State, or other sources. If floodway data is available, the applicant shall meet the
floodway requirements in Section 6.03.13 (floodway requirements) of this Ordinance.
6.03.7 SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT AND DEMANAGE DETERMINATIONS
A. For all development in a special flood hazard area that proposes to improve an existing
structure, including alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, additions,
rehabilitations, renovations, repairs of damage from any origin (such as, but not limited to flood,
fire, wind or snow) and any other improvement of or work on such structure including within its
existing footprint, the Floodplain Administrator, in coordination with any other applicable
community official(s), shall be responsible for the following:
1. Review description of proposed work submitted by the applicant.
2. Use the community’s current assessed value of the structure (excluding the land) to
determine the market value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or
improvement, or in the case of damage, the market value prior to the damage occurring.
If the applicant disagrees with the use of the community’s assessed value of the
Town of Milford Article VI
6.03
Floodplain
Zoning Ordinance Management
Revised 3/2020 Page 60 of 187
structure, the applicant is responsible for engaging a licensed property appraiser to
submit a comparable property appraisal for the total market value of only the structure.
3. Review cost estimates of the proposed work including donated or discounted
materials and owner and volunteer labor submitted by the applicant. Determine if the
costs are reasonable for the proposed work, or use other acceptable methods, such as
those prepared by licensed contractors or professional construction cost estimators and
from building valuation tables, to estimate the costs.
4. Determine if the proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of
substantial damage as defined in this Ordinance.
5. Notify the applicant in writing of the result of the substantial improvement or damage
determination. If the determination is that the work constitutes substantial improvement
or substantial damage, the written documentation shall state that full compliance with the
provisions of this Ordinance is required.
6. Repair, alteration, additions, rehabilitation, or other improvements of historic
structures shall not be subject to the elevation and dry floodproofing requirements of this
Ordinance if the proposed work will not affect the structure’s designation as a historic
structure. The documentation of a structure’s continued eligibility and designation as a
historic structure shall be required by the Floodplain Administrator in approving this
exemption.
6.03.8 FLOODPLAIN PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS
A. All proposed development within a special flood hazard area shall require a permit from the
Town of Milford, prior to the commencement of any development activities. Development, as
defined in this Ordinance, includes both building and non-building activities.
B. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first submit a completed application in writing on a form
furnished by the Town of Milford, for that purpose. Every application shall include, but is not
limited to:
1. The name, address and phone number of the applicant, owner, and contractor(s);
2. A map indicating the location of the proposed development sufficient to accurately
locate property and structure(s) in relation to existing roads and waterbodies;
3. A description of the proposed development and the use or occupancy for which the
proposed development is intended;
4. If the development involves proposed work on an existing structure, a description of
the total costs of the proposed work including all materials and labor;
Town of Milford Article VI
6.03
Floodplain
Zoning Ordinance Management
Revised 3/2020 Page 61 of 187
5. In a Zone A, for proposed developments either greater than 50 lots or greater than 5
acres, the base flood elevation(s) established for the area, including any data such as
hydraulic and hydrologic analyses, used to determine the elevation(s);
6. Submittal of evidence that all necessary permits have been obtained from those
Federal, State, or local government agencies from which prior approval is required; and
7. Such other material and information as may be requested by the Floodplain
Administrator to determine conformance with, and provide enforcement of, this
Ordinance.
C. The Floodplain Administrator shall review all permit applications for completeness and
accuracy, and coordinate with the applicant for corrections or further documentation, as needed.
If the proposed development will comply with this Ordinance, the Floodplain Administrator shall
approve the application and issue a permit. If the proposed development will not comply with
this Ordinance, the Floodplain Administrator shall deny the permit application and return to the
applicant with a written explanation of denial.
D. Following completion of new construction of a structure or an existing structure that was
substantially improved or replaced, or that incurred substantial damage, or the placement or
substantial improvement of a manufactured home, the applicant shall submit the following to the
Floodplain Administrator:
1. A completed and certified copy of an Elevation Certificate that includes the as-built
elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor of the structure and whether
or not the structure has a basement.
2. If a non-residential structure includes dry floodproofing, a completed and certified
copy of the Floodproofing Certificate for Non-Residential Structures that includes the asbuilt
elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure was dry floodproofed
and certification of floodproofing.
E. The Floodplain Administrator shall review all required as-built documentation and other
documentation submitted by the applicant for completeness and accuracy and verify that all
permit conditions have been completed in compliance with this Ordinance.
The Floodplain Administrator shall either:
1. Issue a Certificate of Compliance to the applicant if it has been determined that full
compliance with this Ordinance has been met; or
2. Notify the applicant in writing of any violation of this Ordinance and the actions required to
bring the development into compliance with this Ordinance if it has been determined that full
compliance with this Ordinance has not been met.
Town of Milford Article VI
6.03
Floodplain
Zoning Ordinance Management
Revised 3/2020 Page 62 of 187
6.03.9 FLOOD ELEVATION DETERMINATIONS
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall determine the flood elevation for a structure as applicable
for each permit application in the following flood zones:
1. For Zone AE, the base flood elevation is determined from the data provided in the
community's FIS and accompanying FIRM.
2. For Zone A with no base flood elevation shown in the FIS or on the FIRM:
a. The Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any
base flood elevation data available from any Federal, State or other source
including data submitted to the community for development proposals (i.e.
subdivisions, site plan approvals).
b. Where a base flood elevation is not available or not known, the base flood
elevation shall be determined to be at least 2 feet above the highest adjacent
grade.
c. For a development either greater than 50 lots or greater than 5 acres,
the applicant shall develop a base flood elevation for the site and provide it to the
Floodplain Administrator with their permit application.
B. If a structure is affected by multiple base flood elevations, the highest base flood elevation
shall apply.
6.03.10 FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
A. All development located in a special flood hazard area shall be:
1. Reasonably safe from flooding;
2. Designed and constructed with methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
3. Designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement (including structures and above ground gas or liquid storage tanks);
4. Constructed with flood damage-resistant materials;
5. Constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding;
6. Adequately drained to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
Town of Milford Article VI
6.03
Floodplain
Zoning Ordinance Management
Revised 3/2020 Page 63 of 187
6.03.11 STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS
A. New construction of a residential structure, or an existing residential structure to be
substantially improved or replaced, or that has incurred substantial damage, located in a special
flood hazard area shall have the lowest floor elevated at least to the base flood elevation.
B. New construction of a non-residential structure, or an existing non-residential structure to be
substantially improved or replaced, or that has incurred substantial damage, located in a special
flood hazard area shall:
1. Have the lowest floor elevated at least to the base flood elevation; or
2. Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities:
a. Be floodproofed at least one foot above the base flood elevation so that below this
elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage
of water;
b. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads
and the effects of buoyancy; and
c. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the dry
floodproofing design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this section. Such certification shall
be provided to the Floodplain Administrator in the form of a completed and signed
Floodproofing Certificate for Non-Residential Structures.
C. A fully enclosed area for new construction of a structure, or an existing structure to be
substantially improved or replaced, or that has incurred substantial damage located in a special
flood hazard area that is below the lowest floor of a structure, below the base flood elevation,
and therefore subject to flooding, shall meet the following requirements:
1. Be constructed with flood damage-resistant materials;
2. Be used solely for the parking of vehicles, building access, or storage;
3. Be constructed with the floor of the enclosed area at grade on at least one side of the
structure; and
4. Be constructed with flood openings installed in the enclosure walls so that they are
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing
for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
Town of Milford Article VI
6.03
Floodplain
Zoning Ordinance Management
Revised 3/2020 Page 64 of 187
a. A minimum of two flood openings on different sides of each enclosed area
having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided;
b. The bottom of all flood openings shall be no higher on the enclosure wall than
one foot above either the interior or exterior grade, whichever is higher; and
c. Flood openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or
devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
D. A fully enclosed area that has a floor that is below grade on all sides, including below-grade
crawlspaces and basements are prohibited for new structures, existing structures to be
substantially improved or replaced, or that have incurred substantial damage located in a
special flood hazard area.
6.03.12 MANUFACTURED HOMES AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
A. A new manufactured home to be placed, or an existing manufactured home to be
substantially improved or replaced, or that has incurred substantial damage, located in a special
flood hazard area shall:
1. Have the lowest floor elevated at least to the base flood elevation;
2. Be on a permanent, reinforced foundation;
3. Be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage;
4. Be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring are authorized to include, but are
not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces; and
5. Comply with the requirements of Section 10(C) of this Ordinance in cases where fully
enclosed areas are present below an elevated manufactured home, including enclosures
surrounded by rigid skirting or other material attached to the frame or foundation.
Flexible skirting and rigid skirting not attached to the frame or foundation of a
manufactured home are not required to have flood openings.
B. A recreational vehicle located within a special flood hazard area shall meet one of the
following requirements:
1. Be on a site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or
2. Be fully licensed, on wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick
disconnect type utilities and security devices, and have no permanently attached
additions; or
Town of Milford Article VI
6.03
Floodplain
Zoning Ordinance Management
Revised 3/2020 Page 65 of 187
3. Meet the requirements for “manufactured homes” as stated in Section 12(A) of this
Ordinance.
6.03.13 WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
A. The following standards shall apply to all water supply, sanitary sewage, and on-site waste
disposal systems located in a special flood hazard area:
1. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems;
2. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed and located to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the
system into flood waters; and
3. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment
to them or contamination from them during flooding.
6.03.14 FLOODWAY REQUIREMENTS
A. Within a floodway, for any development, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and other development or land disturbing-activity the applicant must, prior to a
permit being issued by the Floodplain Administrator, submit certification prepared by a
registered professional engineer, along with supporting technical data and analyses, that
demonstrates that such development will not cause any increase in the base flood elevation at
any location in the community.
If the analyses demonstrate that the proposed activities will result in any increase in the base
flood elevation, the applicant must obtain a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) from
FEMA prior to permit issuance by the Floodplain Administrator. The Floodplain Administrator
reserves the right to deny a permit for the project if concerns about the development being
reasonably safe from flooding remain following issuance of the CLOMR. If a permit is issued
and the project completed, the applicant must also obtain a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) from
FEMA. CLOMR and LOMR submittal requirements and fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
B. Within a riverine special flood hazard area where a base flood elevation has been determined
but a floodway has not been designated, for any development, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other development or land disturbing-activity, the applicant must,
prior to a permit being issued by the Floodplain Administrator, submit certification prepared by a
registered professional engineer, along with supporting technical data and analyses, that
demonstrates that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all
other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the base flood elevation more than
one (1) foot at any point within the community.
Town of Milford Article VI
6.03
Floodplain
Zoning Ordinance Management
Revised 3/2020 Page 66 of 187
If the analyses demonstrate that the proposed activities will result in more than a one (1) foot
increase in the base flood elevation, the applicant must obtain a Conditional Letter of Map
Revision (CLOMR) from FEMA prior to permit issuance by the Floodplain Administrator. The
Floodplain Administrator reserves the right to deny a permit for the project if concerns about the
development being reasonably safe from flooding remain following issuance of the CLOMR. If a
permit is issued and the project completed, the applicant must also obtain a Letter of Map
Revision (LOMR) from FEMA. CLOMR and LOMR submittal requirements and fees shall be the
responsibility of the applicant.
6.03.15 WATERCOURSE ALTERATIONS
A. Prior to a permit being issued by the Floodplain Administrator for any alteration or relocation
of any riverine watercourse, the applicant shall:
1. Notify the Wetlands Bureau of the New Hampshire Department of Environmental
Services and submit copies of such notification to the Floodplain Administrator, in
addition to the copies required by RSA 482-A: 3; and
2. Submit to the Floodplain Administrator certification provided by a registered
professional engineer, assuring that the flood carrying capacity of an altered or relocated
watercourse can and will be maintained.
B. Prior to a permit being issued for any alteration or relocation of any riverine watercourse, the
Floodplain Administrator shall notify adjacent communities and the State NFIP Coordinating
Agency, and submit copies of such notification to FEMA’s Federal Insurance Administrator.
6.03.16 VARIANCES AND APPEALS
A. Any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Floodplain Administrator made
under this Ordinance may be appealed to the Zoning Board of Adjustment as set forth in RSA
676:5.
B. If the applicant, upon appeal, requests a variance as authorized by RSA 674:33, I (b), the
applicant shall have the burden of showing in addition to the variance standards under state law
that:
1. The variance will not result in increased flood heights of any magnitude, additional
threats to public safety, fraud on or victimization of the public; or extraordinary public
expense;
2. The issuance of the variance will not conflict with other State, Federal or local laws or
Ordinances;
3. If the requested variance is for activity within a floodway, no increase in flood levels
during the base flood discharge will result; and
4. The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
Town of Milford Article VI
6.03
Floodplain
Zoning Ordinance Management
Revised 3/2020 Page 67 of 187
C. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall notify the applicant in writing that:
1. The issuance of a variance to construct below the base flood elevation may result in
increased premium rates for flood insurance coverage; and
2. Such construction below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and property.
Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions.
D. The community shall:
1. Maintain a record of all variance actions, including their justification for their issuance;
and
2. Report such variances issued in its annual or biennial report submitted to FEMA's
Federal Insurance Administrator.
Town of Milford Article VI
6.05
Nashua/Elm
Zoning Ordinance Corridor
Revised 3/2020 Page 68 of 187
6.04.0 OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION DISTRICT (2018)
6.04.1 PURPOSE
The Open Space and Conservation District is intended to encourage environmentally sound planning to
permanently protect open space in order to retain and protect important natural and cultural features,
and provide for efficient use of land and community services to advance the goals stated in the master
plan. This section is being adopted pursuant to the authority of RSA 674:21 and it is expressly intended
to establish an innovative land use provision that allows the Planning Board the discretion to establish
the scope and intensity of a proposal under this section.
6.04.2 OBJECTIVES AND STANDARDS
The standards that shall guide the Planning Board in the administration of this section are set forth as
follows:
A. To create permanently protected open space without decreasing the allowable density of the site;
B. To promote the preservation of and to minimize the adverse impacts on environmental resources
and areas of highest ecological value, including but not limited to: streams, ponds, floodplains,
wetlands, drinking water supplies, steep slopes, scenic views, open fields, farmland, forests, wildlife
habitat, unfragmented blocks of undeveloped land, habitat of rare and endangered species, and
historic, archaeologic, and cultural sites and features;
C. To enhance the quality of life with the provision of space for low impact passive recreation and
aesthetic enjoyment;
D. To promote development that incorporates efficient design and siting of the transportation network
and infrastructure, to reduce the use of and the impact on natural resources and to minimize
maintenance costs;
E. To maintain rural character;
F. To locate buildings and structures on those portions of the site that are the most appropriate for
development, avoiding constraints such as, but not limited to: poor soil conditions, high water table,
areas subject to frequent flooding and excessively steep slopes (greater than 25%).
G. To create a contiguous network of open spaces or “greenways” by linking the common open spaces
within the subdivision to open space on adjoining lands wherever possible.
H. To reduce impacts on water resources by minimizing land disturbance, impervious surfaces and
stormwater runoff.
I. To minimize the impact of residential development on the municipality, neighboring properties, and
the natural environment.
J. To exclude high functioning wetlands from house lots when practicable.
Town of Milford Article VI
6.05
Nashua/Elm
Zoning Ordinance Corridor
Revised 3/2020 Page 69 of 187
6.04.3 GENERAL REGULATIONS
A. Any plan submitted under the Open Space and Conservation District section of Milford's Zoning
Ordinance (hereinafter Open Space Preservation Design or OSPD) shall mean a development in
which the provisions of this Section are met.
B. All Open Space shall be dedicated as permanently preserved from future development.
C. The overall dwelling unit density shall not exceed that which would be allowed in the underlying
zoning district.
D. Open Space set asides are ineligible as contributing land area in any subsequent development.
E. Permitted uses are the same as those allowed in the underlying zoning district.
6.04.4 LOCATION AND SCOPE OF AUTHORITY
A. The Open Space and Conservation District is an overlay district which imposes additional
requirements and restrictions to those of the underlying base zoning district established under the
powers granted by NH RSA 674:21. In case of conflict between the requirements of 6.04.0 and the
requirements presented elsewhere in the Milford Zoning Ordinance, the provisions of 6.04.0 shall
apply. (2010)
B. All subdivisions of land into five (5) or more residential lots, or developments of five (5) or more
dwelling units, must incorporate the criteria in OSPD, except as set forth below. The Planning Board
will examine the subdivision proposal using the list of resources desirable for preservation (see
Open Space Design 6.04.6.D.1) to ensure that the proposed open space is consistent with the
criteria set forth and the purpose of the zoning district. At the discretion of the Planning Board, and
if the proposed development does not meet the criteria, the development may be required to
incorporate the criteria of a conventional subdivision as permitted by the underlying zoning district.
C. Properties with subdivision proposals of four (4) or fewer residential lots or for development of four
(4) or fewer dwelling units will be examined by the Planning Board using the list of resources
desirable for preservation (see Open Space Design 6.04.6.D.1). At the discretion of the Planning
Board, these developments may be required to incorporate the criteria in OSPD.
D. Developments of four (4) or fewer lots, or four (4) or fewer dwelling units, that have not been
identified by the Planning Board as needing to comply with OSPD, are exempt from the OSPD
requirement, provided there is no potential for further subdivision or development of any lots or
dwelling units therein or of the parcel from which the four (4) or fewer lots or dwelling units have
been subdivided.
E. Residential subdivisions of land in any zoning district, where each lot is at least 5 times the size
required in the underlying zoning district, shall be exempt from OSPD requirements, provided the
deed and the subdivision plan for each lot(s) contains a restriction prohibiting the further subdivision
of the lot(s).
Town of Milford Article VI
6.05
Nashua/Elm
Zoning Ordinance Corridor
Revised 3/2020 Page 70 of 187
F. When a subdivision or development is proposed which includes a lot(s) which may be capable of
further subdivision or development, the Planning Board may require that a conceptual, long range
plan for the entire parent parcel be presented so that the Board may consider the entirety of a
parcel and its impacts. This long-range plan is non-binding. Any future development of the lot or lots
will be reviewed by the Planning Board with reference to this long-range plan.
In accordance with Section 5.011 of the Town of Milford Development Regulations, the Planning Board,
with input from the Conservation Commission, may require the applicant to submit an ‘Environmental
Study’.
6.04.5 REVIEW PROCESS
All applicants for review of Open Space subdivisions are required to follow the review process stated in
the Milford Development Regulations ARTICLE IV: PERMITTING PROCEDURE – SITE PLAN AND
SUBDIVISION APPLICATIONS.
6.04.6 OPEN SPACE DESIGN
A. Every OSPD shall avoid or minimize adverse impacts on and promote the protection and
enhancement of the town's natural, cultural and historic resources by incorporating permanently
protected Open Space into the design.
B. Minimum Required Open Space:
1. Subdivisions in Residence A and B shall have a minimum of fifteen (15%) percent of the gross
tract area placed into permanently protected open space. The amount to be included in open
space shall include land deemed to serve the public’s interest by the Planning Board. Features
deemed in the public interest include but are not limited to: land for bike lanes, public walkways,
trail connections, public transit stops, pocket parks, stormwater management, and high value
natural resources such as the Souhegan River, its tributaries, wetlands and buffers.
2. Subdivisions in Residence R shall place not less than forty (40) percent of the gross tract area
into permanently protected open space.
C. Of the minimum required Open Space fifty (50) percent must consist of non-wetland soils and soils
with slopes less than twenty-five (25) percent. The remaining fifty (50) percent may consist of a mix
of high value natural resources as listed in D.1 below and buildable land.
D. Design Standards:
1. List of Resources to Consider for Preservation:
a. Open water, waterways, stream channels, floodplains and very poorly drained soils,
including adjacent buffer areas as defined in 6.02.0 Wetland Protection District;
b. The habitat of species listed as endangered, threatened, or of special concern by the NH
Natural Heritage Inventory or by the NH Fish & Game Department's Non-game &
Endangered Wildlife Program;
c. Moderate slopes, fifteen to twenty-five (15-25) percent, and steep slopes, greater than
twenty-five (25) percent, particularly those adjoining water courses and ponds.
Town of Milford Article VI
6.05
Nashua/Elm
Zoning Ordinance Corridor
Revised 3/2020 Page 71 of 187
d. Prime (Federal designation) and Important (State designation) Agricultural Soils, as shown
on the Agricultural Soils Map in the current Milford Conservation Plan;
e. Historic sites and features;
f. Existing or planned trails connecting the tract to other locations, including, but not limited to,
the trails on the town trails map maintained by the Milford Conservation Commission of
formal and informal trails;
g. Other space or resources as required by the Planning Board for low-impact recreational or
public interest use consistent with Section 6.04.1.
h. Scenic views and elements of the town’s rural character such as forested margins and
agricultural fields.
i. Undeveloped frontage along existing roads to manage increased density by minimizing
views of new development from existing roads.
2. Design and Use considerations for preserved Open Space:
a. The preserved open space shall include as many of the resources listed in Section
6.04.6.D.1 (Resources to Consider for Preservation) as practical;
b. The preserved open space shall be free of all structures except historic sites, features, and
structures related to permitted open space uses;
c. Subsurface disposal systems may not be placed in the preserved open space;
d. Water supplies may be placed in the preserved open space;
e. Stormwater management systems may, at the discretion of the Planning Board, be placed in
the preserved open space;
f. Preserved open space shall be accessible to all the lots or units within the development,
g. Narrow open space strips (of less than fifty (50’) feet) shall not be permitted unless the
incorporation of the open space strips provides a logical and practical link to, or expansion
of, existing or known planned adjacent preserved open space;
h. Preserved open spaces shall be interconnected wherever possible to provide a contiguous
network of open space lands within and adjoining to the development;
i. Public access, regardless of ownership, shall be provided to trails within open space if they
are linked to other publicly accessible pathway systems.
6.04.7 Protection and Ownership:
A. All open space shall be permanently protected by a conservation easement or by covenants and
restrictions in perpetuity, approved by the Planning Board after review by the Conservation
Commission. The Planning Board may require further legal review of any documents submitted, the
cost of which shall be borne by the applicant.
B. All approved open space shall be marked in the field by the developer with signage approved by the
Conservation Commission to distinguish these areas from house lots. The signage for a lot must be
in place prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for that lot.
Town of Milford Article VI
6.05
Nashua/Elm
Zoning Ordinance Corridor
Revised 3/2020 Page 72 of 187
C. The Planning Board will be responsible for providing a recommendation, with input from the
Conservation Commission, on ownership of the preserved open space to the Board of Selectmen
for its consideration and acceptance.
D. At the completion of the project, the open space shall be owned in one of the following ways:
1. Owned by the Town of Milford and managed by the Conservation Commission.
2. Owned by a Non-Profit Organization dedicated to conservation principles.
3. Owned by a private individual or organization.
6.04.8 DENSITY AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
A. Density:
1. The density of the proposed development shall be equal to or less than the density allowed in
the underlying zoning district;
2. The maximum density of a proposed development shall be established by one of the following
two methods. The method used is at the discretion of the Applicant:
a. Conventional Plan Approach:
A preliminary plan, based on accurate topographic field survey information, shall show the
number of lots or units which could be laid out in a conventional subdivision or site plan
without the need to obtain variances, special exceptions, and/or waivers for lot frontage,
setbacks, area, road and driveway grades, and soil types for subsurface disposal systems (if
used).
The purpose of the conventional subdivision or site plan is to provide the applicant at the
completion of the design review stage a maximum number of lots or dwelling units to
proceed to final design. However, if more detailed final engineering indicates the maximum
number of lots/dwelling units approved at the design review stage cannot be reasonably
incorporated into the final plan based on the elements noted above, the Planning Board
reserves the right to reduce the allowable number of lots/units in the final design.
b. Formula Approach: Under the formula approach, the base number of dwelling units is
determined by the following formula:
[Total Area of Parcel – (Wetlands + Steep Slopes)] x Factor ÷ Minimum Lot Size = Maximum
Number Dwelling Units
Table 6.04-1
Town of Milford Article VI
6.05
Nashua/Elm
Zoning Ordinance Corridor
Revised 3/2020 Page 73 of 187
Percentage of Parcel
that is Wetlands and/or
Steep Slopes*
[*=25%]
Factor
0 – <10% 0.75
10 – <20% 0.70
20– <30% 0.65
30% or more 0.60
B. Dimensional Standards:
1. Lot Size
Once the maximum number of lots has been determined utilizing one of the methods outlined
above, the actual minimum size of the individual lots in the subdivision may be determined by
the Planning Board which may establish lots in sizes smaller than the prevailing minimum lot
size requirement applicable in the underlying zoning district; provided, nevertheless, all such
approved lots shall have the required area to meet applicable safety and health requirements.
2. Other Dimensional Standards:
All lots, including lots the size of which is reduced pursuant to Section B.1, above, shall comply
with the following additional dimensional standards provided; nevertheless, the Planning Board,
at its discretion, may expressly waive any of the other dimensional requirements set forth
(below):
a. The minimum lot frontage shall be fifty (50) feet.
b. The building shall be setback at least thirty (30) feet from the front property line. The
building shall be at least fifteen (15) feet from the side and rear property lines.
3. Waiver Process
The Planning Board, when exercising the discretion to establish minimum lot sizes under
Section B.1, above and to waive otherwise applicable dimensional standards under Sections
B.2, above, shall consider evidence relating to the same at a noticed public hearing and,
pursuant thereto, shall grant such waivers and/or reduce the minimum lot sizes, only after the
Planning Board determines that the waiver and/or reduction, if allowed, will meet the standards
set forth in Section 6.04.2.
C. Miscellaneous Requirements:
1. Village Plan alternatives as outlined in NH RSA 674:21.VI shall be permitted. No increase in
density will be permitted.
Town of Milford Article VI
6.05
Nashua/Elm
Zoning Ordinance Corridor
Revised 3/2020 Page 74 of 187
2. The Planning Board may require site plans for individual lots containing slopes greater than
fifteen (15) percent, soils rated as having "severe" limitations for septic systems if not on
municipal sewer (as determined by the USDA), very poorly drained soils, or when the Board
questions the adequacy of a proposed lot to support a dwelling unit and related structures.
Town of Milford Article VI
6.05
Nashua/Elm
Zoning Ordinance Corridor
Revised 3/2020 Page 75 of 187
6.05.0 NASHUA AND ELM STREETS CORRIDOR DISTRICT (2012)
6.05.1 AUTHORITY
A. Title: This Ordinance shall be known as the Nashua and Elm Streets Corridor District. (2012)
B. Authority: The Planning Board is hereby authorized to administer this Ordinance under the
provisions set forth in NH RSA 674:21, Innovative Land Use Controls.
6.05.2 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Ordinance is to implement the Town of Milford’s vision for the future as set forth in
the Community Character Chapter of the Master Plan 2007 Update:
Goal No. 2: Foster the traditional character of Milford’s neighborhoods by encouraging a human scale
of development that is similar in setbacks, size and height, and that is comfortable and safe for
pedestrians and non-motorized vehicles while allowing for an efficient and safe roadway network.
In carrying out this goal, this Ordinance is designed to accomplish the following:
A. Promote development that reflects the intended character of Milford’s residential, commercial, and
industrial neighborhoods relative to height, lot coverage, and setbacks.
B. Encourage the development of entryway corridors and gateways relative to architectural and
historic heritage, landscaping, stormwater management, traffic management, and parking.
C. Preserve and enhance the architectural and visual character of the corridors.
D. Encourage development to reflect the historic pattern of development in Town and enhance
Milford’s sense of community and place.
E. Encourage attractive pedestrian scale development.
F. Improve the overall streetscape of major corridors.
G. Improve transportation efficiency.
H. Promote alternative modes of transportation, particularly pedestrian and biking.
The following standards are tools that create a flexible framework to guide the appearance of future
development that is compatible with the historic nature of Milford, while allowing for innovation and
architectural creativity in order to enhance a special place.
6.05.3 FINDINGS
A. The Nashua and Elm Streets corridor is becoming increasingly congested due to additional curb
cuts and traffic from both local and regional development.
B. Access management will increase the efficiency, safety and mobility of the corridor.
Town of Milford Article VI
6.05
Nashua/Elm
Zoning Ordinance Corridor
Revised 3/2020 Page 76 of 187
C. Inter-site connections are needed to reduce the potential conflict points along major corridors.
D. Milford’s historical architecture is recognized as an important element of community character.
E. Non-residential development that is indifferent to Milford’s architectural heritage constitutes a
significant threat to the character and future of the community.
F. Future development can be guided to encourage building design that is functional, aesthetically
pleasing and compatible with the architectural heritage of the community.
G. The architecture of the community is varied and necessarily will evolve as the community grows.
The regulation of architectural design must allow for flexibility, creativity and innovation within the
context of an articulated framework.
6.05.4 APPLICABILITY
The provisions as set forth in this Ordinance shall apply to the following activities within the Corridor
Overlay District:
A. Applications for site plan and subdivision review.
B. New building construction used for non-residential or multi-family purposes.
C. Additions or alterations to buildings used for non-residential or multi-family purposes which
significantly increases or decreases the square footage of a building.
D. Additions or alterations to a site plan or buildings used for non-residential or multi-family purposes
which significantly alter the visual appearance of the site or a façade visible from a public way.
E. The Nashua and Elm Streets Corridor District is an overlay district which imposes additional
requirements and restrictions to those of the underlying base district established under the powers
granted under NH RSA 674:21. In case of a conflict between the requirements of 6.05.0 and the
requirements presented elsewhere in the Milford Zoning Ordinance, the provisions of 6.05.0 shall
apply. (2010)
6.05.5 DISTRICT BOUNDARIES (2012)
The Nashua and Elm Streets Corridor District boundaries include the area along Nashua and Elm
Streets from Ponemah Hill Road to (and including) Granite Town Plaza, more fully depicted on the map
entitled “Nashua and Elm Streets Corridor Overlay District Boundaries” dated 8/6/07, and incorporating
the Tax Map lots as listed in Appendix I.
6.05.6 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
A. General
1. Pre-Application Review. The Community Development Director, or designee, shall review all
proposals to determine applicability as stated in Section 6.05.4 above.
Town of Milford Article VI
6.05
Nashua/Elm
Zoning Ordinance Corridor
Revised 3/2020 Page 77 of 187
2. Development Review. Upon determination by the Community Development Director, or
designee, that an application meets the Section 6.05.4 applicability requirements, the applicant
shall consult with the Planning Board using the Development Review Procedure set forth in the
Town of Milford Development Regulations.
3. Consistency with Plans. In addition to providing the required development review information,
the applicant shall demonstrate how the proposed plan will address the specific site
recommendations as well as the general principles set forth in the following studies and
documents:
a. Evaluation of Highway Improvement Alternatives in Milford, NH (2002); Prepared by Hoyle,
Tanner and Associates
b. Route101A Corridor Master Plan and Improvements Program, (2002); Prepared by VHB
and Nashua Regional Planning Commission
c. Milford Transportation and Community Systems Preservation (TCSP) Plan (2006); Prepared
by Nashua Regional Planning Commission
d. Town of Milford Nashua and Elm Street Corridor Design Guidelines (2007); Prepared by
Nashua Regional Planning Commission
B. Transportation Standards
1. Access Management:
a. All projects subject shall construct wherever feasible interconnecting driveways to adjacent
properties or provide secure future connections through easements to adjacent property
boundaries. This includes bicycle-pedestrian access to adjacent residential developments,
where practical.
b. New access points onto Nashua or Elm streets shall only be created when it is not feasible
to combine or share existing access points.
c. Interior parking lots shall provide for shared use and interconnected drives
d. Interior driveways should provide adequate throat length for vehicle stacking (queuing) and
unobstructed views for exiting safely.
e. Interconnecting driveways shall promote vehicular and pedestrian access between adjacent
lots without accessing the roadway.
2. Transit Facilities. The development of future transit facilities shall be incorporated within all
major site plan developments that could generate high volumes of transit use, particularly senior
housing or other multi-family housing as well as retail areas.
a. Potential transit routes, access points, bus pull-outs, bus stop, signage and shelter locations
may be designated along major roadways and within the perimeter of such projects, and
easements reserved for such facilities.
b. Transit facilities shall be provided in a manner to encourage transit as an alternative mode
of travel.
Town of Milford Article VI
6.05
Nashua/Elm
Zoning Ordinance Corridor
Revised 3/2020 Page 78 of 187
3. Bicycle Facilities. Separate bicycle facilities may be required by the Planning Board where
recommended by the studies listed in section VI.A.2. or where otherwise appropriate.
a. Bicycle routes may be provided in the form of a separate off-street path or on-street marked
bicycle lanes.
b. Bicycle racks and other amenities may be required for all developments and shall be located
in a convenient and secure location.
4. Pedestrian Facilities. Sidewalks shall be constructed as recommended by the studies listed in
section VI.A.2. or where otherwise appropriate.
a. Sidewalk corridors shall be easily accessible to all users, whatever their level of ability and
comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) standards.
b. The sidewalk shall provide for a landscaped buffer (esplanade) between the roadway
pavement and the sidewalk where adequate right of way exists.
c. The walking route along a sidewalk corridor shall connect destinations and shall not require
pedestrians to travel out of their way unnecessarily.
d. Buildings should be sited so as to create pedestrian-scale plazas and gathering places.
e. Sidewalk construction shall be in accordance with Department of Public Works
specifications.
5. Gateways. Some locations contribute to the landscape character of the community because of
their location and scenic qualities. Many such properties and approaches act as gateways,
providing first impressions and reinforcing Milford’s sense of place. Consideration should be
given towards complementing these resources through the careful siting of new buildings, and
the application of the Site Design Standards. The locations of proposed gateways are identified
on the Nashua and Elm Streets Corridor Overlay District Boundaries Map. In these areas,
appropriate landscaping or other improvements may be required.
• Nashua Street Neighborhood Gateway – Ponemah Hill Road and Nashua Street
• Elm Street Neighborhood Gateway – Elm Street at Granite Town Plaza
• Oval Area Gateways –
o Elm Street and Cottage Street
o Nashua Street and Tonella Road
• Other potential gateway locations outside of the District which should be considered for
special treatment include:
o Amherst Street and Souhegan Street (outside of St. Patrick’s Church)
o Mont Vernon Street and Granite Street
o South Street and Lincoln/Prospect Street
Town of Milford Article VI
6.05
Nashua/Elm
Zoning Ordinance Corridor
Revised 3/2020 Page 79 of 187
C. Site Design Standards
1. Natural Features. Buildings, lots, impervious surfaces and accessory structures shall be sited
in those portions of the site that have the most suitable conditions for development.
a. Environmentally sensitive areas, including but not limited to, wetlands, steep slopes in
excess of 15%, floodplains, significant wildlife habitats and corridors, wooded areas,
fisheries, scenic areas, habitat for rare and endangered plants and animals, unique natural
communities and natural areas, and sand and gravel aquifers, shall be maintained and
preserved to the maximum extent.
b. Natural drainage areas shall be preserved to the maximum extent. The development shall
include appropriate measures for protecting these resources, including but not limited to,
modification of the proposed design of the site, timing of construction, and limiting the extent
of excavation.
2. Parking Areas
a. Parking lots shall be located to the rear or side of a building.
b. Parking shall not be permitted in front of a building or along the frontage of a lot.
c. Side yard parking shall be well buffered from the street.
d. Shared parking provisions for any combination of uses on site and adjacent sites are
encouraged.
e. Offsite parking shall be protected with a shared parking easement agreement which shall be
reviewed and recorded with the approved plans, except in areas exempt from parking
standards such as but not limited to the Oval Sub-district.
3. Build-to-Zone. Building setbacks influence the character of the street. New structures shall be
constructed so as to maintain a traditional streetscape edge. The setbacks of adjacent
structures and context of spacing between buildings shall be considered in determining the
appropriate building setback. At a minimum, a new structure shall be constructed within a Buildto-
Zone between 15’ and 35’ from the public street right of way. If site circumstances dictate a
new structure may be constructed within 10’ of the public street right of way.
4. Landscaping. Required landscaping coverage shall be in accordance with the Town of Milford
Subdivision and Site Plan Regulations, and shall be required for all proposals in the Nashua and
Elm Streets Corridor District.
a. Trees. Required street trees should be species which are native to New Hampshire as set
forth on the “List of NH Native Trees” (as amended) published by UNH Cooperative
Extension (See Appendix II). Recognizing that site and growing conditions vary other
appropriate street trees may be considered and approved by the Planning Board.
b. Landscaping plants. Landscaping with native plants and materials is strongly encouraged.
However, recognizing the need to accommodate varying site and growing conditions, nonnative
landscaping plants may be permitted in accordance with published recommendations
from the UNH Cooperative Extension and Hillsborough County Conservation District. See
“Alternatives to Invasive Landscape Plants”, UNH Cooperative Extension (as amended).
c. Prohibited Plants and Trees. Plant species as listed on the “NH Prohibited Invasive Species
List” (as amended) by the NH Department of Agriculture are prohibited. As of 2007, the list
includes the species listed in Appendix III. (2012)
D. Architectural Design Standards
1. General Criteria
Town of Milford Article VI
6.05
Nashua/Elm
Zoning Ordinance Corridor
Revised 3/2020 Page 80 of 187
a. Plans shall show all building elevations and portray the design of all buildings and the
relationship of the development to surrounding properties, buildings, natural features and
built features.
b. The Planning Board may require that development proposals be reviewed by an historic
preservation consultant or architect, and be designed by a NH licensed architect at the cost
of the applicant.
2. Building Orientation. New structures shall orient their main entrance or storefront to a public
street.
a. New structures shall maintain an appropriate street edge in relationship to adjacent
structures. (See 6.05.6:C.3 Build-to-Zone)
b. Buildings shall be sited so that entrances are clearly identifiable and directly accessible from
a sidewalk and shall be accessible for pedestrians, bicyclists and future public transit users.
3. Building Massing, Forms and Pedestrian Scale. The size, mass and form of new structures
must relate to the appropriate scale of neighboring buildings as well as the context of the
corridor. The following architectural features and treatments should be used to enhance the
character of new development and the corridor:
a. Avoid blank walls at ground-floor levels through the use of windows, trellises, wall
articulation.
b. Arcades, materials changes, awnings or other features.
c. Reduce the apparent scale of the building by introducing small-scaled architectural features,
creating an irregular footprint and variations in roof forms and height of roof elements.
d. Enhance definition of each floor of the building through terracing, articulated structural
elements, changes in materials, belt courses and horizontal trim bands.
4. Building Heights. Building heights shall be generally compatible with and transition from the
height of adjacent development within the historic context of the corridor. The overall building
height and number of floors shall comply with the dimensional requirements of the Town of
Milford Zoning Ordinance; however, wall plane heights shall be “stepped back” to minimize the
mass of the structure along the frontage or public way.
5. Roof Forms and Materials. Rooflines shall be characteristically sloped and articulated with
architectural features such as dormers, chimneys, gables, cupolas, etc.
a. Rooflines shall not run in continuous planes, and shall be broken into appropriately scaled
masses.
b. Flat roofs are prohibited unless the Planning Board finds that a proposal can provide
appropriate visual appeal and does not detract from the character of the corridor.
c. Where appropriate roofs shall provide adequate overhangs for pedestrian activity.
d. Roof materials shall be composed of high quality, durable and architecturally consistent
materials, including but not limited to concrete tile, asphalt shingles and standing seam
metal.
Town of Milford Article VI
6.05
Nashua/Elm
Zoning Ordinance Corridor
Revised 3/2020 Page 81 of 187
6. Architectural Features and Materials. Architectural features and details shall be considered in
every building design.
a. Traditional features and details such as columns, pilasters, canopies, porticos, awnings or
arches associated with Milford’s architectural heritage are strongly encouraged.
b. Long expanses of repetitive architectural elements and flat unarticulated wall surfaces shall
be avoided.
c. Use of traditional materials or materials that have the same visual effect shall be used
including but not limited to wood, brick, tile, or stone.
7. Windows. With the exception of retail storefronts, modestly scaled vertically proportioned
windows are the most appropriate to the local building vernacular.
a. Building facades should have an abundance of windows that use clear non-reflective glass.
b. Windows on higher floors should align vertically with windows below, if possible.
c. Walls facing streets and pedestrian approaches shall have display windows, recessed
windows, detailed entry areas, awnings or prominent sills and a pedestrian scaled lighting
element. Storefronts should use windows to reveal indoor amenities, activities and displays.
8. Building Entrances. All building entrances shall be clearly defined and highly visible using a
variety of the following details (Please refer to the Town of Milford Design Guidelines for
examples):
a. Porticos
b. Canopies
c. Overhangs
d. Arcades
e. Recesses or projections
f. Raised cornice parapets over doors
g. Arches with detail (tile work or moldings) integrated with the building
h. Outdoor patios
i. Display windows
j. Integral planters
k. Wing walls with planters or seating
9. Mechanical Equipment and Building Accessory Screening. All rooftop air conditioning,
heating equipment, other large mechanical equipment and building accessories such as
dumpsters shall be screened from public view. The screening may be part of the articulation of
the building.
10. Existing Structures. Existing buildings and structures of historic value should be preserved
and if renovated or expanded done so in a manner that is respectful of the character, features
and details of the existing structure.
Town of Milford Article VI
6.05
Nashua/Elm
Zoning Ordinance Corridor
Revised 3/2020 Page 82 of 187
11. Signs. Signs shall comply with the Town of Milford Sign Ordinance and should be designed to
meet the needs of the individual uses while complementing the building, site and surroundings.
a. Wall signs shall be appropriately scaled to the building or surface on which it is placed and
should not obscure important architectural features.
b. Signs shall be readable for both pedestrians and drivers approaching a site.
c. Consideration should be given to form, color, lighting and materials that are compatible with
the building and its surroundings.
12. Lighting. All new developments shall include pedestrian-scaled light fixtures that are
appropriate to the building and location. The use of floodlights, wall packs and tall light posts
intended for lighting large areas shall be prohibited.
6.05.7 WAIVER PROVISION
There may be unusual or exceptional circumstances that exist where the application of one or more of
the Performance Standards of Section 6.05.6 would entail practical difficulty or unreasonable hardship
when balanced against the public purposes sought to be achieved by this Ordinance. In such
circumstances, the Planning Board may waive the applicability of some or all of the Performance
Standards in accordance with the Development Regulations waiver process (Section 5.020).
6.05.8 APPEALS
A decision of the Planning Board made pursuant to the Nashua and Elm Streets Corridor District shall
not be appealed to the Zoning Board of Adjustment, but rather shall be appealed to the Superior Court
as provided by NH RSA 677:15 and NH RSA 676:5, III.
6.05.9 SAVING CLAUSE
Where any provision of this Ordinance is found to be invalid, such determination shall not affect the
validity of the remainder of this Ordinance.
6.05.10 EFFECTIVE DATE
The Nashua and Elm Streets Corridor District Ordinance was adopted by the Town of Milford on
Tuesday, March 11, 2008 and is effective the same date.
Town of Milford Article VI
6.05
Nashua/Elm
Zoning Ordinance Corridor
Revised 3/2020 Page 83 of 187
Appendix I – Parcels included in the Nashua and Elm Streets Corridor District
Map and Lot Numbers: 19/3 thru19/8, 19/10-19/14, 19/15-1, 19/15-2, 19/16, 19/16-1, 19/17, 19/21,
19/25, 19/25-1 thru 19/25-9, 20/44, 20/45, 20/47, 20/49 thru 20/52, 20/54 thru 20/61, 25/1 thru 25/7,
25/9, 25/9-1, 25/10, 25/11, 25/11-1, 25/12 thru 25/27, 25/32 thru 25/36, 25/38 thru 25/40, 25/42 thru
25/52, 25/56 thru 25/76, 25/112 thru 25/120, 25/122 thru 25/126, 25/126-1, 25/127 thru 25/133, 26/90
thru 26/99, 26/99-1, 26/100 thru 26/103, 26/103-1, 26/104 thru 26/109, 26/111 thru 26/166, 26/166-1,
26/167 thru 26/184, 26/184-1, 30/1 thru 30/4, 30/9, 30/10, 30/31 thru 30/37, 30/40 thru 30/53, 30/57
thru 30/63, 30/63-1, 30/64, 30/65, 30/65-1, 30/66, 31/2 thru 31/13, 31/32, 31/32-1, 31/32-2, 31/33,
31/52 thru 31/55, 32/1 thru 32/7, 32/11, 32/16, 32/17, 32/19 thru 32/24, 32/24-1, 32/28 thru 32/30,
43/46 thru 43/51 and 43/54.
Appendix II - “List of NH Native Trees”
Arborvitae Hackberry Poplar
Ash Hawthorn Sassafras
Basswood Hemlock Serviceberry
Beech Hickory Spruce
Birch Hophornbeam Sumac
Cherry Juniper Sycamore
Chestnut Larch Viburnum
Dogwood Maple Walnut
Elm Mountain ash White cedar
Fir Oak Willow
Gum Pine Witch-hazel
Appendix III – Invasive Species
Tree of Heaven European Frogbit Yellow Floating Heart
Garlic Mustard Water-flag Common Reed
European Barberry Blunt-leaved Privet Japanese Knotweed
Flowering Rush Showy Bush Honeysuckle Curly-leaf Pondweed
Fanwort Japanese Honeysuckle Common Buckthorn
Oriental Bittersweet Morrow’s Honeysuckle Glossy Buckthorn
Black Swallow-wort Tartarian Honeysuckle Multiflora Rose
Pale Swallow-wort Purple loosestrife Water Chestnut
Brazilian elodea Parrot Feather Burning Bush
Autumn Olive Variable Milfoil Norway Maple
Giant Hogweed European Water-Milfoil Japanese Barberry
Hydrilla European Naiad
Town of Milford Article VI
6.06
Commerce &
Zoning Ordinance Community
Revised 3/2020 Page 84 of 187
6.06.0 COMMERCE AND COMMUNITY DISTRICT
Entire article removed in 2020.
Town of Milford Article VI
6.07
West Elm St
Zoning Ordinance Gateway
Revised 3/2020 Page 85 of 187
6.07.0 WEST ELM STREET GATEWAY DISTRICT
6.07.1 AUTHORITY
A. Title: This Ordinance shall be known as the West Elm Street Gateway District.
B. Authority: The Planning Board is hereby authorized to administer this Ordinance under the
provisions set forth in NH RSA 674:21, Innovative Land Use Controls.
6.07.2 PURPOSE
The intent of this District is to encourage economic development in the West Elm Street Gateway
District by enhancing, preserving and protecting the natural, historic and cultural resources of the Town.
The purpose of this Ordinance is to implement the Town of Milford’s vision for the future as set forth in
the Community Character Chapter of the Master Plan 2007 Update:
Goal No. 2: Foster the traditional character of Milford’s neighborhoods by encouraging a human scale
of development that is similar in setbacks, size and height, and that is comfortable and safe for
pedestrians and non-motorized vehicles while allowing for an efficient and safe roadway network.
The Ordinance implements the Master Plan vision for Milford’s gateway corridors and is designed to
accomplish the following:
A. Encourage and promote commercial, industrial and mixed use development sensitive to Milford’s
agricultural, architectural and historic heritage by preserving and enhancing the streetscape, the
unique scenic vistas, views of the Souhegan River, and visual character of the corridor.
B. Encourage development to reflect the historic pattern of development in Town and enhance
Milford’s sense of community and place.
C. Encourage attractive pedestrian scale development.
D. Improve transportation efficiency, landscaping, stormwater management, traffic management, and
parking.
E. Promote alternative modes of transportation, particularly pedestrian and biking.
F. Promote development that reflects the intended character of Milford’s residential, commercial, and
industrial neighborhoods relative to height, lot coverage, and setbacks.
The following standards are tools that create a flexible framework to guide the appearance of future
development that is compatible with the historic nature of Milford, while allowing for innovation and
architectural creativity in order to enhance a special place.
6.07.3 FINDINGS
A. Milford’s West Elm Gateway District is a unique area with distinctive natural features, scenic vistas
and a streetscape that reflects Milford’s agricultural and commercial history.
Town of Milford Article VI
6.07
West Elm St
Zoning Ordinance Gateway
Revised 3/2020 Page 86 of 187
B. Non-residential development that is indifferent to Milford’s history and economic needs constitutes a
significant threat to the character and future of the community.
C. Future development can be guided to encourage building design that is functional, aesthetically
pleasing and harmonious with the agricultural and architectural heritage of the community as well
as provide positive economic return to the Town and property owners.
D. The architecture of the community is varied and necessarily will evolve as the community grows.
The regulation of architectural design must allow for flexibility, creativity and innovation within the
context of an articulated framework.
E. Access management will increase the efficiency, safety and mobility of the corridor, and inter-site
connections are needed to reduce the potential conflict points along the corridors.
F. Future development should incorporate bicycle, pedestrian, and public transportation amenities as
important features that add to Milford’s character, sense of place and public health.
6.07.4 APPLICABILITY
The provisions as set forth in this Ordinance shall apply to the following activities within the Corridor
Overlay District:
A. Applications for site plan and subdivision review.
B. New building construction for non-residential or multi-family purposes greater than 600 SF.
C. Additions or alterations to buildings for non-residential or multi-family purposes greater than 600 SF.
D. Additions or alterations to a site plan or buildings used for non-residential or multi-family purposes
which significantly alter the visual appearance of the site or a façade visible from a public way.
E. The West Elm Street Gateway District is an overlay district which imposes additional requirements
and restrictions to those of the underlying base district established under the powers granted under
NH RSA 674:21. In case of a conflict between the requirements of 6.07.0 and the requirements
presented elsewhere in the Milford Zoning Ordinance, the provisions of 6.07.0 shall apply.
6.07.5 DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
6.07.6 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
“The West Elm Street Gateway District consists of a significant portion of Elm St and Route 101,
from the Granite Town Plaza to the Wilton Town Line. It is bounded to the north by the Souhegan
River until the fork at Wilton Road and Elm Street, where it is then bounded by North River Road
and Wilton Road. The study area is bounded to the south by Elm Street and both sides of Old
Wilton Road, and Route 101. The southern boundary also includes Meadowbrook Drive,
Scarborough Lane and two large parcels just south of Route 101 and west of Savage Road. The
area is fully depicted on the map entitled “West Elm Street Gateway District Boundaries”.
Town of Milford Article VI
6.07
West Elm St
Zoning Ordinance Gateway
Revised 3/2020 Page 87 of 187
A. General
The West Elm Street Gateway District is a major economic driver in Town and contributes to the
overall character of the community because of its location, landscape and scenic qualities. This
District provides a first impression and should reinforce Milford’s sense of place. Consideration shall
be given towards complementing these resources through the careful siting of new buildings,
appropriate landscaping and the application of the Site Design Standards.
1. Pre-Application Review. The Community Development Director, or designee, shall review all
proposals to determine applicability as stated in Section 6.07.4 above.
2. Development Review. Upon determination by the Community Development Director, or
designee, that an application meets the Section 6.07.4 applicability requirements, the applicant
shall submit an application to the Planning Board in accordance with the Development Review
Procedure set forth in the Town of Milford Development Regulations.
3. Consistency with Plans. In addition to providing the required development review information,
the applicant shall demonstrate how the proposed plan will address the specific site
recommendations as well as the general principles set forth in the following studies and
documents:
a. The Milford Master Plan and subsequent updates.
b. Town of Milford West Elm Street Gateway District Design Guidelines (2011); Prepared by
Nashua Regional Planning Commission.
B. General Provisions
1. General
2. Viewshed: Development must take into account the varied and natural beauty of the corridor.
Building scale and siting must foster and enhance the unique natural amenities and landscape.
a. Wooded and agricultural areas shall be maintained and preserved to the maximum extent
possible.
b. Development along the Souhegan River shall be situated to provide views from adjacent
buildings as well as pedestrian amenities and lookouts near the River’s edge. Natural
drainage areas shall be preserved to the maximum extent. The development shall include
appropriate measures for protecting these resources, including but not limited to,
modification of the proposed design of the site, timing of construction, and limiting the extent
of excavation.
c. Development should be situated in such a way as to not impede views of Dram Cup Hill and
Pack Monadnock. Where possible buildings and pedestrian areas should be located to
maximize views of these natural features.
3. Underground Utility Lines: Utility lines shall be located underground whenever possible in all
new developments and during significant upgrades and renovations to existing sites.
Town of Milford Article VI
6.07
West Elm St
Zoning Ordinance Gateway
Revised 3/2020 Page 88 of 187
4. Streetscaping: Amenities such as public art, lighting, street furniture, special sidewalk
treatments and banners should be incorporated into site design proposals.
5. Gateways: Some locations contribute to the landscape character of the community because of
their location and scenic qualities. Many such properties and approaches act as gateways,
providing first impressions and reinforcing Milford’s sense of place. Consideration should be
given towards complementing these resources through the careful siting of new buildings, and
the application of the Site Design Standards. The locations of proposed gateways are identified
on the West Milford Gateway District Design Guidelines, Corridor Overlay District and Potential
Gateways Map.
In these areas, appropriate landscaping or other improvements may be required.
a. Near the Wilton Town Line on Route 101
b. North River Road just north of the Elm Street / Route 101 intersection
c. Near Map 7, Lot 12 on Elm Street
d. Just west of the Route 13 / Route 101 intersection
6. Screened Loading Docks and Storage Areas:
a. All loading docks shall be well screened to conceal delivery trucks and bays from public
right-of-way and viewsheds.
b. Supplies should be stored inside of buildings.
c. Outside storage of supplies shall be heavily screened with attractive landscaping or fencing.
7. Natural Features: Buildings, lots, impervious surfaces and accessory structures shall be sited
in those portions of the site that have the most suitable conditions for development.
a. Environmentally sensitive areas, including but not limited to, wetlands, steep slopes in
excess of 15%, floodplains, significant wildlife habitats and corridors, wooded areas,
fisheries, scenic areas, habitat for rare and endangered plants and animals, unique natural
communities and natural areas, and sand and gravel aquifers, shall be maintained and
preserved to the maximum extent.
b. Natural drainage areas shall be preserved to the maximum extent. The development shall
include appropriate measures for protecting these resources, including but not limited to,
modification of the proposed design of the site, timing of construction, and limiting the extent
of excavation.
C. Mixed Use Development: Mixed use development as permitted under the Zoning Ordinance can
include a combination of residential, commercial or industrial development in either the same
building or on the same site.
1. On mixed use development sites, the design shall complement the multiple uses with care
placed on creating visual integration of features such as building setbacks, driveways, building
entrances, windows, landscaping and pedestrian amenities.
2. In general, any residential uses should be in upper stories of multi-storied buildings with the
commercial or industrial use below.
Town of Milford Article VI
6.07
West Elm St
Zoning Ordinance Gateway
Revised 3/2020 Page 89 of 187
D. Commercial Development: Commercial development should be scaled appropriately to provide
for a mix of building styles and traditional architectural features and materials, that foster Milford’s
sense of place.
1. Buildings and building entrances shall be human scale and close to the street when practical.
2. Building siting shall be such that the mass is scaled smaller in appearance.
3. Parking should be situated to the side and rear of the building whenever possible.
E. Mixed Use and Commercial – Design
1. Building Orientation - New structures shall orient their main entrance or storefront to a public
street.
a. New structures shall maintain an appropriate street edge in relationship to adjacent
structures.
b. Buildings shall be sited so that entrances are clearly identifiable and directly accessible from
a sidewalk and shall be accessible for pedestrians, bicyclists and future public transit users.
2. Building Massing, Form and Height
The mass, form and height of new structures must relate to the appropriate scale of neighboring
buildings as well as the context of the corridor. The following architectural features and
treatments should be used to enhance the character of new development and the corridor:
a. Reduce the apparent scale of the building by introducing small-scaled architectural features,
creating an irregular footprint and variations in roof forms and height of roof elements.
b. Enhance definition of each floor of the building through terracing, material changes,
articulated structural elements, changes in materials and horizontal trim bands.
3. Architectural Features and Materials
Architectural features and details shall be considered in every building design.
a. Traditional features and details such as columns, pilasters, porticos, awnings or arches
associated with Milford’s architectural heritage are strongly encouraged.
b. Long expanses of repetitive architectural elements and flat unarticulated wall surfaces shall
be avoided.
c. Traditional materials or materials that have the same visual effect shall be used, including
but not limited to, wood, brick, tile, or stone.
4. Pedestrian Scale
Building design should take into consideration pedestrians at the ground level.
a. Avoid blank walls at ground-floor levels through the use of windows, trellises, material
changes, arcades, or other features to increase visual interest.
b. Pedestrian scale lighting shall be used wherever possible and be consistent with the existing
building and location.
c. Floodlights and tall light posts are not encouraged.
Town of Milford Article VI
6.07
West Elm St
Zoning Ordinance Gateway
Revised 3/2020 Page 90 of 187
5. Parking Areas
a. Parking lots should be located to the rear or side of a building whenever possible.
b. Side yard parking shall be well buffered from the street.
c. Shared parking provisions for any combination of uses on site and adjacent sites are
encouraged.
d. Offsite parking shall be protected with a shared parking easement agreement which shall be
approved by the Zoning Administrator and recorded with the approved plans.
6. Existing Structures
Existing buildings and structures of historic value should be preserved and if renovated or
expanded done so in a manner that is respectful of the character, features and details of the
existing structure.
7. Roof Form and Materials
Rooflines shall be characteristically sloped and articulated with architectural features such as
dormers, chimneys, gables, cupolas, etc.
a. Rooflines shall not run in continuous planes, and shall be broken into appropriately scaled
masses.
b. Flat roofs are generally discouraged.
c. Where appropriate roofs shall provide adequate overhangs for pedestrian activity.
d. Roof materials shall be composed of high quality, durable and architecturally consistent
materials, including but not limited to concrete tile, asphalt shingles and standing seam
metal.
8. Windows
Modestly scaled vertically proportioned windows are the most appropriate to the local building
vernacular.
a. Building facades should have an abundance of windows that use clear non-reflective glass.
b. Windows on higher floors should align vertically with windows below, if possible.
c. Walls facing streets and pedestrian approaches shall have display windows, recessed
windows, detailed entry areas, awnings or prominent sills and a pedestrian scaled lighting
element. Storefronts should use windows to reveal indoor amenities, activities and displays.
9. Building Entrances
All building entrances shall be clearly defined and highly visible using a variety of the following
details (Please refer to the West Milford Gateway District Design Guidelines for examples):
a. Porticos
b. Canopies
c. Overhangs
Town of Milford Article VI
6.07
West Elm St
Zoning Ordinance Gateway
Revised 3/2020 Page 91 of 187
d. Arcades
e. Recesses or projections
f. Raised cornice parapets over doors
g. Arches with detail (tile work or moldings) integrated with the building
h. Outdoor patios
i. Display windows
j. Integral planters
k. Wing walls with planters or seating
10. Signage
Signs shall comply with the Town of Milford Sign Ordinance and should complement the
building site and surroundings.
a. Wall signs shall be appropriately scaled to the building or surface on which it is placed and
should not obscure important architectural features.
b. Signs shall be readable for both pedestrians and drivers approaching a site.
c. Consideration should be given to form, color, lighting and materials that are compatible with
the building and its surroundings.
11. Screening
All rooftop air conditioning, heating and large mechanical equipment, building accessories, and
refuse shall have noise reduction screening and be screened from public view and have noise
reduction screening.
F. Mixed Use and Commercial – Traffic Standards
1. Access Management
a. All projects shall construct wherever feasible interconnecting driveways to adjacent
properties or provide secure future connections through easements to adjacent property
boundaries. This includes bicycle-pedestrian access to adjacent residential developments,
where practical.
b. New access points onto Elm Street shall only be created when it is not feasible to combine
or share existing access points.
c. Interior parking lots shall provide for shared use and interconnected drives.
d. Interconnecting driveways shall promote vehicular and pedestrian access between adjacent
lots without accessing the roadway.
2. Driveway Throat Length
Interior driveways should provide adequate throat length for vehicle stacking (queuing) and
unobstructed views for exiting safely.
3. Bicycle Facilities
Town of Milford Article VI
6.07
West Elm St
Zoning Ordinance Gateway
Revised 3/2020 Page 92 of 187
Separate bicycle facilities may be required by the Planning Board where recommended by the
studies listed in section 6.07.6 A.3. or where otherwise appropriate.
a. Bicycle routes may be provided in the form of a separate off-street path or on-street marked
bicycle lanes.
b. Bicycle racks and other amenities may be required for all developments and shall be located
in a convenient and secure location.
4. Pedestrian Facilities
Sidewalks shall be constructed as recommended by the studies listed in section 6.07.6 A.3 or
where otherwise appropriate.
a. Sidewalk corridors shall be easily accessible to all users, and comply with the Americans
with Disabilities Act (ADA) standards.
b. The sidewalk shall provide for a landscaped buffer (esplanade) between the roadway
pavement and the sidewalk where adequate right of way exists.
c. The walking route along a sidewalk corridor shall connect destinations and shall not require
pedestrians to travel out of their way unnecessarily.
d. Buildings should be sited so as to create pedestrian-scale plazas and gathering places.
e. Sidewalk construction shall be in accordance with Department of Public Works
specifications.
5. Transit Facilities
The development of future transit facilities shall be incorporated within all major site plan
developments that could generate high volumes of transit use.
a. Potential transit routes, access points, bus pull-outs, bus stops, signage and shelter
locations may be designated along major roadways and within the perimeter of such
projects, and easements reserved for such facilities.
b. Transit facilities shall be provided in a manner to encourage transit as an alternative mode
of travel.
G. Industrial Development: All industrial sites should be visually appealing and well integrated with
adjacent sites, the natural landscape and viewsheds.
1. Building Orientation and Siting
a. Buildings should orient their main entrances toward the street when practical.
b. Buildings with main entrances not oriented toward the street shall be oriented toward
internal roadways and sidewalks within the site.
c. Main entrances shall have human scale features, architectural details, landscaping and
adequate signage.
2. Building Massing, Form, and Height
a. New industrial buildings should have massing, form and height that is compatible with
adjacent properties.
b. Buildings should be designed so as to minimize the appearance in mass and scale.
Town of Milford Article VI
6.07
West Elm St
Zoning Ordinance Gateway
Revised 3/2020 Page 93 of 187
c. Architectural features, windows, entrances and building materials may be utilized to reduce
the appearance of building size.
3. Architectural Features and Materials
a. Buildings and adjacent walkways shall use a variety of architectural materials, colors and
features to create attractive and visually appealing structures.
b. Corrugated metal buildings and large flat wall surfaces should not be located within view of
both internal and external street networks, or shall be screened, or given architectural
treatments to break up large surface areas, and situated in less visible areas of the site.
4. Access Management
a. Industrial sites should be limited to two main entrances.
b. If the site is large enough a tree lined roadway through the campus will provide access to
smaller connector roads and parking areas.
c. Where feasible interconnecting driveways should be constructed to provide access to
adjacent properties or easements should be provided for interconnecting driveways for
future development.
5. Parking
a. Parking should be located to the rear and side of buildings when practical to avoid large
parking lots in front of buildings adjacent to the public right-of-way.
b. Landscaping and small street trees shall be densely planted on medians.
c. Special crosswalk and sidewalk treatments shall be used to create safe internal pedestrian
access between parking lots and buildings.
6. Bicycle and Pedestrian Design
a. Connections to adjacent trails and networks shall be made where applicable.
b. Separate bicycle facilities may be required by the Planning Board where recommended by
the studies listed in section 6.07.6 A.3. or where otherwise appropriate.
i. Bicycle routes may be provided in the form of a separate off-street path or on-street
marked bicycle lanes.
ii. Bicycle racks and other amenities may be required for all developments and shall be
located in a convenient and secure location.
7. Transit
a. All sites over 2 acres will be evaluated to determine if the site is a feasible location for future
public transit service. An easement to accommodate future bus turnouts and shelters may
be required.
b. Internal sidewalks should be planned to provide access to this easement area.
Town of Milford Article VI
6.07
West Elm St
Zoning Ordinance Gateway
Revised 3/2020 Page 94 of 187
H. Campus Style Development
Campus style development refers to business and industrial parks that are interconnected by
internal roadway and sidewalk networks and accommodate multiple buildings, parking areas and
uses. All campus developments should be visually appealing and well integrated with other internal
buildings, the natural landscape and viewsheds.
1. Building Orientation and Siting
a. Buildings should be oriented toward internal streets and sidewalks.
b. Front entrances shall have human scale features, architectural details, landscaping, and
adequate signage indicating the main entrance.
c. All entrances shall have direct access to sidewalks.
2. Building Massing, Form and Height
a. Campus buildings on the same site should have similar massing, form and height.
b. Buildings should be designed to minimize the appearance of mass and must conform to the
height requirements of the zoning ordinance. Architectural features, windows, entrances,
and building materials should be consistent among buildings and should also help to reduce
the appearance of building size.
3. Architectural Features and Materials
a. Buildings and adjacent walkways shall use a variety of architectural standards, colors and
features to create attractive and visually appealing structures.
b. Similar materials should be incorporated on buildings and walkways throughout the campus
to create a cohesive look.
c. Interesting features such as brick, patterns, detailed entrances and varied setbacks should
be incorporated.
4. Lighting
a. Attractive downcast lighting shall be incorporated in a uniform manner throughout the
campus.
5. Green Space
a. Campus style developments must set aside a green space that can accommodate bicycle
and pedestrian use.
b. This space should include landscaping, benches, tables, fountains or public artwork.
c. This space shall connect to the internal sidewalk network.
d. This space can be counted towards total open space requirements.
6. Directional Signs
a. Uniform directional signs shall be located at main entrances and throughout the campus.
Directional signs should provide clear directional information for deliveries and visitors.
7. Access Management
Town of Milford Article VI
6.07
West Elm St
Zoning Ordinance Gateway
Revised 3/2020 Page 95 of 187
a. Access to campus styles developments should be limited to two main driveways.
b. In the case of large sites, a main tree-lined access drive through the campus should provide
access to smaller connector drives and parking areas.
8. Parking
a. Parking should be located to the rear and side of buildings to avoid large parking lots in front
of buildings.
b. Landscaping and small street trees shall be densely planted on medians.
c. Special crosswalk and sidewalk treatments shall be used to create safe internal pedestrian
access between parking lots and buildings.
9. Bicycle and Pedestrian Design
a. Connections to adjacent trails and networks shall be made where applicable.
b. Separate bicycle facilities may be required by the Planning Board where recommended by
the studies listed in section 6.07.6 A.3. or where otherwise appropriate.
i. Bicycle routes may be provided in the form of a separate off-street path or on-street
marked bicycle lanes.
ii. Bicycle racks and other amenities may be required for all developments and shall be
located in a convenient and secure location.
10. Transit
a. All sites over 2 acres will be evaluated to determine if the site is a feasible location for future
public transit service. An easement to accommodate future bus turnouts and shelters may
be required.
b. Internal sidewalks should be planned to provide access to this easement area.
Town of Milford Article VI
6.07
West Elm St
Zoning Ordinance Gateway
Revised 3/2020 Page 96 of 187
6.07.7 WAIVER PROVISION
There may be unusual or exceptional circumstances that exist where the application of one or more of
the Performance Standards of Section 6.07.6 would entail practical difficulty or unreasonable hardship
when balanced against the public purposes sought to be achieved by this Ordinance. In such
circumstances, the Planning Board may waive the applicability of some or all of the Performance
Standards in accordance with the Development Regulations waiver process (Section 5.020).
6.07.8 APPEALS
A decision of the Planning Board made pursuant to the West Elm Street Gateway District shall not be
appealed to the Zoning Board of Adjustment, but rather shall be appealed to the Superior Court as
provided by NH RSA 677:15 and NH RSA 676:5, III.
6.07.9 SAVING CLAUSE
Where any provision of this Ordinance is found to be invalid, such determination shall not affect the
validity of the remainder of this Ordinance.
6.07.10 EFFECTIVE DATE
The West Elm Street Gateway District Ordinance was adopted by the Town of Milford on Tuesday,
March 13, 2012 and is effective the same date.
Town of Milford Article VII
7.01
Gravel/Earth
Zoning Ordinance Removal
Revised 3/2020 Page 97 of 187
ARTICLE VII: SUPPLEMENTARY STANDARDS
7.01.0 GRAVEL AND EARTH REMOVAL (2014)
Loam, sand, gravel and similar earth materials may be removed from a lot or land area in Zoning
Districts which allow such use only after a permit for earth removal has been issued by the Planning
Board. All applications for gravel or earth products removal shall be in conformance with the conditions
set forth in NH RSA Chapter 155-E, as amended and the Town of Milford's Gravel and Earth Removal
Regulation, that may be amended from time to time.
Town of Milford Article VII
7.02
On-site
Sewage
Disposal
Zoning Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 98 of 187
7.02.0 ON-SITE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
7.02.1 No septic tank, leach field, or other on-site sewage disposal system shall be constructed or
enlarged within twenty five hundred (2,500) feet of any well of the Milford Town Water System subject
to the following exceptions:
A. On-site sewage disposal systems for one and two family residences shall be permitted.
B. On-site sewage disposal systems for the treatment of organic wastes with flow not in excess of one
thousand (1,000) gallons per twenty-four (24) hour period shall be permitted, however only one
disposal system shall be permitted on each parcel of land held in single ownership.
C. The Board of Adjustment, after proper public notice and public hearing, may grant a Special
Exception for the installation or modification of an on-site sewage disposal system within twenty-five
hundred (2,500) feet of a town well, when it is satisfied that no pollution of any town well shall result
from the action. The application for a Special Exception shall include a written report(s) prepared
by a licensed professional engineer, ground water geologist and/or hydrologist, who has been
approved in advance by the Board. This report shall be based on on-site inspections, testings,
and/or scientific analysis of the ground water transmigration. The report(s) shall include an analysis
of the type of pollutants to be introduced into the disposal system, the maximum daily flows that are
anticipated, soil types, and other relevant engineering and soils factors. All costs for the
preparation of the required reports and any on-site testing shall be borne by the applicant for the
Special Exception.
D. On-site sewage disposal systems shall be permitted when the disposal system is located on one
side of a river, stream or other body of water which has a year round flow and the town well is
located on the other side.
7.02.2 However, in no case shall any on-site sewage disposal system be constructed or enlarged
within four hundred (400) feet of a town well.
7.03.0 CLUSTER OPEN SPACE DEVELOPMENT Deleted (2000)
7.04.0 PRIVATE WAYS Deleted (2001)
Town of Milford Article VII
7.05
Manufactured
Zoning Ordinance MH Parks
Revised 3/2020 Page 99 of 187
7.05.0 EXISTING MANUFACTURED MOBILE HOME PARKS
7.05.1 ALLOWABLE USES (1992)
Additions to manufactured housing in existing manufactured home parks shall be allowed when it can
be shown that adequate water and sewer facilities exist.
7.05.2 ALLOWABLE USES IN THE INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION
Any manufactured housing park in existence at the time of the passage of this Ordinance that has a
minimum of thirty (30) units may expand subject to the limitations contained herein and provided the
Board of Adjustment has approved a Special Exception for such expansion pursuant hereto.
The Board of Adjustment in determining whether such a park is entitled to a Special Exception to
expand shall apply the following criteria:
A. The proposed shall only apply to a park with municipal water and sewer service or one which has
received permission from the Selectmen to construct such water and sewer services at the park
owner's expense;
B. The proposed shall include a commitment to improve all existing and contemplated roads within the
park to such standards as required by the Selectmen for current road improvements;
C. The Board of Adjustment shall determine that there exists or will be provided, parks, playgrounds,
open green space or other amenities sufficient to provide for existing and proposed occupants of
the park;
D. The Board of Adjustment shall determine the extent to which the park shall be allowed to expand
provided that they shall not approve any expansion that will result in a total park density greater
than the existing multi-family housing density in the Town;
E. The Board of Adjustment shall consider the proposed expansion and may impose any reasonable
conditions on the grant of the Special Exception which are, in the judgment of the Board of
Adjustment, necessary to insure that the proposed expansion meets the above criteria, the general
criteria for a special exception (set forth in Article X, Para. 10.02.0 of the Ordinance) and also
provide for the safety of existing and further occupants in terms of fire safety, flooding, traffic and
any other appropriate considerations.
It is understood that once a Special Exception is granted hereunder the applicant will thereafter present
a Site Plan to the Planning Board in accordance with existing Development Regulations. All required
improvements will be bonded as normally required.
A joint meeting of the Planning Board and Board of Adjustment is permissible if said boards concur.
(1989)
Town of Milford Article VII
7.06
Sign
Zoning Ordinance Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 100 of 187
7.06.0 SIGN ORDINANCE (2019)
7.06.1 PURPOSE AND INTENT
A. The purposes of these sign regulations are to:
1. Encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication in the Town of Milford;
2. Retain the Town’s ability to attract and encourage economic development and growth;
3. Improve pedestrian and vehicle traffic safety;
4. Respect the environment;
5. Address new technologies;
6. Minimize potential adverse effects of signs on nearby public and other private property;
7. Complement the character of the zoning districts’ existing land uses, including, without
limitation, the Oval Sub-District’s central role in the social, political and economic life of the
Town; and,
8. Enable fair and consistent enforcement of the sign regulations.
9. To ensure that the constitutionally guaranteed right of free speech is protected.
B. It is further intended that this Article will help the Town in its efforts to protect the safety and welfare
of the public, implement the Town’s Master Plan and reduce potential visual clutter by encouraging
the effective use of signs.
C. This Article is structured on a graduated basis that allows a progressively greater variety and size of
signs as the zoning districts increase in scale and minimum lot area required for development.
Conversely, as the zoning districts increase in density, this Article allows progressively smaller
numbers of types and sizes to reflect the corresponding intensity of mixed land uses and the
density of development.
D. The “Applicability” subsection of each sign structure described in this Article provides a definition of
the type of sign subject to this Article. To the extent that a provision of this Article and another
section of the Zoning Ordinance conflict, the provisions of this Article shall control.
E. This Article shall be liberally construed to effectuate its purposes; provided, however, that no sign
shall be subject to any limitation based on the content of the message contained in such sign.
F. If any section, clause, provision, portion or phrase of this Ordinance shall be held to be invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect, impair or
invalidate any other section, clause, provision, portion or phrase of this Ordinance.
7.06.2 SHORT TITLE
This article shall be known as the Town of Milford Sign Ordinance or the Sign Ordinance. The Sign
Ordinance is enacted as part of the Town’s Zoning Ordinance.
Town of Milford Article VII
7.06
Sign
Zoning Ordinance Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 101 of 187
7.06.3 DEFINITIONS
The following words and phrases in this Article shall have the meaning described herein for all
purposes associated with the construction and interpretation of the Sign Ordinance.
Abandoned sign: The cessation of the use of a sign as indicated by the visible or otherwise apparent
intention of an owner to discontinue the use of a sign and/or structural framework; or the removal of the
characteristic equipment or furnishing of the sign, without its replacement by similar equipment or
furnishings; or the replacement of a nonconforming sign with a conforming sign.
Animated Sign: Any sign employing actual motion, the illusion of motion, or light and/or color changes
achieved through mechanical, electrical, or electronic means. Animated signs, which are differentiated
from manually activated changeable signs as defined and regulated by this Code, include the following
types: Mechanically Activated signs, Electrically Activated Changeable Signs as define herein.
1. Flashing: Animated signs or animated portions of signs whose illumination is characterized by a
repetitive cycle in which the period of illumination is either the same as or less than the period of
non-illumination. For the purposes of this ordinance, flashing will not be defined as occurring if
the cyclical period between on-off phases of illumination exceeds five (5) seconds.
2. Patterned Illusionary Movement: Animated signs or animated portions of signs whose illumination
is characterized by simulated movement through alternate or sequential activation of various
illuminated elements for the purpose of producing repetitive light patterns designed to appear in
some form of constant motion.
Area: The space, on the largest single face of a sign, within and including a perimeter which forms the
outside shape of a sign. Where signs are established back to back, the larger face shall be calculated
for purposes of determining allowable area. The space of a sign having no such perimeter or border
shall be computed by enclosing the entire copy area within the outline of a parallelogram, triangle, circle
or any other easily recognized geometric shape and then computing the area. Where a sign is of a
three-dimensional, round or irregular shape, the largest cross section shall be used in a flat projection
for the purpose of computing sign area.
Awning: A removable shelter of canvas, metal or similar material extending over a doorway or window
to provide shelter from natural elements.
Awning sign: A sign painted on or attached flat or flush against the surface of the awning, but not
extending above, below or beyond the awning or attached to the underside. The copy area on awnings
is computed as all or a portion of the allowed wall sign area. A minimum clearance of eight (8) feet
above sidewalk level must be maintained for pedestrian clearance.
Background area: The total area of a sign face on which copy could be placed, often referenced to in
connection with wall signs.
Banner sign: A sign made of fabric or other similar non-rigid material supported or anchored at four
corners or along top with weighted bottom. A larger banner will require additional support and anchor
points.
Billboard: A large board on which advertisements are shown, esp. at the side of a road; a Billboard
may or may not be an off-premise sign.
Building face or wall: All window and wall or façade areas of a building in one (1) plane or elevation.
Town of Milford Article VII
7.06
Sign
Zoning Ordinance Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 102 of 187
Building fascia: The exterior linear length of a building that has frontage along a right-of-way or the
exterior linear length of a building utilized for public access.
Building frontage: The linear length of a building parallel to or closely facing the right-of-way at street
level.
Building marker sign: A sign lettered to give the name of a building and/or date of construction of the
building. Such signs shall include signs recessed into the surface, cut into any masonry surface, or
constructed of metallic or other noncombustible material. For purposes of this Article, “building name
signs” are deemed to be directional signs.
Canopy (or marquee): A permanent roof-like shelter extending from part or all of a building face over a
public right-of-way and constructed of a durable material such as metal, glass or plastic.
Canopy or marquee sign: Any sign attached to or part of a canopy or marquee. The copy area on
such signs is computed as all or a portion of the allowed wall sign area.
Changeable Sign - A sign with the capability of content change by means of manual or remote input,
includes the following types:
1. Manually Activated - Changeable sign whose message copy or content can be changed manually
on a display surface. A manually activated changeable sign may be part of any sign type.
2. Electrically Activated - Changeable sign whose message copy or content can be changed by
means of remote electrically energized on-off switching combinations of alphabetic or pictographic
components arranged on a display surface. Illumination may be integral to the components, such
as characterized by lamps or other light-emitting devices; or it may be from an external light
source designed to reflect off the changeable copy area. See also: Electronic Message Center.
Code Administrator: The term “Code Administrator” shall also include the designees of the Code
Administrator.
Copy: The wording or message on a sign surface in either permanent or temporary
(removable/changeable) letter or organic form.
Copy area: The area in square feet of the smallest geometric figure which describes the area enclosed
by the actual copy of a sign. When referring to a wall sign or fascia sign, the copy area refers to the
actual message or total area within a border or area highlighted within a contrasting background, not to
the illuminated background. Also see “area”.
Directional sign: Signage which is necessary for on-site public safety and convenience.
Directory sign:.Permanent signs which are necessary to identify and locate occupants of a building
when there is more than one occupant i n a building or on a site.
Display Time – The amount of time a message and/or graphic is displayed on an Electronic Message
Center or Sign (EMC).
Dissolve – A mode of message transition on an Electronic Message Sign accomplished by varying the
light intensity or pattern, in which the first message gradually appears to dissipate and lose legibility
with the gradual appearance and legibility of the second message.
Dynamic Frame Effect – An Electronic Message Sign frame effect in which the illusion of motion
and/or animation is used.
Town of Milford Article VII
7.06
Sign
Zoning Ordinance Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 103 of 187
Electronic awning sign: A fireproof space frame structure with translucent covering designed in
awning form, but whose purpose and use is signage. Such signs are internally illuminated by
fluorescent or other light sources in fixtures approved under national and local electrical codes. The
copy area is computed as all or a portion of the allowed wall sign area.
Electronic Message Center or Sign (EMC) - An electrically activated changeable sign (also referred
to as digital signs or computer-controlled electronic signs) whose variable message and/or graphic
presentation capability can be electronically programmed by computer from a remote location. Also
known as an EMC. EMCs typically use light emitting diodes (LEDs) as a lighting source. (See also
following terms principally associated with Electronic Message Centers: Display Time, Dissolve,
Dynamic Frame Effect, Fade, Frame, Frame Effect, Scroll, Transition, Travel)
Establish: This term shall mean to attach, alter, build, construct, reconstruct, enlarge, move, hang,
place, suspend, affix, erect, manufacture, and includes the painting of wall signs, but does not include
copy changes on any permitted sign.
Façade sign: See “wall sign.”
Face of sign: The entire area of the sign on which copy could be placed. Also see “copy area” and
“area.”
Fade – A mode of message transition on an Electronic Message Sign accomplished by varying the light
intensity, where the first message gradually reduces intensity to the point of not being legible and the
subsequent message gradually increases intensity to the point of legibility.
Fascia sign: See “wall sign.”
Flag: A sign made of fabric or other similar non-rigid material supported or anchored along one edge or
two corners. If any side is more than three times as long as any other side the flag becomes a banner.
Flashing sign: Animated signs or animated portions of signs whose illumination is characterized by a
repetitive cycle in which the period of illumination is either the same as or less than the period of nonillumination.
For the purposes of this ordinance, flashing will not be defined as occurring if the cyclical
period between on-off phases of illumination exceeds five (5) seconds.
EMC Frame – A complete, static display screen on an Electronic Message Sign.
Frame Effect – A visual effect on an Electronic Message Sign applied to a single frame. See also
Dynamic Frame Effect.
Freestanding sign: See “Monument sign.”
Frontage, minimum: That continuous portion of a lot bordering on a road(s) from which access can be
taken, that meets the minimum requirements of the underlying zoning district.
Height of sign: The vertical distance measured from the adjacent undisturbed grade of the sign to the
highest point of the sign.
Historic marker sign: A marker that identifies an historic place, person event or date and is erected by
a historical organization or by a government agency.
Illuminance – The amount of light falling upon a real or imaginary surface, commonly called “light level”
or “illumination” measured in foot candles (lumens/square foot).
Town of Milford Article VII
7.06
Sign
Zoning Ordinance Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 104 of 187
Illuminated sign: Any sign which emanates light either by means of exposed tubing, electrical bulbs,
fluorescent lights, neon tubes or lamps on its surface, or by means of illumination transmitted through
the sign faces. Any decorative lighting that is used expressly for the purpose of advertisement shall be
constructed as a sign.
Individual letter sign: Any sign made of self-contained letters that are mounted individually. See “copy
area.”
Landmark sign: An older sign of artistic or historic merit, uniqueness, or extraordinary significance, as
identified by the local historic commission or society. The character of landmark signs warrants their
preservation in original condition, or their restoration.
Location: Any lot, premises, building, structure, wall, or any place upon which a sign is located.
Long-term temporary (LTT) sign: Any sign established for a temporary period of not more than six (6)
months, but not less than 14 days. (see Short-term Temporary Sign definition.).
Luminance – The light that is emitted by or reflected from a surface. Measured in units of luminous
intensity (candelas) per unit area and units as foot lamberts and equivalent. This can be measured by
means of a luminance meter.
Maintain: To permit a sign, sign structure or any part of each to continue; or to repair or refurbish a
sign, sign structure or any part of each. A sign shall be maintained in good repair for reasons of public
safety and aesthetics.
Marquee: See “canopy.”
Marquee sign: See “canopy sign.”
Mechanically Activated sign (animated): Animated signs characterized by repetitive motion and/or
rotation activated by a mechanical system powered by electric motors or other mechanically induced
means.
Message: The wording or copy on a sign. See “copy.”
Monument sign: A sign established on a freestanding structure, frame, mast or pole and not attached
to any building. Where such signs are established back to back, the larger face shall be calculated for
the purposes of determining allowable area. Also known as detached sign, freestanding sign, pole sign,
ground sign and pylon sign.
Nonconforming sign: Any sign which was lawfully established prior to the date this Article was
adopted, and which fails to conform to the specifications of this Article.
Off-premises sign: A sign unrelated to a business or a profession conducted, or to a commodity or
service sold or offered, upon the premises where such a sign is located. It is recognized that, unlike onpremises
signs which are actually a part of a business, off-premise signs are a separate and distinct
use of the public thoroughfare.
On-premises sign: Any sign visible from a public right-of-way located on the premises where the sign
is installed and maintained.
Parking signs: Signs that identify available spaces or areas for parking of vehicles. Parking signs are
deemed “Directional signs” for the purposes of this Article.
Town of Milford Article VII
7.06
Sign
Zoning Ordinance Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 105 of 187
Permanent sign: A permanent sign is any sign established for a period of greater than six (6) months.
Pole sign: See “Monument sign.”
Political sign: Signs erected on residential property by or with the consent of the property owner,
where such signs coincide with the timing of a political campaign or other matter on which voters may
vote. Political signs are considered temporary signs for the purpose of this ordinance.
Portable sign: Movable sign that is not attached to a structure or the ground, includes: A-boards,
portable reader-boards and similar signs.
Premises: A lot or number of lots on which are situated a building or group of buildings designed as an
unit or on which a building or a group of buildings are to be constructed. The premises and the sign to
which it relates must have a physical connection.
Projecting Sign: A sign which is affixed to any building wall or structure and extends beyond the
building wall, structure, building line or property line more than twelve (12) inches.
Public right-of-way: A public right of way includes the portion of a public street, road or highway
dedicated to and accepted by the Town and/or the State as measured from property line to property
line. When property lines on opposite sides of the public street are not parallel, the public right-of-way
width shall be determined by the Code Administrator.
Real estate rider board: A typically small sign that either hangs from the base of or is established on
top of a real estate sign. The area of these signs shall be included in the total allowable sign area for
real estate signs.
Register: The register of signs shall consist of an official record maintained by the Code Administrator
as to the purpose of signage and containing the date of establishment and removal.
Roof line: The top edge of the roof or the top of the parapet, where the junction of the roof and the
perimeter wall of the structure forms the top line of the building silhouette.
Roof sign: A sign established upon, against, or directly above a roof, or on the top of or above the
parapet of a building.
Rotating sign: Any sign or portion of a sign which moves in a revolving or similar manner, but not
including multi-prism indexing signs. See also Mechanically Animated sign.
Scroll: A mode of message transition on an Electronic Message Sign in which the message appears
to move vertically across the display surface.
Short-term temporary (STT) sign: Any sign which is established for no more than fourteen (14)
calendar days.
Sign: A permanent or temporary device, structure, light, letter, word, two- or three-dimensional, object
or copy, model, banner, streamer, pennant, display, insignia, emblem, trade flag, presentation by
figures, designs, pictures, logos or colors visible to the public from outside a building, from a traveled
way or otherwise. The purpose of a sign is to convey a message to the public, to advertise, direct,
invite, announce, or draw attention to, directly or indirectly, a use conducted, goods, products, services
or facilities available, either on the lot or on any other premises, includes any permanently installed or
prominently situated merchandise. For the purpose of removal, signs shall also include all sign
structures and appurtenances.
Town of Milford Article VII
7.06
Sign
Zoning Ordinance Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 106 of 187
Sign structure: Any framework, either freestanding or an integral part of the building, which supports
or is capable of supporting any sign, including decorative cover.
Storefront: The side of the store or business facing the public right-of-way or from which provides
primary customer or business access measured at street level.
Snipe Sign: any sign that is attached to any public utility pole or structure, streetlight, tree, fence, fire
hydrant, bridge, curb, sidewalk, park bench or the location on public property.
Street: A public highway, road or thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to adjacent
lots, and measured from property line to property line. Also see “public right-of-way.”
Suspended Sign: Any sign that hangs from below a roof, porch or eave and hangs in a horizontal
orientation to the ground.
Temporary sign: Any sign established for any period of less than six (6) months. Please see
definitions for portable, short term temporary, and long term temporary signs.
Temporary message: a message that may be changed manually or digitally as part of a permanent
sign structure.
Transition – A visual effect used on an Electronic Message Sign to change from one message to
another.
Travel – A mode of message transition on an Electronic Message Sign in which the message appears
to move horizontally across the display surface.
Use: The purpose for which a building, lot, sign or other structure is arranged, intended, designed,
occupied or maintained.
Utility sign: These signs are noncommercial in nature and identify the location of gas lines, water lines
or phone cables, often warning of the potential hazard of digging or excavation in the immediate area.
Wall sign: Any sign attached parallel to the building wall or other surface to which it is mounted that
does not extend more than twelve (12) inches from said surface and has only one (1) sign face that is
intended to be read parallel to the wall or other surface to which it is mounted. Window signage shall
not be included in the total allowable wall sign area. Wall sign also includes any sign established on
any other part of a building provided that the sign is on a plane parallel to the wall of the building. Wall
signs may not project above the top of a parapet, wall or the roof line at the wall, whichever is highest.
A wall sign is also that sign established on a false wall or false roof that does not vary more than thirty
(30) degrees from the plane of the building’s parallel wall. See also, fascia signs or façade signs.
Window sign: A sign affixed to the surface of a window or within twelve (12) inches of the window
plane with its message intended to be visible to the exterior environment. Such sign shall not be
construed to include merchandise located in a window.
7.06.4 PROHIBITED SIGNS
Any sign not specifically authorized by this Article is prohibited unless required by law. The following
signs and conditions are prohibited:
A. Any sign located within, on, or projecting over a property line which borders a public or private
street, highway, alley, lane, parkway, avenue, road, sidewalk, or other right-of-way, except as
Town of Milford Article VII
7.06
Sign
Zoning Ordinance Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 107 of 187
provided in this Article. The Code Administrator may cause to be removed any temporary or
portable sign erected or displayed upon, or projecting into public property; and,
B. Any sign attached to any public utility pole or structure, street light, tree, fence, fire hydrant, bridge,
curb, sidewalk, park bench, or other location on public property, also known as “snipe signs,” except
as provided herein; and,
C. Any sign placed, which by reason of its location, will obstruct the view of any authorized traffic sign,
signal or other traffic control device or which by reason of shape, color, or position interferes with or
could be confused with any authorized traffic signal or device; and,
D. Any sign which is placed so as to prevent or inhibit free ingress to or egress from any door, window,
or any exit way required by the Building Code or the Fire Code; and,
E. Any flashing sign, strobe containing sign or other sign or lighting device, on the exterior of the
building, except as provided for herein.
F. Any sign with unshielded incandescent, metal halide, or fluorescent light bulbs; and,
G. Any sign which emits audible sound, odor, smoke, steam, laser or hologram lights, or other visible
matter, including any sign that employs any stereopticon or motion picture projection; and,
H. Any sign mechanically animated by attachment affected by the movement of the air; and,
I. Any rotating sign; and,
J. Signs placed on or painted on a motor vehicle or trailer parked with the primary purpose of
providing signage not otherwise allowed by the Code; Prohibited is any sign displayed on a parked
trailer or truck or other vehicle where the primary purpose of the vehicle is to advertise a product,
service business, or other activity. This regulation shall permit the use of business logos,
identification or advertising on vehicles primarily and actively used for business purposes and/or
personal transportation.
K. Any roof signs; and,
L. Any billboards.
7.06.5 GENERAL ADMINISTRATION
A. PERMITS: No sign may be established without a sign permit issued by the Code Administrator,
except as provided for in (C) below.
B. MAINTENANCE: All signs must be maintained in good repair for reasons of public safety. Ordinary
maintenance and minor repair shall not include replacement of the structural framing and supports,
enlargements of the area of a sign face or relocation of the sign.
C. PERMIT NOT REQUIRED: The following signs are exempt from the permit requirements of this
Article, but are otherwise subject to the standards contained herein. Any failure to comply with
Town of Milford Article VII
7.06
Sign
Zoning Ordinance Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 108 of 187
these standards and any other provisions of this Article shall be considered a violation of the Zoning
Ordinance.
1. Nameplate signs giving property identification names or numbers, or names of occupants; and,
2. Signs on mailboxes or newspaper tubes; and,
3. Security and Warning Signs - On-premise signs regulating the use of the premises, such as
“private parking”, “no hunting” and “no soliciting” signs that do not exceed one (1) sign two (2)
square feet in area in residential areas and one (1) sign five (5) square feet in area in
commercial and industrial zones. These limitations shall not apply to the posting of conventional
“no trespassing” signs in accordance with RSA 635:4 as amended.
4. Public Signs erected by government agencies or utilities, including traffic, utility, safety, railroad
crossing and identification signs for public facilities and any signs erected by the Town of
Milford;
5. Historic marker signs, erected by any historical organization or governmental agency, provided
that said signs are no more than two (2) square feet:
6. Flags of any governmental organization when not displayed in connection with a commercial
promotion or as an advertising device. No flag shall be flown from a pole that is more than fifty
(50’) feet in height;
7. One temporary sign per lot placed on property which is actively marketed for sale. Such signs
shall not be illuminated. In residential districts, such signs shall not exceed sixteen (16) square
feet in area and the maximum sign height shall be six (6) feet above grade to the top of the sign
and its supporting structure. In non-residential districts, such signs shall not exceed thirty-two
(32) square feet in area and the maximum sign height shall be ten (10) feet above grade to the
top of the sign and its supporting structure. In all districts, such signs shall be removed
immediately after sale, lease, or rental;
8. A temporary sign placed within a parcel of property upon which construction activities of any
type are being actively performed. Such signs shall not be illuminated, and may identify the
project, the owner or developer, architect, engineer, contractor and subcontractors, funding
sources, and may contain information related to sale or leasing of the premises. In residential
districts, such signs shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area and the maximum sign
height shall be six (6) feet above grade to the top of the sign and its supporting structure. In
non-residential districts, such signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area and the
maximum sign height shall be ten (10) feet above grade to the top of the sign and its supporting
structure. In all districts. Such signs shall not be erected prior to the issuance of a building
permit and shall be removed within fourteen (14) days after the issuance of the Final Certificate
of Occupancy;
9. Signs erected on residential property by or with the consent of the property owner, where such
signs coincide with the timing of a political campaign or other matter on which voters may vote
pursuant to NH RSA 664:14-No such sign may exceed the sign area permitted for other signs
within the zoning district in which it is located; provided, however, that political signs must be
removed within seventy-two (72) hours of the election to which they refer, unless the sign seeks
to notify the public of the winner of the said election, in which case, the sign must be removed
Town of Milford Article VII
7.06
Sign
Zoning Ordinance Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 109 of 187
within ten (10) days of the election to which it refers;
10. Building marker signs that do not exceed four (4) square feet in area;
11. Signs that are located on, or are an integral part of, a property that has been placed on or
determined eligible for the National and State Register of Historic Places, provided that such
signs are recognized as contributing to the National Register status of the property;
12. Signs which are not visible from a public roadway; however, these signs must comply with any
building and construction provisions enacted by the IBC;
13. Signs inside a building beyond twelve (12) inches of the window plane;
14. Signs carved into a building or raised in integral relief on a building;
15. Painted and/or applied wall accents and decorations;
16. Public Art, including Permitted Original Art Murals;
17. Decals - Decals and/or logos affixed to windows or door glass panels, such as those indicating
membership in a business group or identifying credit cards accepted at the establishment.
18. The Oval, as distinct from the Oval Subdistrict, is owned by the Town of Milford. Signs on the
Oval are regulated pursuant to Chapter 7.16 of the Milford Municipal Code.
D. APPLICATION PROCEDURE
An application for a sign permit may be obtained from the Community Development Department of
the Town of Milford. The Code Administrator shall complete the review of an application for a sign
permit within thirty (30) days of the receipt of said application by the Town. A permit shall be
approved if a proposed sign conforms to all Town Ordinances and any currently adopted Building
Codes that may be applicable.
1. An applicant for a sign permit shall submit to the Code Administrator the following:
a. A completed sign permit application form;
b. A non-refundable application review fee in an amount to be set by the Board of
Selectmen, which may be changed by the Board of Selectmen in their discretion. The
Code Administrator shall display notice of the applicable fee in the offices of the Code
Administrator in a form and manner designed to give reasonable notice to the public of
the amount of the application review fee.
c. An illustration of the proposed sign(s) shall be submitted, drawn to scale, that includes
the following information:
i. The total area of the proposed sign(s) in square feet;
ii. The total copy area of the proposed sign(s);
iii. The support structure for the proposed sign(s);
iv. The overall height, width and depth of the proposed sign(s);
v. Any structural, electrical, animation, illumination and other essential characteristics
for the proposed sign(s);
Town of Milford Article VII
7.06
Sign
Zoning Ordinance Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 110 of 187
vi. The location(s) of the proposed sign(s) on the property and/or building(s);
vii. A photograph of existing signage, if any, including dimensions drawn onto the
photograph; for multi-unit properties, condominiums and the like, the applicant need
only submit a photograph detailing existing signage for the Applicant’s particular unit;
viii. The material from which the proposed sign(s) is to be constructed;
ix. Any sign may be required to provide engineer licensed stamped plans, at the
discretion of the Code Administrator, upon review.
2. Completeness Review: The Code Administrator shall determine whether the sign permit
application is complete within ten (10) calendar days after the application is filed.
3. Decisions:
a. The Code Administrator shall either approve or deny the sign permit application within the
time periods specified below after the Code Administrator determines that the application is
complete. Applications found to be incomplete shall not be acted upon but returned to the
applicant identifying the items needed for completion.
b. Upon a finding by the Code Administrator that the sign permit application complies with the
provisions of this Article, the Code Administrator shall cause to be issued a sign permit for
installation by the applicant. The sign permit shall be issued within ten (10) calendar days of
the date on which the application was deemed complete.
c. If the sign permit application is denied, the applicant shall be notified within ten (10) calendar
days of the date on which the application was deemed complete. The notice of denial shall
specifically explain any deficiencies in writing in the application and how the applicant may
proceed under this Section and Article 10 of the Zoning Ordinance.
d. No sign permit may be issued until all fees have been paid and other requirements of the
Sign Ordinance have been satisfied.
4. Approval Criteria: The Code Administrator shall issue the requested sign permit if the sign
permit application complies with this Article. Otherwise, the Code Administrator shall deny the
sign permit application.
5. Revised Applications: When a sign permit application is denied by the Code Administrator, an
applicant may resubmit a revised sign permit application that conforms to the requirements of
Section 7.06.5 and specifies what changes were adopted by the applicant to remedy the
cause(s) for denial. The Code Administrator may suggest alternative locations or design
modifications.
6. Appeal: An applicant may appeal the decision of the Code Administrator pursuant to Article VIII
of the Zoning Ordinance within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of Code Administrator’s
decision.
7. Amendments: No new sign or modification of the size, materials or design characteristics of any
existing sign shall occur unless a new sign permit is issued in accordance with the procedures
established by this Article.
8. Signs approved as a part of a Site Plan or Subdivision Approval shall meet the requirements set
Town of Milford Article VII
7.06
Sign
Zoning Ordinance Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 111 of 187
forth within the Milford Development Regulations for a Signage Plan and Approval.
E. VARIANCE; APPEALS OF THE ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT: The Zoning Board of
Adjustment may grant relief by authorizing a variance of this Article. Variances from this Article shall
be governed by Article X of the Zoning Ordinance, NH RSA Chapter 677, and applicable case law.
F. ENFORCEMENT VIOLATIONS: The Code Administrator is authorized, empowered and directed to
enforce the provisions of this Article. Any person, including, without limitation, an owner of real
property, who violates, suffers a violation to occur or refuses to comply with any provision of this
Article may be subject to the penalty provisions as described in Article VIII of the Zoning Ordinance.
G. NOTICE OF NON-COMPLIANCE: If the Code Administrator determines that any sign is unsafe,
insecure, dilapidated, or deteriorated, the Code Administrator shall give written notice to remove or
replace said sign to the person or persons responsible, in accordance with this Ordinance.
H. ORDER OF REMOVAL
1. If the permit holder, owner of the sign, or owner of the property on which the sign is located fails
to remove or repair the sign within ten (10) days after said notice or fails to file an allegation of
error in accordance with this Ordinance, the Code Administrator is hereby authorized to cause
the removal of such sign.
2. Any expense incident to the removal of said sign shall be paid by the permit holder, owner of the
sign, or owner of the property on which the sign is located.
3. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the immediate removal, without notice, of any sign or
portion of a sign, which is determined by the Code Administrator to be an immediate threat or
danger to the health, safety, and general welfare of the public.
4. The removal of the sign or portion of the sign shall be limited to the extent necessary to
eliminate the threat to the health, safety, and general welfare of the public.
5. The Town is authorized to file a lien against any property, which is not otherwise exempt, to
recover expenses incurred by the Town for the removal of a sign or portion of a sign from a
property.
7.06.6 NO DISCRIMINATION AGAINST NON-COMMERCIAL SIGNS OR SPEECH:
The owner of any sign which is otherwise allowed under this Article may substitute non-commercial
copy in lieu of any other commercial or non-commercial copy. This substitution of copy may be made
without any additional approval or permitting. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent
favoring of commercial speech over non-commercial speech, or favoring of any particular noncommercial
message over any other non-commercial message. This provision prevails over any more
specific provision to the contrary. This provision does not create a right to increase the total amount of
signage on a parcel.
7.06.7 NONCONFORMING SIGNS
A. CONTINUANCE: A nonconforming sign lawfully existing at the time of adoption or subsequent
Town of Milford Article VII
7.06
Sign
Zoning Ordinance Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 112 of 187
amendment of this Article may continue, although such sign does not conform to the provisions of
this Article. Portable not eligible under this section for continuance and shall, therefore, require sign
permits and compliance with the provisions of this Article.
B. MAINTENANCE: A nonconforming sign must be maintained in good repair for reasons of public
safety. Ordinary maintenance and minor repairs shall not include replacement of the structural
framing and supports, enlargement of the area of a sign face, removable sign panel changes,
illumination increase or changes, or relocation of the sign.
C. ALTERATION, RELOCATION AND REPLACEMENT: Alterations, relocation, and/or replacement
of a legal nonconforming sign structure is permitted when damage or deterioration does not exceed
fifty percent (50%) of the area of the sign and structure. A non-conforming sign that is damaged by
any casualty or force majeure may be replaced by an identical sign in the same location that is
identical to the damaged sign within three hundred and sixty-five (365) days of such casualty. The
replacement sign retains its status as a permitted, non-conforming use.
D. REMOVAL: A nonconforming sign shall be removed within three hundred and sixty-five (365) days
if any one of the following conditions exist:
1. If the damage or deterioration of the sign structure exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the area; or,
2. If the building to which the sign structure is accessory is damaged or demolished to an extent
exceeding fifty percent (50%) of the building’s appraised value and no plans have been
submitted for the building’s reconstruction or restoration pursuant to applicable codes and
Ordinances; or,
3. If the sign has been abandoned for at least three hundred sixty-five (365) days.
E. Any sign that has been removed due to any of the conditions listed in 7.06.6:D above shall not be
replaced and any succeeding sign shall conform to the provisions of this Article. If any portion of the
sign structure is removed, then all parts and components of the sign shall also be removed.
7.06.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR SIGN TYPES
A. The following section contains general standards for different types of signs. These standards
regulate the dimensions, location and design of signs based upon their structural characteristics
and location. The following section lists sign requirements within specific Zoning Districts.
B. ELECTRICALLY ACTIVATED CHANGING SIGNS
1. Applicability: This subsection applies to any sign that is either electronically or electrically
controlled to illustrate different copy changes of the same sign. This sign’s message may be
changed by electronic switching or automatic switching of lamps or alteration in the level of
illumination or other illumination source to form words, letters, designs, figures, numerals and
pictures often through the apparent vertical or horizontal movement of light. Such signs shall
not include a flashing light source. In the case of an Electrically Activated Changeable Sign,
flashing shall be defined as an interval of illumination less than five (5) seconds in duration.
These signs are commonly used to display time, temperature, date and message centers or
Town of Milford Article VII
7.06
Sign
Zoning Ordinance Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 113 of 187
reader boards, indexing signs, and those known as Electronic Message Centers.
2. Electronic Message Center (EMC): Where EMC’s are permitted, they shall be subject to all of
the following restrictions:
a. The EMC may not exceed fifty (50) percent of the total of the sign area or twenty-four (24)
square feet, whichever is smaller. The remaining 50% shall not include blank area that
would be seen as a border, frame or otherwise non-sign area;
b. All illumination elements on the face of an EMC shall remain at a fixed level of illumination
for a period of not less than ten (10) seconds; provided, however, that time and temperature
text shall remain at a fixed level of illumination for a period of not less than five (5) seconds;
c. Changes from one message to another shall be accomplished by the change of all
illumination elements on the face of a EMC simultaneously, with the provision that the sign
may fade to complete darkness and then re-illuminate with or fade to the new message;
d. An EMC shall be equipped with down-cast lighting and the ability to adjust the brightness of
the sign. No sign can be a danger to public health and safety and cannot exceed seven
hundred fifty (750) cd/m² or Nits at least one-half hour before Apparent Sunset, All
illuminated signs must comply with this maximum luminance level throughout the night, if the
sign is energized, until Apparent Sunrise, at which time the sign may resume luminance
levels appropriate for daylight conditions, when required or appropriate;
e. All EMC signs shall have automatic dimming controls, either by photocell (hardwired) or via
software settings, in order to bring the EMC lighting level at night into compliance with
requirements stated herein;
f. All EMC and other electronically or electrically changing signs must submit a Certificate of
Compliance for said sign prior to a Building Permit being issued for said sign.
C. AWNING SIGNS/CANOPY SIGNS/MARQUEE SIGNS/PROJECTING AND SUSPENDED SIGNS
1. There must be a minimum clearance of eight (8) feet above sidewalk level must be maintained
for pedestrian clearance.
2. The copy area of Awning/Canopy/Marquee signs is computed as all or a portion of the allowed
wall sign area.
3. Copy Area: The copy area on any awning sign, canopy sign, electronic awning sign, or
marquee sign is computed as all or a portion of the allowed wall sign area. Copy located on the
canopy or awning sign shall not exceed one-half (1/2) of the area bounded by the edges of the
canopy or awning visible from the public right-of-way. If copy is only found in fringe drip-flap
portion of the canopy, the entire portion of said area may be utilized for signage.
4. Right-of-Way: An awning or canopy sign which projects into the right-of-way in the Oval Sub-
District may be approved and permitted by the Code Administrator as long as the sign does not
interfere with the health and safety of the public use of the right-of-way. If an awning or canopy
sign projects into the right-of-way in any allowed district other than the Oval Sub-district, a
special exception is required from the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
5. Electric Awning Signs: Electric awning signs shall be located on multistory buildings between
Town of Milford Article VII
7.06
Sign
Zoning Ordinance Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 114 of 187
the first and second story windows, or on single-story buildings above the first story windows.
Electric awning signs located on multiple storefronts shall be allowed copy space no more than
eighty (80) percent of the individual storefront width, in order to maintain adequate separation
between tenant spaces.
6. Height/Clearance: Awning, canopy, marquee, projecting and suspended signs shall not exceed
five (5) feet in height and shall maintain a minimum of eight (8) feet clearance.
D. WALL SIGNS (FASCIA SIGN OR FAÇADE SIGN)
Permitted wall signs shall be calculated using the formula in Chart 7.06.2-A, for the maximum
square footage of any particular sign. See “storefront” both single and multi-story building to
determine other values.
Chart 7.06.2-A
Distance of Storefront from Property
Line with main point of access of
abutting street
Storefront Multiplied By Maximum sign area
in square feet
50-99 1.0 100
100-249 1.5 110
250 and over 2.0 120
1. The total area for all wall signage shall not exceed the allowable maximum sign area per
storefront.
2. The copy area of Awning/Canopy/Marquee signs shall be included in the total area of the
allowed wall signage for any individual storefront.
3. One (1) directory wall sign may be located per building entrance or driveway access with
frontage on a street or parking area. Maximum area shall be one (1) square foot per tenant with
a combined area not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet. Directory signs shall not require
permits if located so as not to be viewed from a public right of way or adjoining premises. If a
directory sign can be viewed from a public right of way or adjoining property, the directory sign
shall be included in the maximum area allowed for the premises.
4. For the purpose of this section, in the case of multi-tenant buildings, the location of the
storefront and its linear measure shall be used to determine distance from abutting street.
E. DIRECTIONAL SIGNS
1. The text must be at least sixty-five percent (65%) of the area of the sign.
2. Supplemental Standards for Directional Signs:
a. Directional Signs are allowed in addition to other permitted signage on-site.
b. A sign permit is required for directional signs that are setback less than fifteen (15) feet from
Town of Milford Article VII
7.06
Sign
Zoning Ordinance Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 115 of 187
a property line, or located so as to be visible from a public right-of-way.
c. Directional signs may be located adjacent to a driveway provided it does not impede lines of
sight or visibility.
d. Directional signs shall conform to the Manual of Uniform Traffic-Control Devices where
applicable.
F. MONUMENT SIGN - ALSO KNOWN AS: GROUND, IDENTIFICATION, DETACHED,
FREESTANDING, POLE OR PYLON SIGN
1. Address number(s) must be displayed on each face of the sign so as to be visible from the
public way with Arabic numerals or Alphabet letters a minimum of four (4”) inches in height. The
required address identifier is not considered as part of the total allowable sign area calculation.
2. Monument signs shall be located on the property where the businesses exist and no portion of
the sign shall be allowed in the public right of way.
3. Monument signs shall be located at least the same distance from a sidewalk or roadway as the
height of the sign. This shall be known as the “fall zone”.
4. All monument signs will require stamped engineered plans for signs greater than six (6’) in
height.
5. The Community Development Office may require building, electrical and other permits to insure
code compliance for any monument sign.
6. Permanent subdivision signs are considered monument signs.
G. PERMANENT OFF-PREMISE SIGNS
1. Permanent off-premise signs are directional in nature.
2. For each off-premise sign, written permission of the land owner must be filed with the
applicant’s sign permit application.
3. No off-premise sign, may be established in any public right-of- way. The purpose of this
restriction is to ensure that any type of off-premise sign does not impede pedestrian or vehicle
traffic or otherwise create a public safety hazard in any area that is regularly traveled by the
public on foot or by vehicle.
H. PORTABLE, SHORT-TERM TEMPORARY (STT) AND LONG-TERM TEMPORARY (LTT) ONPREMISE
SIGNS
1. An applicant may apply no more than six (6) times in any twelve months for a permit for a STT
sign. A permit for a STT sign is valid for thirty (30) days and expires without further action by the
Code Administrator. The fee for temporary sign permits is waived.
2. An applicant may apply no more than two (2) times in any twelve months for a permit for an LTT
sign. A permit for a LTT sign is valid for seven (7) months and expires without further action by
the Code Administrator. The fee for LTT sign permits is waived.
3. An applicant in a non-residential district may apply to the Zoning Board of Adjustment for a
Town of Milford Article VII
7.06
Sign
Zoning Ordinance Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 116 of 187
special exception to be allowed a LTT sign.
4. No STT or LTT signs may be established in any public right-of-way. The purpose of this
restriction is to ensure that temporary signs do not impede pedestrian or vehicle traffic or
otherwise create a public safety hazard in any area that is regularly traveled by the public on
foot or by vehicle.
7.06.9 SIGN REQUIREMENTS BY ZONING DISTRICT
A. There are eight (8) zoning districts in the Town of Milford: Residence “A” District, Residence “B”
District, Residence “R” District, the Commercial District (“C”), the Industrial District (“I”), the Limited
Commercial-Business District (“LCB”), the Integrated Commercial Industrial District (“ICI”) and
Integrated Commercial Industrial 2 District (ICI-2) and one Oval Sub-District (“OSD”). The maximum
cumulative number and maximum cumulative area of all sign structures permitted for any lot, parcel
or business within a zoning district is set forth in following sections.
B. Any property requiring a site plan approval or subdivision approval shall create a comprehensive
sign master plan for the property adhering to the requirements for the various sign types specified in
this ordinance.
C. Please see Section 7.06.9 General Provisions for Sign Types for additional requirements.
D. RESIDENCE “A”, RESIDENCE “B”, and RESIDENCE “R” DISTRICTS
1. Permitted Sign Types.
a. Home Based Business signs not to exceed the allowed signage in Section 7.12.
b. Subdivision and Site Plan approved signs.
c. Long-Term Temporary (LTT) Off-Premise Signs.
i. A permit is required for this sign.
ii. Two signs are allowed per site.
iii. The area per sign cannot exceed 16 square feet.
d. Permanent Off-Premise Signs.
i. A permit is required for this sign. The applicant must apply for and receive a special
exception from the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The Milford Zoning Board of Adjustment
may impose additional conditions or restrictions, as the Board deems appropriate to the
public interest.
ii. One sign is allowed per site.
iii. The area per sign cannot exceed 16 square feet.
iv. The maximum height is 8 feet.
e. Portable On-Premise Signs.
i. A sign with an area that is equal to or less than six (6) square feet does not require a
permit. A sign with an area that is greater than six (6) square feet must have a permit.
Town of Milford Article VII
7.06
Sign
Zoning Ordinance Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 117 of 187
ii. Two signs are allowed per site
iii. The area per sign cannot exceed 6 square feet.
f. Long-Term On-Premise Signs.
i. A sign with an area that is equal to or less than six (6) square feet does not require a
permit. A sign with an area that is greater than six (6) square feet must have a permit.
ii. Two signs are allowed per site.
iii. The sign area depends on the total acreage of the property where the sign is to be
established. For properties consisting of less than five (5) acres of land, the maximum
area permitted is six (6) square feet. For properties five (5) acres or larger, the maximum
area permitted is six (6) square feet without a permit and sixteen (16) square feet with a
permit.
2. Prohibited Sign Types.
a. Awning Signs, Canopy Signs, Marquee Signs, Projecting and Suspended Signs, Electronic
Message Centers, Electronically Activated Changing Signs.
E. COMMERCIAL, INTEGRATED COMMERCIAL INDUSTRIAL, INTEGRATED COMMERCIAL
INDUSTRIAL 2, and INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
1. Permitted Sign Types.
a. Changeable Signs.
b. Awning Signs, Canopy Signs, Marquee Signs, Projecting and Suspended Signs.
i. A permit is required for this sign.
ii. 3 signs are allowed per site.
iii. Fifty percent (50%) of the storefront’s linear measure or maximum of one hundred (100)
square feet, whichever is less.
c. Walls Signs (Fascia or Façade Signs).
i. A permit is required for this sign.
ii. Changeable signs are permitted.
iii. For storefronts located within fifty (50) feet from the property line of an abutting street a
maximum of fifty (50 %) percent of the storefront’s linear measure or one hundred (100)
square feet, whichever is less shall be allowed.
iv. For storefronts located greater than fifty (50) feet from the property line of an abutting
street, please see the requirements under 7.06.8.E.
d. Directional Signs.
i. No permit required in permitted district if part of site plan package; otherwise, permit
required.
ii. The maximum area per sign is four (4) square feet.
Town of Milford Article VII
7.06
Sign
Zoning Ordinance Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 118 of 187
e. Monument Sign, Also Known as Ground, Identification, Detached, Freestanding, Pole or
Pylon Sign
i. A permit is required for this sign.
ii. Only one ground sign per site is allowed.
iii. The maximum area permitted is seventy-five (75) square feet.
iv. The maximum height is fifteen (15) feet.
f. Short-Term Temporary (STT) Off-Premise Signs.
i. A permit is required for this sign. The applicant must apply for and receive a special
exception from the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The Milford Zoning Board of Adjustment
may impose additional conditions or restrictions, as the Board deems appropriate to the
public interest.
ii. Two signs are allowed per site.
iii. The area per sign cannot exceed fifty (50) square feet.
g. Permanent Off-Premise Signs.
i. A permit is required for this sign.
ii. Two signs are allowed per site.
iii. The area per sign cannot exceed 16 square feet.
iv. The maximum height is 8 feet.
h. Portable On-Premise Signs.
i. A sign with an area that is equal to or less than six (6) square feet does not require a
permit. A sign with an area that is greater than six (6) square feet must have a permit.
ii. Two signs are allowed per site.
iii. The area per sign cannot exceed 6 square feet.
i. Short-Term On-Premise Signs.
i. A sign with an area that is equal to or less than six (6) square feet does not require a
permit. A sign with an area that is greater than six (6) square feet must have a permit.
ii. Two signs are allowed per site.
iii. The maximum area per sign is fifty (50) square feet.
2. Prohibited Sign Types.
a. Long-Term Temporary (STT) Off-Premise Signs.
b. Long-Term Temporary (STT) On-Premise Signs.
F. LIMITED COMMERCIAL-BUSINESS DISTRICT
1. Permitted Sign Types.
Town of Milford Article VII
7.06
Sign
Zoning Ordinance Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 119 of 187
a. Awning Signs, Canopy Signs, Marquee Signs, Projecting and Suspended Signs.
i. A permit is required for this sign.
ii. 2 signs are allowed per site.
iii. The maximum area per sign is seventy-five percent (75%) of the storefront’s linear
measure or maximum of fifty (50) square feet, whichever is less.
b. Walls Signs (Fascia or Façade Signs).
i. A permit is required for this sign.
ii. Manually Activated Changeable signs are permitted.
iii. The area per storefront for storefronts located within fifty (50) feet from the property line
of an abutting street is a maximum of fifty (50 %) percent of the storefront’s linear
measure or one hundred (100) square feet, whichever is less shall be allowed
iv. For storefronts located greater than fifty (50) feet from the property line of an abutting
street, please see the requirements under 7.06.8.E.
c. Directional Signs.
i. No permit required in permitted district if part of site plan package; otherwise, permit
required.
ii. The maximum area per sign is four (4) square feet.
d. Monument Sign, Also Known as Ground, Identification, Detached, Freestanding, Pole or
Pylon Sign.
i. A permit is required for this sign.
ii. Only one ground sign per site is allowed.
iii. The maximum area permitted is thirty-two (32) square feet.
iv. The maximum height is ten (10) feet.
v. Manually Activated Changeable signs are permitted.
e. Short-Term Temporary (STT) Off-Premise Signs.
i. A permit is required for this sign.
ii. Two signs are allowed per site.
iii. The area per sign cannot exceed thirty-two (32) square feet.
f. Permanent Off-Premise Signs.
i. A permit is required for this sign. The applicant must apply for and receive a special
exception from the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The Milford Zoning Board of Adjustment
may impose additional conditions or restrictions, as the Board deems appropriate to the
public interest.
ii. Two signs are allowed per site.
iii. The area per sign cannot exceed 16 square feet.
Town of Milford Article VII
7.06
Sign
Zoning Ordinance Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 120 of 187
iv. The maximum height is 8 feet.
g. Portable On-Premise Signs.
i. A sign with an area that is equal to or less than six (6) square feet does not require a
permit. A sign with an area that is greater than six (6) square feet must have a permit.
ii. Two signs are allowed per site
iii. The area per sign cannot exceed 6 square feet.
h. Short-Term On-Premise Signs.
i. A sign with an area that is equal to or less than six (6) square feet does not require a
permit. A sign with an area that is greater than six (6) square feet must have a permit.
ii. Two signs are allowed per site.
iii. The maximum area per sign is thirty-two (32) square feet.
2. Prohibited Sign Types.
a. Long-Term Temporary (LTT) Off-Premise Signs.
b. Long-Term Temporary (LTT) On-Premise Signs.
c. Electronic Message Centers.
G. OVAL SUBDISTRICT
1. Permitted Sign Types.
a. Awning Signs, Canopy Signs, Marquee Signs, Projecting and Suspended Signs.
i. A permit is required for this sign.
ii. 2 signs are allowed per site.
iii. The maximum area per sign is seventy-five percent (75%) of the storefront’s linear
measure or maximum of fifty (50) square feet, whichever is less.
b. Walls Signs (Fascia or Façade Signs).
i. A permit is required for this sign.
ii. Manually Activated Changeable signs are permitted.
iii. The area per storefront for storefronts located within fifty (50) feet from the property line
of an abutting street is a maximum of fifty (50%) percent of the storefront’s linear
measure or one hundred (100) square feet, whichever is less shall be allowed
iv. For storefronts located greater than fifty (50) feet from the property line of an abutting
street, please see the requirements under 7.06.8.E.
c. Directional Signs.
i. No permit required in permitted district if part of site plan package; otherwise, permit
required.
Town of Milford Article VII
7.06
Sign
Zoning Ordinance Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 121 of 187
ii. The maximum area per sign is four (4) square feet.
d. Monument Sign, Also Known as Ground, Identification, Detached, Freestanding, Pole or
Pylon Sign.
i. A permit is required for this sign.
ii. Only one ground sign per site is allowed.
iii. The maximum area permitted is thirty-two (32) square feet.
iv. The maximum height is ten (10) feet.
vi. Manually Activated Changeable signs are permitted.
e. Short-Term Temporary (STT) Off-Premise Signs.
i. A permit is required for this sign.
ii. Two signs are allowed per site.
iii. The area per sign cannot exceed sixteen (16) square feet.
f. Portable On-Premise Signs.
i. A sign with an area that is equal to or less than six (6) square feet does not require a
permit. A sign with an area that is greater than six (6) square feet must have a permit.
ii. One sign is allowed per site.
iii. The area per sign cannot exceed 6 square feet.
g. Short-Term Temporary On-Premise Signs.
i. A sign with an area that is equal to or less than six (6) square feet does not require a
permit. A sign with an area that is greater than six (6) square feet must have a permit.
ii. Two signs are allowed per site.
iii. The maximum area per sign is sixteen (16) square feet.
2. Prohibited Sign Types
a. Long-Term Temporary (LTT) Off-Premise Signs.
b. Long-Term Temporary (LTT) On-Premise Signs.
c. Permanent Off-PreAmise Signs.
d. Electronic Message Centers.
Town of Milford Article VII
7.07
Senior
Housing
Development
Zoning Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 122 of 187
7.07.0 SENIOR HOUSING DEVELOPMENT (DELETED 2014)
Town of Milford Article VII
7.08
Adult
Zoning Ordinance Entertainment
Revised 3/2020 Page 123 of 187
7.08.0 STANDARDS FOR ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES (2000)
A. Purpose
It is the purpose of this to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of
adult entertainment businesses within the Town of Milford.
B. Intent
1. It is the intent to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the Town of
Milford; and, it is the intent of this that the regulations be utilized to prevent problems of blight
and deterioration which accompany and are brought about by the concentration of adult
entertainment businesses; and, the provisions of this have neither the purpose nor effect of
imposing limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including
sexually oriented materials;
2. It is not the intent nor the effect of this to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented
materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors
of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market; and, neither is it the intent nor effect
of this to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene materials.
C. Allowed locations and Location Restrictions of Adult Entertainment Businesses
1. Allowed Locations
Adult entertainment businesses, defined in 7.08.1 are permitted only in the ICI (Integrated
Commercial-Industrial District) provided that all other regulations, requirements, and restrictions
for the zone in which the adult entertainment business is to be located are met; and no
entertainment business shall be permitted within one thousand (1,000) feet of another existing
adult entertainment business or one for which a building permit has been applied for; and
2. Location Restrictions
a. No adult entertainment business shall be permitted within one thousand (1,000) feet of all
other zoning boundaries, except for the Industrial (I) Zone.
b. No adult entertainment business shall be permitted within one thousand (1,000) feet of any
church, place of worship, parish house, convent, public, parochial, or private school,
kindergarten, State approved Day Care Center, or Commercial or Not-for Profit
Recreational Facilities and no adult entertainment business shall be permitted within one
thousand (1,000) feet of the Town boundaries;
c. No adult entertainment business shall be permitted within five hundred (500) feet of an
existing residence; and
d. No adult entertainment business shall be permitted within one thousand (1,000) feet of
another existing adult entertainment business on the date of the passage of this and, no
adult entertainment business shall be permitted within a building, premise, structure or
other facility that contains a sexually oriented business as defined herein.
3. Measure of Distance
Town of Milford Article VII
7.08
Adult
Zoning Ordinance Entertainment
Revised 3/2020 Page 124 of 187
The distance between any adult entertainment business and a church, school, residence, etc. or
another adult entertainment business shall be measured in a straight line, from property
boundary to property boundary, without regard to intervening structures.
4. Additional Reasonable Regulations
The Planning Board is empowered hereunder to review and approve permit applications for adult
entertainment businesses and impose reasonable restrictions for buffering, outdoor lighting,
parking, adequate ingress and egress from the site off of and onto public roads, pedestrian
movement, hours of operation, and to provide for appropriate landscaping and building aesthetics
as required in the Town of Milford Development Regulations.
7.08.1 DEFINITIONS
Except where specifically defined or otherwise referenced within this Ordinance, words and terms used
are intended to imply their customary definition and meaning. The following words and terms are
specifically defined as follows:
Adult bookstore or adult video store - A commercial establishment that devotes more than fifteen
(15) percent of the total display, shelf, rack, wall, table, stand or floor area, utilized for the display and
sale of the following items listed in a) and b) below. The establishment, as one of the principal
business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration, any one or more of the
following:
A. Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, video productions, slides, tapes, records, CD-ROMs or other forms of visual or audio
representations which depict or describe “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”
or meet the definition of “harmful to minors” and/or “sexual conduct” as set forth in NH RSA 571-
B:1; or,
B. Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connections with “sexual
conduct” as defined in NH RSA 571-B:1, other than birth control devices. A commercial
establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale
or rental of material depicting or describing “specified sexual conduct or activities” and still be
categorized as “Adult Video/Book Store”. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt
such commercial establishments from being categorized as an “Adult Video/Book Store” so long as
one of its principal business purposes is offering for sale or rental for consideration to specified
material which depict or describe specified sexual conduct or activities or specified anatomical
areas.
1. Specified sexual conduct or activities means that the male genitals in a state of sexual arousal
and/or the vulva or more intimate parts of the female genitals.
2. Specified anatomical areas means and includes any of the following:
a. The fondling or other erotic touching of the human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or
female breasts;
Town of Milford Article VII
7.08
Adult
Zoning Ordinance Entertainment
Revised 3/2020 Page 125 of 187
b. Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, or copulation, or
sodomy;
c. Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
d. Excretory function as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in a) through
c) above.
An adult bookstore or adult video store does not include an establishment that sells books or
periodicals as an incidental or accessory part of its principal stock and trade and does not devote more
than fifteen (15) percent of the total display area of the establishment to the sale of books and
periodicals.
Adult cabaret: A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar establishment which during a substantial portion
of the total presentation time features live performances which meet the definition of “harmful to minors”
and/or “sexual conduct” as set forth in NH RSA 571-B:1, and/or feature films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions, a substantial portion of the total presentation
time of which is devoted to showing of material which meets the definition of “harmful to minors” and/or
“sexual conduct” as set forth in NH RSA 571-B:1.
Adult drive-in theater: An open lot or part thereof, with appurtenant facilities, devoted primarily to the
presentation of motion pictures, films, theatrical productions and other forms of visual productions, for
any form of consideration to persons in motor vehicles or on outdoor seats, in which a substantial
portion of the total presentation time being presented for observation by patrons is devoted to the
showing of material which meets the definition of “harmful to minors” and/or “sexual conduct as set forth
in NH RSA 571-B:1.
Adult entertainment business: means an Adult Bookstore or Adult Video Store, Adult Cabaret, Adult
Drive-In Theater, Adult Motel, Adult Motion Picture Arcade, Adult Motion Picture Theater, Adult Theater,
Nude Model Studio or Sexual Encounter Center.
Adult motel: A motel or similar establishment offering public accommodations of any form of
consideration which provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures,
video cassettes, slides or photographic reproductions, a substantial portion of the total presentation
time of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of
materials which meet the definition of “harmful to minors” and/or “sexual conduct” as set forth in NH
RSA 571-B:1.
Adult motion picture arcade: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or
slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines,
projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer
persons per machine at any one time, in which a substantial portion of the total presentation of the
images so displayed is devoted to the showing of material which meets the definition of “harmful to
minors” and/or “sexual conduct” , as set forth in NH RSA 571-B:1.
Adult motion picture theater: An establishment with a capacity of five (5) or more persons, where for
any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic
reproductions are shown, and in which a substantial portion of the total presentation time is devoted to
the showing of material which meets the definition of “harmful to minors” and/or “sexual conduct” as set
forth in NH RSA 571-B:1.
Town of Milford Article VII
7.08
Adult
Zoning Ordinance Entertainment
Revised 3/2020 Page 126 of 187
Adult theater: A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar establishment either indoor or outdoor in
nature, which for any form of consideration, regularly features live performances, a substantial portion
of the total presentation time of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on activities
which meet the definition of “harmful to minors” and/or “sexual conduct” as set forth in NH RSA 571-
B:1.
Nude model studio: A place where a person who appears in the state of nudity or displays male
genitals in a state of arousal and/or the vulva or more intimate parts of the female genitals and is
observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons
who pay money or any form of consideration or such display is characterized by an emphasis on
activities which meets the definition of “harmful to minors” and/or “sexual conduct” as set forth in NH
RSA 571-B:1.
Nudity or a state of nudity: The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female
genitals, or full female breast.
Semi-nude: A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than genitals, pubic region and areola of
the female breast, as well as portions of the body supporting straps or devices.
Sexual encounter center: A business or commercial enterprise that as one of its primary business
purposes offers for any form of consideration:
a. Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or
b. Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more
persons are in the state of nudity; or
c. Where the activities in a. or b. is characterized by an emphasis on activities which meets the
definition of “harmful to minors” and/or “sexual conduct”, as set forth in NH RSA 571-B:1
Town of Milford Article VII
7.09
Telecom
Zoning Ordinance Facilities
Revised 3/2020 Page 127 of 187
7.09.0 TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES (2013)
A. Purpose and Intent
The regulation of telecommunications facilities is important to minimize visual and environmental
impacts and assure all new facilities are consistent with the goals and identity of the Town of
Milford. It is the express purpose of this Section to preserve the scenic, historical and cultural
values of the Town, balance economic growth and enhance the ability of providers of
telecommunications services to offer such services to the community effectively and efficiently.
Carriers shall be allowed to locate telecommunications facilities within the Town provided they are
consistent with the appropriate land use regulations that will ensure compatibility with the natural
and built features and character of the Town. Compatibility with these features are measured based
on the change in community scale and character in relation to the height, mass, materials,
contrasts, or proportion within the surroundings of a proposed telecommunications facility.
The intent of this ordinance is to implement the following goals and objectives throughout the Town
of Milford, while conforming to federal, state and local laws and regulations:
• Facilitate the provision of wireless telecommunication services to the residents and
businesses of Milford;
• Provide for the appropriate location and development of telecommunications facilities;
• Minimize adverse visual and environmental effects of towers and antennas through careful
design and siting standards;
• Encourage co-location whenever possible; and
• Minimize economic impacts on adjacent property values.
B. Applicability
The terms of this Section and the Development Regulations shall apply to telecommunications
facilities (hereinafter “facility(ies)”) on property owned by the Town of Milford, on privately owned
property, and on property that is owned by any governmental entity that acts in its proprietary
capacity to lease such property to a carrier.
7.09.1 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Article, the following terms shall have the meaning given herein:
Antenna: The surface from which wireless radio signals are sent and/or received by a
telecommunications facility.
Antenna array: A collection of antennas attached to a mount to send and receive radio signals.
Average tree canopy height: An average height found by inventorying the height at above-ground
level (AGL) of all trees over twenty (20) feet in height for a defined area.
Camouflaged: A telecommunications facility that is disguised, hidden, part of an existing or proposed
structure, or placed within an existing or proposed structure.
Carrier: A Company that provides telecommunications services. Also sometimes referred to as a
provider.
Co-location: The use of a single mount on the ground by more than one carrier (vertical co-location) or
the same carrier with multiple licenses, and/or the use of several mounts on an existing building or
structure by more than one carrier or the same carrier with multiple licenses.
Town of Milford Article VII
7.09
Telecom
Zoning Ordinance Facilities
Revised 3/2020 Page 128 of 187
Environmental assessment (EA): An EA is a document required by the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) and the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) when a telecommunications
facility is placed in certain designated areas.
Equipment shelter: An enclosed structure, cabinet, shed, vault, or box near the base of the mount
within which are housed equipment for telecommunications facilities such as batteries and electrical
equipment. Equipment shelters are sometimes referred to as base transceiver stations.
Facility: See Telecommunications Facility
Fall zone: The area on the ground from the base of a ground mounted telecommunications facility that
forms a circle with a diameter equal to the height of the facility, including any antennas or other
appurtenances. The fall zone is the area within the area defined by the circle, which there is a potential
hazard from falling debris (such as ice) or collapsing material.
Guyed tower: A monopole or lattice tower that is secured to the ground or other surface by diagonal
cables for lateral support.
Height: The height above ground level (AGL) from the natural grade of a site to the highest point of a
structure.
Lattice tower: A type of mount with multiple legs and structural cross bracing between the legs, that is
self-supporting and freestanding.
Mast: A thin pole that resembles a streetlight standard or a telephone pole. A dual-polarized antenna
is typically deployed on a mast.
Monopole: A thicker type of mount than a mast that is self-supporting with a single shaft of wood, steel
or concrete, or other material that is designed for the placement of antennas and arrays along the shaft.
Mount: The structure or surface upon which antennas are mounted, including the following four types
of mounts:
1. Roof-mounted (mounted on the roof of a building)
2. Side-mounted (mounted on the side of a building)
3. Ground-mounted (mounted on the ground)
4. Structure-mounted (mounted on a structure other than a building)
Radio frequency (rf) engineer: An engineer specializing in electrical or microwave engineering,
especially the study of radio frequencies.
Radio frequency radiation (rfd): The emissions from telecommunications facilities.
Shot Clock: Federal Communications Commission (FCC) ruling for a “reasonable period of time” to
process wireless applications.
? 90 days for co-location request
? 150 days for new siting applications
Security barrier: A wall, fence, or berm that restricts an area from unauthorized entry or trespass.
Town of Milford Article VII
7.09
Telecom
Zoning Ordinance Facilities
Revised 3/2020 Page 129 of 187
Separation: The distance between one carrier’s array of antennas and another carrier’s array.
Telecommunications facility: A facility for the provision of personal wireless services as defined by
the Telecommunications Act of 1996, as amended. Telecommunications facilities include a mount,
antenna, equipment shelter, and other related equipment. Telecommunications facilities do not include
private or non-commercial wireless communication facilities such as amateur ham radio and citizen
band radio.
Telecommunications services: The three types of services regulated by this Section are:
Commercial mobile radio services, unlicensed wireless services and common carrier wireless
exchange access services as described in the Telecommunications Act of 1996, as amended.
7.09.2 DISTRICT & FEDERAL REGULATIONS
A. Federal Requirements - All facilities shall meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Federal Communications Commission (FCC) (as per
Telecommunications Act of 1996), and any other agency of the federal government with the
authority to regulate such facilities.
B. Location - Telecommunications facilities shall be permitted in all zoning districts in accordance with
this ordinance. Applicants seeking approval for these facilities shall first evaluate existing structures
for their siting. Only after finding that there are no suitable existing structures pursuant to Section
7.09.2:C herein, shall a provider propose a new ground-mounted facility.
C. Existing Structures: Policy - When available, telecommunications facilities shall be located on
existing structures, including but not limited to buildings, water towers, existing telecommunications
facilities, utility poles or towers, and related facilities, provided that such installation preserves the
character and integrity of those structures.
D. Existing Structures: Burden of Proof - The applicant shall have the burden of proving that there are
no existing structures which are suitable to locate its telecommunications facility and/or transmit or
receive radio signals. To meet that burden, the applicant shall take all the following actions to the
extent possible:
1. The applicant shall submit to the Planning Board a list of all contacts made with owners of
potential sites regarding the availability of potential space for a telecommunications facility. If
the Planning Board informs the applicant that additional existing structures may be satisfactory,
the applicant shall contact the property owner(s) of those structures.
2. The applicant shall provide copies of all letters of inquiry made to owners of existing structures,
letters of rejection if received, and proof of certified mailing. If letters of rejection are not
provided, at a minimum, unanswered “Return Receipt Requested” forms from the U.S. Post
Office shall be provided for each owner of existing structures that was contacted.
3. If the applicant claims that a structure is not capable of physically supporting a
telecommunications facility, this claim shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer.
The certification shall, at a minimum, explain the structural issues and demonstrate that the
structure cannot be modified to support the telecommunications facility without unreasonable
costs. The estimated cost shall be provided to the Planning Board.
E. Ground-mounted Facilities: Policy - New ground-mounted facilities are permitted but only when the
use of existing structures and buildings are found to not be feasible. If the applicant demonstrates
that it is not feasible to locate on an existing structure, ground-mounted telecommunications
Town of Milford Article VII
7.09
Telecom
Zoning Ordinance Facilities
Revised 3/2020 Page 130 of 187
facilities shall be designed so as to be camouflaged to the greatest extent possible, including but
not limited to: use of compatible building materials and colors, screening, landscaping and
placement within trees.
7.09.3 USE REGULATIONS
A telecommunications facility may require site plan review as noted below, and a building permit in all
cases, and may be permitted as follows:
A. Existing Tower Structures - Subject to the issuance of a building permit that includes site plan
approval by the Planning Board, which review shall include, but not be limited to issues relating to
access, bonding, and security for removal, structural integrity and appropriate camouflage of such
siting. Carriers may locate a telecommunications facility on any guyed tower, lattice tower, mast, or
monopole in existence prior to the adoption of this Section, or on any facility previously approved
under the provisions of this Section so long as the co-location complies with the approved site plan.
All the Performance Standards from this Section shall be met. This provision shall apply only so
long as the height of the mount is not increased, a security barrier already exists, and the area of
the security barrier is not increased. Otherwise, site plan review is required.
B. Reconstruction of Existing Tower Structures - An existing guyed tower, lattice tower, monopole, or
mast in existence prior to the adoption of this Section may be reconstructed with a maximum twenty
(20) foot increase in height so as to maximize co-location so long as the standards of this Section
are met and so long as this twenty (20) foot increase in height does not cause a facility previously
existing at less than two-hundred (200) feet to exceed two-hundred (200) feet in height. The mount
shall be replaced with a similar mount that does not significantly increase the visual impact on the
community. Site plan review is required.
C. Existing Structures - Subject to the provisions of this Section and site plan review under NH RSA
674:43:III and except as otherwise permitted under Section 7.09.3:A, a carrier may locate a
telecommunications facility on an existing structure, building, utility tower or pole, or water tower.
For the purpose of this section, new structures that are conforming to all other district zoning
requirements shall be considered as existing structures.
D. Ground-mounted Facility - A telecommunications facility involving construction of a ground-mount
shall require site plan review and be subject to the provisions of this Section.
7.09.4 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS
A. All telecommunications facilities erected, constructed, located, replaced, altered, or extended within
the Town shall comply with the following dimensional requirements:
1. Height Maximum - In no case shall a telecommunications facility exceed two-hundred (200) feet
in height, unless the mount for the facility was greater than two-hundred (200) feet in height
prior to the adoption of this Article.
2. Height, Existing Structures and Utility Poles - Carriers that locate new telecommunications
facilities on water towers, electric transmission and distribution towers, utility poles and similar
existing utility structures, guyed towers, lattice towers, masts, and monopoles may be permitted
to increase the height of those structures no more than twenty (20) feet, or forty (40) feet at the
discretion of the Planning Board, if the additional height will not materially impair the visual
impacts of the site. This increase in height shall only be permitted once for each structure.
3. Height, Ground-Mounted Facilities – New ground-mounted telecommunications facilities shall
not project higher than twenty (20) feet above the average tree canopy height within a oneTown
of Milford Article VII
7.09
Telecom
Zoning Ordinance Facilities
Revised 3/2020 Page 131 of 187
hundred fifty (150) foot radius of the mount, security barrier, or designated clear area for access
to equipment, whichever is greatest.
4. Setbacks - In addition to compliance with the minimum zoning district setback requirements,
ground-mounted telecommunications facilities shall be set back, at a minimum, the distance
equal to the fall zone, as defined in Section 7.09.1 and 7.09.4:A.5. Fences necessary for the
facility shall comply with the setback provisions of the zoning district in which the facility is
located if the fence is six (6) feet or more in height.
5. Fall Zone for Ground-Mounts - In order to ensure public safety, the minimum distance from the
base of any ground-mount of a telecommunications facility to any property line, public road,
habitable dwelling, business or institutional use, or public recreational area shall be, at a
minimum, the distance equal to the fall zone, as defined in this Section. The fall zone may
cross property lines, so long as the applicant secures a fall zone easement from the affected
property owner(s). The area of the easement shall be shown on all applicable plans submitted
to the Town, and the terms of the easement shall be provided as part of the Site Plan review.
Easements shall be recorded at the Hillsborough County Registry of Deeds.
6. Fall Zone for Non-Ground Mounts - In the event that an existing structure is proposed as a
mount for a telecommunications facility, a fall zone shall not be required, but the setback
provisions of the zoning district shall apply. In the case of pre-existing non-conforming
structures, telecommunications facilities and their equipment shelters shall not increase any
non-conformities.
B. Planning Board Flexibility: Heights - In reviewing a site plan application for a telecommunications
facility, the height limit imposed may be increased by the Planning Board by approval of a
conditional use permit as defined in section 7.11.0. The Planning Board may permit an increase in
the height of a ground-mounted facility up to forty (40) feet above the average tree canopy height, if
no material increase in visual or environmental impacts will result from the increased height. The
visual and environmental criteria of this Section and the Development Regulations shall be the
guidelines in making this determination.
7.09.5 PERFORMANCE AND DESIGN STANDARDS
A. Visibility:
1. Visual impacts are measured on the basis of:
a. Change in community scale, as exhibited in relative height, mass or proportion of the
telecommunications facility within their proposed surroundings
b. New visible elements proposed on a contrasting background
c. Different colors and textures proposed against a contrasting background
d. Use of materials that are foreign to the existing built environment
2. Enhancements are measured on the basis of:
a. Conservation of opportunities to maintain community scale, e.g. buffering areas and lowlying
buildings should not be compromised to as to start a trend away from the existing
community scale
b. Amount and type of landscaping and/or natural vegetation
c. Preservation of view corridors, vistas, and view sheds
Town of Milford Article VII
7.09
Telecom
Zoning Ordinance Facilities
Revised 3/2020 Page 132 of 187
d. Continuation of existing colors, textures and materials
3. Visibility focuses on:
a. Eliminating or mitigating visual impact
b. Protecting, continuing, and enhancing the existing environment
4. Camouflage for Facilities on Existing Buildings or Structures - Roof Mounts when a
telecommunications facility extends above the roof height of a building on which it is mounted,
every effort shall be made to conceal or camouflage the facility within or behind existing or new
architectural features to limit its visibility from public ways. Facilities mounted on a roof shall be
stepped back from the front facade in order to limit their impact on the building’s silhouette.
5. Camouflage for Facilities on Existing Buildings or Structures - Side Mounts -
Telecommunications facilities, which are side-mounted, shall blend with the existing building’s
architecture and, if individual antenna panels are over five (5) square feet, the panels shall be
painted or shielded with material consistent with the design features and materials of the
building.
6. Camouflage for Ground-Mounted Facilities - All ground-mounted telecommunications facilities
shall be surrounded by a buffer of dense tree growth, primarily of coniferous or evergreen trees,
that extends continuously for a minimum distance of one hundred-fifty (150) feet from the
mount, security barrier, or designated clear area for access to equipment, whichever is greatest,
and screens views of the facility in all directions. These trees shall be existing on the subject
property, planted on site, or be within a landscape easement on an adjoining site. The Planning
Board shall have the authority to decrease, relocate, or alter the required buffer based on site
conditions. The one-hundred and fifty (150) foot vegetative buffer area shall be protected by a
landscape easement or be within the area of the carrier’s lease. The easement or lease shall
specify that the trees are dead or dying and present a hazard to persons or property.
7. Color - To the extent that any telecommunications facilities extend above the height of the
vegetation immediately surrounding it, they shall be of a color, which blends with the
background or surroundings.
8. Equipment Shelters - Equipment shelters for telecommunications facilities shall be designed
consistent with one of the following design standards:
a. Equipment shelters shall be located in underground vaults; or
b. Equipment shelters shall be designed so that the shelters are architecturally consistent, with
respect to materials and appearance, to the buildings in the area of the telecommunications
facilities; or
c. Equipment shelters shall be camouflaged behind an effective year-round landscape buffer,
equal to the height of the proposed building, and/or wooden fence. The Planning Board
shall determine the style of fencing and/or landscape buffer that is compatible with the
neighborhood; or
d. If mounted on a rooftop, the equipment shelter shall be concealed or camouflaged so that
the shelter either is not visible at grade or appears to be a part of the original structure.
9. Lighting, Signage and Security
Town of Milford Article VII
7.09
Telecom
Zoning Ordinance Facilities
Revised 3/2020 Page 133 of 187
a. Lighting:
a. Facility Lighting- The mounts of telecommunications facilities shall be lighted only if
required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
b. Site Lighting- If required, all on site lighting shall be shielded from abutting properties.
Foot-candle measurements at the property line shall be 0.0 initial foot candles.
b. Signage - Signs shall be limited to those needed to identify the property and the owner and
warn of any danger. All signs shall comply with the requirements of the Milford Zoning
Ordinance.
c. Security Barrier - The Planning Board shall have final authority on whether a ground
mounted telecommunications facility should be surrounded by a security barrier.
10. Historic Buildings
a. Any telecommunications facility located on or within a historic structure shall not alter the
character-defining features, distinctive construction methods, or original historic materials of
the building.
b. Any alteration made to a historic structure to accommodate a telecommunications facility
shall be fully reversible.
c. Telecommunications facilities authorized by this subsection shall be concealed within or
behind existing architectural features, or shall be located so that they are not visible from
public roads and viewing areas.
11. Scenic Landscapes and Vistas - Ground-mounted facilities shall not be located within open
areas that are clearly visible from public roads, recreational areas, or abutting properties. All
ground-mounted telecommunications facilities shall be surrounded by a buffer of dense tree
growth as per Section 7.09.5:A.6.
12. Driveways - If available, existing entrances and driveways to serve a telecommunications facility
shall be utilized, unless the applicant can demonstrate that a new entrance and driveway will
result in less visual, traffic and environmental impact. New driveways to serve a
telecommunications facility shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in width. A gravel or crushed stone
surface is encouraged.
13. Antenna Types - Any antenna array placed upon an existing or proposed ground mount, utility
pole, or transmission line mount shall have a diameter of no more than four (4) feet, exclusive of
the diameter of the mount. A larger diameter antenna array may be permitted after a finding by
the Planning Board that the visual impacts of a larger antenna array are negligible.
14. Ground and Roof Mounts - All ground mounts shall be of a mast type mount. Lattice towers,
guyed towers, and roof mounted monopoles are expressly prohibited, unless constructed as
part of a reconstruction project permitted under Section 7.09.3:B.
15. Hazardous Waste - No hazardous waste shall be discharged on the site of any
telecommunications facility. If any hazardous materials are to be used on site, there shall be
provisions for full containment of such materials. An enclosed containment area shall be
provided with a sealed floor, designed to contain at least one hundred and ten (110) percent of
the volume of the hazardous materials stored or used on the site.
Town of Milford Article VII
7.09
Telecom
Zoning Ordinance Facilities
Revised 3/2020 Page 134 of 187
16. Noise - Telecommunications facilities shall not generate noise in excess of that permitted by
Town Ordinance.
17. Radio frequency Radiation (RFR) Standards - All equipment proposed for a telecommunications
facility shall be fully compliant with the FCC Guidelines for Evaluating the Environmental Effects
of Radio frequency (FCC Guidelines), under Report and Order, FCC 96-326, published on
August 1, 1996, and all subsequent amendments.
7.09.6 MONITORING AND MAINTENANCE
A. Maintenance - The owner of the facility shall maintain the telecommunications facility in good
condition. Such maintenance shall include, but shall not be limited to, painting, structural integrity of
the mount and security barrier, and maintenance of the buffer areas and landscaping.
B. Monitoring - As part of the issuance of the site plan approval or building permit, the property owner
shall agree that the Town of Milford may enter the subject property to obtain RFR measurements
and noise measurements at the expense of the carrier. The Town shall provide reasonable written
notice to the carrier and landowner and provide them the opportunity to accompany the Town
representatives when the measurements are conducted.
C. Security for Removal - Recognizing the hazardous situation presented by abandoned and
unmonitored telecommunications facilities, all owners of telecommunications facilities shall obtain
and maintain a bond or other approved form of security, in an amount set forth by the Planning
Board, that represents the cost for removal and disposal of abandoned telecommunications
facilities in the event that a facility is abandoned and the facility owner is unwilling or unable to
remove the facility in accordance with Section 7.09.8.
The amount of security shall be based upon the removal cost, plus fifteen percent (15%), be
provided by the property owner, and the amounts certified by a professional structural engineer
licensed in New Hampshire. The owner of the facility shall provide the Planning Board with a
revised removal cost estimate and structural evaluation prepared by a professional structural
engineer licensed in New Hampshire every five (5) years from the date of the Planning Board
approval of the site plan. If the cost has increased more than fifteen percent (15%), then the
property owner shall provide additional security in the amount of the increase.
7.09.7 PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS
A. Application Process - All wireless telecommunications equipment installations and wireless
telecommunications site developments, except as provided elsewhere, are subject to review and
Site Plan Approval by the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall act upon the application in
accordance with 5.03 and 5.04 Submittal Requirements of the Milford Development Regulations
and RSA 676:4 as amended. In addition to the following items:
1. An inventory of existing towers that are within the jurisdiction of the Town and those within two
miles of the border thereof, including specific information about the location, height, design of
each tower, as well as economic and technological feasibility for the co-location on the
inventoried towers. The Planning Board may share such information with other applicants
applying for approvals or conditional use permits under this section or other organizations
Town of Milford Article VII
7.09
Telecom
Zoning Ordinance Facilities
Revised 3/2020 Page 135 of 187
seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of the Town, provided, however, that the
Planning Board is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that
such sites are available or suitable.
2. If the applicant is proposing to build a new tower, the applicant shall submit written evidence
demonstrating that no existing structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna in
accordance with Section 7.09.2:D.
B. Review Process - Planning Board Approval and Town Building Permit Required: Non-residential
and non-amateur telecommunications facilities may be located within the Town of Milford, subject to
Planning Board approval and issuance of a building permit. Modifications to an existing installation
shall also be subject to Planning Board approval. Construction or modification of an approved
facility shall not begin or continue without a valid building permit issued.
C. All applications shall be assessed for a basic completeness review within 30 days of receipt of the
application. Incomplete applications will not be reviewed by the Planning Board. If an application
passes this basic completeness review, it should be date stamped to establish the date when it was
filled. If the Board or staff determines additional information is needed to evaluate the application,
any request for additional information must be submitted within thirty (30) days of the filing date.
The Board shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application within 90 days (colocation
applications) or 150 days (siting applications) of the filing date in accordance with FCC
standards.
7.09.8 ABANDONMENT OR DISCONTINUATION OF USE
A. Notification - At such time that a carrier plans to abandon or discontinue operation of a
telecommunications facility, the owner of the facility shall notify the Town by certified U.S. mail of
the proposed date of abandonment or discontinuation of operations. Such notice shall be given no
less than sixty (60) days prior to abandonment or discontinuation of operations. In the event that a
carrier fails to give such notice, the telecommunications facility shall be considered abandoned
upon such discontinuation of operations.
B. Removal - Any telecommunications facility that is declared abandoned shall be considered
hazardous to the public health and safety. Upon abandonment or discontinuation of use, the owner
shall physically remove the abandoned structure and restore the site to its natural appearance
within ninety (90) days from the date of abandonment or discontinuation of use. “Physically
remove” shall include, but not be limited to:
1. Removal of antennas, mount, equipment shelters and security barriers from the subject
property.
2. Proper disposal of the waste materials from the site in accordance with local and state solid
waste disposal regulations.
3. Restoring the location of the telecommunications facility to its natural condition, except that any
landscaping and grading shall remain in the after-condition.
C. Failure to Remove - If the owner of the facility does not remove the facility upon the Order of the
Zoning Administrator, then the Board of Selectmen shall, after holding a public hearing with notice
to the owner of the facility, the property owner, and abutters, issue a Declaration of Abandonment.
Town of Milford Article VII
7.09
Telecom
Zoning Ordinance Facilities
Revised 3/2020 Page 136 of 187
The owner of the facility shall dismantle and remove the facility within ninety (90) days of receipt of
the Declaration of Abandonment by the Board of Selectmen. If the abandoned facility is not
removed within ninety (90) days, the Town may execute the security bond to pay for this action.
Town of Milford Article VII
7.10
Small Wind
Zoning Ordinance Energy Systems
Revised 3/2020 Page 137 of 187
7.10.0 SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS
7.10.1 AUTHORITY
This Ordinance is established pursuant to The State of New Hampshire RSA 674:62-66, as amended
and the purposes outlined in NH RSA 672:I-IIIa. All references in this Ordinance will refer to State of
New Hampshire RSAs.
7.10.2 PURPOSE AND INTENT
It is the purpose of this Section to protect the public’s health, safety and welfare and promote the safe,
effective and efficient use of small wind energy systems to reduce the on-site consumption of utility
supplied electricity. This Ordinance intends to permit the location of these systems within the Town of
Milford consistent with the master plan, and the Ordinances and regulations of the Town.
7.10.3 APPLICABILITY
The terms of this Section shall apply to small wind energy systems (hereinafter “system(s)”) on property
owned by the Town of Milford, on privately owned property, and on property that is owned by any
governmental entity that acts in its proprietary capacity to lease such property.
7.10.4 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Article, the following terms shall have the meaning given herein:
Meteorological tower (met tower): Includes the tower, base plate, anchors, guy wires and hardware,
anemometers (wind speed indicators), wind direction vanes, booms to hold equipment for
anemometers and vanes, data loggers, instrument wiring and any telemetry devices that are used to
monitor or transmit wind speed and wind flow characteristics over a period of time for either
instantaneous wind information or to characterize the wind resource at a given location. For the
purpose of this Ordinance, met towers shall refer only to those whose purpose are to analyze the
environmental factors needed to assess the potential to install, construct or erect a small wind energy
system.
Modification: Any change to the small wind energy system that materially alters the size, type, output
or location of the small wind energy system. Like-kind replacements shall not be construed to be a
modification.
Net metering: The difference between the electricity supplied to a customer over the electric
distribution system and the electricity generated by the customer’s small wind energy system that is fed
back into the electric distribution system over a billing period.
Power grid: The transmission system, managed by ISO New England, created to balance the supply
and demand of electricity for consumers in New England.
Shadow flicker: The visible flicker effect when rotating blades of the wind generator cast shadows on
the ground and nearby structures causing a repeating pattern of light and shadow.
Town of Milford Article VII
7.10
Small Wind
Zoning Ordinance Energy Systems
Revised 3/2020 Page 138 of 187
Small wind energy system: A wind energy conversion system consisting of a wind turbine, a
generator, a tower and associated control or conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity of 100
kilowatts or less and will be used primarily for onsite consumption.
System height: The vertical distance from ground level to the tip of the wind generator blade
when it is at its highest point.
Tower: The monopole, guyed monopole or lattice structure that supports a wind generator.
Tower height: The height above grade of the fixed portion of the tower, excluding the wind
generator.
Wind generator: Blades and associated mechanical and electrical conversion components mounted
on top of the tower whose purpose is to convert kinetic energy of the wind into rotational energy used to
generate electricity.
7.10.5 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Small wind energy systems are permitted by the granting of a conditional use permit and a building
permit in all zoning districts.
7.10.6 PROCEDURE FOR REVIEW
A. Conditional Use Permit – Small wind energy systems and met towers require Planning Board
approval of a conditional use permit (see section 7.11.0).
1. Application – Applications submitted to the Planning Department shall conform to the minor site
plan regulations and shall contain the following information:
a. Property lines and physical dimensions of the applicant’s property.
b. Location, dimensions and types of existing major structures on the property.
c. Location of the proposed small wind energy system, foundations, guy anchors and
associated equipment.
d. Setback requirements as outlined in this Ordinance.
e. The right-of-way of any public road that is contiguous with the property.
f. Any overhead utility lines.
g. Small wind energy system specifications including rotor diameter, tower height, tower type
and nameplate generation capacity.
h. Sound level analysis prepared by the wind generator manufacturer or qualified engineer.
i. List of abutters to the applicant’s property.
B. Abutter and Regional Notification – In accordance with the site plan regulations all small wind
energy system conditional use permit applications shall be heard at an abutter notified public
hearing where the Planning Board will make a determination on potential Regional Impact in
accordance with NH RSA 36:54-58.
Town of Milford Article VII
7.10
Small Wind
Zoning Ordinance Energy Systems
Revised 3/2020 Page 139 of 187
C. Building Permit – Once a conditional use permit has been approved the applicant shall submit and
be granted approval for a building permit prior to a small wind energy system being erected,
constructed or installed. A building permit shall be required for any physical modifications to an
existing small wind energy system. Met towers that receive a building permit shall be permitted on a
temporary basis not to exceed three (3) years from the date the building permit was issued.
1. Application – Applications submitted to the Building Department shall contain the following
information:
a. Planning Board approved conditional use permit minor site plan
b. Tower foundation blueprints or drawings with New Hampshire engineering approval.
c. Tower blueprints or drawings with New Hampshire engineering approval.
d. Small wind energy systems specifications including manufacturer, model, rotor diameter,
tower height, tower type, nameplate generation capacity.
e. Small wind energy systems that will be connected to the power grid shall include a copy of
the application for interconnection with their electric utility provider.
f. Sound level analysis prepared by the wind generator manufacturer or qualified engineer.
g. Electrical components in sufficient detail to allow for a determination that a manner of
installation conforms to most current adopted Electrical Code.
h. Evidence of compliance or non-applicability with Federal Aviation Administration
requirements.
2. All Planning Department information will be available to the Building Department to aid the
permitting process.
7.10.7 STANDARDS
A. The Planning Board shall evaluate the application for compliance with the following standards:
1. Setbacks – The setback shall be calculated by multiplying the minimum setback requirement
number by the system height and measured from the center of the tower base to property line,
public roads or nearest point on the foundations of an occupied building.
a. Small wind energy systems must meet all setbacks for principal structures for the zoning
district in which the system is located.
b. Guy wires used to support the tower are exempt from the small wind energy system setback
requirements.
Minimum Setback Requirements
Occupied Buildings
on Participating
Landowner Property
Occupied Buildings
on Abutting Property
Property Lines
of Abutting Property
and Utility Lines
Public Roads
0 1.5 1.1 1.5
Town of Milford Article VII
7.10
Small Wind
Zoning Ordinance Energy Systems
Revised 3/2020 Page 140 of 187
Table 7.10- 1
2. Tower – The maximum tower height shall be restricted to thirty-five (35’) feet above the tree
canopy within three hundred (300’) feet of the small wind energy system. In no situation shall
the tower exceed 150 feet.
3. Sound level – The small wind energy system shall not exceed 60 decibels using the A scale
(dBA), as measured at the site property line, except during short-term events such as severe
wind storms and utility outages.
4. Shadow flicker – Small wind energy systems shall be sited in a manner that does not result in
significant shadow flicker impacts. Significant shadow flicker is defined as more than thirty (30)
hours per year on abutting occupied buildings. The applicant has the burden of proving that the
shadow flicker will not have significant impact on neighboring or adjacent uses. Potential
shadow flicker will be addressed either through siting or mitigation measures.
5. Signs – All signs, including flags, streamers and decorative items, both temporary and
permanent, are prohibited on small wind energy systems, except for manufacturer identification
or appropriate warning signs.
6. Visual Impacts – It is inherent that small wind energy systems may pose some visual impacts
due to the tower height needed to access wind resources. The purpose of this section is to
reduce the visual impacts without restricting the owner’s access to the optimal wind resources
on the property.
a. The applicant shall demonstrate through project site planning and proposed mitigation that
the small wind energy system’s visual impacts will be minimized for surrounding neighbors
and the community. This may include, but not be limited to information regarding site
selection, wind generator design or appearance, buffering, and screening of ground
mounted electrical and control equipment. All electrical conduits shall be underground,
except when the financial costs are prohibitive, to be determined by the Planning Board.
b. The color of the small wind energy system shall either be stock color from the manufacturer
or painted with a non-reflective, unobtrusive color that blends in with the surrounding
environment. Approved colors include, but are not limited to, white, off-white or gray.
c. A small wind energy system shall not be artificially lit unless such lighting is required by the
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). If lighting is required, the applicant shall provide a
copy of the FAA determination to establish the required markings and/or lights for the small
wind energy system.
7. Approved wind generators – The manufacturer and model of the wind generator to be used in
the proposed small wind energy system must have been approved by the California Energy
Commission or the New York State Energy Research and Development Authority, or a similar
list approved by the State of New Hampshire, if available.
8. Utility Connection – If the proposed small wind energy system is to be connected to the power
grid through net metering, it shall adhere to NH RSA 362-A: 9.
Town of Milford Article VII
7.10
Small Wind
Zoning Ordinance Energy Systems
Revised 3/2020 Page 141 of 187
9. Access – The tower shall be designed and installed so as not to provide step bolts or a ladder
readily accessible to the public for a minimum height of eight (8’) feet above the ground. All
ground-mounted electrical and control equipment shall be labeled and secured to prevent
unauthorized access.
10. Clearing – Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to that which is necessary for the
construction, operation and maintenance of the small wind energy system and as otherwise
prescribed by applicable laws, regulations and Ordinances.
B. In addition to the above listed items the Building Inspector will also evaluate a Building Permit
application for the following items:
1. Code Compliance – The small wind energy system shall comply with all applicable sections of
the New Hampshire State Building Code and any other applicable State and Federal
regulations.
2. Aviation – The small wind energy system shall be built to comply with all applicable Federal
Aviation Administration regulations including, but not limited to, 14 C.F.R. part 77, subpart B
regarding installations close to airports and the New Hampshire Aviation regulations including,
but not limited to, NH RSA 422-b and NH RSA 424.
7.10.8 MAINTENANCE AND MONITORING
A. Maintenance - The owner of the system shall maintain the small wind energy system in good
condition.
B. Monitoring - As part of the issuance of the building permit, the property owner shall agree that the
Town of Milford may enter the subject property to obtain noise measurements, if required, at the
expense of the owner. The Town shall provide reasonable written notice to the owner and provide
them the opportunity to accompany the Town representatives when the measurements are
conducted.
7.10.9 ABANDONMENT OR DISCONTINUATION OF USE
A. At such time that a small wind energy system is scheduled to be abandoned or discontinued, the
applicant will notify the building inspector by certified U.S. mail of the proposed date of
abandonment or discontinuation of operations.
B. Upon abandonment or discontinuation of use, the owner shall physically remove the small wind
energy system within ninety (90) days of receipt of the notice of abandonment or discontinuation of
use. This period may be extended at the request of the owner and at the discretion of the building
inspector. “Physically remove” shall include, but not be limited to:
1. Removal of the wind generator and tower and related above-grade structures.
2. Proper disposal of the waste materials from the site in accordance with local and state solid
waste disposal regulations.
Town of Milford Article VII
7.10
Small Wind
Zoning Ordinance Energy Systems
Revised 3/2020 Page 142 of 187
3. Restoration of the location of the small wind energy system to its natural condition, except that
any landscaping, grading or below grade foundation may remain in its same condition at
initiation of abandonment.
C. In the event that an applicant fails to give such notice, the small wind energy system shall be
considered abandoned or discontinued if the system is out of service for a continuous twelve (12)
month period. After the twelve (12) months of inoperability, the building inspector may issue a
Notice of Abandonment to the owner of the small wind energy system. The owner shall have the
right to respond to the Notice of Abandonment within thirty (30) days from the Notice receipt date.
After review of the information provided by the owner, the building inspector shall determine if the
small wind energy system has been abandoned. If it is determined that the small wind energy
system has not been abandoned the building inspector shall withdraw the Notice of Abandonment
and notify the owner of the withdrawal.
D. If the owner fails to respond to the Notice of Abandonment or if, after the review by the building
inspector, it is determined that the small wind energy system has been abandoned or discontinued,
the owner of the small wind energy system shall remove the wind generator and tower at the
owner’s sole expense within ninety (90) days of receipt of the Notice of Abandonment. If the owner
fails to physically remove the small wind energy system after the Notice of Abandonment
procedure, the building inspector may pursue legal action to have the small wind energy system
removed at the owner’s expense.
7.10.10 VIOLATION
It is unlawful for any person to construct, install or operate a small wind energy system that is not in
compliance with this Ordinance. Small wind energy systems installed prior to adoption of this Ordinance
are exempt from this Ordinance except or until such time as modifications are proposed to the small
wind energy system.
7.10.11 PENALTIES
Any person who fails to comply with any provision of this Ordinance or a building permit issued
pursuant to this Ordinance shall be subject to enforcement and penalties as allowed by NH Revised
Statutes Annotated Chapter 676:17.
7.10.12 SEVERABILITY
If any section, phrase, sentence or portion of this Ordinance is for any reason held invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed separate, distinct
and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions
thereof.
Town of Milford Article VII
7.11
Solar Collection
Zoning Ordinance Systems
Revised 3/2020 Page 143 of 187
7.11.0 SOLAR COLLECTION SYSTEMS
7.11.1 Authority
This solar collection system ordinance is enacted in accordance with RSA 674:17(I)(j) and the purposes
outlined in RSA 672:1-III-a as amended.
7.11.2 Purpose and Intent
The purpose of this ordinance is to accommodate solar energy collection systems and distributed
generation resources in appropriate locations, while protecting the public’s health, safety and welfare,
and the environment. The Town intends to facilitate the State and National goals of developing clean,
safe, renewable energy resources in accordance with the enumerated polices of NH RSA 374-G and
362-F that include national security and economic and environmental sustainability.
7.11.3 Definitions
Agriculture Solar - Accessory: Any ground-mounted or roof-mounted solar collection system
designed to primarily reduce on-site consumption of utility power and without a limit to the rated
nameplate capacity or solar land coverage provided the existing agricultural use is preserved at the
time of installation.
Agriculture Solar - Primary: Any ground-mounted solar collection system that is partially used to
reduce on-site consumption of utility power and with a rated nameplate capacity up to 1 MW AC in size
or has a solar land coverage in excess of 5 acres provided the existing agricultural use is preserved at
the time of installation.
Carport Mount: Any solar collection system of any size that is installed on the roof structure of a
carport over a parking area.
Commercial Solar: A use of land that consists of one or more free-standing, ground-mounted solar
collection systems with a rated nameplate capacity of up to 1 MW AC and that is less than 5 acres in
solar land coverage.
Community Solar: A use of land that consists of one or more free-standing, ground-mounted solar
collection systems regardless of nameplate capacity that is up to 100 kW AC and that is less than 1
acre of solar land coverage.
Ground Mount: A solar collection system and associated mounting hardware that is affixed to or
placed upon (such as ballasted systems) the ground including but not limited to fixed, passive or active
tracking racking systems.
Industrial Solar: A use of land that consists of one or more free-standing, ground-mounted solar
collection systems regardless of nameplate capacity that is between 25 acres and 50 acres in solar
land coverage.
Large Commercial Solar: A use of land that consists of one or more free-standing, ground-mounted
solar collection systems with a rated nameplate capacity of between 1 MW and 5 MW that is between 5
and 25 acres in solar land coverage.
Rated Nameplate Capacity: Maximum rated alternating current (“AC”) output of solar collection
Town of Milford Article VII
7.11
Solar Collection
Zoning Ordinance Systems
Revised 3/2020 Page 144 of 187
system based on the design output of the solar system.
Residential Solar: Any ground-mounted or roof-mounted solar collection system primarily for on-site
residential use, and consisting of one or more free-standing, ground or roof-mounted, solar arrays or
modules, or solar related equipment, intended to primarily reduce on-site consumption of utility power
and with a rated nameplate capacity of 10 kW AC or less and that is less than 500 square feet solar
land coverage.
Roof Mount: A solar collection system that is structurally mounted to the roof of a building or other
permitted structure, including limited accessory equipment associated with a system which may be
ground-mounted. For purposes of calculating array sizes or solar land coverage under the solar
definitions in this section, roof-mounted portions shall not be included if the system is made up of both
roof and ground-mounted systems, the roof-mounted portions shall also be excluded.
Solar Array: A grouping of multiple solar modules with purpose of harvesting solar energy.
Solar Cell: The smallest basic solar electric device which generates electricity when exposed to light.
Solar Collection System: Includes all equipment required to harvest solar energy to generate
electricity. The Solar Collection System includes storage devices, power conditioning equipment,
transfer equipment, and parts related to the functioning of those items. Solar Collection Systems
include only equipment up to (but not including) the stage that connection is made to the utility grid or
site service point.
Solar Glare: The potential for solar panels to reflect sunlight, with an intensity sufficient to cause
annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility.
Solar Land Coverage: Defined exclusively for the purposes of calculating the footprint of the land
area occupied by the components of a solar array. The Solar Land Coverage is the land area that
encompasses all components of the solar collection system including, but not limited to mounting
equipment, panels and ancillary components of the system. This definition does not include access
roads or fencing and is not to be interpreted as a measurement of impervious surface as it may be
defined in this ordinance.
Solar Module: A grouping of solar cells with the purpose of harvesting solar energy.
Solar Power Generation Station: Any solar collection system that is over 30 MW in nameplate
capacity. In no case shall a Solar Power Generation Station exceed 150 acres.
Utility Solar: A use of land that consists of one or more free-standing, ground-mounted solar collection
systems regardless of nameplate capacity that is over 50 acres in solar land coverage and less than 30
MW in rated nameplate capacity.
Town of Milford Article VII
7.11
Solar Collection
Zoning Ordinance Systems
Revised 3/2020 Page 145 of 187
7.11.4 District Regulations
A. Table of Uses:
Zoning District
Residential Residential Commercial
/ Limited
Commercial
ICI ICI2 / Industrial
R A, B
Residential Solar P P P P P
Community Solar P X P P P
Accessory Agricultural
Solar P X P P P
Primary Agricultural
Solar CUP X P P P
Commercial Solar CUP X X CUP CUP
Large Commercial
Solar CUP X X CUP CUP
Industrial Solar X X X CUP CUP
Utility Solar X X X X CUP
Solar Power
Generation Station X X X X CUP
• P = Use permitted by right with building and electrical permit.
• CUP = Use permitted by Conditional Use Permit.
• X = Use prohibited.
B. Specific Solar System Requirements and Exemptions:
1. A ground-mounted Accessory Residential Solar system over 15 feet in height at any point shall
be located in rear yard between the primary structure and rear lot line. All other ground-mounted
systems located in the front yard shall be reasonably screened from abutting residential
properties.
2. Non-residential Carport Mounted solar collection systems over parking areas are permitted in all
zones without a Conditional Use Permit. A site plan review shall be required in accordance with
Town of Milford Article VII
7.11
Solar Collection
Zoning Ordinance Systems
Revised 3/2020 Page 146 of 187
the Town Development Regulations.
3. Roof-mounted solar collection systems of any size are permitted in all zones without a
Conditional Use Permit except within the Oval District Overlay.
4. Municipal Systems: All solar collection systems for municipal use are exempt from land use
regulations pursuant to NH RSA 674:54.
C. Additional Provisions Regarding Solar Collection Systems:
1. Building Height: Roof-mounted solar collection systems shall be exempt from building height
limitations.
2. Solar Land Coverage: Ground-mounted solar collection systems shall not exceed 70% of the
total lot area. The ground-mounted solar collection system shall not be considered impervious
surface. Impervious surface limitations as related to stormwater management for solar collection
systems shall be addressed in accordance with this Ordinance and the Milford Stormwater
Management And Erosion Control Regulations.
7.11.5 Solar Collection Systems Conditional Use Permits
A. Permit Required: No solar collection system, except as authorized by Section 7.11.4 shall be
erected, constructed, installed or modified without first receiving a Conditional Use Permit (CUP)
from the Planning Board pursuant to Section 7.14.0. The CUP shall clearly set forth all conditions of
approval and shall list all plans, drawings and other submittals that are part of the approved use.
B. Application and Review Procedure:
1. An Application for a Conditional Use shall be initiated by filing with the Planning Board for an
application for a Conditional Use Permit.
2. The applicant shall follow the requirements for specific uses as laid out in this Ordinance. The
applicant shall submit an application in accordance with the Minor Site Plan development
regulations and shall include the following:
a. System Layout.
i. A detailed sketch or plan showing the installation area of the site.
ii. A detailed sketch of any land clearing or grading required for the installation and
operation of the system.
iii. The location of all equipment to be installed on site including utility connection point(s)
and equipment. To the maximum extent practical all wiring associated with the utility
connection shall be underground.
iv. All equipment locations, except for utility connections, shall comply with required
setbacks.
b. Equipment Specification.
i. All proposed equipment or specifications must be included with the application.
ii. Such information can be supplied via manufacturer’s specifications or through detailed
Town of Milford Article VII
7.11
Solar Collection
Zoning Ordinance Systems
Revised 3/2020 Page 147 of 187
description.
3. Applicable Site Plan Review Regulations. The specific requirements for a Conditional Use
Permit shall pre-empt any similar requirement in the Development Regulations.
C. Standards of Review:
Following a fully noticed public hearing on the proposed use, the Planning Board may issue a
Conditional Use Permit, if it finds, based on the information and testimony submitted with respect to the
application, that:
1. The use is specifically authorized by Section 7.11.4 as a conditional use.
2. The development in its proposed location will comply with Section 7.14.0 and with all applicable
requirements of the Development Regulations not otherwise covered in this section.
3. The use will not materially endanger the public health or safety;
4. Required screening and visual mitigation shall be maintained during the operative lifetime of the
Solar Collection System Conditional Use Permit.
5. In granting a conditional use permit pursuant to this section, the Planning Board may impose
any reasonable conditions or restrictions deemed necessary to carry out the intended purpose
of this ordinance.
7.11.6 Standards
A. The Planning Board shall evaluate the application for compliance with the following standards:
1. Setbacks.
Solar collection systems shall be considered structures and shall comply with dimensional
setback requirements from lot lines for the entire system – including the panels. Tracking
systems shall have the setback measured from the point and time where the array is closest to
the lot line. No portion of a system may cross into the setback.
2. Natural Resource Impacts and Buffers.
a. Solar collection systems shall be visually screened through the preservation of existing
vegetation or through a landscaped buffer in accordance with the following:
i. Plan: The buffering plan shall indicate the location, height and spacing of existing
vegetation to be preserved and areas where new planting will be required.
ii. All solar collection systems shall have a reasonable visual buffer as required in the
Development Regulations from public ways and neighboring commercial/residential uses
based on the viewsheds, contours of the land, and abutting land uses.
iii. Areas that are within the view shed of significant value as identified in the Master Plan
shall include additional reasonable mechanisms to mitigate a continuous and
uninterrupted view of the system.
b. Fencing shall be installed, if required, by the electric code or the utility. Additional security or
fencing may be required if the location of the system presents a safety concern for abutting
Town of Milford Article VII
7.11
Solar Collection
Zoning Ordinance Systems
Revised 3/2020 Page 148 of 187
land uses.
c. Primary Agriculture Solar should minimize impacts to farmland activities and Prime
Farmland Soils (as defined and delineated by soil survey and definition of NH NRCS). Dual
use arrangements (solar and farming activities are encouraged where practical).
d. Land Clearing.
i. Land clearing shall be limited to what is necessary for the installation and operation of
the system and to insure sufficient all-season access to the solar resource given the
topography of the land.
ii. Following construction, cleared land areas must be restored with native species that are
consistent with the use of the site as a solar collection system (such as slow growth or
low ground cover).
iii. Erosion control measures during construction shall be detailed as required by the Milford
Development Regulations and the Town’s Stormwater Management and Erosion Control
Ordinance.
e. Additional Requirements for Industrial, Utility, and Solar Power Generation Station
(I/U/SPGS) Solar:
i. A detailed pre-construction and post-construction plan identifying existing vegetation and
areas to be cleared with specific identification of locations of buffer areas adjacent to
neighboring uses and public ways.
ii. The Planning Board, with input from the Conservation Commission, may require the
applicant to submit an ‘Environmental Study’ in accordance with the Milford
Development Regulations, Section 5.011 Environmental Study. Efforts and practices that
can provide for a dual use of the site should be explored if feasible and encouraged
where appropriate.
iii. The applicant shall demonstrate effective stormwater infiltration along with erosion
control measures and soil stabilization.
3. Buffer Plan.
As deemed appropriate, all applications shall submit a detailed buffering plan demonstrating
how the proposed ground-mounted solar installation will be incorporated into the local
landscape so that effective screening is provided along public ways and from abutting views.
The use of existing or created topography is encouraged to reduce visual impacts.
4. Stormwater.
a. Stormwater and Erosion Control Permits
i. Ground-mounted systems that are required to obtain a New Hampshire Department of
Environmental Services (NH DES) Alteration of Terrain (AoT) Permit in accordance with
NH RSA 485:17 shall secure such permit accordingly.
ii. A Municipal Stormwater Permit and Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Plan
(SWMP) shall be provided when required by and in conformance with the requirements
of the Town of Milford’s Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Regulation.
Town of Milford Article VII
7.11
Solar Collection
Zoning Ordinance Systems
Revised 3/2020 Page 149 of 187
iii. The final Permits issued by NH DES and Town shall be incorporated by reference into
the final Town approval and shall be enforceable by the Town in accordance with this
zoning ordinance.
b. The stormwater management plan shall include the following.
i. The stormwater study shall take into account the nature of the solar panel installation
and how the spacing, slope and row separate can enhance infiltration of stormwater.
Percolation tests or site specific soil information may be provided to demonstrate
recharge can be achieved without engineered solutions.
ii. Additional information, if required, shall calculate potential for concentrated flows of
runoff due to the panels, slope, soil type and the impacts of other regulated impervious
areas (such as equipment pads and roadways).
c. Required for all systems:
i. All ground-mounted systems shall be constructed in accordance with Best Management
Practices for erosion and sedimentation control during the pre-construction, construction
and post- construction restoration period.
ii. Post construction: For purposes of enhancing natural stormwater management, site
conditions and plantings post-construction shall insure that areas of soil compaction
have been restored to natural conditions. Plantings shall be native species and are
recommended to beneficial habitat to song birds, pollinators and/or foraging specifies in
order to maintain a healthy surface and subsurface habitat that can attenuate
stormwater on the site.
5. Emergency Response.
a. Access to the site for emergency response shall be provided and detailed on the plan.
b. A narrative or manual for municipal Fire Department detailing response guidance and
disconnection locations necessary for fire response.
c. Additional industry guidance documents that provide information about safety procedures for
specific equipment on site shall be provided as needed to insure adequate public safety.
d. Contact information for the solar collection system owner/operator shall be posted on site at
the access way and provided and updated to the municipality.
6. Glare.
a. A statement detailing potential significant glare onto abutting structures and roadways
estimating the interaction of sun to panel angle, time of year and visibility locations.
b. Based on the above information, the Planning Board may require reasonable mitigation.
Mitigation may include angle of panels, details on the anti-reflective nature of the panel
coating or any additional specific screening to minimize resulting impacts.
c. Mitigation through anti-reflective coatings shall have an index of refraction equal to or less
than 1.30.
7. Noise.
Town of Milford Article VII
7.11
Solar Collection
Zoning Ordinance Systems
Revised 3/2020 Page 150 of 187
a. Estimates of any equipment noise on the site based on equipment specification materials
(such as inverters).
b. Noise levels at the property line shall be in accordance with the Town noise ordinance or at
reasonable levels given the location of the facility with due consideration to the surrounding
land uses and zone.
8. Lighting.
a. On site lighting shall be minimal and limited to access and safety requirements only.
b. All lighting shall be downcast and shielded from abutting properties.
B. General Requirements.
1. All Solar Collection Systems shall conform to applicable state and federal laws and regulations
and local ordinances, including the State Building Code, the State Electrical Code and the State
Fire Code.
2. All systems not connected to the grid shall be approved by the electrical inspector or Building
Inspector, as required.
3. Transmission Lines Underground: All power transmission lines from a Ground-mounted Solar
Energy System to any building or other structure shall be located underground and/or in
accordance with the State Building Code or Electrical Code, as appropriate.
4. Grid-tied systems shall file a copy of a final approved interconnection with the municipality prior
to operation of the system.
5. All roof-mounted and ground-mounted Solar Collection System require permits.
a. Electrical permits are required.
b. Plumbing permits may be required.
c. Building permits may be required.
d. Engineer stamped letter certifying that the roof can accommodate the load may be required.
7.11.7 Abatement and Decommissioning/Removal
Solar Collection Systems shall be deemed to be abandoned if operations have discontinued for more
than 6 months without written consent of the Town (such as for reasons beyond the control of the
owner/operator). An abandoned system shall be removed and the site restored within 6 months of
abandonment.
7.11.8 Violation
It is unlawful for any person to construct, install or operate a Solar Collection System that is not in
compliance with this Ordinance. Solar Collection Systems installed prior to adoption of this Ordinance
are exempt from this Ordinance except or until such time as modifications are proposed to the Solar
Collection System. If the owner fails to remove the abandoned Solar Collection System within the 6
months, the Town may pursue a legal action to have the system removed at the owner’s expense.
Town of Milford Article VII
7.11
Solar Collection
Zoning Ordinance Systems
Revised 3/2020 Page 151 of 187
7.11.9 Penalties
Any person who fails to comply with any provision of this Ordinance or a building permit issued
pursuant to this Ordinance shall be subject to enforcement and penalties as allowed by NH Revised
Statutes Annotated Chapter 676:17.
7.11.10 Severability
If any section, phrase, sentence or portion of this Ordinance is for any reason held invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed separate, distinct
and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions
thereof.
Town of Milford Article VII
7.12
Home Based
Zoning Ordinance Business
Revised 3/2020 Page 152 of 187
7.12.0 HOME BASED BUSINESS (2019)
7.12.1 General Provisions
There are four (4) categories of Home Based Businesses: Home Offices, Home Occupations, Home
Businesses, and Home Industries. All categories are subject to the requirements listed below, in
addition to the specific criteria contained herein for each individual category of use.
7.12.2 Administration of Permits
A. Each level of Home Based Business is permitted based on the criteria of the process stipulated in
each section.
B. Any approvals issued hereunder shall automatically terminate when the applicant moves the
business, closes the business or no longer resides in the dwelling unit.
C. Prior to commencement of a Home Based Business, the resident shall make application for a
permit to the Community Development Office. The following criteria shall apply:
1. A Certificate of Compliance shall be issued based on the level of approval required for the
Home Based Business (administrative approval, Special Exception, Conditional Use Permit);
2. Prior to the issuance of the Certificate of Compliance, the Code Officer will inspect the site to
insure that any conditions required for operation of the Home Based Business have been met;
3. The resident business owner shall submit to a Code Compliance Inspection once every three
years. In the event that a Home Based Business is found to no longer be in compliance with the
original approval, the resident business owner shall either seek additional approvals for the level
of Home Based Business in operation relocate the business/operations to a suitable location in
the appropriate district for that use.
7.12.3 Standard Applicable To All Home Based Businesses
A. The Home Based Business must be clearly incidental and secondary to the primary use of the
premises as a residence.
B. The Home Based Business must not change the character of the premises or surrounding
neighborhood. There shall be no window displays or other features not normally associated with
residential use.
C. Parking that is necessary for all employed residents, employees, and customers must be
accommodated off-street, and new parking areas must be screened from the view of abutters and
from public ways (streets or pedestrian ways) utilizing plantings, fencing, and/or topography. When
possible, parking areas shall be located at the side or rear of the residence or accessory buildings.
D. Proof of compliance with all applicable federal, state, and/or local environmental controls is
required, as well as any other applicable local zoning regulations.
E. When the business use will necessitate the construction of new buildings, building additions, or
Town of Milford Article VII
7.12
Home Based
Zoning Ordinance Business
Revised 3/2020 Page 153 of 187
parking areas, the applicant shall seek a Conditional Use Permit from the Planning Board in
conformance with Article 7.11.0 of the Milford Zoning Ordinance.
7.12.4 Home Office
A business that is operated solely by the resident(s) business owner(s) with no additional employees.
All business operations shall be conducted by mail or electronic communication and involve no traffic to
or from the property by customers, clients or deliveries, and no signage. Home offices are permitted in
all districts and no permit or registration is required.
7.12.5 Home Occupation
An accessory business type use located and conducted so that the average neighbor, under normal
circumstances, would not be aware of its existence. Types of occupations that would qualify for a
Home Occupation Permit might include but are not limited to – tradespeople, artists, tutors, tailors,
accountants, lawyers, engineers, realtors, healing practitioners, architects, IT professionals, not-forprofit
organizations, bakers, and candy makers. Agriculture and Farming related activities, as defined
in NH RSA 21:34-a as amended, are not considered a Home Occupation. Home Occupations are
permitted in Residential A, B, R, ICI and IND districts.
A. Administrative Review and Approval.
The following criteria must be met for a Home Occupation Permit to be issued by the Community
Development Office. A Home Occupation permit must be renewed every 3 years:
1. Location - The Home Occupation shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling or accessory
structure.
2. Signs - A sign of not more than four (4) square feet is allowed and shall not advertise in such a
way that would encourage customers or salespersons to come to the property without an
appointment.
3. Employees - Only residents as employees, personnel or volunteers may be affiliated with the
Home Occupation.
4. Area - There shall be not more than five hundred (500) square feet dedicated to the Home
Occupation on any property.
5. Vehicles - Only one (1) branded vehicle to be used by the owner of the Home Occupation shall
be kept onsite.
6. Traffic - There shall be not more than five (5) clients or deliveries per day.
7.12.6 Home Business
A Home Based Business involving the creation, provision, or sale of services and/or goods to and from
the property. Businesses that qualify for a HOME BUSINESS include but are not limited to –
tradespeople, artists, tutors, tailors, accountants, lawyers, engineers, realtors, healing practitioners,
architects, IT professionals, not-for-profit organizations, bakers, and candy makers, single chair
beauty/barber shops, small repair shops, groomers, family day care homes as defined herein. Home
Town of Milford Article VII
7.12
Home Based
Zoning Ordinance Business
Revised 3/2020 Page 154 of 187
Businesses are permitted in Residential A, B and R districts under the following criteria:
A. Special Exception Approval: The following criteria must be met for a Special Exception for a
Home Business to be issued by the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
1. Location - The Home Business shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling or accessory
structure.
2. Signs - a sign of not more than six (6) square feet is allowed and shall not advertise in such a
way that would encourage customers or salespersons to come to the property without an
appointment.
3. Employees - There shall be no more than two (2) non-resident employees of the Home
Business.
4. Area - The Home Business shall not be more than 25% of the combined floor area of all
structures on the property.
5. Sales - Retail sales of goods incidental to Home Business are allowed.
6. Traffic - There shall be not more than sixteen (16) clients or deliveries per day.
7. Vehicles - There shall be no parking of or deliveries by vehicles with more than two (2) axles.
Only one (1) commercial vehicle may be parked on the property in conjunction with the Home
Business.
8. Hours of Operation- A Home Business shall not be conducted in a way that is perceptible in
external effects (such as but not limited to noise, odors, traffic) from beyond the lot line between
the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:30 a.m. This time limit shall also apply to any loading or unloading
of vehicles on the property or on a street that causes noise to adjoining residents.
9. Hazardous Substances - The use shall not involve the storage or use of hazardous, flammable
or explosive substances, other than types and amounts commonly found in a dwelling. The use
shall not involve the use or storage of toxic substances.
7.12.7 Home Industry
A Home Based Business that has a manufacturing component and/or may involve the storage of
equipment and materials outside. Businesses that qualify for a Home Industry include but are not
limited to – brewers, landscapers, contractors where storage or manufacturing is included and other
building trade professionals. Home Industries are permitted in Residential-R districts once a
Conditional Use Permit has been issued by the Planning Board under the following criteria:
A. Conditional Use Permit: In addition to the standards and conditions stated in Section 7.14.0 of the
Milford Zoning Ordinance, the following criteria must be met for a Conditional Use Permit to be
issued by the Planning Board.
1. No more than six (6) people, including the resident(s), may be employed on the premises.
Town of Milford Article VII
7.12
Home Based
Zoning Ordinance Business
Revised 3/2020 Page 155 of 187
2. The Home Industry may be conducted in part outdoors, but all such activities, equipment, and
storage shall be permanently screened from the view of abutters and from public ways by
buffers such as year round vegetation, fences, and/or topography.
3. No more than one quarter (25%) of the lot area, exclusive of areas covered by buildings, shall
be used for the Home Industry, including outdoor storage or parking.
4. The Planning Board must determine that access to the premises by all vehicles that are
anticipated to commonly serve the use will do so without adversely affecting safety in the
vicinity, whether those vehicles are based on the premises or elsewhere.
5. Commercial vehicles may be permitted provided that the vehicles do not adversely affect the
character of the neighborhood, as determined by the Planning Board.
6. Hours of Operation- A Home Industry shall be conducted in a way to minimize the external
effects (such as but not limited to noise, odors, traffic) on abutting properties. The hours of
operation shall be determined through the site plan review process.
7. Hazardous Substances - The use shall not involve the storage or use of hazardous, flammable
or explosive substances, other than types and amounts commonly found in a dwelling. The use
shall not involve the use or storage of toxic substances.
7.12.8 Home Based Business Table of Uses
Town of Milford Article VII
7.13
Self-Storage
Zoning Ordinance Facilities
Revised 3/2020 Page 156 of 187
7.13.0 SELF-STORAGE FACILITIES (2019)
7.13.1 PURPOSE
Self-Storage Facilities have characteristics in common with both commercial uses and industrial
uses. This subsection provides regulations to appropriately site Self-Storage Facilities in Milford while
maintaining the desired character of the community compatible with higher quality commercial
development and existing neighborhoods.
7.13.2 District Regulations
Self-Service Storage Facilities are permitted in the Integrated Commercial-Industrial, Integrated
Commercial-Industrial 2 and Industrial Zoning Districts by the granting of a conditional use permit by
the Planning Board.
7.13.3 CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT
In addition to the standards and conditions stated in Section 7.14.0 of the Milford Zoning Ordinance,
the following criteria must be met for a Conditional Use Permit to be issued by the Planning Board.
A. Granting of the application would meet some public need or convenience.
B. The property in question is reasonably suited for the use requested.
C. There must be appropriate provision for access facilities adequate for the estimated traffic from
public streets and sidewalks, so as to assure public safety and to avoid traffic congestion.
D. The building design and layout is compatible with the surrounding properties.
E. Landscaping and screening shall provide adequate visual mitigation to abutting properties.
7.13.4 STANDARDS
A. The Planning Board shall evaluate the application for compliance with the following standards:
1. The use of the premises shall be limited to storage only, and shall not be used to manufacture,
fabricate, or process goods; service or repair vehicles or boats, trailers, small engines or
electrical equipment, or to conduct similar repair activities
2. No auctions, garage sales or retail sales of any kind, with the exception of the property owner
liquidating abandoned contents of a storage unit, shall be allowed on site.
3. No commercial or industrial activity other than that which pertains to the operation and
maintenance of the facility shall be allowed on the site.
4. An individual self-service storage unit or private postal boxes within a self-service storage facility
shall not be considered premises for the purpose of assigning a legal or business address.
5. Electrical service to storage units shall be for lighting and climate control only. No electrical
outlets are permitted inside individual storage units. Lighting fixtures and switches shall be of
a secure design that will not allow tapping the fixtures for other purposes;
Town of Milford Article VII
7.13
Self-Storage
Zoning Ordinance Facilities
Revised 3/2020 Page 157 of 187
6. Exterior light fixtures shall comply with Section 6.06 of the Milford Development Regulations.
7. If the facility abuts residentially zoned property, the facility loading bays, docks or doors shall
have appropriate permanent visual mitigation to as to not be visible from the residential
property or from public rights-of-way;
8. In order to promote visual compatibility with commercial development allowed in commercial
and industrial zones, Self-Storage Facility buildings shall incorporate appropriate
landscaping/screening and architectural design features, such as: massing; proportion; facade
modulation; exterior building materials and detailing; varied roofline; pedestrian scale; etc.
9. All outdoor storage of merchandise or commodities (including motor vehicles) shall be
screened from any lot which is in a residence district by a strip at least four (4) feet wide,
densely planted with shrubs or trees which are of a type that may be expected to form a
year-round dense screen at least six (6) feet high within three (3) years, or by an opaque
wall, barrier or uniform fence at least six (6) feet high above finished grade. Such screening
shall be maintained in good condition at all times. Such screening or barrier may be
interrupted by normal entrances or exits, and shall have no signs hung or attached thereto
other than those permitted in the district. As a part of the Site Plan approval, the Planning
Board may require additional screening beyond that set forth in Section 6.08 of the Milford
Development Regulations if it determines that additional Screening is necessary or
appropriate.
10. Self-storage facilities shall utilize building materials and architectural features which fit into
the context of the surrounding properties.
11. Except as provided herein, all property stored on the premises shall be entirely within an
enclosed building. Open storage of recreation vehicles, boats and storage pods is permitted,
subject to the following:
a. Storage shall occur only in a designated area which is clearly delineated for open storage.
b. Such areas shall not exceed 10 percent of the lot or parcel area.
c. Such areas shall be screened from view from property zoned for detached single family
residential use and public property, including the public right-of-way.
d. Storage shall not occur in required parking spaces, drives, parking lanes nor within required
building setback areas.
e. No vehicle maintenance, washing or repair shall be permitted.
12. Vehicle and trailer rental may be permitted on the premises as an accessory use by the Self-
Storage Facility owner, subject to review and approval as part of Site Plan Approval. Rental
vehicles shall not be parked in required parking spaces, drives or parking lanes.
Town of Milford Article VII
7.14
Conditional Use
Zoning Ordinance Permits
Revised 3/2020 Page 158 of 187
7.14.0 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
7.14.1 GENERAL
Conditional Use Permits as herein provided for shall be deemed to be permitted uses in their respective
zones, subject to the satisfaction of the requirements and standards set forth herein, in addition to all
other requirements and standards of this Ordinance. All such cases are hereby declared to possess
characteristics of such unique and special form that each specific use shall be considered as an
individual case. The applicant shall bear the burden of persuasion, through the introduction of sufficient
evidence through testimony or otherwise, that the development, if completed as proposed, will comply
with this Article and will satisfy the specific requirements for the use contained in the Ordinance.
7.14.2 PLANNING BOARD TO ADMINISTER
Wherever a conditional use permit is authorized by this Ordinance, the authority to administer or grant
conditional use permits shall be vested in the Planning Board.
7.14.3 STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ALL CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
A. Conditions for Conditional Use Permits
Before the Planning Board considers the approval of an application for a Conditional Use Permit,
the applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the Planning Board that all the following conditions
have been met:
1. That the property in question is in conformance with the dimensional requirements of the zone
or is determined to be legally non-conforming and that the proposed use is consistent with the
Milford Master Plan.
2. That the proposal meets the purposes of the Ordinance under which the application is
proposed.
3. That there will be no significant adverse impacts resulting from the proposed use upon the
public health, safety and general welfare of the neighborhood and the Town of Milford.
4. That the proposed use will not be more objectionable to nearby properties by reason of noise,
fumes, vibration, or inappropriate lighting than any use of the property permitted under the
existing Zoning District Ordinances.
5. That the proposed use will not adversely affect the ground water resource of Milford, in
particular the Groundwater Protection District areas as defined in Section 6.01.0 of this
Ordinance.
B. The applicant shall follow the requirements for specific uses as laid out in this Ordinance and
submit an application in accordance with the Minor Site Plan regulations.
C. Conditions of Approval
1. The Planning Board may attach such conditions to its approval as are reasonable, necessary
and appropriate.
2. All Conditional Use Permit uses are hereby declared to have special characteristics that shall be
considered on a case-by-case basis.
Town of Milford Article VII
7.14
Conditional Use
Zoning Ordinance Permits
Revised 3/2020 Page 159 of 187
D. Limits on a Conditional Use Permit
1. Substantial construction must commence within one (1) year of the Planning Board approval of
the Conditional Use Permit.
2. If construction is not commenced within this period, prior to expiration, the applicant may apply
at a regular Planning Board meeting for one, six-month extension to allow time to commence
construction. The approval of this extension shall be at the Board’s discretion.
7.14.4 BUILDING PERMITS FOR CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
A building permit for a Conditional Use Permit shall not be issued by the Board of Selectmen or their
duly appointed representative, the Administrative official, until so directed by the Planning Board who
shall first be satisfied that all the standards and conditions of this section and the Ordinance have been
met.
7.14.5 WAIVERS
The Planning Board may grant a waiver from a specific section of the Conditional Use Permit in a
special case when:
A. The strict application would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties or exceptional and
undue hardship upon the owner of the affected property; or
B. An alternative design approach which meets the purpose of the Ordinance equally well or better
than compliance with the existing standards and conditions.
In either of the forgoing circumstances, the waiver may be granted so that justice may be done and the
public interest secured, provided that such waiver will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and
purposes of this section, the Zoning Ordinance, Development Regulations or the Master Plan.
The Planning Board shall approve or disapprove waivers based upon the evidence presented to it in
each specific case.
Town of Milford Article VIII
Administration Zoning Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 160 of 187
ARTICLE VIII: ADMINISTRATION
8.01.0 ENFORCEMENT (2012)
This Ordinance shall be enforced by the Board of Selectmen, and the Board of Selectmen is hereby
given power and authority to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. The Board of Selectmen is
further empowered to confer upon an administrative official appointed by the Board of Selectmen the
duty of administering the provisions of this Ordinance in accordance with RSA 676:17 (as amended) or
as otherwise authorized by RSA. A copy of RSA 676:17 is included in appendix.
8.02.0 BUILDING PERMITS
8.02.1 No building or dwelling shall be constructed nor shall any structural alteration or enlargement of
any existing building or dwelling or the placement of a mobile home for use as a dwelling be
commenced until a permit shall have been obtained from the Board of Selectmen or their duly
authorized representative.
8.02.2 The Board of Selectmen or their authorized representative may require of any applicant for a
permit such sketches, drawings, plot plans, or other material as may be deemed necessary by the
Board in connection with the issuance of the permit.
8.02.3 If an applicant for a permit requests a permit to undertake an activity on a lot not conforming in
size and frontage as otherwise required by this Ordinance, such applicant shall file as part of his
application the date of the recording and register of deeds volume and page number of the lot involved.
8.02.4 The State of New Hampshire Building Code pursuant to NH RSA 155-A more appropriately
titled The International Codes, including adopted Appendix Chapters and amendments, shall govern
and regulate the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment,
location, removal and demolition of all detached one and two family dwellings, multiple single-family
dwellings (townhouses), multiple family dwellings and all other commercial and industrial buildings in
the Town of Milford, said Codes also provides for the issuance of permits and collection of fees. (2009)
8.02.5 A building permit is not required for the construction of an accessory structure that is two
hundred (200) sq. ft. or less and does not have electricity or plumbing. A building permit is required for
the construction of an accessory structure greater than two hundred (200) sq. ft. or an accessory
structure of any size that has electricity or plumbing. A building permit is also required for the addition
of electricity or plumbing to any existing accessory structure. (2017)
8.03.0 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
Any subdivision approved subsequent to March 11, 1986 which requires road system layout and
construction, shall have provided in accordance with the Town Road Standards the base coat of
surface pavement, which shall be subject to approval by the Department of Public Works and the
Planning Board, prior to the issuance of any Certificate of Occupancy for any structure whose lot
frontage would include any part of such proposed road system. Private ways shall be considered
exempt from this requirement.
Town of Milford Article VIII
Administration Zoning Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 161 of 187
8.04.0 DRIVEWAY ENTRANCE PERMIT (2008)
A driveway entrance permit is required from the Milford Department of Public Works for any
construction of any new or alteration of any existing driveway, entrance, exit or approach within the
limits of the right of way of any town road. This permit shall be required for new impervious surfaces
over 2,500 SF applied to any existing unpaved driveway in the Level 1 or Level 2 Groundwater
Protection District (See section 6.01.2).
8.05.0 2009 INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE (2010)
An Ordinance establishing the minimum regulations governing the conditions and maintenance of all
property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and
other physical things and conditions essential to insure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for
occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and
use and the demolition of such structures; known as the property maintenance code.
8.05.1 SECTION 1: ADOPTION OF PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE (2010)
That a certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the town clerk of the Town
of Milford, being marked and designated as "the International Property Maintenance Code, 2009,” as
published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance
Code of the Town of Milford, in the State of NH for regulating and governing the conditions and
maintenance of all property, buildings, and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities
and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe,
sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for
human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing
for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance Code on file in the office of
the Town of Milford are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
Ordinance, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Section 2 of this
Ordinance.
8.05.2 SECTION 2: ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS AND CHANGES (2010)
That the 2009 International Property Maintenance Code is amended and revised in the following
respects:
Section -101.1
Insert: Town of Milford
Section 103.5
Delete section
Section 302.4
Delete section
Section 302.7
Delete the word "fence"
Town of Milford Article VIII
Administration Zoning Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 162 of 187
Section 304.14
Insert: May 1 to October 1
Section 602.3
Insert: October 1 to May 31
Section 602.4
Insert: October 1 to May 31
8.05.3 SECTION 3: INCONSISTENT ORDINANCES REPEALED
That Ordinance No. 8.05.0 of The Town of Milford entitled 1993 BOCA NATIONAL PROPERTY
MAINTENANCE CODE and all other Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby
repealed.
8.05.4 SECTION 4: SAVING CLAUSE
That if any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance is, for any reason, held to
be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
Ordinance. The Town of Milford herby declares that it would have passed this Ordinance, and each
section, subsection, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, sentences, clauses and phrases be declared unconstitutional.
8.05.5 SECTION 5: SAVING CLAUSE
That nothing in this Ordinance or in the Property Maintenance Code hereby adopted shall be construed
to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or
any cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or Ordinance hereby repealed as
cited in Section {2} of this Ordinance; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost,
impaired or affected by this Ordinance.
8.05.6 SECTION 6: DATE OF EFFECT
That the Town Clerk shall certify to the adoption of this Ordinance, and cause the same to be published
as required by law; and this Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its approval as
required by law.
Town of Milford Article VIII
Administration Zoning Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 163 of 187
Appendix I
TITLE LXIV
PLANNING AND ZONING
CHAPTER 676
ADMINISTRATIVE AND ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
Penalties and Remedies - Section 676:17
676:17 Fines and Penalties; Second Offense. –
I. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this title, or any local ordinance, code, or
regulation adopted under this title, or any provision or specification of any application, plat, or plan
approved by, or any requirement or condition of a permit or decision issued by, any local administrator
or land use board acting under the authority of this title shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural
person, or guilty of a felony if any other person; and shall be subject to a civil penalty of $275 for the
first offense, and $550 for subsequent offenses, for each day that such violation is found to continue
after the conviction date or after the date on which the violator receives written notice from the
municipality that the violator is in violation, whichever is earlier. Each day that a violation continues
shall be a separate offense.
II. In any legal action brought by a municipality to enforce, by way of injunctive relief as provided by
RSA 676:15 or otherwise, any local ordinance, code or regulation adopted under this title, or to enforce
any planning board, zoning board of adjustment or building code board of appeals decision made
pursuant to this title, or to seek the payment of any fine levied under paragraph I, the municipality shall
recover its costs and reasonable attorney's fees actually expended in pursuing the legal action if it is
found to be a prevailing party in the action. For the purposes of this paragraph, recoverable costs shall
include all out-of-pocket expenses actually incurred, including but not limited to, inspection fees, expert
fees and investigatory expenses.
III. If any violation of a local ordinance, code or regulation, or any violation of a planning board,
zoning board of adjustment or building code board of appeals decision, results in the expenditure of
public funds by a municipality which are not reimbursed under paragraph II, the court in its discretion
may order, as an additional civil penalty, that a violator make restitution to the municipality for such
funds so expended.
IV. The superior court may, upon a petition filed by a municipality and after notice and a preliminary
hearing as in the case of prejudgment attachments under RSA 511-A, require an alleged violator to post
a bond with the court to secure payment of any penalty or remedy or the performance of any injunctive
relief which may be ordered or both. At the hearing, the burden shall be on the municipality to show that
there is a strong likelihood that it will prevail on the merits, that the penalties or remedies sought are
reasonably likely to be awarded by the court in an amount consistent with the bond sought, and that the
bond represents the amount of the projected expense of compliance with the injunctive relief sought.
V. The building inspector or other local official with the authority to enforce the provisions of this
title or any local ordinance, code, or regulation adopted under this title may commence an action under
paragraph I either in the district court pursuant to RSA 502-A:11-a, or in the superior court. The
prosecuting official in the official's discretion may, prior to or at the time of arraignment, charge the
offense as a violation, and in such cases the penalties to be imposed by the court shall be limited to those
provided for a violation under RSA 651:2 and the civil penalty provided in subparagraph I(b) of this
section. The provisions of this section shall supersede any inconsistent local penalty provision.
Source. 1983, 447:1. 1985, 103:25; 210:4. 1988, 19:6, 7. 1996, 226:5, 6. 1997, 92:4, 5. 2004, 242:1.
2006, 101:1, eff. Jan. 1, 2007. 2009, 173:1, eff. Sept. 11, 2009.
Town of Milford Article IX
Board of
Zoning Ordinance Adjustment
Revised 3/2020 Page 164 of 187
ARTICLE IX: BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT (1986)
9.01.0 AUTHORIZATION
In accordance with the provisions of the New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated (NH RSA), 1955,
Chapter 31 (updated 1985, Chapter 674.33) as amended and as hereinafter a Board of Adjustment is
established.
9.02.0 MEMBERS
The Board of Adjustment shall consist of five members appointed by the Board of Selectmen in the
Town of Milford. Appointments to the Board shall be for a term of three (3) years. Members of the
Board shall serve without compensation. The Board shall elect one of its members to serve as
chairman. The Board shall have five (5) alternate members to be appointed by the Board of Selectmen
for a term of three (3) years each. (1997)
9.03.0 DUTIES & POWERS
The Board of Adjustment shall perform all the duties and have all the powers provided by the New
Hampshire revised statutes annotated, 1955, as amended and as hereinafter provided.
9.04.0 MEETINGS
Meeting of the Board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the Board of
Adjustment may determine. All meetings shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep a record of
all proceedings showing the vote upon every question. Every rule or regulation, every amendment or
repeal thereof and every order, requirement or decision of the Board of Adjustment shall immediately
be filed in the Office of the Zoning Administrator and shall become a public record. The concurring vote
of three members of the Board of Adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, or
determination of the administrative office or to decide any matter upon which it is required to pass or
effect any variance from the strict application of the provisions of this Ordinance.
9.05.0 RULES
The Board of Adjustment shall adopt and promulgate rules of procedure for the guidance of all persons
having business before the Board.
Town of Milford Article X
Administrative
Zoning Ordinance Relief
Revised 3/2020 Page 165 of 187
ARTICLE X: ADMINISTRATIVE RELIEF
10.01.0 VARIANCES (2012)
10.01.1
Any request for a permit of any nature required under this Ordinance which will require a variance from
the prescribed standards of this Ordinance shall be made only by the owner of the property in question,
the owner’s duly appointed agent and shall be transmitted to the Board of Adjustment or its duly
appointed official to the Board. All variance requests made to the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be
made in accordance with RSA 676:5 (as amended), a copy of which is included in the Appendix.
10.01.2
Every variance granted by the Board of Adjustment shall be in accordance with the powers of the Board
as stated in RSA 674:33 (as amended), a copy of which is included in the appendix.
10.02.0 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
10.02.1
The Board of Adjustment may in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate conditions and
safeguards as determined by the Board, grant permits for such special exceptions as allowed in the
various zoning districts as set forth in Article II. The Board may refer all applications for special
exceptions to the Planning Board for its review and recommendations prior to holding public hearing on
the application. The Board of Adjustment, in acting on an application for a special exception shall take
into consideration the following conditions: (1992)
A. The proposed use shall be similar to those permitted in the district.
B. The specific site is an appropriate location for the proposed use.
C. The use as developed will not adversely affect the adjacent area.
D. There will be no nuisance or serious hazard to vehicles or pedestrians.
E. Adequate appropriate facilities will be provided for the proper operation of the proposed use.
10.02.2
The Board of Adjustment shall act upon an application for a special exception in the same manner as
prescribed in Section 10.01.1 of this article.
10.02.3 HOME OCCUPATIONS
A. In all cases involving home occupations, the Board of Adjustment in addition to the criteria
contained herein shall consider the following requirements:
Town of Milford Article X
Administrative
Zoning Ordinance Relief
Revised 3/2020 Page 166 of 187
1. The person conducting the home occupation shall reside in the dwelling unit, and there shall be
no more than one (1) non-resident person employed in connection with such occupation.
2. There shall be no evidence outside the dwelling, except permitted signs and required off-street
parking, that the dwelling contains a home occupation.
3. The home occupation shall not exceed 25% of the combined gross floor area of the existing
home and any accessory structures, or 1,000 SF, whichever is less. (2016)
4. Accessory finished goods may be provided for sale in conjunction with the home occupation,
sold and stored in allowed home occupation space only. (2008)
5. The home occupation and the conduct thereof shall not impair the residential character of the
premises nor impair the reasonable use, enjoyment and value of other residential property in the
neighborhood.
B. Any special exceptions issued hereunder shall automatically terminate when the applicant no longer
resides in the dwelling unit.
C. Prior to commencement of a Home Occupation, the homeowner shall make application for a permit
to the Community Development Office, submit to a Code Compliance Inspection specific to the
location or area of the Home Occupation. (2012)
10.02.4 SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITIES (1997)
Entire Section DELETED in 2019.
10.02.5 MANUFACTURING IN THE “C”- COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (2011)
Entire Section DELETED in 2011.
10.02.6 ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS (2017)
A. In all cases involving an Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU):
1. An ADU shall meet the following minimum requirements:
a. Only one (1) ADU shall be allowed per property. (2013)
b. Either the principal dwelling unit or the ADU must be owner occupied. (2017)
c. The size of an ADU shall be no more than 750 SF gross floor area. (2017)
d. The ADU shall include no more than two (2) bedrooms. (2017)
e. No additional curb cuts shall be allowed.
f. An attached ADU shall have and maintain at least one common interior access between
the principal dwelling unit and the ADU consisting of a connector that is a minimum of 36”
in width or a doorway a minimum of 32” in width. (2017)
Town of Milford Article X
Administrative
Zoning Ordinance Relief
Revised 3/2020 Page 167 of 187
g. The ADU shall be located in an existing or proposed single-family dwelling, its detached
accessory structure(s), or as a stand-alone dwelling unit subordinate to the single-family
dwelling. (2017)
h. Deleted (2013)
i. An existing, nonconforming, single-family residential structure or its detached accessory
structure shall not be made more nonconforming. (2013)
j. An ADU shall meet all applicable local and State Building, Fire and Health Safety Codes.
(2012)
k. Must have adequate provisions for a water supply and sewerage disposal method for the
ADU, in accordance with NH RSA 485-a:38 Approval to Increase Load on a Sewage
Disposal System (as amended). (2017)
2. The Board of Adjustment, prior to granting a Special Exception, shall conduct a hearing to
determine if the proposed ADU complies with the following criteria:
a. The ADU must be developed in a manner which does not alter the character or appearance
of the principal use as a single-family dwelling. (2017)
b. The ADU is intended to be secondary and accessory to a principal single-family dwelling
unit.
c. The ADU shall not impair the residential character of the premises nor impair the reasonable
use, enjoyment and value of other property in the neighborhood.
d. Adequate off-street parking must be provided.
e. Any necessary additional entrances or exits shall be located to the side or rear of the
building whenever possible.
B. All ADUs must apply for a compliance inspection when a change of ownership occurs, to ensure
compliance with Section 10.02.6:A.
C. Existing Unpermitted Accessory Dwelling Units:
Unpermitted Accessory Dwelling Units found to be in existence prior to the passage of this Section
and are not legally non-conforming, must obtain Special Exception approval to continue to be
occupied in accordance with the following criteria: (2010)
1. The ADU complies with all requirements in 10.02.6.A.
2. Prior to the Special Exception application being heard by the Zoning Board of Adjustment, a
compliance inspection shall be conducted by the Code Enforcement Department.
3. Within forty-five (45) days of the approval of a Special Exception to allow the continuation of an
existing unpermitted ADU, the applicant shall complete one of the following:
a. If the ADU has been found to meet all applicable codes, or will need alterations that do not
require a building permit, obtain a certificate of compliance from Code Enforcement based
on the code compliance inspection; or
Town of Milford Article X
Administrative
Zoning Ordinance Relief
Revised 3/2020 Page 168 of 187
b. If the ADU has been found not to meet all applicable codes, and a building permit is
required, the ADU shall pass all required inspections and obtain a certificate of occupancy.
D. Failure to obtain a certificate of compliance or occupancy for an ADU shall be a violation of the
Milford Zoning Ordinance and subject to enforcement action.
10.02.7 OFFICE IN THE RESIDENCE A AND B DISTRICTS (2011)
A. In all cases involving offices in the Residence A and Residence B districts, the following shall be
minimum performance standards for approval by the Zoning Board of Adjustment:
1. The specific site of the proposed office use will be located in an existing building that is an
appropriate location for the proposed use;
2. The use as proposed will not adversely affect adjacent areas;
3. There will be no nuisance, such as but not limited to: noise, odor, hours of operation, traffic,
deliveries and lighting;
4. There will be no outside storage; and
5. The use shall require site plan approval by the Planning Board, subsequent to Zoning Board
approval.
Town of Milford Article X
Administrative
Zoning Ordinance Relief
Revised 3/2020 Page 169 of 187
10.03.0 APPEALS TO THE BOARD (2008)
10.03.1
The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals in accordance with NH RSA 674:33 and NH
RSA 676:5 through 676:7. The rules of the Board of Adjustment shall specify the time within which
such an appeal shall be taken.
10.03.2
Appeals of Planning Board decisions exercising subdivision or site plan review shall be made to the
Board of Adjustment in accordance with NH RSA 676:5,III. All other appeals of Planning Board
decisions may be made in superior court in accordance with NH RSA 677:15.
10.04.0 APPEAL FROM ORDER OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT (2008)
Rehearings by the Board of Adjustment shall be conducted in accordance with NH RSA 677:2 and :3.
Appeals from the Board of Adjustment’s decision on a motion for rehearing shall be conducted in
accordance with NH RSA 677:4 through 14.
10.05.0 PLANNING BOARD REVIEW NECESSARY (2008)
Whenever a variance or special exception is required for a use or structure which must also receive
subdivision or site plan review by the Planning Board such required variance or special exception must
be received from the Board of Adjustment prior to Planning Board final approval of the subdivision or
site plan.
10.06.0 EXPIRATION (2015)
If within two (2) years after the granting of a variance or special exception by the Board of Adjustment,
none of the work required by a building permit covered by a variance or special exception has been
executed, then such variance or special exception shall become null and void except in any case where
legal proceedings relative to the variance or special exception shall have caused an undue delay in the
execution of the required building permit. Only one, six-month extension may be granted for any
variance or special exception. The applicant may apply for the extension at a regularly scheduled
Zoning Board meeting.
10.07.0 EQUITABLE WAIVER (2012)
All equitable waivers of dimensional requirements shall be governed by RSA 674:33-a (as amended), a
copy of which is included in the Appendix.
Town of Milford Article X
Administrative
Zoning Ordinance Relief
Revised 3/2020 Page 170 of 187
Appendix I, 676:5 Appeals to Board of Adjustment
TITLE LXIV
PLANNING AND ZONING
CHAPTER 676
ADMINISTRATIVE AND ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
Zoning Board of Adjustment
Section 676:5
676:5 Appeals to Board of Adjustment. –
I. Appeals to the board of adjustment concerning any matter within the board's powers as set forth in RSA
674:33 may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the municipality
affected by any decision of the administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as
provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the board a
notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith
transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
II. For the purposes of this section:
(a) The "administrative officer'' means any official or board who, in that municipality, has responsibility for
issuing permits or certificates under the ordinance, or for enforcing the ordinance, and may include a building
inspector, board of selectmen, or other official or board with such responsibility.
(b) A "decision of the administrative officer'' includes any decision involving construction, interpretation or
application of the terms of the ordinance. It does not include a discretionary decision to commence formal or
informal enforcement proceedings, but does include any construction, interpretation or application of the terms of
the ordinance which is implicated in such enforcement proceedings.
III. If, in the exercise of subdivision or site plan review, the planning board makes any decision or
determination which is based upon the terms of the zoning ordinance, or upon any construction, interpretation, or
application of the zoning ordinance, which would be appealable to the board of adjustment if it had been made by
the administrative officer, then such decision may be appealed to the board of adjustment under this section;
provided, however, that if the zoning ordinance contains an innovative land use control adopted pursuant to RSA
674:21 which delegates administration, including the granting of conditional or special use permits, to the
planning board, then the planning board's decision made pursuant to that delegation cannot be appealed to the
board of adjustment, but may be appealed to the superior court as provided by RSA 677:15.
IV. The board of adjustment may impose reasonable fees to cover its administrative expenses and costs of
special investigative studies, review of documents, and other matters which may be required by particular appeals
or applications.
V. (a) A board of adjustment reviewing a land use application may require the applicant to reimburse the board
for expenses reasonably incurred by obtaining third party review and consultation during the review process,
provided that the review and consultation does not substantially replicate a review and consultation obtained by
the planning board.
(b) A board of adjustment retaining services under subparagraph (a) shall require detailed invoices with
reasonable task descriptions for services rendered. Upon request of the applicant, the board of adjustment shall
promptly provide a reasonably detailed accounting of expenses, or corresponding escrow deductions, with copies
of supporting documentation.
Source. 1983, 447:1. 1987, 256:5. 1989, 69:1. 1991, 231:13. 1995, 243:1, eff. Jan. 1, 1996. 2010, 303:1, eff. Sept.
11, 2010.
Town of Milford Article X
Administrative
Zoning Ordinance Relief
Revised 3/2020 Page 171 of 187
Appendix II, 674:33 Powers of Zoning Board of Adjustment
TITLE LXIV- PLANNING AND ZONING
CHAPTER 674
LOCAL LAND USE PLANNING AND REGULATORY POWERS
Section 674:33
Zoning Board of Adjustment and Building Code Board of Appeals
674:33 Powers of Zoning Board of Adjustment. –
I. The zoning board of adjustment shall have the power to:
(a) Hear and decide appeals if it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination
made by an administrative official in the enforcement of any zoning ordinance adopted pursuant to RSA 674:16;
and
(b) Authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, a variance from the terms of the zoning ordinance if:
(1) The variance will not be contrary to the public interest;
(2) The spirit of the ordinance is observed;
(3) Substantial justice is done;
(4) The values of surrounding properties are not diminished; and
(5) Literal enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance would result in an unnecessary hardship.
(A) For purposes of this subparagraph, "unnecessary hardship'' means that, owing to special conditions of
the property that distinguish it from other properties in the area:
(i) No fair and substantial relationship exists between the general public purposes of the ordinance
provision and the specific application of that provision to the property; and
(ii) The proposed use is a reasonable one.
(B) If the criteria in subparagraph (A) are not established, an unnecessary hardship will be deemed to
exist if, and only if, owing to special conditions of the property that distinguish it from other properties in the
area, the property cannot be reasonably used in strict conformance with the ordinance, and a variance is therefore
necessary to enable a reasonable use of it.
The definition of "unnecessary hardship'' set forth in subparagraph (5) shall apply whether the provision of
the ordinance from which a variance is sought is a restriction on use, a dimensional or other limitation on a
permitted use, or any other requirement of the ordinance.
I-a. Variances authorized under paragraph I shall be valid if exercised within 2 years from the date of final
approval, or as further extended by local ordinance or by the zoning board of adjustment for good cause, provided
that no such variance shall expire within 6 months after the resolution of a planning application filed in reliance
upon the variance.
II. In exercising its powers under paragraph I, the zoning board of adjustment may reverse or affirm, wholly or
in part, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may make such order
or decision as ought to be made and, to that end, shall have all the powers of the administrative official from
whom the appeal is taken.
III. The concurring vote of 3 members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any action of the
administrative official or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter on which it is required to pass.
IV. A local zoning ordinance may provide that the zoning board of adjustment, in appropriate cases and subject
to appropriate conditions and safeguards, make special exceptions to the terms of the ordinance. All special
exceptions shall be made in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the zoning ordinance and shall be in
accordance with the general or specific rules contained in the ordinance. Special exceptions authorized under this
paragraph shall be valid if exercised within 2 years from the date of final approval, or as further extended by local
ordinance or by the zoning board of adjustment for good cause, provided that no such special exception shall
expire within 6 months after the resolution of a planning application filed in reliance upon the special exception.
Continued on next page
Town of Milford Article X
Administrative
Zoning Ordinance Relief
Revised 3/2020 Page 172 of 187
TITLE LXIV- PLANNING AND ZONING
CHAPTER 674
LOCAL LAND USE PLANNING AND REGULATORY POWERS
Section 674:33
Zoning Board of Adjustment and Building Code Board of Appeals
674:33 Powers of Zoning Board of Adjustment. –
(Continued from prior page)
V. Notwithstanding subparagraph I(b), any zoning board of adjustment may grant a variance from the terms of a
zoning ordinance without finding a hardship arising from the condition of a premises subject to the ordinance,
when reasonable accommodations are necessary to allow a person or persons with a recognized physical disability
to reside in or regularly use the premises, provided that:
(a) Any variance granted under this paragraph shall be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the
zoning ordinance.
(b) In granting any variance pursuant to this paragraph, the zoning board of adjustment may provide, in a
finding included in the variance, that the variance shall survive only so long as the particular person has a
continuing need to use the premises.
VI. The zoning board of adjustment shall not require submission of an application for or receipt of a permit or
permits from other state or federal governmental bodies prior to accepting a submission for its review or rendering
its decision.
VII. Neither a special exception nor a variance shall be required for a collocation or a modification of a
personal wireless service facility, as defined in RSA 12-K:2.
Source. 1983, 447:1. 1985, 103:20. 1987, 256:1. 1998, 218:1, eff. Aug. 17, 1998. 2009, 307:6, eff. Jan. 1, 2010.
Town of Milford Article X
Administrative
Zoning Ordinance Relief
Revised 3/2020 Page 173 of 187
Appendix III, RSA 674:33-a Equitable Waiver of Dimensional Requirement
TITLE LXIV
PLANNING AND ZONING
CHAPTER 674
LOCAL LAND USE PLANNING AND REGULATORY POWERS
Zoning Board of Adjustment and Building Code Board of Appeals
Section 674:33-a
674:33-a Equitable Waiver of Dimensional Requirement. –
I. When a lot or other division of land, or structure thereupon, is discovered to be in violation of a physical
layout or dimensional requirement imposed by a zoning ordinance enacted pursuant to RSA 674:16, the zoning
board of adjustment shall, upon application by and with the burden of proof on the property owner, grant an
equitable waiver from the requirement, if and only if the board makes all of the following findings:
(a) That the violation was not noticed or discovered by any owner, former owner, owner's agent or
representative, or municipal official, until after a structure in violation had been substantially completed, or until
after a lot or other division of land in violation had been subdivided by conveyance to a bona fide purchaser for
value;
(b) That the violation was not an outcome of ignorance of the law or ordinance, failure to inquire,
obfuscation, misrepresentation, or bad faith on the part of any owner, owner's agent or representative, but was
instead caused by either a good faith error in measurement or calculation made by an owner or owner's agent, or
by an error in ordinance interpretation or applicability made by a municipal official in the process of issuing a
permit over which that official had authority;
(c) That the physical or dimensional violation does not constitute a public or private nuisance, nor diminish
the value of other property in the area, nor interfere with or adversely affect any present or permissible future uses
of any such property; and
(d) That due to the degree of past construction or investment made in ignorance of the facts constituting the
violation, the cost of correction so far outweighs any public benefit to be gained, that it would be inequitable to
require the violation to be corrected.
II. In lieu of the findings required by the board under subparagraphs I(a) and (b), the owner may demonstrate to
the satisfaction of the board that the violation has existed for 10 years or more, and that no enforcement action,
including written notice of violation, has been commenced against the violation during that time by the
municipality or any person directly affected.
III. Application and hearing procedures for equitable waivers under this section shall be governed by RSA
676:5 through 7. Rehearings and appeals shall be governed by RSA 677:2 through 14.
IV. Waivers shall be granted under this section only from physical layout, mathematical or dimensional
requirements, and not from use restrictions. An equitable waiver granted under this section shall not be construed
as a nonconforming use, and shall not exempt future use, construction, reconstruction, or additions on the
property from full compliance with the ordinance. This section shall not be construed to alter the principle that
owners of land are bound by constructive knowledge of all applicable requirements. This section shall not be
construed to impose upon municipal officials any duty to guarantee the correctness of plans reviewed by them or
property inspected by them.
Source. 1996, 226:4, eff. Jan. 1, 1997.
Town of Milford Article XI
Impact Fees Zoning Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 174 of 187
ARTICLE XI: IMPACT FEES (2003)
11.01.0 GENERAL
11.01.1 AUTHORITY
This Ordinance is established pursuant to The State of New Hampshire RSA 674:21 (V). All references
in this Ordinance will refer to State of New Hampshire RSAs.
11.01.2 INTENT
This Ordinance is intended to:
Implement and be consistent with the Town of Milford's Master Plan; and
Allocate a fair and equitable share of the cost of public capital facilities (including school construction)
to new development (exclusive of existing impact fee regulations that relate to sewer and water facilities
enacted pursuant to NH RSA 38 and NH RSA 149-I, currently in place); and
Require that new development contribute its proportionate share of funds necessary to accommodate
its impact on public facilities; and
Apply to all forms of development identified in NH RSA 674:21 (V), other than the sewer and water
facilities identified above.
11.01.3 FINDINGS
The Town of Milford is responsible for and committed to the provision of public facilities and services at
levels necessary to support residential and non-residential growth and development.
Such facilities and services have been and will be provided by the Town utilizing funds allocated via the
Capital Improvements Program as regularly updated pursuant to NH RSA 674:5.
The rate of growth experienced by the Town in recent years and projected growth rates, have and will
continue to necessitate an expenditure of public funds in order to provide adequate facility standards.
New development may create a need for the construction, equipping or expanding of public capital
facilities.
The imposition of impact fees is one of the available methods of ensuring that public expenditures are
not excessive, and that new development bears a proportionate share of the cost of public capital
facilities necessary to accommodate such development. This must be done in order to promote and
ensure the public health, safety and welfare.
The fees established by the Impact Fee Schedules for the categories identified in Section 11.031 are
derived from, based upon, and shall not exceed the costs of:
Town of Milford Article XI
Impact Fees Zoning Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 175 of 187
Providing additional public capital facilities necessitated by the new development for which the fees are
levied; or
Compensating the Town of Milford for expenditures made for existing public facilities that were
constructed in anticipation of new growth and development.
11.01.4 DEFINITIONS
The following definitions shall apply to ARTICLE XI - Impact Fees.
Accessory Structure - Non-Residential: A structure on the same lot with, and of a nature incidental
and subordinate to, the principal structure.
Applicant: A person or agent applying for the issuance of a building permit, permit for manufactured
home installation, subdivision, site plan or other local land use decision, permit or approval.
Dwelling Unit: One room or rooms connected together, constituting a separate, independent
housekeeping establishment physically separated from any other dwelling units in the same structure,
and containing independent cooking and sleeping facilities.
New Development: Any activity that results in:
o The creation of a new dwelling unit or dwelling units;
o The conversion of a non-residential use to a dwelling unit or dwelling units;
o Construction of new non-residential facilities and/or accessory structures;
o The conversion of a residential use to non-residential use.
New Development does not include:
The reconstruction of a residential or non-residential structure that has been destroyed by fire or natural
disaster, provided there is no change in the number of dwelling units or size of the structure;
The replacement of a manufactured home with another manufactured home provided there is no
change in the number of dwelling units or size of the structure.
Public Capital Facilities: Facilities and equipment which are owned and operated by the Town of
Milford, the Milford School System, or cooperatively with other municipalities and which have a useful
life of no less than five years. Public capital facilities do not include the costs associated with the
operation, maintenance or repair of such facilities, or with facility replacements that do not increase the
capacity or level of service, but do include reasonable costs for planning, engineering, design, land
acquisition, and other reasonable costs associated with such facilities.
Total Non-Residential Area: The total area of a non-residential structure shall equal the sum of the
gross horizontal area of each floor and mezzanine. Any non-residential structure with an area of one
hundred twenty (120) square feet or less is excluded.
Total Residential Area: The total residential area of a residential structure shall be equal to the sum of
the gross horizontal area of each floor, including attached decks, porches, breezeways, sun rooms,
balconies and attached garages. Total residential area excludes basements, cellars and detached
outbuildings.
Town of Milford Article XI
Impact Fees Zoning Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 176 of 187
11.02.0 OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENT
An improvement that is required by the Planning Board for either a site plan or subdivision that is
necessary, in the judgment of the Planning Board, for the project to operate properly on the day that it
opens shall be considered to be an Off-Site Improvement. Off-site improvements for site specific
applications shall be assessed on a case by case basis and shall be in addition to other impact fees
imposed pursuant to this Ordinance. In a case in which it is determined that such an improvement is
necessary for the proper operation of the project, the Planning Board shall so notify the applicant. The
applicant shall be required to present to the Board a study that identifies the proportionate share of the
cost of the required improvement. The Planning Board may, at the expense of the applicant, refer such
study to a consultant of its own choosing to determine the reliability of the findings that shall be
considered by the Board to arrive at an amount to be paid by the applicant for the offsite improvement.
The applicant shall be assessed his/her proportionate share of the cost of the project. In cases where it
is determined that an improvement is necessary for the proper functioning of a site plan or subdivision,
but the applicant, for whatever reason is determined to contribute more than his/her proportionate share
to the improvement under this section, and, therefore, that the improvement will also accommodate
other future development, the Planning Board, at the request and expense of the applicant, may
establish a separate, project related impact fee that assesses other future site plans or subdivisions for
their proportionate share of the improvement to reimburse the applicant for such disproportionate
contribution. Such future impact fees shall provide for the payment to the original applicant, with any
interest.
11.03.0 IMPOSITION OF IMPACT FEES FOR NEW DEVELOPMENT
Any person or agent, who after the effective date of this Ordinance, seeks to undertake new
development within the Town of Milford, New Hampshire, by applying for a building permit and who is
not vested under NH RSA 674:39, is hereby required to pay the appropriate impact fee in the manner
set forth in this Ordinance, in accordance with any Impact Fee Schedule adopted by the Board of
Selectmen.
No new building permit for an activity requiring payment of one or more impact fee(s) pursuant to this
Ordinance shall be issued unless and until the impact fee(s) hereby required have been assessed and
agreed upon.
11.03.1 COMPUTATION OF IMPACT FEES
A. Amount of Impact Fees and Type of Facilities:
The amounts of the impact fees shall be determined using the values contained in the Impact Fee
Schedules for the following types of facilities:
* Storm water, drainage and flood control facilities
* Public road systems and rights-of-way
* Municipal office facilities
* Public school facilities
Town of Milford Article XI
Impact Fees Zoning Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 177 of 187
* The municipality's proportional share of capital facilities of a cooperative or regional
governmental venture
* Public safety facilities
* Public health facilities
* Solid waste collection, transfer, recycling, processing and disposal facilities
* Public library facilities
* Public recreational facilities not including public open space.
Sewer and water facilities are excluded from this list because the impacts on these facilities, as well
as the fees relating to same, are addressed elsewhere in regulations arising out of NH RSA 38 and
NH RSA 149-I.
B. Impact Fees Schedules shall be established and reviewed as set forth in Section 11.06.0 below.
In the case of change of use, redevelopment expansion or modification of an existing use that
constitutes New Development, the impact fees shall be based upon the net increase of the total
residential area or total nonresidential area of the redevelopment, expansion or modification.
C. Assessment and Payment of Fees. All impact fees imposed pursuant to this Ordinance shall be
assessed prior to, or as a condition for, the issuance of a building permit or other appropriate
permission to proceed with development. Impact fees shall be collected as a condition for the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
D. Appeals. If an applicant elects to dispute the amount of the impact fee(s), the applicant may
prepare and submit to the Planning Board an independent fee calculation study for the new
development activity that is proposed. The Planning Board shall review such study and render a
decision within sixty (60) days of the receipt of the independent fee calculation.
All cost(s) incurred by the Town for the review of such study shall be paid by the applicant.
The decision of the Planning Board regarding any disputed fee calculations may be appealed to the
Superior Court as provided by NH RSA 677.15.
11.03.2 ADMINISTRATION AND CUSTODY OF FUNDS COLLECTED
Any impact fee collected shall be properly identified and promptly deposited in the appropriate Impact
Fee accounts and used solely for the purpose for which it was collected. Impact fee accounts shall be
special revenue fund accounts and under no circumstances will impact fee revenues accrue to the
General Fund. Each fee collected under a specific Impact Fee Schedule shall not be commingled with
any other impact fee accounts or any other funds.
The Town Treasurer shall have custody of all accounts and shall pay out the same only upon written
orders of the Board of Selectmen.
Town of Milford Article XI
Impact Fees Zoning Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 178 of 187
At the end of each fiscal year, the Town Treasurer shall prepare a report, showing a full account of all
impact fee transactions during the year and deliver same to the Board of Selectmen, the Planning
Board, and shall make the report available to the Public.
11.03.3 REFUND OF FEES PAID
A refund shall be owed only when the Town has failed, within the period six (6) years from the payment
of a fee, to expend or encumber a fee for public capital facilities intended to benefit the development
that had paid the fees.
The Board of Selectmen shall notify the owner of record by certified mail, return receipt requested, that
a refund is due.
The current owner of property on which impact fees have been paid may apply for a full or partial
refund of such fees, together with any accrued interest.
In the event that the owner elects to apply for a refund, such application shall be submitted in writing to
the Board of Selectmen within sixty (60) days from the date of receiving notice from the Board of
Selectmen. Payment of a refund will be made within sixty (60) days after receiving the written request
for a refund from the current owner of record.
11.03.4 CREDITS IN EXCHANGE FOR PUBLIC CAPITAL FACILITIES
The Board of Selectmen may grant a credit to an impact fee in exchange for public capital
improvements. Said public capital improvements may be offered by the applicant as total or partial
payment of the required impact fee. Such credit shall be determined to represent an identifiable dollar
value computed in a manner acceptable to the Planning Board. The Board of Selectmen shall act on a
request for credit only after receipt of a recommendation on the request provided by the Planning
Board.
Any claim by the applicant for credit must be made prior to the Planning Board vote on subdivision or
site plan approval.
Credits shall not be transferable, and apply only to a specific subdivision or site plan approval.
Credits shall not be transferable from one impact fee to any other impact fee.
Any decision by the Board of Selectmen pursuant to the credit provision of this section may be
appealed to the Superior Court in accordance with NH RSA 677:15.
Under no circumstances shall this section imply that the Board of Selectmen has an obligation to
accept any credit offer that is proposed.
11.04.0 ADDITIONAL ASSESSMENTS
Payment of an impact fee does not restrict the Town or the Planning Board from requiring other
payments from the applicant, including without limitation such payments relating to the cost of the
Town of Milford Article XI
Impact Fees Zoning Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 179 of 187
extensions of water and sewer mains or the construction or improvement of roads or streets or other
infrastructure and facilities specifically benefiting the development which are required by the
development review regulations or as otherwise permitted by law.
11.05.0 PREMATURE AND SCATTERED DEVELOPMENT
Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed so as to limit the existing authority of the Milford Planning
Board to provide against development which is scattered or premature, which requires an excessive
expenditure of public funds, or otherwise violates the Town of Milford's Development Regulations or
Zoning Ordinance.
11.06.0 ESTABLISHMENT, CALCULATION, REVIEW & TERMINATION OF IMPACT FEES
11.06.1 ESTABLISHMENT OF IMPACT FEES
In order to establish an impact fee, the Capital Improvements Plan Citizens Advisory Committee as
established by the Planning Board shall identify and recommend to the Planning Board projects eligible
for impact fee funding. If such recommendations are accepted, the Planning Board will then prepare an
Impact Fee Schedule in accordance with NH RSA 674:21 and this Ordinance.
The Planning Board shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed Schedule, and shall consider all
comments received prior to finalizing the Schedule. The Planning Board, upon such finalization, shall
then submit the Schedule to the Board of Selectmen for its consideration. The Board of Selectmen at a
regular meeting shall either accept or reject the proposed Schedule. The Impact Fee Schedule shall
become effective when a majority of the Board of Selectmen approves the schedule. Should the Board
of Selectmen fail to approve the schedule, it shall state its reason(s) for doing so in writing and shall
forward these comments to the Planning Board within 60 days of the receipt of the Impact Fee
Schedule. The Planning Board may reconsider the adoption of such a Schedule.
11.06.2 IMPACT FEE SCHEDULE CALCULATION
The Impact Fee Schedule shall be prepared in accordance with NH RSA 674:21 and based upon the
most recent data available. The Impact Fee Schedule shall be calculated using the following factors:
The size of the capital facility;
An estimate of the proportion of users from future Milford commercial, industrial or residential
development subject to the impact fee that will use the facility when it has reached its capacity;
Projections of future users based upon new building permit projections;
Estimates of the cost to the Town of Milford for the proposed facility, including financing and excluding
non-municipal funding sources;
Credits for property taxes to be paid by the proportion of the project to be financed by impact fees;
A fee assessed for new development based upon the total residential area or total non-residential area;
Town of Milford Article XI
Impact Fees Zoning Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 180 of 187
A determination of the number of building permits that will need to be issued in order to finance the
impact fee;
An accounting of the number of permits issued, with a maximum number of permits to be assessed an
impact fee prior to the fee's termination;
Exemptions, if any;
Impact fee schedules will be available in the Department of Planning and Community Development and
the Building Department.
11.06.3 REVIEW OF IMPACT FEES
The Planning Board shall review all established Impact Fee Schedules on an annual basis.
The Planning Board shall modify the Impact Fee Schedule if it finds that new data is available that may
change the schedule. This may include the replacement of factors used in the Impact Fee Schedule
with more accurate or recent projections, data and figures. The Planning Board shall submit the Impact
Fee Schedule to the Board of Selectmen if modifications are recommended. The Board of Selectmen
shall vote to affirm or deny the modifications within sixty (60) days of the receipt of recommendations
from the Planning Board. If the Board of Selectmen fails to affirm the modifications, the impact fee
schedule in effect shall remain in place.
11.06.4 TERMINATION OF IMPACT FEES
Impact fees shall terminate in accordance with the Impact Fee Schedule, which shall set forth the
number of building permits to be issued prior to its expiration.
The Board of Selectmen may terminate a specific impact fee schedule in effect by majority vote. This
may be done only after soliciting recommendations from the Planning Board, and after conducting a
public hearing. The Planning Board shall be given sixty (60) days notice prior to any such vote to
provide written recommendations to the Board of Selectmen.
11.07.0 SEVERABILITY
If any section, phrase, sentence or portion of this Ordinance is for any reason held invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate,
distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions thereof.
11.08.0 EFFECTIVE DATE
This Ordinance shall become effective on the date of its passage, subject to the limitations imposed by
NH RSA 676:12.
Town of Milford Article XII
GMO Zoning Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 181 of 187
ARTICLE XII: GROWTH MANAGEMENT AND INNOVATIVE LAND USE CONTROL
Entire article deleted in 2010.
Town of Milford Zoning
Amendments Zoning Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 182 of 187
Changes/amendments to zoning Ordinance by year
Year Article Section Effect
2020 VI 6.03 Floodplain Management District Remove and replace entire section
2020 VI 6.06 Commerce Community Overlay Delete section
2020 VI 6.07.6 West Elm Overlay District Revise wording to reflect new boundary area
2019 II 2.03.1.C.2 General Provisions Revise wording and correct section reference.
2019 IV 4.01.0 Definitions Remove and replace Home Occupation with Home Based Business
2019 IV 4.01.0 Definitions Remove and replace Self-Storage Facilities with Self-Storage
Facility
2019 V 5.04.2.A.12 Special Exception Remove Self-service storage facilities in accordance with Section
10.02.4
2019 V 5.02.1, 5.03.1, 5.04.1, 5.05.1, 5.06.1 Add Solar Collection Systems in accordance with Section 7.11.0
5.07.1, 5.08.1, 5.09.1 Acceptable Uses
2019 V 5.02.1, 5.03.1, 5.04.1, 5.06.1, 5.08.1 Add Home Based Business in accordance with Section 7.12.0
Acceptable Uses
2019 V 5.02.2.A, 5.03.2.A, 5.04.2.A Replace Home occupations in accordance with Section 10.02.3 and
Acceptable Uses add Home Based Business in accordance with Section 7.12.0
2019 V 5.04.2.B Add Home Based Business in accordance with Section 7.12.0
2019 V 5.04.2.B, 5.06.2.B, 5.08.2.B, Add Solar Collection Systems in accordance with Section 7.11.0
5.09.2.B Conditional Use Permits
2019 VII 7.06.0 Sign Ordinance Remove and replace entire section
2019 VII 7.11.0 Solar Collection Systems Add Solar Collection Systems
2019 VII 7.12.0 Home Based Business Add Home Based Business
2019 VII 7.13.0 Self-Storage Facilities Add Self-Storage Facilities
2019 VII 7.14.0/7.14.5 Conditional Use Permits Renumber Section 7.11.0 to 7.14.0 and add Section 7.14.5 Waivers
2019 X 10.02.3 Home Occupations Delete Section
2018 IV 4.01.0 Definitions Amend definition for a Utility, public or private
2018 VI 6.04.1/6.04.2/6.04.8 Revise standards and waiver process
2017 IV 4.01.0 Definitions Amend definition for an Accessory Dwelling Unit
2017 VI 6.02.0 Wetland Conservation District Amendments throughout section
2017 VIII 8.02.5 Building Permits Revise accessory structure from 120SF to 200SF
2017 X 10.02.6 Administrative Relief Amend language relative to Accessory Dwelling Unit
2016 IV 4.01.0 Definitions Amend Accessory Dwelling Unit
2016 IV 4.01.0 Definitions Add Floor Area, Gross
2016 VI 6.04.0 Open Space Conservation Amend entire section
2016 X 10.02.3:A.3 Home Occupations Revise wording
2016 X 10.02.6:A.1 ADU’s Revise wording
2015 IV 4.01.0 Definitions Amend Groundwater, Manufactured Housing
2015 IV 4.01.0 Definitions Remove Animal Feed Lot, Senior Housing Units & Leachable Wastes
2015 V 5.02.2/5.03/5.05.1/5.07.1/5.08.2 Remove Senior Housing Developments
2015 VI 6.02.4 Wetland Conservation Amend Surface Water definition
2015 VI 6.03.2 Floodplain Management Replace Manufactured Home with Manufactured Housing
2015 VI 6.04.5:C Open Space Conservation Amend language relative to Senior Housing Developments
2015 VII 7.06.3 Sign Definitions Amend Banner, Changing, Flag, Flashing, Portable, Temporary & Wall
2015 VII 7.06.3 Sign Definitions Add Storefront
2015 VII 7.06.4 Prohibited Signs Revise wording
2015 VII 7.06.5 Signs-General Admin Revise wording for permits required
2015 VII 7.06.7:D Awning signs Revise wording
2015 VII 7.06.7:E Wall Signs Remove and replace wording in section
2015 VII 7.06.7:I Temporary On-Premise Remove and replace entire section
2015 VII 7.06.8:D.5 General Sign Provisions Add wording for Portable Signs in the Oval Sub District
2015 X 10.06.0 Expiration Revise expiration from 1 Year to 2 Years
Town of Milford Zoning
Amendments Zoning Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 183 of 187
Changes/amendments to zoning Ordinance by year
Year Article Section Effect
2015 X 10.06 Appendix II Replace RSA 674:33
2014 III 3.01.0 Zoning Map Re-zone parcels 43/20 and 43/69
2014 IV 4.01.0 Definitions Remove Public Utility
2014 V 5.02.2 Remove Public Utility
2014 V 5.03.2 Remove Public Utility
2014 VII 7.01 Gravel/Earth Products Amend wording
2014 VII 7.07.0 Senior Housing Remove section
2013 II 2.02 Non-Conforming Uses Amend title, add language
2013 II 2.03.1 Non-Conforming Uses Amend to include Structure
2013 II 2.03.1:C Non-Conforming Uses Amend wording
2013 IV 4.01.0 Definitions Amend ADU, Accessory Use or Structure, Dwelling-Two family
2013 IV 4.01.0 Definitions Remove Portable Sign
2013 VI 6.01.1 Groundwater Protection Amend definition of Junkyard
2013 VII 7.06.3 Sign Definitions Amend Façade and Wall sign definitions
2013 VII 7.06.5:C Signs-Permit Not Required Amend wording
2013 VII 7.06.5:D Signs- Procedure Add, delete and amend wording for Decisions & Amendments
2013 VII 7.06.7 Sign Ordinance Revise all tables to include ICI-2
2013 VII 7.06.7:A Sign Requirements by type Amend wording and add ICI-2
2013 VII 7.06.7:E Wall Signs Amend language to include Façade signs
2013 VII 7.06.7:F Directional Signs Revise table 7.06-3
2013 VII 7.07.3 Senior Housing Amend language for Dwelling Unit
2013 VII 7.09.0 Telecommunications Revise entire section
2013 X 10.02.6 Accessory Dwelling Units Amend language for ADU’s
2012 I 1.02.3 Authorization Add Shall, Should and May terminology
2012 II 2.01.0 General Provisions Add wording If in existence
2012 II 2.02.0 Non-Conforming Uses Amend wording
2012 II 2.06.0 Equitable Waiver Move entire section to 10.07.0
2012 IV 4.01.0 Definitions Delete Kennel, Nursery, Nursery Stock
2012 IV 4.01.0 Definitions Add Apartments
2012 IV 4.01.0 Definitions Revise Discontinued Use, Lot of Record
2012 V 5.02.2/5.03.2/5.04.2 Add Utility, Public or Private
2012 V 5.05.1/5.07.0/5.08.1 Add Dwelling, Mixed-Use
2012 V 5.08.1 Add Filling Station
2012 VI 6.06.0 Overlay Districts Revise Nashua & Elm Streets Overlay District wording
2012 VI 6.06.0 Overlay Districts Add Commerce & Community Overlay District
2012 VI 6.06.0 Overlay Districts Add West Elm Street Gateway Overlay District
2012 VII 7.06.3 Sign Definitions Amend Building Marker Sign
2012 VII 7.06.7 Sign Requirements Amend to permit Directional Signs in Res A
2012 VII 7.06.7 Sign Requirements Amend Monument Signs to require address numbers
2012 VII 7.06.5 Sign General Admin Move Section 7.06.5.F.2 to 8.01.0
2012 VIII 8.01.0 Enforcement Amend wording
2012 X 10.01.0 Variances Amend wording
2012 X 10.02.3 Home Occupations Add Section 10.02.3.C Code Compliance
2012 X 10.02.6 Accessory Dwelling Units Amend entire section
2012 X 10.07.0 Equitable Waiver Section relocated from 2.06.0
2011 IV 4.01.0 Definitions Add Harvesting of Natural Resources
2011 IV 4.01.0 Definitions Add Health Service Facilities
Town of Milford Zoning
Amendments Zoning Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 184 of 187
Changes/amendments to zoning Ordinance by year
Year Article Section Effect
2011 IV 4.01.0 Definitions Add Hospice House
2011 IV 4.01.0 Definitions Add Hospital
2011 IV 4.01.0 Definitions Add Hotel
2011 IV 4.01.0 Definitions Add Nursing Home Facility
2011 IV 4.01.0 Definitions Add Utility, Public or Private
2011 IV 4.01.0 Definitions Amend Assisted Living Facility
2011 IV 4.01.0 Definitions Amend Congregate Care Facility
2011 IV 4.01.0 Definitions Amend Independent Senior Housing Units
2011 IV 4.01.0 Definitions Delete Hotel/Motel
2011 V 5.02.5/5.03.6/5.04.5 Revise Minimum side/rear setbacks to 6ft
2011 V 5.02.2/5.04.2 Amend Churches & Houses of Worship
2011 V 5.02.2/5.03.2/5.04.2 Add Utility, Public or Private
2011 V 5.02.2/5.03.2 Add Office in accordance with Section 10.02.7
2011 V 5.03.2/5.04.2 Add Hospice House
2011 V 5.03.2/5.04.2 Add Nursing Home or Facility
2011 V 5.04.1 Delete Farms
2011 V 5.04.2 Amend Processing of Natural Resources
2011 V 5.05.1 Delete Laundries and Dry Cleaning
2011 V 5.05.1 Amend Filling Stations
2011 V 5.05.1 Amend Hospitals
2011 V 5.05.1/5.08.1/5.09.1 Amend Hotels
2011 V 5.05.1/5.07.1/5.08.1 /5.09.1 Amend Churches or Houses of Worship
2011 V 5.05.1/5.08.1/5.09.1 Amend Motor Vehicles Sales Facilities
2011 V 5.05.1/5.07.1 Add Day Care Facilities
2011 V 5.05.1 Add Motor Vehicle Repair Facilities
2011 V 5.05.1/5.08.1/5.09.1 Add Veterinary Clinics
2011 V 5.05.1/5.07.1 Add Hospice House
2011 V 5.05.1/5.07.1/5.08.1/5.09.1 Add Health Services Facilities
2011 V 5.05.1/5.06.1/5.08.1/5.09.1 Add Agriculture and Farming
2011 V 5.05.1/5.08.1/5.09.1 Add Nursing Home or Facility
2011 V 5.05.1/5.06.1/5.07.1 /5.08.1 Add Utility, Public or Private
2011 V 5.05.2 Delete Day Care Facilities
2011 V 5.05.2 Amend Manufacturing
2011 V 5.05.2 Add Distribution and Mailing Facilities
2011 V 5.05.2 Add Research and Development
2011 V 5.06.1 Amend Harvesting of Natural Resources
2011 V 5.06.1 Amend Offices
2011 V 5.06.1 Add Harvesting of Natural Resources
2011 V 5.06.1/5.08.1/5.09.1 Add Newspaper or Job Printing
2011 V 5.06.2 Add Hotels
2011 V 5.07.1 Delete Hospitals and/or Medical Facilities
2011 V 5.07.2 Delete Day Care Facilities
2011 V 5.08.1/5.09.1 Amend Day Care Facilities
2011 V 5.08.1/5.09.1 Amend Research and Development
2011 V 5.08.1/5.09.1 Add Bed and Breakfast
2011 V 5.08.1/5.09.1 Add Processing of Natural Resources
Town of Milford Zoning
Amendments Zoning Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 185 of 187
Changes/amendments to zoning Ordinance by year
Year Article Section Effect
2011 V 5.08.1/5.08.1 Add Hospitals
2011 V 5.08.2/5.09.2 Delete Processing of Natural Resources
2011 V 5.09.1 Amend Utility, Public or Private
2011 V 5.09.1 Amend Research and Development
2011 V 5.09.1 Add Banks and Financial Institutions
2011 VI 6.01.1 Overlay Districts Add definition for Liquid Petroleum Products
2011 VI 6.02.5 Overlay Districts Amend Special Exception requirements
2011 VI 6.02.6 Overlay Districts Amend Special Exception buffer requirements
2011 VI 6.04.0 Overlay Districts Replace entire Open Space & Conservation District
2011 VII 7.06.3 Sign Ordinance Add Building Fascia, Event Sign, PNS, Special Event
2011 VII 7.06.7 Sign Ordinance Revisions to Wall Sign requirements
2011 VII 7.06.7 Sign Ordinance Revisions to Monument Sign requirements
2011 VII 7.06.7 Sign Ordinance Revisions to Changing Sign requirements
2011 VII 7.06.7 Sign Ordinance Revisions to Off Premise Sign requirements
2011 VII 7.06.7 Sign Ordinance Revisions to EMC Sign requirements
2011 VII 7.06.7 Sign Ordinance Add Event Sign requirements
2011 VII 7.07.8 Supplementary Standards Amend Assisted Living, Congregate Care, Indep. Senior Housing
2011 X 10.02 Special Exceptions Delete Manufacturing in the C District
2011 X 10.02 Special Exceptions Add Offices in the A & B Districts
2010 III 3.01.0 Districts Revise to read Official Zoning Map, removing year
2010 IV 4.01.0 Definitions Delete Agriculture
2010 IV 4.01.0 Definitions Add Agriculture and Farming
2010 IV 4.01.0 Definitions Add Farm
2010 IV 4.01.0 Definitions Add Farm Roadside Stand
2010 IV 4.01.0 Definitions Add Farmer’s Market
2010 V 5.02.1 Acceptable uses Add Farm Roadside Stands
2010 V 5.02.3 Uses not specified Revise to include Conditional Use Permits
2010 V 5.03.1 Acceptable uses Add Farm Roadside Stands
2010 V 5.03.3 Uses not specified Revise to include Conditional Use Permits
2010 V 5.04.1 Acceptable uses Add Agriculture and Farming, Farms & Roadside Stands
2010 V 5.04.3 Uses not specified Revise to include Conditional Use Permits
2010 V 5.05.1 Acceptable uses Revise to include Conditional Use Permits
2010 V 5.06.1 Acceptable uses Add Farm Roadside Stands
2010 V 5.06.3 Uses not specified Revise to include Conditional Use Permits
2010 V 5.07.1 Acceptable uses Add Farm Roadside Stands
2010 V 5.07.3 Uses not specified Revise to include Conditional Use Permits
2010 V 5.08.1 Acceptable uses Add Farmer’s Market & Farm Roadside Stands
2010 V 5.08.3 Uses not specified Revise to include Conditional Use Permits
2010 V 5.09.1 Acceptable uses Add Farmer’s Market & Farm Roadside Stands
2010 V 5.09.3 Uses not specified Revise to include Conditional Use Permits
2010 VI 6.01.1/6.02.1/6.03.1 Revise wording to resolve possible conflicts
2010 VI 6.04.3/6.05.4 Revise wording to resolve possible conflicts
2010 VII 7.06.4 Prohibited signs Revise to permit A-frame Signs in Oval Sub-Dist
2010 VII 7.06.7.C Sign requirements Revise timing & dimming for Changing Signs
2010 VII 7.06.7.D Sign types Add definitions for Projecting & Suspended signs
2010 VII 7.06.7.D Sign types Revise Height/Clearance restrictions
Town of Milford Zoning
Amendments Zoning Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 186 of 187
Changes/amendments to zoning Ordinance by year
Year Article Section Effect
2010 VII 7.07.0 Senior housing Amend Age Requirements to 55 (by citizen petition)
2010 VIII 8.05.0/8.05.1/8.05.2 Revise to adopt the 2009 IPMC
2010 X 10.02.6 Accessory Dwellings Add language for Existing ADU’s
2010 XII 12.01.0-12.011.0 GMO Delete entire article
2009 Entire Ordinance reformatted
2009 IV 4.01.0 Definitions Revise Agriculture, Junkyard, & Lot of Record
2009 IV 4.01.0 Definitions Delete Principal Route of Access
2009 IV 4.01.0 Definitions Add Small Wind Energy Systems
2009 V 5.02.4/5.03.5/5.04.4/5.05.4 Revise to Class V or Better Road
2009 V 5.07.4/5.08.4/5.09.4 Revise to Class V or Better Road
2009 V 5.06.2/5.08.2/5.09.2 Add: Reduced Front, Side & Rear Setbacks
2009 V 5.02.2/5.03.2/5.04.2/5.05.2 Add: Conditional Use Permits & Small Wind Energy Sys
2009 V 5.06.2/5.07.2/5.08.2/5.09.2 Add: Conditional Use Permits & Small Wind Energy Sys
2009 VII 7.10.0 Small Wind Energy Sys Add section for Small Wind Energy Systems
2009 VII 7.11.0 Conditional Use Permits Add section for Conditional Use Permits
2009 VIII 8.02.4 Building permits Revise wording to comply with NH RSA 155-A
2009 X 10.06.0 Expiration Timeframe changes
2009 XII 12.01.0 Sunset Change date from 2011 to 2010
2008 II 2.040 Public Nuisance Amend to include Residential
2008 II 2.060 Equitable Waiver Remove 2.061, 2.062 & replace with Sections I,II,III,IV
2008 IV 4.010 Definitions Accessory Dwelling Unit
2008 V 5.022/5.032/5.042/5.052/5.072 Accessory Dwelling Units
2008 V 5.062/5.082/5.092 Accessory Dwelling Units for Existing Single-family
2008 VI 6.050 Add Nashua & Elm St Corridor Overlay District
2008 VII 8.040 Driveways Revise permit requirements for Existing Driveways
2008 X 10.023 Home Occupations Revise section A.4 to include Accessory Goods
2008 X 10.026 Add Accessory Dwelling Units
2008 X 10.030/10.040/10.050 Replace and revise Appeals requirements
2008 X 10.031/10.032 Add both sections pertaining to Appeals
2008 XII 12.004.B,C/12.006.B/12.008.B Replace and revise Section requirements for GMO
2008 XII 12.010/12.011 Replace and add Sections of GMO
2007 III 3.010 Districts Rezone portions of I, R to ICI-2 and I to R
2007 IV 4.010 Definitions Abutter, Day Care Facility, Lot Use, Motorized Vehicle Sales
2007 V 5.034.A.1 Amend Allowable Density
2007 V 5.022/.031/.051/.071/.082 Amend Acceptable Uses-Senior Housing Developments
2007 V 5.050/5.080 Add Acceptable Uses; Motorized Vehicle Sales Facility
2007 V 5.057 Amend Oval Sub district-Exemptions from Requirements
2007 V 5.090-5.097 Add Integrated-Commercial Industrial 2 (ICI-2) District
2007 VI 6.030 Floodplain Management District; replaced in entirety
2007 VII 7.060 Sign Ordinance; replaced in entirety
2007 VIII 8.050 Administration Amend with 2003 International Property Maintenance Code
2007 X 10.030/10.060 Admin Relief Amend 30 day Time Frame and Expiration
2006 IV 4.010 Definitions Frontage definition deleted/replaced
2006 VII 7.010-7.067 Sign Ordinance; replaced in its entirety
2006 XII 12.010-12.009 Growth Mgmt Ordinance replaces Interim GMO
2005 III 3.010 Districts Rezone portion of Residential “A” to Residential “R”
Town of Milford Zoning
Amendments Zoning Ordinance
Revised 3/2020 Page 187 of 187
Changes/amendments to zoning Ordinance by year
Year Article Section Effect
2005 IV 4.010 Definitions Height definition added
2005 V 5.022.K, 5.032.L, 5.042.N Special Exception for Height Greater than Allowed
2005 V 5.026/5.038/,5.047.A,B,C Height requirements
2005 V 5.052.E/5.062.A/5.072.E Special exception for Height Greater than Allowed
2005 V 5.058/5.067/5.077, A, B, C Height requirements
2005 V 5.082.E Special Exception for Height Greater than Allowed
2005 V 5.087.A, B, C Height requirements
2005 VII 8.024 Delete and replace with IRC 2003 edition
2005 XII 12.010-12.011 Interim Growth Management Ordinance
2004 VI 6.040-6.045 Replace Open Space & Conservation Zoning District
2003 III 3.010 Districts Rezone portion of ICI to C; Res. R to C; Res. A to C
2003 V 5.052.D Special Exception for Manufacturing Use
2003 V 5.061 Revise Light Manufacturing to Manufacturing
2003 V 5.081 Revise Light Manufacturing to Manufacturing
2003 VI 6.010-6.014 Amend Groundwater Protection District
2003 VI 6.020-6.027 Amend Wetland Conservation District
2003 X 10.025 Special Exception for Manufacturing in the C District
2003 XI 11.010-11 Impact Fees; replaced in its entirety
2002 I, III 1.030, 3.010 Town Vote replaced Town Meeting
2002 I 1.050 Amendments Open Space replaced Cluster Development
2002 II 2.060-2.062 Equitable Waiver of Dimensional Requirements
2002 IV 4.010 Definitions Multiple definition revisions
2002 VII 7.070-7.085 Senior Housing Development
2002 X 10.010-10.070 Impact Fees
2001 II 2.030 Delete “Conforming Uses” in section
2001 IV 4.010 Definitions Amend Church, House of Worship, Structure
2001 V 5.040-5.046 Revisions to Residential “R” District
2001 V 5.022.H, 5.032.K Replace Reduced Front, Side & Rear Setbacks
2001 V 5.025.C, 5.036.C Delete sections
2001 V 5.042.I, 5.052.C Replace Reduced Front, Side & Rear Setbacks
2001 V 5.045.C, 5.055.C Delete sections
2001 V 5.072.D Replace Reduced Front, Side & Rear Setbacks
2001 V 5.075.C Delete section
2001 VI 6.044.D.2.c Replace Open Space Design
2001 VII 7.040 Private ways Delete section
Community Development Department
Town of Milford
Development
Regulations
Site Plan and Subdivision Regulations
Adopted by Milford Planning Board 2/24/2009
Revised 9/5/2017
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
2
2011 Printing
Table of Contents
ARTICLE I: INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................................ 6
1.01 PURPOSE ................................................................................................................................................................... 6
1.02 AUTHORITY ............................................................................................................................................................... 6
1.03 VALIDITY.................................................................................................................................................................... 6
1.03.1 INTERPRETATION ........................................................................................................................................................ 6
1.03.2 CONFLICT .................................................................................................................................................................... 6
1.04 SEVERABILITY ............................................................................................................................................................ 7
1.05 AMENDMENTS .......................................................................................................................................................... 7
1.06 EFFECTIVE DATE......................................................................................................................................................... 7
ARTICLE II: JURISDICTION ................................................................................................................................ 7
2.01 GENERAL ................................................................................................................................................................... 7
2.02 APPLICABILITY ........................................................................................................................................................... 7
2.03 DEVELOPMENT REQUIRING SITE PLAN APPROVAL .................................................................................................... 7
2.04 DEVELOPMENT REQUIRING SUBDIVISION APPROVAL ............................................................................................... 8
ARTICLE III: DEFINITIONS .................................................................................................................................. 8
3.01 DEFINITIONS .............................................................................................................................................................. 8
ARTICLE IV: PERMITTING PROCEDURE – SITE PLAN AND SUBDIVISION APPLICATIONS ......... 14
4.01 PROCESS .................................................................................................................................................................. 14
4.02 CONCEPTUAL REVIEW ............................................................................................................................................. 15
4.03 DESIGN REVIEW ....................................................................................................................................................... 15
4.04 FORMAL REVIEW ..................................................................................................................................................... 16
4.05 PUBLIC HEARING AND NOTICES ............................................................................................................................... 17
4.06 DETERMINATION OF POTENTIAL REGIONAL IMPACT ............................................................................................... 17
4.07 SITE PLAN EXTENSION AND EXPIRATION OF APPROVAL .......................................................................................... 18
4.08 SUBDIVISION EXTENSION AND EXPIRATION OF APPROVAL ..................................................................................... 18
4.09 PLANNING BOARD ACTION AND TIME REQUIREMENTS: SITE PLAN AND SUBDIVISIONS ......................................... 18
4.010 FAILURE TO APPROVE .............................................................................................................................................. 19
4.011 APPROVAL AND DISAPPROVAL: SITE PLAN AND SUBDIVISION ................................................................................ 19
4.011.1 CONDITIONAL APPROVAL ......................................................................................................................................... 19
4.011.2 FINAL APPROVAL ...................................................................................................................................................... 20
4.011.3 DISAPPROVAL ........................................................................................................................................................... 20
4.012 RECORDING PROCEDURE ......................................................................................................................................... 20
4.013 REVOCATION OF APPROVAL .................................................................................................................................... 20
4.014 BUILDING AND CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY PERMITS ........................................................................................... 20
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
3
2011 Printing
ARTICLE V: PLAN REQUIREMENTS: SITE PLAN AND SUBDIVISION .................................................. 21
5.01 SCOPE OF REVIEW ................................................................................................................................................... 21
5.02 TYPES OF SITE PLAN APPLICATIONS ......................................................................................................................... 21
5.03 SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS – MINOR SITE PLAN APPLICATIONS ............................................................................ 21
5.04 SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS – MAJOR SITE PLAN APPLICATIONS ............................................................................ 22
5.05 TYPES OF SUBDIVISION APPLICATIONS .................................................................................................................... 24
5.06 SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS – MINOR SUBDIVISION, LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT AND CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION
APPLICATIONS.......................................................................................................................................................... 25
5.07 SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS – MAJOR SUBDIVISION APPLICATIONS ....................................................................... 27
5.08 OPEN SPACE CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENTS ....................................................................................................... 29
5.09 IMPACT STUDIES ..................................................................................................................................................... 29
5.010 REFERRAL TO TOWN AGENCIES AND BOARDS ......................................................................................................... 30
5.011 ENVIRONMENTAL STUDY ........................................................................................................................................ 30
5.012 HYDROGEOLOGIC STUDY ......................................................................................................................................... 31
5.013 PREMATURE DEVELOPMENT ................................................................................................................................... 32
5.014 ALTERNATIVES TO A RULING OF PREMATURE DEVELOPMENT ................................................................................ 33
5.015 OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS ....................................................................................................................................... 33
5.016 ACCEPTANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS ........................................................................................................................... 34
5.017 PHASING.................................................................................................................................................................. 34
5.018 TAX LIEN DISCLOSURES ............................................................................................................................................ 34
5.019 DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT ................................................................................................................................... 34
5.020 WAIVER APPLICATIONS ........................................................................................................................................... 35
5.021 AMENDMENTS ........................................................................................................................................................ 35
5.022 SEAL AND CERTIFICATION ........................................................................................................................................ 36
5.023 FINAL PLAN: SITE PLAN AND SUBDIVISION .............................................................................................................. 36
5.024 FINAL PLAN COPIES ................................................................................................................................................. 37
ARTICLE VI: DEVELOPMENT GUIDELINES .................................................................................................. 37
6.01 GENERAL ................................................................................................................................................................. 37
6.02 PURPOSE ................................................................................................................................................................. 37
6.03 CONFORMITY .......................................................................................................................................................... 37
6.04 ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN ......................................................................................................................................... 38
6.04.1 PURPOSE ................................................................................................................................................................... 38
6.04.2 GENERAL CRITERIA ................................................................................................................................................... 38
6.04.3 GUIDELINES .............................................................................................................................................................. 38
6.05 PARKING REQUIREMENTS ....................................................................................................................................... 39
6.05.1 GENERAL ................................................................................................................................................................... 39
6.05.2 PARKING SPACE LOCATION ...................................................................................................................................... 40
6.05.3 PARKING SPACE DIMENSIONS .................................................................................................................................. 40
6.05.4 TABLE OF OFF-STREET PARKING ............................................................................................................................... 41
6.05.5 Ada compliance ........................................................................................................................................................ 42
6.05.6 PARKING AND LOADING AREA STANDARDS ............................................................................................................. 43
6.05.7 PARKING SUBSTITUTIONS ......................................................................................................................................... 44
6.05.8 INCREASE OR CHANGE OF USE ................................................................................................................................. 44
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
4
2011 Printing
6.05.9 PRIOR NON-CONFORMING USES .............................................................................................................................. 44
6.05.10 PROVISION FOR SHARED PARKING ........................................................................................................................... 45
6.06 OUTDOOR LIGHTING ............................................................................................................................................... 45
6.07 FIRE PROTECTION .................................................................................................................................................... 45
6.08 LANDSCAPING STANDARDS ..................................................................................................................................... 45
6.08.1 GENERAL ................................................................................................................................................................... 45
6.08.2 SITE FEATURES AND LAYOUT .................................................................................................................................... 46
6.08.3 SOIL PREPARATION ....................................................................................................................................................... 47
6.08.4 MULCHING ................................................................................................................................................................ 47
6.08.5 LANDSCAPING BUFFERS ........................................................................................................................................... 48
6.08.6 LANDSCAPING ALONG BUILDING FRONTAGES ......................................................................................................... 48
6.08.7 LANDSCAPING PARKING LOTS AND ACCESS WAYS .................................................................................................. 49
6.08.8 PLANTING SPECIFICATIONS ...................................................................................................................................... 50
6.08.9 LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT LANDSCAPING .......................................................................................................... 51
6.08.10 LANDSCAPING STANDARDS – SUBDIVISIONS – NEW ROADS ................................................................................... 51
6.08.11 MAINTENANCE OF LANDSCAPING ............................................................................................................................ 52
6.08.12 ENFORCEMENT ......................................................................................................................................................... 52
6.08.13 LANDSCAPING TIME FRAME ..................................................................................................................................... 52
6.08 SNOW STORAGE AND REMOVAL ............................................................................................................................. 52
6.09 WETLANDS .............................................................................................................................................................. 53
6.010.1 WETLAND BOUNDARY MARKERS ............................................................................................................................. 53
6.010.2 WETLANDS ................................................................................................................................................................ 53
6.010 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN ...................................................................................................................... 53
6.011 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL ........................................................................................................................ 54
6.012 OTHER STORMWATER AND EROSION CONTROL PERMITS ....................................................................................... 54
6.013 SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS .............................................................................................................................. 55
6.014 MUNICIPAL AND PUBLIC UTILITIES .......................................................................................................................... 55
6.015 SANITARY SYSTEMS – GENERAL REQUIREMENTS .................................................................................................... 56
6.016 WATER SERVICES– GENERAL REQUIREMENTS ......................................................................................................... 57
6.017.1 MUNICIPAL WATER .................................................................................................................................................. 57
6.017.2 PRIVATE WATER SYSTEMS ........................................................................................................................................ 57
6.017.3 ON-SITE WATER SUPPLY ........................................................................................................................................... 57
6.017 BRIDGES .................................................................................................................................................................. 58
6.018 SIGNAGE .................................................................................................................................................................. 58
6.019 EASEMENTS, DEED RESTRICTIONS, DEDICATIONS, COVENANTS .............................................................................. 58
6.020 SELF-IMPOSED RESTRICTIONS AND/OR COVENANTS ............................................................................................... 59
6.021 BOUNDS .................................................................................................................................................................. 59
ARTICLE VII: ROADWAY REGULATIONS ................................................................................................... 60
7.01 ROADWAYS – GENERAL ........................................................................................................................................... 60
7.02 ROADWAY STANDARDS CHARTS Table 1: Roadway Standards ............................................................................... 62
7.03 SIDEWALKS .............................................................................................................................................................. 63
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
5
2011 Printing
ARTICLE VIII: PERFORMANCE AND MAINTENANCE SECURITIES .................................................... 64
8.01 POSTING OF PERFORMANCE SECURITIES ................................................................................................................. 64
8.02 RELEASE OF PERFORMANCE SECURITIES.................................................................................................................. 64
8.03 MAINTENANCE SECURITIES ..................................................................................................................................... 65
ARTICLE IX: EXPIRATION, ENFORCEMENT, FINES, PENALTIES AND APPEALS ............................. 65
9.01 ENFORCEMENT ........................................................................................................................................................ 65
9.02 FINES AND PENALTIES ............................................................................................................................................. 66
9.03 APPEALS .................................................................................................................................................................. 66
ARTICLE X: FEES................................................................................................................................................. 66
10.01 APPLICATION FEES ................................................................................................................................................... 66
10.02 ADMINISTRATIVE AND OTHER FEES ......................................................................................................................... 66
10.03 PUBLIC NOTICES AND HEARING FEES ....................................................................................................................... 66
10.04 INSPECTION SERVICE FEE ......................................................................................................................................... 67
ARTICLE XI: APPENDICES ................................................................................................................................. 68
APPENDIX I: CHECKLISTS (2014) ...................................................................................................................................... 68
APPENDIX II: major subdivision process ........................................................................................................................... 68
APPENDIX III: open space subdivision flowchart ............................................................................................................... 68
APPENDIX IV: environmental study .................................................................................................................................. 68
APPENDIX V: securities submission documentation ......................................................................................................... 68
a. Cash ....................................................................................................................................................................... 68
b. Bond ....................................................................................................................................................................... 68
c. Irrevocable Letter of Credit .................................................................................................................................... 68
APPENDIX VI: ROADWAY ACCEPTANCE INFORMATION .................................................................................................... 68
APPENDIX VII: TOWN DOCUMENT RESOURCES LIST ......................................................................................................... 68
APPENDIX II: MAJOR SUBDIVISION PROCESS ................................................................................................................... 87
APPENDIX III: OPEN SPACE SUBDIVISION FLOWCHART ..................................................................................................... 88
APPENDIX IV: ENVIRONMENTAL STUDY ........................................................................................................................... 90
APPENDIX V: SECURITIES SUBMISSION DOCUMENTATION .............................................................................................. 92
APPENDIX VI: ROADWAY ACCEPTANCE INFORMATION .................................................................................................... 96
APPENDIX VII: TOWN DOCUMENT RESOURCES LIST ......................................................................................................... 99
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
6
2011 Printing
ARTICLE I: INTRODUCTION
1.01 PURPOSE
These regulations are adopted in accordance with RSA 674:36 and 674:44, as amended, for the
following purposes:
A. To provide for the safe, attractive and harmonious development of land.
B. To insure the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Town of Milford.
C. To provide against such scattered or premature development of land as would involve danger or
injury to health, safety, or prosperity by reason of the lack of water supply, drainage,
transportation, schools, fire protection, or other public services, or necessitate the excessive
expenditure of public funds for the supply of such services.
D. To provide for open spaces and green spaces of adequate proportions.
E. To provide for adequate public services, facilities and parking.
F. To provide for suitably located roads of sufficient width to accommodate existing and proposed
pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
G. To provide for adequate drainage, stormwater management, pollution prevention, proper
landscaping and protection from negative environmental impacts.
H. To provide for harmonious and aesthetically pleasing development of the municipality and its
environs.
I. To encourage the wise use and management of natural resources, conservation of energy and
historic features throughout the municipality in order to preserve the integrity, stability, and beauty
of the community and the value of the land.
J. To guide the future growth and development of the municipality, in accordance with the Town’s
Master Plan.
1.02 AUTHORITY
Pursuant to the authority vested in the Planning Board by the voters of the Town of Milford and in
accordance with state laws, but not limited to, the provisions of Chapter 672 - 677 of the New Hampshire
Revised Statutes Annotated, 2008, or as may be amended, the Planning Board adopts the following
regulations governing the development and subdivision of land in the Town of Milford, New Hampshire.
1.03 VALIDITY
1.03.1 INTERPRETATION
These Development Regulations shall be construed broadly to promote the purposes for which they are
adopted.
1.03.2 CONFLICT
Whenever the regulations made under the authority hereof differ from those prescribed by any statute,
ordinance or other regulations, that provision which imposes the greater restriction or the highest
standard shall govern.
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
7
2011 Printing
1.04 SEVERABILITY
If any section, clause, provision, portion or phrase of these regulations shall be held to be invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent authority, such holding shall not affect, impair or invalidate
any other section, clause, provision, portion or phrase of these regulations.
1.05 AMENDMENTS
These regulations may be amended or rescinded by the Planning Board following a public hearing and a
formal motion by the Planning Board on the proposed changes. The Chairman or Secretary of the
Planning Board shall transmit a record of any changes so authorized to the Town Clerk.
1.06 EFFECTIVE DATE
This Regulation shall be in effect from the time of its adoption by the vote of a majority of the Planning
Board present and voting.
ARTICLE II: JURISDICTION
2.01 GENERAL
This Regulation shall pertain to all land within the boundaries of the Town of Milford. All Sections and
paragraphs of these Development Regulations shall apply to all Planning Board applications unless the
section or paragraph specifically indicates otherwise.
2.02 APPLICABILITY
These provisions shall govern subdivisions and commercial, industrial and multi-family development
within the boundaries of the Town of Milford. No land shall be developed, redeveloped, or subdivided or
until:
A. The Planning Board has given final approval of the site plan or subdivision at a public hearing and
the Chairman of the Planning Board (or designee) has affixed his/her signature on the approved
plan
B. The Community Development Director and Zoning Administrator have determined that no
Planning Board approval is necessary per Sections 2.03 DEVELOPMENT REQUIRING SITE
PLAN APPROVAL and 2.04 DEVELOPMENT REQUIRING SUBDIVISION APPROVAL of these
regulations
C. The applicant has complied with all of the Town of Milford regulations including but not limited to
the Stormwater Regulations, Zoning Ordinance, DPW Standards, Residential Driveway
Standards and the regulations herein, including the posting of appropriate performance
guarantees
D. The approved plan is filed with the Hillsborough County Registry of Deeds, if required
2.03 DEVELOPMENT REQUIRING SITE PLAN APPROVAL
Site Plan approval shall be required for:
A. Any new commercial, industrial and multi-family dwelling uses of land.
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
8
2011 Printing
B. Any change or expansion of use to a commercial, industrial or multi-family site plan which does
not have an approved site plan.
C. Any change or expansion of use to a commercial, industrial or multi-family site plan which would
require upgrades to parking, drainage, landscaping or may have a significant traffic impact.
D. Any cumulative land disturbance of greater than or equal to 20,000 SF for commercial, industrial
and multi-family sites.
The property owner or his representative shall apply in writing to the Planning Board on application forms
provided by the Planning Board for approval of any Site Plan.
2.04 DEVELOPMENT REQUIRING SUBDIVISION APPROVAL
Subdivision approval shall be required for:
A. The subdivision of any lot, tract or parcel of land
B. Lot line adjustment
C. Condominium conversion
The property owner or his representative shall apply in writing to the Planning Board on application forms
provided by the Planning Board for approval of any subdivision, condominium conversion or lot line
adjustment.
The merging or consolidation of lots within Milford does not require formal Planning Board approval. By
recording a Lot Merger form, available through the Community Development Office, the merged parcels
of land shall, for all purposes be considered a single lot and shall be assigned a single tax map and lot
number and shall not be sold separately, nor shall any other divided interest be conveyed except with the
prior approval of the Milford Planning Board in accordance with its duly adopted subdivision regulations.
Recording of the form implies endorsement from the Milford Planning Board and or its designee.
ARTICLE III: DEFINITIONS
3.01 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of these Regulations, the word “shall” is mandatory, the words “may” and “can” are
permissive.
For any term not defined in these regulations, the definition, if any given in the Town of Milford Zoning
Ordinance or applicable State Statutes shall prevail. Terms and Words not so specifically defined shall
have their common meaning. In the event a conflict is found to exist between the meaning or definition of
any word or term defined in this document, and the meaning or definition of any word or term also
defined in the Zoning Ordinance or applicable State Statues, the most restrictive meaning or definition
shall prevail.
Term Definitions:
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
9
2011 Printing
Active and Substantial Development: Unless otherwise defined by the Planning Board at the time of
approval, shall mean the installation of erosion and sediment control measures, site grading and
construction of permanent physical improvements such as road base, water and sewer lines or other
underground utilities including drainage structures has occurred.
Abutter: Any person whose property is located in New Hampshire and adjoins or is directly across the
street or stream from the land under consideration by the local land use board. For purposes of receiving
testimony only, and not for purposes of notification, the term “abutter” shall include any person who is
able to demonstrate that his/her land will be directly affected by the application under consideration. For
purposes of receipt of notification by a municipality of a local land use board hearing, in the case of an
abutting property being under a condominium or other collective form of ownership, the term abutter
means the officers of the collective or association, as defined in RSA 356-B:3, XXIII. For purposes of
receipt of notification by a municipality of a local land use board hearing, in the case of an abutting
property being under a manufactured housing park form of ownerships defined in RSA 205-A: 1, the term
“abutter” includes the manufactured housing park owner and the tenants who own manufactured housing
which adjoins or is directly across the street or stream from the land under consideration by the local land
use board. As defined in RSA 356.B:3 and any amendments thereto.
Applicant: The owner or the person or persons duly authorized in writing by the Owner(s) to act on
behalf of the Owner(s) in all matters concerning these regulations.
Best Management Practice (BMP): A proven or accepted structural, non-structural, or vegetative
measure; the application of which reduces erosion, sediment, or peak storm discharge, or improves the
quality of stormwater runoff.
Building: Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.
Buffer: Land area maintained in either a natural or landscaped state and used to visibly separate or
screen one use from another or to minimize potentially negative impacts on surrounding areas (e.g.,
shield or block noise, light or other nuisances, reduce water pollution).
Change of Use: Any change to a building or site, to another separately identified use specified as either
“Acceptable” or “Acceptable by Special Exception” in the Milford Zoning Ordinance, or as allowed by
variance from the Milford Zoning Ordinance.
Compliance Hearing: A publicly noticed hearing of the Planning Board within which the Planning Board
will determine if the all conditions of approval, as previously determined in a motion of Conditional
Approval by the Planning Board have been met.
Condominium: A building or group of buildings in which units are owned individually and the structure,
common areas and facilities are owned by all the owners on a proportional, undivided basis.
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
10
2011 Printing
Condominiums shall be considered a subdivision under the requirements of RSA 356-B and these
regulations, and allowed or approved accordingly.
Condominium Conversion: The division of an existing or approved building or group of buildings into
units owned individually and the common areas and facilities are owned by all the owners on a
proportional, undivided basis.
Corner Lot: A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) Class VI or better roads or on a curved road on
which the interior angle of such intersection or curved road does not exceed 135 degrees.
Development: Any construction, site disturbance or grading activities to improved or unimproved real
estate other than for agricultural and silvicultural practices.
Development Plan: A plan submitted as part of a subdivision or site plan application.
Density: The gross number of residential dwelling units per acre.
Development Agreement: A contract representing an understanding between the Town of Milford and
the applicant/land owner, regarding the granting of site plan or subdivision approval by the Planning
Board, to contain improvements and agreements pursuant to the plans and any conditions referenced in
the contract document, including definitions of “Substantial Completion of Improvements” and “Active and
Substantial Development”.
Disturbed Area: An area where natural vegetation has been removed exposing the underlying soil or
where vegetation has been covered.
Dwelling Unit: One room or rooms connected together, constituting a separate, independent
housekeeping establishment physically separated from any other dwelling units in the same structure,
and containing independent cooking and sleeping facilities.
Dwelling, Single-family: A detached residential dwelling unit, other than a mobile home, designed for
one family only.
Dwelling, Two-family: A structure which contains two (2) separate dwelling units, each provided with
complete and independent living facilities for one or more persons, including provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation as well as independent access and egress to and from each
living unit.
Dwelling, Multi-family: A structure consisting of three (3) or more dwelling units designed for occupancy
by three (3) or more families.
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
11
2011 Printing
Easement: A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner to or for use by the public
or other person(s) or entity. Examples include but are not limited to: Access, Conservation, Drainage,
Slope and Utility.
Erosion: The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity.
Frontage: That continuous portion of land bordering on a road(s) from which access may be taken.
Grading: Any excavating, grubbing, filling (including hydraulic fill) or stockpiling of earth materials or any
combination thereof, including the land in its excavated or filled condition.
Lot: The whole area of a single parcel of land, with assertable boundaries in single or joint ownership
undivided by a road and established by deeds of record (see also Parcel and Tract).
Lot Line Adjustment: A subdivision where no new buildable lots are created. A lot line adjustment may
not create a more a non-conforming lot per the Town of Milford Zoning Ordinance, save those cases
where a variance has been granted for such.
Lot of Record: A lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so
recorded in the Hillsborough County Registry of Deeds.
Minimum Building Setback Line: That horizontal distance measured between the right-of-way of a
road or a side or rear lot line and the closest point at which any building or structure contained on the lot
may be situated, as specified in the Milford Zoning Ordinance.
Manufactured Housing: Any structure transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling
mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width and forty (40) body feet for more in length, or when erected
on site, is 320 square feet or more, and which is built upon a permanent chassis and designed to be
used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to required utilities, which
include plumbing, heating, and electrical heating systems contained therein. Manufactured Housing shall
not include presite built housing as defined in RSA 674:31-a, as amended.
Manufactured Housing Park: A parcel of land upon which two (2) or more manufactured houses are,
or are intended to be, placed and occupied as dwellings.
Parcel: The whole area of a single tract of land, with assertable boundaries in single or joint ownership
undivided by a road and established by deeds of record (see also Lot and Tract).
Presite Built Housing: Any structure designed primarily for residential occupancy which is wholly or in
substantial part made, fabricated, formed or assembled in off-site manufacturing facilities in conformance
with the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development minimum property standards and
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
12
2011 Printing
local building codes for installation, or assembly and installation, on the building site. Presite Built
Housing shall not include similarly built manufactured housing as defined in RSA 673:31, as amended.
Parking Space: An off-street space available for the parking of one motor vehicle, exclusive of the
necessary internal access driveways and passageways.
Planning Board: The Planning Board of the Town of Milford.
Person: Any individual, firm, co-partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association
or body politic, trustee, receiver, assignee, or other similar representative thereof.
Public Utility: Buildings, structures and facilities, including generating and switching stations, poles,
lines, pipes, pumping stations, repeaters, antennas, transmitters and receivers, valves and all buildings
and structures relating to the furnishing of utility services, such as electric, gas, telephone,
communications, fire protection, water, sewer and public transit, to the public.
Regular Planning Board Meeting: A publicly noticed regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning
Board at which applications may be presented for acceptance and approval by the Board, generally held
the third Tuesday of each month.
Road: Any vehicular right-of-way that: (1) is an existing Federal, State, Town, or privately owned and
maintained roadway; (2) is shown upon a plan approved pursuant to NH RSA’s; (3) is shown on a plan
duly filed and recorded in the Office of the Hillsborough County Registry of Deeds; or (4) is approved by
any other official action of the Town of Milford. A road contains all the land within the right-of-way. The
following shall be used to classify all roads:
A. Arterial Road: A road which serves the major movements of traffic within and through the
community.
B. Collector Road: A road which serves to collect and distribute traffic primarily from local roads to
Arterial Roads.
C. Local Road: A road which is designed to be used primarily for direct access to abutting
properties and leading into Collector Roads.
D. Dead-End Road: A road having an outlet at one end only and having the other end permanently
closed with facilities permitting vehicles to turn around.
E. Private Road: A road or road system on private property from a public road, constructed in
accordance with these regulations and to the Department of Public Works Infrastructure Design,
Construction and Administration Standards. Such private property and private roads shall be
permanently encumbered with deed restrictions, satisfactory to the Planning Board, which shall
insure that the private road does not become a public road and that the Town will have no liability
or responsibility to maintain said road.
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
13
2011 Printing
F. Alley: A strip of land dedicated for public use, located at the side or rear of lots, providing
secondary access to abutting property which generally does not meet required right-of-way and
paved surface widths.
Sediment: Solid material, either mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is transported, or has been
moved from its site of origin by erosion.
Sign: Any device, including support structures, that communicates information or a message.
Signage Plan: A plan containing specification for one or more signs on a proposed development or
application.
Site Plan, Minor: An application of six hundred (600) square feet, or less, of additional building space.
Site Plan, Major: An application of greater than six hundred (600) square feet of additional building
space.
Soil: Any unconsolidated mineral or organic material of any origin.
Stabilized: A condition when the soil erosion rate approaches that of undisturbed soils. Soils which are
disturbed will be considered protected when covered with a healthy, mature growth of grass, or a good
covering of straw mulch or other equivalent (seedless) mulch (2 tons/acre). Mulch is only a temporary
measure; ultimately, a site needs vegetation.
Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Plan (SWMP): A plan which may be required by the
Town which outlines project features, proposed temporary and permanent erosion control features,
maintenance schedules and practices, and design basis used to establish temporary and permanent
stormwater design features. If a SWPPP is required under Federal or State law, the applicant may
completely incorporate SWMP requirements into the SWPPP and request that the SWPPP cover both
the SWPPP and SWMP requirements.
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP): A plan required by the Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) that clearly describes appropriate pollution control measures that include a description of
all pollution control measures (i.e., BMP’s) that will be implemented as part of the construction activity to
control pollutants in stormwater discharges and describes the interim and permanent stabilization
practices for the site.
Stream, Intermittent: A place where water flows for sufficient duration and/or in sufficient quantity to
maintain a channel.
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
14
2011 Printing
Stream, Perennial: Any channel, natural or manmade, which has water present for twelve (12) months
of a normal year but which may dry up during a period in which the rainfall is less than sixty (60) percent
of average for more than three consecutive months.
Structure: A combination of materials for occupancy or use, such as, but not limited to, a building,
bridge, trestle, tower, tunnel, pier, wharf, fence and retaining wall over six (6) feet in height above grade
and swimming pool.
Subdivision: The division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, sites, or other
divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, rent, lease, condominium
conveyance or building development. It includes re-subdivision and, when appropriate to the context,
relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or territory subdivided. The division of a parcel of land
held in common and subsequently divided into parts among the several owners shall be deemed a
subdivision under NH RSA 674, as amended.
Subdivision, Minor: The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land which would result in three (3) or fewer
new building lots and which does not require the installation of any new roads (public or private) or the
extension of any municipally owned utilities (sewer and water).
Subdivision, Major: The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land which creates four (4) or more additional
building lots or an application which requires the installation of new roads (public or private) or the
extension of municipally owned utilities (sewer and water).
Town Engineer: The duly designated engineer of the Town of Milford, or if there is no such official, the
planning consultant or official assigned by the Planning Board.
Tract: The whole area of a single parcel of land, with assertable boundaries in single or joint ownership
undivided by a road and established by deeds of record (see also Lot and Parcel).
Wetland: An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and
duration sufficient to support, and that under normal conditions does support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands include swamps, marshes, bogs and
similar areas.
ARTICLE IV: PERMITTING PROCEDURE – SITE PLAN AND SUBDIVISION
APPLICATIONS
4.01 PROCESS
The applicant may elect to forgo both the conceptual review and the design review stage of the planning
process. However, for major site plans and subdivisions these stages are recommended.
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
15
2011 Printing
4.02 CONCEPTUAL REVIEW
Prior to the formal acceptance of an application submitted for review by the Planning Board, the Planning
Board at a duly noticed public meeting of the Board may conduct a conceptual review with the applicant
or applicant’s representatives, and may hear and confer with other parties whose interest may be
affected by the proposed layout.
The Planning Board shall discuss the application in conceptual form and only in general terms with the
applicant. No formal decisions can be made.
A conceptual review shall not bind either the applicant or the Planning Board. In order to facilitate
discussion, the applicant is requested to submit:
A. A drawing or plan of the site to be developed or property to be subdivided
B. A brief written description of the development plan
Abutter notification is not required for conceptual review.
4.03 DESIGN REVIEW
A more detailed review of an application can be made at the design review phase. More specific design
and engineering details are discussed at this stage.
The Planning Board may review the basic concept of the application and provide suggestions, which
might be of assistance in resolving problems with meeting requirements during formal consideration.
The Planning Board may make decisions on the granting of waivers and shall determine the allowed
density for future Open Space Conservation Development (OSCD) subdivision final applications. (See
also Sections 5.020 WAIVER APPLICATIONS and 5.08 OPEN SPACE CONSERVATION
DEVELOPMENTS)
The Planning Board may require outside or interdepartmental review of engineering or impact studies
requested at this stage. If outside review is required by the Board all costs are to be borne by the
applicant.
Design review discussions may be non-binding for the applicant and the Planning Board. However, any
formal motions and decisions voted on are binding for the applicant and the Planning Board.
In order to facilitate discussion, the applicant is requested to submit:
A. A plan, drawn to scale, of the site to be developed or property to be subdivided, which meets the
minimum submittal requirements of the minor site plan or minor subdivision application
B. A brief written description of the development plan
C. Preliminary Engineering
Design review requires abutters be notified by registered mail per RSA 676:4, as amended.
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
16
2011 Printing
The Planning Board may require the applicant to submit an architectural elevation of the project, which
complies with Section 6.04 ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN.
The Planning Board shall make an official motion to end the design review process and shall notify the
applicant in writing of the date the design review process is completed.
4.04 FORMAL REVIEW
The applicant shall file the completed application for Formal Review with the Community Development
Department at least fifteen (15) days prior to the meeting at which the application will be accepted, per
the schedule of regular Planning Board Meetings. Application checklists are located in APPENDIX I:
CHECKLISTS. A copy of the schedule of regular Planning Board Meetings is available at the Community
Development Department.
The application shall include the names and addresses of the applicant, engineer(s), property owner and
all abutters, as listed in the Department of Assessing records, current within five (5) days of the deadline
for filing an application.
Once an application has been submitted to the Community Development Department it will be sent out
for Interdepartmental Review whereby, all applicable Town Departments and Commissions will have
seven (7) days to review the application for comment and compliance with Town regulations.
Prior to the public hearing, a Staff Report will be provided to the Planning Board for review. The Staff
Reports summarize the application, including any Interdepartmental Review comments and a copy of the
documentation submitted by the applicant. Staff Reports may also include documentation submitted by
interested parties. The applicant shall receive a copy of the Staff Report prior to the public hearing.
At a properly noticed public hearing, the Planning Board may:
A. Vote to determine if the application poses potential regional impact and take corresponding action.
If the Planning Board determines there is potential regional impact, further action on the
application will be tabled until after the public hearing on potential regional impact.
B. Determine if an application is complete and if so accept the application, or if the application is
determined not to be complete, the Board will deny or table the acceptance of the application and
thereafter shall communicate to the applicant in writing why such action has been taken by the
Planning Board.
C. Vote to table, approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application.
The Planning Board may require outside or interdepartmental review of engineering or impact studies
required at this stage. If outside review is required by the Board all costs are to be borne by the
applicant.
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
17
2011 Printing
4.05 PUBLIC HEARING AND NOTICES
No application shall be accepted, approved or disapproved by the Planning Board without affording a
public hearing thereon.
A public hearing will be held for any of the following:
A. An amendment to a previously approved plan
B. A waiver request
C. Design review
D. Formal review
The applicant and the abutters shall be notified of the public hearing by certified mail (as necessary),
return receipt requested, mailed at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. The notice shall include the
time and place of the public hearing and a general description of the application and shall identify the
applicant and the location of the application.
Notice to the general public shall also be given at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing by posting said
notice in the Offices of the Board of Selectmen and the Community Development Department within the
Town of Milford or on the Town website.
4.06 DETERMINATION OF POTENTIAL REGIONAL IMPACT
Determination of potential regional impact shall apply to all applications requiring abutter notification and
shall be made at an abutter notified public hearing to provide notice to and an opportunity for response
from potentially affected municipalities and the regional planning commission(s) concerning
developments which are likely to have impacts beyond the boundaries of the Town of Milford, in
accordance with RSA 36:54-58, as amended.
A. Determination of potential regional impact may be found for applications which meet any of the
following impacts:
1. Relative size or number of dwelling units as compared with existing stock
2. Proximity to the borders of a neighboring community
3. Transportation networks
4. Anticipated emissions such as light, noise, smoke, odors, or particles
5. Proximity to aquifers or surface waters which transcend municipal boundaries
6. Shared facilities such as schools and solid waste disposal facilities
If a determination of potential regional impact is made by the Board, the Planning Board will notify the
regional planning commission and affected municipalities, in accordance with RSA 36:57 as amended.
All costs associated with notification shall be borne by the applicant.
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
18
2011 Printing
4.07 SITE PLAN EXTENSION AND EXPIRATION OF APPROVAL
Approved and conditionally approved site plans that have not yet been signed by the Planning Board
Chairman, have one (1) year from the date of approval to meet the conditions of approval and have the
site plan signed. Prior to expiration, the applicant may apply at a regular Planning Board meeting for a
single six (6) month extension to allow time to complete the conditions of approval. The approval of this
extension shall be at the Planning Board’s discretion.
Signed site plans have two (2) years from the date of signing to complete active and substantial
development or building on the site, in accordance with RSA 674:39, as amended. If the applicant fails to
complete active and substantial development or building within that time they may, prior to expiration,
apply at a regular Planning Board meeting for a single six (6) month extension of approval. If active and
substantial development or building is not accomplished by the end of the extension period, the site plan
approval expires and any proposed development will have to apply to the Planning Board with a new site
plan application.
Extensions of approval must be granted at a public hearing, but do not require abutter notification.
4.08 SUBDIVISION EXTENSION AND EXPIRATION OF APPROVAL
Approved and conditionally approved subdivisions that have not yet been signed have one year from the
date of approval to meet the conditions of approval and have the subdivision plan signed. Prior to
expiration, the applicant may apply at a regular Planning Board meeting for a single six (6) month
extension to allow time to complete the conditions of approval. The approval of this extension shall be at
the Planning Board’s discretion.
Signed major subdivisions have two (2) years from the date of signing to submit the required bonding
and complete active and substantial development or building as defined in these regulations, on the plan
or in the development agreement. If the applicant fails to complete active and substantial development or
building within that time they may, prior to expiration, apply at a regular Planning Board meeting for a
single twelve (12) month extension of approval.
If active and substantial development or building is not accomplished by the end of the extension period,
the subdivision will not be subject to the five (5) year exemption per RSA 674:39, as amended.
Extensions of approval must be granted at a public hearing but do not require abutter notification.
4.09 PLANNING BOARD ACTION AND TIME REQUIREMENTS: SITE PLAN AND
SUBDIVISIONS
The Planning Board shall place on its agenda for consideration any application meeting the minimum
requirements for completion submitted to it and move to accept, table or deny the application within thirty
(30) days or at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning Board. Checklists with the minimum
requirements are available at the Community Development office.
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
19
2011 Printing
The final determination as to the completeness of the application and acceptance thereof shall only be
made at a noticed public hearing. After an application has been formally accepted the Planning Board
shall act to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the application within sixty-five (65) days.
The Planning Board may apply to the Board of Selectmen for an extension not to exceed an additional
ninety (90) days before acting to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the plan. The applicant
may waive the requirement for Planning Board action and consent to an extension as may be mutually
agreeable, in which case no application to the Board of Selectmen is required.
This section is intended to be in accordance with RSA 676:4, as amended.
4.010 FAILURE TO APPROVE
Upon failure to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove an application, the Board of Selectmen
shall, upon request of the applicant, immediately issue an order directing the Planning Board to act on
the application within thirty (30) days. If the Planning Board does not act on the application within the
thirty (30) day time period, then within forty (40) days of the issuance of the order, the Board of
Selectmen shall certify on the applicant’s application that the plan is approved, unless within those forty
(40) days the Board of Selectmen identify in writing a specific provision of these regulations, the Zoning
Ordinance, or other applicable regulation or law with which the application does not comply. If the Board
of Selectmen approves the application it shall constitute final approval for all purposes including filing,
recording and court review.
4.011 APPROVAL AND DISAPPROVAL: SITE PLAN AND SUBDIVISION
4.011.1 CONDITIONAL APPROVAL
The Planning Board may grant conditional approval of an application as presented to the Planning Board
at the public hearing.
Conditional approval shall become final approval without further public hearing, upon satisfactory
compliance with the conditions imposed and a signature by the Planning Board Chairman or his/her
representative. The plan will not be signed or recorded until all of the conditions have been met. An
application may be granted conditional approval when the conditions are:
A. Minor plan changes whether or not imposed by the Planning Board as a result of public hearing
B. Conditions that are administrative in nature not requiring discretionary judgment by the Planning
Board
C. Conditions regarding the applicant’s possession of permits and approvals granted by other boards
or agencies
Compliance Hearings may be required at the discretion of the Planning Board when conditional approval
is granted. Public notice is required.
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
20
2011 Printing
An applicant has one (1) year to obtain final approval. If final approval cannot be obtained within one (1)
year, the applicant will be required to come back to the Planning Board for an extension of approval.
(See Section 4.07 SITE PLAN EXTENSION AND EXPIRATION OF APPROVAL and 4.08 SUBDIVISION
EXTENSION AND EXPIRATION OF APPROVAL)
4.011.2 FINAL APPROVAL
The Planning Board may grant final approval of an application as presented to the Planning Board at a
public hearing. Approvals are final when all conditions of approval have been completed and the plan is
signed and dated by the Chairman or designee of the Planning Board.
4.011.3 DISAPPROVAL
In cases where an application has not been accepted, denied or an application has not been approved,
the grounds for such disapproval shall be clearly stated in the minutes of the Planning Board’s meeting
and in the notice provided to the applicant.
4.012 RECORDING PROCEDURE
Site Plans – The Planning Board generally does not require site plans to be recorded, however the
Board reserves the right to require a site plan be recorded by the Town at the Hillsborough County
Registry of Deeds once said plan is approved and signed
Subdivisions, Easements and Other Documents – All approved and signed subdivision plans,
development agreements, easements and notarized documents, will be recorded at the Hillsborough
County Registry of Deeds
The cost of recording plans and all documents shall be borne by the applicant. The recording fees will be
determined by the Registry at the date of filing.
4.013 REVOCATION OF APPROVAL
A site plan, subdivision or other approval which has been filed with the appropriate recording official may
be revoked by the Planning Board in accordance with RSA 676:4-a, as amended.
4.014 BUILDING AND CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY PERMITS
No building permit shall be issued for any parcel subject to site plan (Section 2.03 DEVELOPMENT
REQUIRING SITE PLAN APPROVAL) or subdivision (Section 2.04 DEVELOPMENT REQUIRING
SUBDIVISION APPROVAL) approval unless final approval from the Planning Board has been granted.
No Certificate of Occupancy may be issued for a building or structure that is within the purview of the
regulations contained herein until the Director of Community Development or their designee, certifies that
all site improvements as shown on the approved site development plan have been completed. The
applicant may elect to post a bond (or another assurance) adequate to ensure completion of all site
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
21
2011 Printing
improvements, in which case a Certificate of Occupancy may be issued if deemed acceptable by State
Regulations and the Code Enforcement Officer.
ARTICLE V: PLAN REQUIREMENTS: SITE PLAN AND SUBDIVISION
5.01 SCOPE OF REVIEW
Any application, whether it covers the entire site or just a building addition, must, by necessity,
incorporate the entire parcel within the review. Not to do so may cause approval of a use or situation
which does not conform to the Zoning Ordinance and/or other applicable ordinances and regulations.
5.02 TYPES OF SITE PLAN APPLICATIONS
The following are considered site plan applications:
MINOR SITE PLAN – an application of six hundred (600) square feet, or less, of additional building
space.
MAJOR SITE PLAN – an application of greater than six hundred (600) square feet of additional building
space.
5.03 SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS – MINOR SITE PLAN APPLICATIONS
A fully executed and signed copy of the application.
Four (4) large copies and one (1) reduced (11”x17”) copy of a plan drawn at a scale sufficient to allow
review of the following items:
A. Name, address and signature of applicant
B. Name, address and signature of owner(s) of record, if different from applicant
C. Name and address of person or firm preparing the plan
D. Names and addresses of all current abutting property owners as displayed in the Assessing
Department’s records within five (5) days of application due date
E. North arrow
F. Scale
G. Date prepared
H. Locus map showing general location of the site within the Town
I. Property boundary lines, inclusive of distances and angles plotted to scale
J. The lot area of the parcel, road frontage and minimum zoning requirements for lot size and road
frontage
K. Current zoning classification of property, and location of district boundaries if located in two or
more zones
L. All existing buildings, parking and driveways
M. The location of all building setbacks required by the Zoning Ordinance.
N. The location of any proposed addition(s)
O. On-site flow of traffic
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
22
2011 Printing
P. All existing utilities such as sewer, water, electric and gas
Q. Provisions for storage and removal of refuse and recycling
R. Location, size and details of signs
S. Location, size and details of exterior lighting
T. Location, size and character of storage tanks
U. Existing and proposed landscaping with detail table
V. Snow storage details
W. A note defining the purpose of the plan
X. A note referencing and delineations on the plan of all easements, rights-of-way and deeded
property restrictions
Y. A note detailing applicable Impact Fees
Z. A note detailing the Open Space calculations per 6.04.0 of the Zoning Ordinance
AA. Flood hazard information provided in conformance with the requirements of 6.014 SPECIAL
FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
BB. A note detailing Groundwater Protection District Information per 6.01.0 of the Zoning Ordinance.
CC. Architectural details in accordance with 6.04 ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN
DD. Any approved waivers indicating the sections waived and a brief general description of the
waiver
The Planning Board may require outside and Interdepartmental Reviews including but not limited to
Assessing, Ambulance, Building/Code Enforcement, Fire, Police, Public Works, Water Utilities,
Conservation Commission, Stormwater, Tax Collector, Town Clerk and Heritage Commission.
The Planning Board may require a Stormwater Management and Erosion Control permit or plan be
submitted in accordance with the Town’s Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Regulation. (See
APPENDIX VII: TOWN DOCUMENT RESOURCES LIST)
5.04 SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS – MAJOR SITE PLAN APPLICATIONS
A fully executed and signed copy of the application.
One (1) reduced (11”x17”) copy of a plan and four (4) large copies to be determined at the time of
application, shall be drawn at a scale sufficient to allow review of the items listed under the following
requirements:
A. Name, address and signature of applicant
B. Name, address and signature of owner(s) of record, if different from applicant
C. Name and address of person or firm preparing the plan
D. Names and addresses of all current abutting property owners as displayed in the Assessing
Department’s records within five (5) days of the application due date.
E. North arrow
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
23
2011 Printing
F. Scale of not more than fifty (50) feet to the inch
G. Date prepared
H. Locus map showing general location of the site within the Town
I. Property boundary lines, inclusive of distances and angles, plotted to scale
J. The lot area of the parcel, frontage and minimum zoning requirements for lot size and road
frontage
K. Current zoning classification of property and location of district boundaries if located in two or
more zones
L. Delineation of all wetlands and wetlands buffers
M. Existing and proposed topography of the site at five (5’) foot contour intervals or two (2) foot
contour intervals if major changes to the existing topography are being proposed
N. Scaled roadway centerline at fifty (50’) feet increments for rural areas and ten (10’) feet
increments in the Urbanized/Oval Sub-district area
O. The location of all existing buildings within fifty (50’) feet of the subject site
P. Locations of all roads or driveways within two hundred (200’) feet of the subject site
Q. Locations of infiltrating drainage systems within two hundred (200’) feet, where appropriate
R. Existing access roads, recreational trails and boundaries (such as stone walls, barbed wire, etc.)
S. The location of existing and proposed buildings (including size and height), driveways, sidewalks,
parking spaces, loading areas, open spaces, significant trees, vegetated areas, open drainage
courses, service areas, rock ledges and other essential features on site(s) of proposed
development
T. The location of all building setbacks as required by the Zoning Ordinance
U. On-site flow of traffic
V. Provisions for storage and removal of refuse and recycling
W. Location, size and details of signs
X. Location, size and details of exterior lighting
Y. Location, size and detail of storage tanks
Z. Snow Storage locations
AA. A note defining the purpose of the plan
BB. A note detailing Open Space calculations per 6.04.0 of the Zoning Ordinance
CC. Brief history of the property, including other disturbances that have happened on the property
and previously approved Planning Board, ZBA and other regulatory approvals
DD. General description of the existing characteristics such as: developed, productive farmland,
meadow, forest, viewshed, archeological site, areas contiguous with other open space, wildlife
corridors
EE. Brief description of drainage upstream onto property and discharge downstream from property
FF. A note detailing applicable Impact Fees
GG. A note indicating that: “All water, sewer, road (including parking lot) and drainage work shall be
constructed in accordance with the Town of Milford’s Water Utilities Department and Public
Works Department standards.”
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
24
2011 Printing
HH. A note indicating that: “As-built plans shall be delivered to the Building Department prior to a
Certificate of Occupancy being issued.”
EE. A note detailing Flood Hazard information in conformance with the requirements of 6.014
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
II. A note detailing Groundwater Protection District information per 6.010 of the Zoning Ordinance
JJ. A note referencing and delineations on the plan of all easements, rights-of-way and deeded
property restrictions
KK. A Landscaping Plan which meets the requirements of 6.08 LANDSCAPING STANDARDS
LL. The Planning Board may require a Stormwater Management or an Erosion and Sediment Control
plan be submitted in accordance with Section 6.011 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN and
the Town’s Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Ordinance. (See APPENDIX VII:
TOWN DOCUMENT RESOURCES LIST)
MM. Architectural Plans in accordance with 6.04 ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN
NN. A Utility Plan in accordance with 6.015 MUNICIPAL AND PUBLIC UTILITIES
OO. Any approved waivers indicating the sections waived and a brief general description of the
waiver
Please note all street signage and individual lot identification number signage must be erected prior to
building construction .
The Planning Board may require outside and Interdepartmental Reviews including but not limited to
Assessing, Ambulance, Building/Code Enforcement, Fire, Police, Public Works, Water Utilities,
Conservation Commission, Stormwater, Tax Collector, Town Clerk and Heritage Commission.
Any Federal or State permits required including but not limited to: NH Water Supply and Pollution Control
Commission for septic systems, NH Wetlands Bureau and/or Milford’s Zoning Board of Adjustment for
relocation, dredging, filling or rechanneling wetlands and wetlands buffers, NH DOT or Milford DPW
driveway permits, Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Permits and NH DES Shoreland
Permits.
The Planning Board may require additional information in certain situations and is not limited to only
those submittal requirements listed in this section.
5.05 TYPES OF SUBDIVISION APPLICATIONS
The following are considered subdivision applications:
CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION – The division of an existing or approved building or group of buildings
into units owned individually and the common areas and facilities are owned by all the owners on a
proportional, undivided basis.
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
25
2011 Printing
LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT– A subdivision where no new buildable lots are created. A lot line adjustment
may not create a more a non-conforming lot per the Town of Milford Zoning Ordinance, save those cases
where a variance has been granted for such.
MINOR SUBDIVISION – The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land which would result in three (3) or
fewer new building lots and which does not require the installation of any new roads (public or private) or
the extension of any municipally owned utilities (sewer and water).
MAJOR SUBDIVISION – The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land which creates four (4) or more
additional building lots or an application which requires the installation of new roads (public or private) or
the extension of municipally owned utilities (sewer and water).
5.06 SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS – MINOR SUBDIVISION, LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT
AND CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION APPLICATIONS
A fully executed and signed copy of the application.
Four (4) large copies and one (1) reduced (11”x17”) copy of a plan drawn at a scale sufficient to allow
review of the following items:
A. Name, address and signature of applicant
B. Name, address and signature of owner(s) of record, if different from applicant
C. Name and address of person or firm preparing the plan
D. Names and addresses of all current abutting property owners as displayed in the Assessing
Department’s records within five (5) days of application due date
E. North arrow
F. Scale
G. Date prepared
H. Locus map showing general location of the site within the Town
I. Property boundary lines, inclusive of distances and angles plotted to scale
J. Areas of proposed lots in square feet and acres
K. Delineation of all wetlands and wetlands buffers
L. Delineation of slopes over twenty-five (25%) percent
M. Location of buildings within fifty (50’) feet of the subject site
N. Location of all roads or driveways within two hundred (200’) feet of the subject site
O. Existing access roads, recreational trails and boundaries (such as stone walls, barbed wire, etc.)
P. Existing and proposed buildings and driveways on-site
Q. Current zoning classification of property, and location of district boundaries if located in two or
more zones
R. The location of all building setbacks required by the Zoning Ordinance
S. On-site flow of traffic
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
26
2011 Printing
T. All existing services such as sewer, water and utilities
U. A note defining the purpose of the plan
V. Brief history of the property, including other disturbances that have happened on the property
W. General description of the existing characteristics such as: developed, productive farmland,
meadow, forest, viewshed, archeological site, areas contiguous with other open space, wildlife
corridors
X. Summary description of drainage upstream onto property and discharge downstream from
property
Y. Flood hazard information provided in conformance with the requirements of 6.014 SPECIAL
FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
Z. A note detailing Groundwater Protection District information per 6.010 of the Zoning Ordinance
AA. A note referencing and delineations on the plan of all easements, rights-of-way and deeded
property restrictions
BB. Deleted.
CC. State of New Hampshire Site Specific permit number(s), if required
DD. All parcels shall be numbered in a consecutive manner with no omissions or duplications. The
notation of the plan shall contain a list of the map and lot numbers of the parent tract(s) as
identified in the Town of Milford Assessing records
EE. Planning Board approval block with space for Chairman’s signature and date, and Approval
number and Approval date
FF. The seal of a duly registered and licensed land surveyor shall be affixed to the final plan attesting
that the final plan is substantially correct and which certifies that all bounds have been set and
that the survey will close within one ten thousandth of a foot (1’/10,000’)
GG. Any approved waivers indicating the sections waived and a brief general description of the
waiver
The Planning Board may require the plans be stamped by a NH Licensed Civil Engineer, Soil Scientist or
Wetlands Scientist, as necessary, to certify all regulations have been adhered to and the plan conforms
to applicable Federal, State and Town regulations.
The Planning Board may require outside and Interdepartmental Review including but not limited to
Assessing, Ambulance, Building/Code Enforcement, Fire, Police, Public Works, Water Utilities,
Conservation Commission, Stormwater, Tax Collector, Town Clerk and Heritage Commission.
The Planning Board may require a Stormwater Management and Erosion Control plan be submitted in
accordance with Section 6.011 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN and the Town’s Stormwater
Management and Erosion Control Ordinance. (See APPENDIX VII: TOWN DOCUMENT RESOURCES
LIST)
The Planning Board may require additional information as deemed necessary in certain situations and is
not limited to only those submittal requirements listed in this section.
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
27
2011 Printing
5.07 SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS – MAJOR SUBDIVISION APPLICATIONS
A fully executed and signed copy of the application.
One (1) reduced (11”x17”) copy of a plan and four (4) large copies to be determined at the time of
application, shall be drawn at a scale sufficient to allow review of the items listed under the following
requirements:
A. Name, address and signature of applicant
B. Name, address and signature of owner(s) of record, if different from applicant
C. Name and address of person or firm preparing the plan
D. Names and addresses of all current abutting property owners as displayed in the Assessing
Department’s records within five (5) days of application due date
E. North arrow
F. Scale
G. Date prepared
H. Current zoning of property
I. Lot area in square feet and acres, frontage and associated minimum zoning requirements
J. Locus map showing general location of the site within the Town
K. Property boundary lines, inclusive of distances and angles plotted to scale
L. Delineation of all wetlands and wetlands buffers
M. Delineation of slopes over twenty-five (25%) percent
N. Existing and proposed topography at five (5’) foot intervals or two (2’) foot intervals if major
changes are proposed
O. Balance sheet of proposed cut and fill quantities with maximum amounts stated
P. Scaled roadway centerline at fifty (50’) feet increments for rural areas and ten (10’) feet increments
in the Urbanized/Oval Sub-district area
Q. Location of buildings within fifty (50’) feet of the subject site
R. Location of all roads or driveways within two hundred (200’) feet of the subject site
S. Locations of infiltrating drainage systems within two hundred (200’) feet, where appropriate
T. Existing access roads, recreational trails and boundaries (such as stone walls, barbed wire, etc.)
U. Existing and proposed buildings, driveways and roads on-site
V. New roads shall have the centerline marked at fifty (50’) intervals
W. The location of all building setbacks required by the Zoning Ordinance
X. On-site flow of traffic
Y. All existing services such as sewer, water and utilities
Z. Provisions for storage of recycling and refuse, as necessary
AA. Location, size and detail of signs
BB. Location, size and detail of exterior lighting
CC. Location, size and detail of storage tanks
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
28
2011 Printing
DD. A note defining the purpose of the plan
EE. Brief history of the property, including other disturbances that have happened on the property
FF. General description of the existing characteristics such as: developed, productive farmland,
meadow, forest, viewshed, archeological site, areas contiguous with other open space, wildlife
corridors
GG. Summary description of drainage upstream onto property and discharge downstream from
property
HH. Flood hazard information provided in conformance with the requirements of 6.014 SPECIAL
FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
II. A note detailing Groundwater Protection District information per 6.01.0 of the Zoning Ordinance
JJ. Deed references for the property
KK. A note referencing and delineations on the plan of all easements, rights-of-way and deeded
property restrictions
LL. Note detailing applicable Impact Fees
MM. Deleted.
NN. A note indicating that: “All water, sewer, road (including parking lot) and drainage work shall be
constructed in accordance with the Town of Milford’s Water Utilities Department and Public
Works Department Standards.”
OO. A note indicating the ownership of any open space to be created as part of the subdivision
application
PP. A note shall be required on the plan stating a sign is required at the entrance to a new road or
set of roads reading as follows: “This road has not been accepted by the Town of Milford. Until
the road has been accepted the Town assumes no responsibility for maintenance including snow
removal, nor any liability for damages resulting from use of the road. RSA 674:41.”
QQ. A Utility plan in accordance with 6.015 MUNICIPAL AND PUBLIC UTILITIES
RR. Road, sidewalk and drainage cross-sections, profiles and engineering specifications
SS. All parcels shall be numbered in a consecutive manner with no omissions or duplications. In
addition, the Notes Section shall contain a list of the map and lot numbers of the parent tract(s) as
identified in the Town of Milford Assessing records
TT. Planning Board approval block with space for Chairman’s signature and date, and Approval
number and Approval date
UU. The seal of a duly registered and licensed land surveyor shall be affixed to the final plan
attesting that the final plan is substantially correct and that the survey will close within one ten
thousandth of a foot (1’/10,000’). All bounds or pints are required to be set on each lot prior to the
issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy and all roadway bounds must be set prior to a road
acceptance.
VV. Any approved waivers indicating the sections waived and a brief general description of the
waiver
Please note all street signage and individual lot identification number signage must be erected prior to
building construction .
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
29
2011 Printing
The Planning Board may require the plans be stamped by a NH Licensed Civil Engineer, Soil Scientist or
Wetlands Scientist, as necessary, to certify all regulations have been adhered to and the plan conforms
to applicable Federal, State and Town regulations.
The Planning Board may require outside and Interdepartmental Review including but not limited to
Assessing, Ambulance, Building/Code Enforcement, Fire, Police, Public Works, Water Utilities,
Conservation Commission, Stormwater, Tax Collector, Town Clerk and Heritage Commission.
The Planning Board may require a Stormwater Management or an Erosion and Sediment Control plan
and/or permit be submitted in accordance with Section 6.011 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN
and the Town’s Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Ordinance. (See APPENDIX VII: TOWN
DOCUMENT RESOURCES LIST)
The Planning Board may require additional information as deemed necessary in certain situations and is
not limited to only those submittal requirements listed in this section.
5.08 OPEN SPACE CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENTS
All subdivisions of (5) or more lots or dwelling units are subject to the Open Space Conservation Zoning
District (OSCD), Section 6.04.0 of the Zoning Ordinance.
The applicant may apply at the Design Review stage for a waiver to the Planning Board for authorization
to design a conventional subdivision based on the list of resources desirable for preservation set forth in
the Open Space Conservation Zoning District (OSCD). Please see APPENDIX III: OPEN SPACE
SUBDIVISION FLOWCHART.
Open space area(s) must be owned by one of the following entities (unless otherwise approved by the
Planning Board):
A. A government agency or nonprofit organization holding the land for conservation purposes
B. In common by the pertinent lot owners in the subdivision
C. A Homeowner’s Association
D. The developer or his/her successor
A note must be added on the final plans stating which of these entities will own the land.
5.09 IMPACT STUDIES
The Planning Board may, at its discretion, require an applicant to provide to the Planning Board with
applicable impact studies such as but not limited to: Hydrogeologic, Facilities, Environmental, Fiscal,
Public Services, Utilities, Traffic, Drainage, and Stormwater. The requirement for these studies shall be
made, when applicable, at the Design Review stage.
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
30
2011 Printing
The purpose of any impact study required by the Board shall be to determine:
A. The extent to which the proposed development or facility will impact resources, public services
and facilities of the Town, and;
B. The extent to which the environment or public services and facilities may need to be expanded,
upgraded or mitigated because of the proposed development.
The scope of any impact study not specifically defined in the following sections will be determined by
Planning Staff at such time as the Planning Board determines which, if any Impact Studies will be
required.
Such studies, once prepared by the applicant, may be required to be reviewed for the Planning Board by
an acceptable consultant, with the scope and cost mutually agreed on by the Planning Board or its
designee and the applicant. The cost of the consultant review shall be borne by the applicant.
The Planning Board, prior to the granting of any approval with respect to a development application
wherein such an impact study has been requested, shall hold a hearing on the information gathered in
accordance with this Section. The Planning Board, in accordance with said hearing, may deny any
application for development in which it is determined that the proposed development, if approved, would
result in danger or injury to health, safety or prosperity by reason of the lack of water supply, drainage,
transportation, fire protection or other public services, or necessitate the excessive expenditure of public
funds for the supply of such services.
5.010 REFERRAL TO TOWN AGENCIES AND BOARDS
The Planning Board may refer any impact studies submitted by the applicant to any boards, agencies or
other administrative or policy making bodies for their evaluation of the extent to which the proposed
development will have an impact, adverse or otherwise, on the Town. The Planning Board may request
that said boards, agencies or other bodies indicate the extent to which the Town’s public services and
facilities can accommodate the demands created by the proposed project in terms of the present
capabilities of the Town and the realistic and planned projections of future increases in said capabilities.
In this regard, reference may be made to the Master Plan, Capital Improvements Plan, Budget or other
documents or plans that are operative or under study in the Town at the time that this study is being
undertaken.
5.011 ENVIRONMENTAL STUDY
Included in the purposes of these regulations is the statement “to encourage the wise use and
management of natural resources, conservation of energy and historic features throughout the
municipality in order to preserve the integrity, stability, and beauty of the community and the value of the
land”. The Planning Board believes that the protection of our natural resources is important, and requires
applicants to have a complete understanding of the natural resources of sites being proposed for
development.
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
31
2011 Printing
The Planning Board, with input from the Conservation Commission, may require the applicant to submit
an ‘Environmental Study’ (see APPENDIX IV: ENVIRONMENTAL STUDY). The criteria used to
determine whether an Environmental Study may need to be completed shall include, at least one of the
following:
A. The property is 25 acres or more and a portion shows a habitat co-occurrence score of three (3) or
higher on the “Course Filter Significant Wildlife Habitat, Co-occurrence Scores Map (see Planning
Department website). Results of future environmental studies or resource inventories that identify
additional areas qualifying as “Highest Ranked” in accordance with NH Fish & Game criteria will
be added to the map used by the town under this requirement.
B. The property is 25 acres or more and a portion is identified on the NH Audubon Natural Services
Network map as providing important ecological services that are difficult and expensive to
replicate. Loss of these services affects human health, safety, quality of life, and economic
opportunity.
C. There exists within the property all or a portion of a perennial stream, a wetland identified in the
National Wetland Inventory (NWI) or a vernal pool.
D. The property is located within an unfragmented block of 250 acres or more as depicted on the NH
Fish & Game Coarse Filter Significant Wildlife Habitat: Base Map (see Planning Department
website).
All of the above referenced maps and resources are available on the Planning Departments website
(http://www.milford.nh.gov).
It is recommended that the field work for the Environmental Study be conducted from April – June or
September – November whenever possible. In unusual circumstances, the developer may be requested
to do field surveys during breeding/flowering seasons.
The Requirements for an Environmental Study are listed in APPENDIX IV: ENVIRONMENTAL STUDY.
5.012 HYDROGEOLOGIC STUDY
A hydrogeologic study may be required for projects when deemed necessary by the Planning Board
when one or more of the following conditions warrant further analysis:
A. Have one or more septic systems designed for a total on-site sewage loading of 2,500 gallons per
day or more
B. Subdivisions of four or more lots located within the Town’s Groundwater Protection District
C. For subdivisions of more than 10 lots with and without Town water and sewer
For subdivisions of three lots or less, the Planning Board will determine on a case-by-case basis the
need for a hydrogeologic study. Particularly sensitive sites may include areas that have septic systems in
close proximity to wells, or may contain excessively drained soils or steep slopes.
A hydrogeologic study shall at a minimum provide the following:
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
32
2011 Printing
A. A hydrogeologic mapping of local groundwater flow
B. Existing background water quality
C. The location of abutter water supply wells and septic systems
D. The location and capacity of the proposed septic system(s)
E. The location of stormwater management facilities
F. Model the affects of stormwater management with proposed well and septic systems
G. Estimates of the transport of contaminants from the septic system(s) and of constituent
concentrations (i.e. nitrates) at the property boundary and at abutter’s water supplies
The proposed septic system(s) shall not create groundwater degradation beyond the limits of the
property line in excess of EPA water quality criteria for domestic supplies, as amended. Degradation that
does occur shall be minimal and shall not result in significant changes in local well water quality.
Systems that violate these tenets shall be rejected.
The hydrogeologic studies shall be performed by registered or certified hydrologists, hydrogeologists, or
other qualified professionals. All water testing is to be performed at EPA approved laboratories.
5.013 PREMATURE DEVELOPMENT
The Planning Board, in its discretion, will not approve such scattered or premature development as
would involve danger or injury to health, safety or prosperity by reason of the lack of water supply,
drainage, transportation, schools, fire protection or other public services; nor will the Planning Board
approve such development which will necessitate an excessive expenditure of public funds for the supply
of such services.
These regulations are designed to guide the Town’s future growth in a balanced and responsible
manner. Towards this end, the Planning Board shall consider the following items when determining
whether a proposed development is scattered or premature:
A. Existing and projected capacity of the Town’s school system and the effect of the development on
school bus transportation
B. Adequacy of existing access roads and/or sidewalks
C. Adequacy of water for domestic needs and firefighting purposes
D. Potential health problems regarding the relationship between on-site sewage disposal systems
and the soil conditions of the parcels, as well as the potential impact on surrounding water quality.
E. Potential problems with the delivery of municipal services (such as fire protection, ambulance and
police services)
F. Potential drainage problems both on-site and downstream and within existing receiving municipal
systems
G. Adequacy of nearby recreation facilities
H. General compliance with applicable Master Plan goals and recommendations
I. Other issues which, in the view of the Planning Board, may cause the proposed development to be
scattered or premature
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
33
2011 Printing
The Planning Board may determine that a proposed development is scattered or premature unless
special improvements are made off-site or to the site itself. In such cases, the Planning Board may
require the applicant to make said improvements prior to, or as a condition of development approval.
Required improvements may consist of, but shall not be limited to, the following:
A. Improvement of access roads leading to the proposed development if, in the view of the Planning
Board, the existing access roads are deemed to be inadequate
B. Extension of the municipal water and/or sewer system(s) if the water mains and/or sewer lines are
within 100 feet of the proposed development
C. Construction or improvement of sidewalks along any access roads where a potential increase in
pedestrian traffic is expected
D. Construction of static water systems for fire protection
E. Improvement of nearby intersections (including the installation of traffic signals) if, in the view of
the Planning Board, the existing intersections are deemed to be inadequate
F. Provision and/or enhancement of recreational facilities
G. Provision and/or extension of drainage facilities or upgrades of existing receiving drainage
systems
The Planning Board will consider only the impact of the proposed development in relation to the provision
of municipal services and, if necessary and appropriate, apportion the costs of any such improvements
required of the applicant. All details for provisions of off-site improvements shall be incorporated either as
detailed plan notes and/or contained in a recorded development agreement.
5.014 ALTERNATIVES TO A RULING OF PREMATURE DEVELOPMENT
Nothing in the foregoing shall preclude the Planning Board and the applicant from coming to some
compromise with respect to the problems that are addressed in regard to this Section so long as the
Planning Board finds that the application is consistent with the overall objectives of the Master Plan,
Capital Improvements Plan or other documents by which it is required to be guided.
5.015 OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS
If the Board determines that the proposed subdivision will adversely affect existing public facilities, roads,
sidewalks, drainage, sewer or water supply, causing them to be inadequate to meet the additional needs
created by the subdivision, then the applicant shall pay a reasonable share for such upgrading of the
public facilities to an extent necessary to protect the public interest. If other properties benefit from the
upgrading of such off-site public improvements, the Board shall determine the portion of the cost to be
paid by the applicant, taking into consideration the following elements:
A. The character of the area
B. The extent that other public and private property will be benefited by the upgrading; and
C. Any other factors that the Board deems appropriate to establish a rational connection between the
needs created by the development and the amount to be paid by the applicant.
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
34
2011 Printing
5.016 ACCEPTANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS
The applicant shall grant easements and/or deeds in a form certified as satisfactory by Planning Board of
any on or off-site improvement, road, utility or open space to be accepted by the Town as part of the
completed plan. Approval of the plan by the Planning Board shall not constitute an acceptance by the
Town of the dedication of any road, on or off-site improvement, utility or open space.
5.017 PHASING
The Planning Board requires developments which qualify as Major Subdivisions to take place over a
period of years, in stages, in order to promote orderly development with minimal impact on the provisions
of Town services. The allocation of building permits shall be by the following method:
# of New Building Permits Phasing (years)
1-10 None
11-20 2
21-30 3
31-40 4
40+ Minimum of 5
A. It is the intention of the phasing schedule to evenly distribute the number of building permits over
the required number of years. However, if the Planning Board determines it is in the public’s best
interest (i.e. through-road connection, etc.) to allow an applicant to have a greater number of
permits in the beginning or end of the allotted phasing period, the Planning Board may grant an
allowance for more permits in a single year, as long as the project remains phased over the entire
phasing period.
B. The approved phasing schedule shall be identified in a note on the plan or laid out as a phasing
plan included in the final plan set.
C. If a development is not built out within the timeframe of the approved phasing plan, the
development may continue to be built out at a rate not greater than the highest yearly rate in the
approved phasing plan or at a rate mutually agreed upon by the applicant and Planning Board.
5.018 TAX LIEN DISCLOSURES
No subdivision shall be finally signed until the Planning Board is provided with confirmation, in writing,
from the Office of the Tax Collector that all tax liens (other than those that apply to April 1 of the tax year
in which the subdivision is being approved) have been paid and cleared; or that a written agreement
between the Tax Collector and the applicant has been signed.
5.019 DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT
The Planning Board may require the applicant to enter into a Development Agreement with the Town in
which the timetable, off-site improvements, responsible parties and methods of payment of the proposed
development will be laid out.
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
35
2011 Printing
5.020 WAIVER APPLICATIONS
The Planning Board may grant a waiver from a specific section of the Development Regulations in a
special case when:
A. The strict application of these regulations would result in peculiar and exceptional practical
difficulties or exceptional and undue hardship upon the owner of the affected property; or
B. An alternative site plan or subdivision design approach which meets the purpose of the regulations
equally well or better than compliance with the existing regulations.
In either of the forgoing circumstances, the waiver may be granted so that justice may be done and the
public interest secured, provided that such waiver will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and
purposes of these Regulations, the Zoning Ordinance or the Master Plan.
The Planning Board shall approve or disapprove waivers based upon the evidence presented to it in
each specific case.
An applicant shall request in writing to waive specific requirements of these Regulations as they pertain
to the application, by the application deadline for a regularly scheduled Planning Board meeting. The
Planning Board’s publicly noticed agenda for the particular meeting shall clearly indicate that a waiver
request(s) has been received, a copy of which is available at the Community Development office and that
the waiver request(s) will be considered at the meeting.
Abutter notification is required for all waiver requests.
All approved waivers shall be noted on the plans, indicating the sections waived and a general
description of the waivers.
5.021 AMENDMENTS
The following provisions shall govern the approval of amendments to an approved development plan:
A. Minor amendments, as determined by the Director of Community Development and Code
Enforcement officer, after consultation with appropriate departments may be approved by the
Director of Community Development or the Planning Board.
B. The Town Engineer may approve engineering changes related to field conditions, provided that
the change(s) do not have a detrimental effect to abutting properties and provided that all
changes are consistent with the Planning Board’s and the Town of Milford’s regulations and
standards.
C. All minor amendments shall be shown on an As-Built plan to be submitted to the Planning
Department.
D. All major amendments as determined by the Director of Community Development shall be shown
on a revised plan to be submitted and approved by the Planning Board prior to the amendment
being undertaken by the applicant.
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
36
2011 Printing
5.022 SEAL AND CERTIFICATION
All plans with on- or off-site engineered designs or details shall be certified by a duly registered and
licensed civil engineer that all regulations have been adhered to and the plan conforms to all the
applicable Town and State regulations.
A land surveyor licensed in the State of New Hampshire shall stamp all subdivisions and boundary
surveys.
5.023 FINAL PLAN: SITE PLAN AND SUBDIVISION
A request for final approval of a site plan or subdivision application shall be accompanied by a Final Plan
legibly and clearly drawn as follows:
A. Size of sheets shall not measure more than 22” x 34”
B. A final plan shall show all items required in minor or major application requirements
C. Copies of all applicable State approvals and permits including but not limited to:
1. Approval of the Department of Environmental Services (DES) of any proposed septic system(s)
or additions to buildings on a septic system
2. Approval of the New Hampshire DES Wetlands Board and/or the Zoning Board of Adjustment
for the relocation, filling, dredging or re-channeling of any natural or manmade drainage area,
river, stream, pond, wet area, etc
3. Approval of the New Hampshire Department of Transportation or Milford Department of Public
Works for any required driveway permits or curb cuts
D. Before final approval of the plan the Planning Board may require outside and Interdepartmental
Review including but not limited to Assessing, Ambulance, Building/Code Enforcement, Fire,
Police, Public Works, Water Utilities, Conservation Commission, Tax Collector, Town Clerk and
Heritage Commission.
E. The original signed and approved mylar of a final Site Plan shall be retained by the Community
Development office. One paper copy shall be delivered to the applicant and the remaining copies
shall be distributed by the Community Development office. For subdivisions the original mylar
shall be delivered by the Community Development office or its authorized representative to the
Hillsborough County Registry of Deeds. The recording fee for said plan shall be given to the
Community Development office at the time of the signing of the Final Plan.
F. Upon completion of all construction of road and utilities on the premises shown on said Final Plan
and prior to acceptance of said roads, on and off-site improvements, open space and utilities by
the Town of Milford, the applicant shall submit to the Planning Board an “As-built” Final Plan
showing the actual location and position of said roads and utilities and all necessary easement
and deed documents. (See APPENDIX VI: ROADWAY ACCEPTANCE INFORMATION )
G. MINOR AND MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS shall also have:
H. The seal of a licensed land surveyor attesting that such Final Plan is substantially correct and
certifies all bounds are set shall be included on the plan. The surveyor shall certify that the survey
will close within one ten thousandth of a foot (1’/10,000’).
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
37
2011 Printing
5.024 FINAL PLAN COPIES
A. Minor Site Plan: minimum of five (5) copies with one (1) copy no larger than 11”X17” and one (1)
electronic PDF or CAD file if available.
B. Major Site Plan: one (1) mylar, one 11” x 17”, one electronic PDF or CAD file and if private water
and sewer five (5) 22”X34” plans or if public water and sewer six (6) 22”X34” plans.
C. Minor Subdivision: Two (2) mylars, one 11” x 17”, one electronic CAD file and if private water and
sewer five (5) 22”X34” plans or if public water and sewer six (6) 22”X34” plans.
D. Major Subdivision: Two (2) mylars, one 11” x 17”, one electronic CAD file and if private water and
sewer five (5) 22”X34” plans or if public water and sewer six (6) 22”X34” plans.
ARTICLE VI: DEVELOPMENT GUIDELINES
6.01 GENERAL
An applicant shall adhere to the following general principles when designing a site plan or laying out a
proposed subdivision development within the Town of Milford. These principals and requirements shall
be construed as the minimum requirements. The Planning Board, at its discretion, may require higher
standards in individual cases or may waive certain requirements (See 5.020 WAIVER APPLICATIONS)
for good cause in accordance with the procedures outlined in these regulations.
6.02 PURPOSE
These guidelines are intended to promote development that protects and improves environmental
quality, preserves natural features, conserve energy and retains historic character where possible and
practical. All development plans shall protect and preserve elements such as but not limited to, historic
and natural features as stonewalls, historic structures, wetlands, watercourses, water bodies, floodplains,
steep slopes, aquifer recharge areas, large or unique trees, wildlife habitats and scenic views. Natural
features that provide buffers between lots, or sections, of a development should be preserved to
enhance privacy and aesthetic value. The road and lot layout shall bear a logical relationship and be
adapted to the topography of the site. Extensive grading and filling is discouraged and shall be avoided
to the greatest extent possible.
Insofar as possible, the development plan shall preserve existing woodlands and vegetation. If not
possible to retain such, additional suitable plantings shall be included on the development plan. In
addition, the Planning Board may require landscaped buffers between developments and adjacent land
uses as deemed necessary. Native species are encouraged whenever possible and invasive species are
prohibited (See APPENDIX VII: TOWN DOCUMENT RESOURCE LIST for Invasive Species
Resources).
6.03 CONFORMITY
Development plans shall be in harmony and consistent with the Town’s Master Plan goals and
objectives, Zoning Ordinance and these Regulations. Development plans shall conform to all regulations
of the Planning Board and other applicable Town by-laws, ordinances, regulations and statutes of the
local, State and Federal governments.
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
38
2011 Printing
6.04 ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN
6.04.1 PURPOSE
The purpose of these regulations is to promote compatibility, imagination, innovation, and variety in new
construction or renovation of commercial and multi-family buildings and related property; and to
encourage continued economic development, energy conservation, improve transportation efficiency,
conserve property values, and further enhance the visual appearance of the community and its gateways
within the context of overall community character. The guidelines are directed towards, but are not
limited to, assisting corporate franchises and commercial developments in the design of structures that
reflect small town New England atmosphere unique to Milford. Consideration must be given to human
scale and pedestrian orientation for the design of or renovation of a structure.
These architectural design guidelines are not necessarily intended to apply to industrial buildings;
however general compliance is encouraged and additional screening may be required for industrial
buildings.
6.04.2 GENERAL CRITERIA
A. Plans shall show all building elevations and portray the design of all buildings and the relationship
of the development to surrounding properties, buildings, natural features and built features.
B. The Planning Board may require that development proposals be reviewed by an historic
consultant or architect, and be designed by a NH licensed architect at the cost of the applicant.
6.04.3 GUIDELINES
The guidelines contained herein do not expect to foresee all possible proposed building situations.
Decisions concerning such unforeseen situations will be made with these guidelines in mind:
A. Monotony of design or warehouse style structures shall be avoided. Variation in detail, form, and
siting shall be used to provide visual interest.
B. New structures shall orient their main entrance or storefront to a public road. Buildings shall be
sited so that entrances are clearly identifiable.
C. The size, mass and form of new structures must relate to the appropriate scale of neighboring
buildings as well as the context of the district in which it is located in. The flowing architectural
features and treatments should be used to enhance the character of new development and the
corridor:
1. Avoid blank walls at ground-floor levels through the use of windows, trellises, wall articulation.
2. Arcades, material changes, awnings or other features.
3. Reduce the apparent scale of the building by introducing small-scaled architectural features,
creating an irregular footprint and variations in roof forms and height of roof elements.
4. Enhance definition of each floor of the building through terracing, articulated structural
elements, changes in materials, belt courses and horizontal trim bands.
D. Roof forms and materials
1. Rooflines shall be characteristically sloped and articulated with architectural features such as
dormers, chimneys, gables, cupolas, etc.
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
39
2011 Printing
2. Rooflines shall not run in continuous planes and shall be broken into appropriately scaled
masses.
3. Flat roofs are strongly discouraged unless the Planning Board finds that a proposal can
provide appropriate visual appeal.
4. Where appropriate roofs shall provide adequate overhangs for pedestrian activity.
5. Roof materials shall be comprised of high quality, durable and architecturally consistent
materials, including but not limited to concrete tile, asphalt shingles and standing seam metal.
6. In cases where pitched roofs are not practical, the use of false building fronts shall be used to
imitate pitched roofs to vary the horizontal lines along portions of the façade to create the
appearance of multiple attached buildings. All sides of a structure shall receive design
consideration. A façade unrelated to the rest of the building is not an acceptable design.
7. In all cases, all roof top mechanical units shall be located or screened so as to not be visible
from road level or from public areas from ground level.
E. Architectural features and details shall be considered in every building design.
1. Traditional features and details such as columns, pilasters, canopies, porticos, awnings or
arches associated with Milford’s architectural heritage are strongly encouraged.
2. Long expanses of repetitive architectural elements and flat unarticulated wall surfaces shall be
avoided.
3. Use of traditional materials or materials that have the same visual effect shall be used including
but not limited to wood, brick, tile or stone.
4. Building facades should have an abundance of windows that use clear non-reflective glass.
5. Windows on higher floors should align vertically with windows below, if possible.
F. Existing buildings and structures of historic value should be preserved and if renovated or
expanded done so in a manner that is respectful of the character, features and details of the
existing structure.
G. Signs
1. Signs shall comply with the Town of Milford Sign Ordinance and should be designed to meet
the needs of the individual uses while complementing the building, site and surroundings.
2. Wall signs shall be appropriately scaled to the building or surface on which it is placed and
should not obscure important architectural features.
3. Signs shall be readable for both pedestrians and drivers approaching the site.
4. Consideration should be given to form, color, lighting and materials that are compatible with the
building and its surroundings.
Alternative architectural solutions may be considered by the Planning Board. Emphasis should be placed
on compatibility, aesthetics and creativity.
6.05 PARKING REQUIREMENTS
6.05.1 GENERAL
Safe, adequate and convenient vehicular and pedestrian traffic must be maintained both within and
adjacent to the development. To this end, all plans should address the following items:
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
40
2011 Printing
A. The effect and impact of the proposed development on traffic conditions on abutting roads
B. The number, location and dimension of vehicular and pedestrian entrances, exits, drives and
walkways
C. The visibility in both directions of all exiting points of the development and the visibility of a vehicle
entering or exiting the development to a driver in a vehicle traveling on the street
D. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided for every new structure, the enlargement of an existing
structure, the development of a new land use or any change in an existing use in accordance with
the Tables of Off-Street Parking. All off-street parking, loading or unloading shall be suitably
improved, graded, surfaced and maintained so as to cause no nuisance from dust or storm
drainage including ice and snow removal
E. The interconnection of parking areas via access drives within and between adjacent lots is
encouraged, in order to provide maximum efficiency, minimize curb cuts and encourage safe and
convenient traffic circulation
F. The location, arrangement and adequacy of truck loading and unloading facilities
G. Patterns of vehicular and pedestrian circulation both within the boundaries of the development and
in relation to adjoining streets and sidewalks
H. Parking and loading spaces shall be arranged so that cars will not back into public roads
I. Whenever possible the applicant is encouraged to utilize alternate paving methods for parking lots,
such as but not limited to porous pavement, porous concrete or grass pavers to reduce the
environmental impact and drainage requirements
6.05.2 PARKING SPACE LOCATION
Required off-street parking spaces shall be provided on the same lot as the principal use they are
required to serve, or when practical difficulties exist, as determined by the Planning Board, prevent their
establishment upon the same lot, they shall be established no further than three hundred feet (300’) from
the closest lot line.
6.05.3 PARKING SPACE DIMENSIONS
A. Each required off-street parking space as follows:
Width (feet) Length (feet)
1. Minimum 9’ 18’
2. Parallel 9’ 23’
3. Shopping Centers 10’ 18’
4. Handicapped 10’ 20’ (plus 5’access aisle)
B. Except on lots occupied by one and two-family dwellings, each off street parking space shall open
directly upon an aisle or driveway width as follows:
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
41
2011 Printing
Parking Angle
(degrees) Aisle Width (feet)
45* 16’
60* 20’
90* 24’
C. The aisle or driveway shall be unobstructed and allow for the passage of emergency vehicles at all
times. The angle shall be measured between the centerline of the parking space and the
centerline of the aisle.
6.05.4 TABLE OF OFF-STREET PARKING
Use Parking Spaces Required
Appliance, Carpet, Furniture, Electrical,
Heating & Plumbing Retails Sales
1.5 per 1,000 SF¹
Adult daycare facilities 1 per employee², plus 1 per 5 clients and if
necessary 1 per facility vehicle
Automotive Services: gas stations, auto
dealers, auto repair & body shops
1 per employee² plus 1 per 1,000 SF or 4 per
bay
Banks 3 per 1,000 SF
College, Universities, Trade School and
Vocational Institutions
1 per 2 seats, plus 1 per every 2 employees²
Government Offices (including municipal and
school)
1 per 200 SF
Hair Salon, Spa & Barber Shop 2 per employee
Bowling Alley, Skating Rinks and other places
of assembly where capacity cannot be
measured in terms of seats
1 per 200 SF or 1 per every 4 people at
capacity, plus 1 per every 2 employees
Childcare Facilities 1 per employee² plus 2 per 1,000 SF
Car Wash 1 per employee
Dwellings:
Single Family 2 per dwelling unit
Multi-family 2 per dwelling unit
Elderly 1.5 per dwelling unit
Hotels and Motels 1 per room, plus 1 per 400 SF of public
meeting area
Laundromats 1 per every 2 washing machines
Medical, Dental, Veterinary and other
Healthcare Providers Offices
4 per practitioner, plus one per every 2
employees
Manufacturing and Light Industrial 1 per 600 SF
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
42
2011 Printing
Mixed Use 2 per dwelling unit
Nursing Home, Assisted Living and
Congregate Care Facilities
1 per employee², plus 1 per bed and if
necessary 1 per facility vehicle
Office for Professionals, Businesses, Legal,
Financial and Real Estate
3 per 1,000 SF
Outdoor Recreational Centers 20 per athletic field or 1 per 600 SF of outdoor
recreation area
Restaurants:
No Lounge 1 per 3 seats
Lounge 1 per 2 seats
Function Halls 1 per 3 seats
Fast Food 0.6 per seat, plus 1 per employee
Retail Shopping Centers
0-49,999 SF 4 per 1,000 SF
+ 50,000 SF 3.5 per 1,000 SF
Theaters, Auditoriums, Churches & Places of
Assembly with fixed seats
1 per 3 seats, plus1 per 2 employees
Wholesale, Storage and Warehouse 1 per 1,000 SF
Other As determined by Planning Board
¹ SF = square feet
² All employee counts are to be determined at largest shift population
A. When the computation of required parking or loading spaces results in the requirement of a
fractional space, any fraction over one-half shall require one space.
B. In lieu of the Parking Table space requirements, the applicant may present Average Daily Trip
(ADT) data for the proposed use, for a discussion with the Board in calculating the total required
number of parking spaces.
6.05.5 ADA COMPLIANCE
Provisions shall be made to ensure that parking lots are in compliance with the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA). The number and design of handicapped parking spaces shall conform to
the NH Architectural Barrier Free Design Code, as prepared by the Governor’s Commission for the
Handicapped and/or Title III of the deferral Americans with Disabilities Act. This shall include the
following:
A. Handicapped Accessible Parking Spaces. All sites which provide on–site parking shall provide
handicapped accessible parking spaces and accompanying access aisles as specified herein in
accordance with above referenced ADA and NH Architectural Barrier Free Design Code as cited
in 6.05.5.
B. The following numbers of handicapped accessible parking spaces are required. For larger lots,
refer to the Federal Register for requirements:
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
43
2011 Printing
Total # of Parking Spaces Minimum # of Handicap
Spaces required
1-25 1
26-50 2
51-75 3
76-100 4
101-150 5
C. At least one in every eight (8) handicapped accessible spaces shall be designated as “van
accessible”, or as otherwise provided for in ADA.
D. Each handicapped accessible space shall be identified with appropriate pavement marking and a
sign. For van accessible spaces signage shall indicate that they are van accessible. Signs shall
be mounted such that they are not obscured by other parked vehicles.
E. Handicap parking spaces shall be large enough to fully contain a rectangle 8’ wide by 20‘ long.
Parked vehicle overhangs shall not reduce the clear width of an accessible route. All
handicapped parking spaces shall be served by a parallel access aisle, which shall be a minimum
of five (5’) feet wide for standard handicapped spaces, and eight (8’) feet wide for van accessible
spaces. Adjacent spaces may share an access aisle.
F. Access aisles adjoining handicapped accessible parking spaces shall be paved (with asphalt,
concrete or other suitable material for handicapped travel) flush to the ground, and the pavement
shall extend all the way to the nearest handicapped accessible entrance. Such parking spaces
shall be located in close proximity to handicapped accessible entrances. Wherever practicable,
the main entrance shall be handicapped accessible.
G. The slope of handicapped accessible parking spaces and adjoining access aisles shall not exceed
one foot of rise per fifty (50’) feet of run.
H. Curb ramps shall be provided as necessary.
I. Where appropriate, handicapped ramps shall be provided, with a slope not exceeding one (1’) foot
of rise per twelve (12’) feet of run.
J. It is recommended, though not required, that a drop-off area be located at handicapped accessible
entrances.
6.05.6 PARKING AND LOADING AREA STANDARDS
All parking and loading areas containing over five spaces, including automotive and drive-in
establishments of all types, are subject to the following:
A. The area and access driveways thereto shall be surfaced with approved paving methods,
including but not limited to bituminous or cement concrete material, porous asphalt, porous
cement or grass pavers. All access drives shall be graded and drained as to dispose of all
surface water accumulation in accordance with acceptable engineering practices and the Town’s
Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Ordinance. Please see 6.08.7 LANDSCAPING
PARKING LOTS AND ACCESS WAYS for additional information.
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
44
2011 Printing
B. Fixtures used to illuminate any area shall be downcast and so arranged as to direct the light away
from the street and away from adjoining premises.
C. There shall not be any storage of materials or equipment, or display of merchandise within
required parking areas except as part of approved site plan and building operations.
D. Any entrance or exit driveway shall not exceed twenty-four feet (24’) in width at its intersection
with the front lot line. Any combination entrance and exit shall not exceed forty feet (40’) in width
at its intersection with the roadway, except a divided entrance exit, which shall not exceed fiftyfive
feet (55’) in width. Residential driveways must comply with the Residential Driveway Permit
Regulations. (See APPENDIX VII: TOWN DOCUMENT RESOURCES LIST )
E. All off-street parking and loading or unloading spaces shall be at least ten feet (10’) from any
public street right-of-way and shall be separated from such right-of-way by a granite curb and
landscaping as required in 6.08 LANDSCAPING STANDARDS.
6.05.7 PARKING SUBSTITUTIONS
If there is reasonable nearby on or off-street Municipal parking spaces the Planning Board may allow the
substitution of space in lieu of the parking requirements of 6.05.4 TABLE OF OFF-STREET PARKING
provided they are located within five hundred feet (500’) of the building which is intended to be served.
In accordance with the Nashua and Elm Streets Corridor Overlay District, properties which share
driveways or drive aisles may also share or overlap in the total number of parking spaces required.
6.05.8 INCREASE OR CHANGE OF USE
When the intensity of use of any building, structure or premise shall be increased through the addition of
dwelling units, floor area, beds, seating capacity or other unit of measurement, parking and loading
facilities, as required, shall be provided for such increase in intensity of use.
Whenever the existing use of a building, structure or premise shall be changed or converted to a new
permitted use, parking and loading facilities shall be provided, as required, for such use.
6.05.9 PRIOR NON-CONFORMING USES
No use, lawfully established prior to the effective date of this chapter, shall be required to provide and
maintain the parking and loading requirements of this chapter; provided, however, that off street parking
and loading space required by any previously adopted zoning ordinance and/or regulation approved
under shall be continued and maintained.
For any non-conforming use which is hereafter damaged or destroyed and which is lawfully
reconstructed, reestablished or repaired, off-street parking and loading facilities equivalent to those
maintained at the time of such damage or destruction, shall be restored and continued in operation.
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
45
2011 Printing
6.05.10 PROVISION FOR SHARED PARKING
Shared parking involves parking spaces that are used at different times by different uses. Shared parking
provisions for combinations of uses on-site and adjacent sites are encouraged within the Nashua and
Elm Streets Corridor Overlay District and may be approved by the Planning Board in other locations on a
case-by-case basis.
Off-site parking shall be protected with a shared parking easement agreement which shall be reviewed
and recorded with the approved plans, except in areas exempt from parking standards such as but not
limited to the Oval Sub-district.
6.06 OUTDOOR LIGHTING
All outdoor lighting shall be downcast and so directed and shielded that no glare will spill out onto
neighboring properties or roads.
In terms of placement and type, all outdoor lighting shall comply with an appropriate lighting standard for
outdoor lighting.
6.07 FIRE PROTECTION
Fire alarms, fire hydrants, fire cisterns and other necessary fire protection measures shall be provided as
specified by the Fire Department and the Department of Public Works Infrastructure Design,
Construction and Administration Standards.
When necessary the Fire Department may require residential dwelling units to have sprinkler systems.
These items shall be shown or noted on the development plan and installed by the applicant.
6.08 LANDSCAPING STANDARDS
6.08.1 GENERAL
The requirements of this Section shall apply to all new commercial, industrial and multi-family
developments. This Section is intended as suggested guidelines for the Oval Sub-district and residential
development, but not required. In addition, these standards may apply whenever a site plan is brought
before the Planning Board for an amendment or a change of use.
The purpose is to protect, enhance, and promote an economic, ecological and aesthetically pleasing
landscape by breaking up visual expanse and connected impervious areas, delineating areas of
vehicular and pedestrian traffic to improve safety and to enhance the gateways to Milford. In addition, soil
and landscaping play an important role in stormwater quality and quantity. These standards are intended
to increase absorption and cleansing of rainfall and runoff so that the quantity and quality are more
reflective of the natural hydrology, where vegetation will thrive with minimal need for additional water,
pesticides and fertilizers.
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
46
2011 Printing
A landscaping plan shall be provided with each site plan application. The plan shall identify existing and
proposed trees, shrubs, ground cover, walls and fences. Existing mature/healthy trees and vegetation
shall be preserved and integrated into the landscape plan. Landscaping must be maintained in good
condition such that all plantings shall be in good health and that the parcel shall present a neat and
orderly appearance, free from refuse and debris. Any dead vegetation that is part of the approved
landscaping design shall be replaced within one year. Site disturbance shall be minimized wherever
possible and practical.
The applicant shall use native plants, shrubs, and trees whenever possible. The plant species selected
should be hardy for the particular area in which they will be located. In addition, the size, number and
type of plants proposed shall be shown. Invasive species must be properly managed within the area of
disturbance using best management practices. Species on the current Prohibited or Restricted Invasive
Plant Species Lists maintained by the NH Department of Agriculture (as amended) are prohibited and
shall not be planted. Said document is hereby incorporated by reference.
Where an applicant proposes leaving a significant portion of healthy non-invasive trees and other
vegetation within the proposed construction area, the Board may consider alternative landscaping
designs.
Plant materials used in conformance with the provisions of this Section shall conform to the standards
set by the American Nursery and Landscape Association (ANLA) [formerly the American Association of
Nurserymen] in the American Standard for Nursery Stock (as amended) [ANSI Z60.1-1996], which
document is hereby incorporated by reference.
The management and care operations of all trees, shrubs, and other woody plants shall conform to the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) A300 Standards for Tree Care Operations; Tree Shrubs,
which document is hereby incorporated by reference.
6.08.2 SITE FEATURES AND LAYOUT
Landscaping should be designed to encourage biodiversity, remain functional, and attractive during all
seasons of the year through a thoughtful selection of deciduous, evergreen, flowering and non-flowering
plant varieties.
Prominent natural or man-made features of the landscape such as mature trees, surface waters, natural
rock outcrops or roadways should be retained and incorporated in to the landscape plan where possible.
Stonewalls must be retained in accordance with RSA 472:6 and biodiversity of species is encouraged.
Vegetation management is encouraged to maintain/preserve the aesthetic and historic qualities of the
stonewall and its functionality. The addition of ornamental rocks, fencing and other features new to the
landscape are encouraged.
Existing natural vegetation should be retained where possible. Existing trees and shrubs to be retained
may be substituted for any compatible required plantings. Maximum effort should be made to preserve
small stands of trees rather than individual trees to minimize the potential for serious damage due to
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
47
2011 Printing
wind, grade changes or soil compaction. Alternatives to pine trees are strongly encouraged. During
construction, best practices are encouraged to protect existing natural vegetation.
Natural re-growth, mulched planting beds and alternative ground cover plant varieties are preferred to
large expanses of lawns. Lawn areas should not be planted in strips of less than six (6’) feet in width,
especially adjacent to roads or parking areas, since such areas require watering but have little utility and
are less likely to thrive.
Native, hybrid and naturalized non-invasive species are encouraged and should be used to meet the
minimum requirements of this Section. Plant varieties selected should be hardy, drought and salt
resistant (as necessary) and require minimal maintenance. Less hardy, exotic or higher maintenance
plant varieties may be used to supplement minimum landscaping requirements where appropriate, but
are not encouraged. Species including those plant species listed on the “New Hampshire Prohibited
Plant Species Rule” list are prohibited.
To promote on-site water retention and filtration, landscaped areas shall be designed in a manner that
guides storm water from on-site impervious roads, parking areas, sidewalks and walkways to vegetated
areas or approved retention areas.
Curbing or equivalent barriers shall be required to protect vegetation from vehicular damage. Barriers
shall be designed with openings that allow storm water to flow into vegetated areas. All curbing in the
Town right-of-way shall be granite.
Site designs are strongly encouraged to incorporate disconnected impervious areas.
When irrigations systems are proposed, a temporary watering plan/schedule or low volume (drip
irrigation) system shall be required. Permanent irrigation systems are discouraged. Irrigation systems
shall be designed and installed for efficient and effective water use to the landscaped area. For those
instances when permanent irrigation is considered necessary, such as an athletic field, permanent
irrigation shall utilize water saving technologies, including rain sensors, and management systems that
monitor current weather conditions. Turf and plant bed irrigation systems should incorporate technology
that allows for minimal and efficient water usage. Spray heads are not recommended due to their high
water usage, low precipitation rates and susceptibility to the wind. Heads that are a hybrid of sprays and
rotors shall be used in place of spray heads.
6.08.3 SOIL PREPARATION
For all newly landscaped areas a minimum of four (4”) to six (6”) inches of topsoil, preferably with organic
matter incorporated shall be spread in all planting and turf areas.
6.08.4 MULCHING
Mulching trees, shrubs and plants helps retain soil moisture, moderates temperature fluctuations,
provides protection from mechanical damage by mowers and trimmers and serves as temporary
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
48
2011 Printing
covering of exposed soil until understory plants and ground covers fill in. Mulch shall be no greater than
three (3”) inches in depth. Excessively thick mulch applications (>3”) and mulch against tree trunks
fosters poor plant health and should be avoided. Mulches for storm water management areas should be
heavier and not a type that will float away. Man-made materials such as recycled tires may not be
acceptable for mulch materials. Round stone shall be given consideration as accent material in planting
beds. Sizes that range from one (1”) inch to six (6”) are acceptable.
6.08.5 LANDSCAPING BUFFERS
Landscaping plans shall be designed to provide buffers in an effort to mitigate impacts to neighboring
properties. Buffers are intended to physically separate one use or property from another so as to visually
shield or block, noise, lights, provide a water quality benefit and to minimize other impacts.
A. Along the periphery of a property, buffers are required in the following instances:
1. Where a proposed non-residential use abuts a residential zoning district.
2. Where a proposed non-residential use abuts an existing residential use.
3. Where a proposed roadway abuts an existing property line or is within twenty (20’) feet of a
property line where the existing use is residential.
B. On the periphery of a property:
1. A landscaped buffer shall be at least ten (10’) feet in width and six (6’) feet in height to
effectively screen from adjacent properties and may consist of evergreens, berms, mounds,
fencing or combinations thereof in conjunction with complimenting shrubs and perennials.
2. Where appropriate existing trees and vegetation shall be incorporated into landscape buffers.
C. Within a property, buffers are required to provide visual screens in the following instances:
1. Outdoor storage areas.
2. Utility installations.
3. Loading areas.
4. Refuse and recycling collection areas.
D. Within a property:
1. Buffers shall be located to prevent visibility of the above listed items from the parking areas,
traveled right-of-way or neighboring properties.
2. Buffers shall be at least six (6’) feet in height and may consist of fencing, evergreens, berms,
mounds or combinations thereof.
3. All outdoor refuse and recycling facilities shall be located on a raised six (6”) inch concrete
pad.
6.08.6 LANDSCAPING ALONG BUILDING FRONTAGES
Landscaping shall be provided along all building frontage. A minimum of one (1) shrub for every five (5’)
feet of building frontage shall be provided. In instances where it is not possible to locate all required
shrubs along the building frontage due to doorways, walkways or other impervious surfaces, the required
shrubs shall be utilized within the parking lot or landscape buffers. Plant locations are designed to be
flexible and not necessarily in even spaced intervals.
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
49
2011 Printing
6.08.7 LANDSCAPING PARKING LOTS AND ACCESS WAYS
All parking lot landscaping shall promote the safe flow of vehicular and pedestrian traffic within and out of
the site.
A. Peripheral landscaping shall be required along all sides of a parking lot or access way that abuts
adjoining property or a public right-of-way as follows:
1. A landscaped strip at least ten feet (10’) in width shall be located between the paved area and
the abutting property lines or public right-of-way except where driveways or other openings
may be required; and
2. At least one (1) tree for each thirty feet (30’) of landscaped strip shall be provided. These
trees shall be complemented by suitable ground cover and shrubs.
B. Landscaping within parking lots or green space encompassing not less than five (5%) percent of
the total parking area shall be required. A minimum of one (1) tree for every fifteen (15) parking
spaces shall be provided. These trees shall be complemented by suitable ground cover and
shrubs. These trees shall also be “street” trees; trees that are salt, heat drought, and urban
tolerant. These trees shall also have a minimum branching height of eight (8’) feet when planted.
C. Parking lots with more than fifty (50) parking spaces shall have curbed planting areas. Planting
areas shall be placed within or at each end of a parking row. No parking row shall contain more
than thirty (30) contiguous parking spaces without a curbed planting area.
1. Curbs around parking lot plantings shall have a shallow descending cut that is a minimum of
five (5’) feet wide to allow drainage to flow from the parking lot into the curbed planting areas
for infiltration.
2. Such planting areas shall be underlain by a suitable layer of crushed stone or other water
holding reservoir, with an overlay of filter fabric to minimize clogging by superfine soils.
Topsoil depths and minimum organic content shall be as listed in 6.08.3 SOIL
PREPARATION for the maximum absorption of rainfall.
3. Snow storage is not permitted in the parking islands.
D. Within the interior of the parking lot, landscaping should be used to delineate vehicular and
pedestrian circulation patterns. Clear and legible signs, different color and texture paving
materials, raised areas, and other techniques should be used to further direct the flow of both
vehicular and pedestrian traffic within the site.
E. Bare soil is not acceptable. The introduction of groundcovers and/or perennials planted enmasse
and the use of mulch as a soil covering is acceptable. However, no more than twenty (20) percent
of the minimum landscaped area may be covered with non-living landscaping materials such as
bark mulch, woodchips, stone or leaf litter.
F. Use of Existing Landscaping Towards Requirements:
1. Each existing healthy and native or non-invasive tree, with a caliper of two and half (2.5) to
three (3) inches or greater, preserved using proper protection methods within the interior
parking lot area may be substituted for one tree required for every fifteen (15) parking spaces.
2. Where an applicant proposes leaving a significant portion of healthy non-invasive trees and
other vegetation within the proposed parking area, the Board may consider alternative
landscaping designs.
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
50
2011 Printing
6.08.8 PLANTING SPECIFICATIONS
All trees, shrubs and ground cover shall be planted according to ANSI A300 standards.
A. Trees and Shrubs
1. All plant stock shall meet the ANSI Z60.1 standard.
2. All deciduous trees shall be 2.5”-3.5” caliper, with a height not less than twelve (12’) feet.
3. Minimum size for evergreen trees shall be six (6’) feet in height.
4. Minimum size for shrubs shall be two (2’) feet in height.
B. Planting Specifications
1. All trees, shrubs and plantings shall be planted according to accepted horticultural standards
2. Cultivated areas shall be covered with not less than a two (2”) inch deep layer of mulch or
ornamental round stone after planting.
3. All trees and shrubs shall be appropriately pruned after planting with all broken or damaged
branches removed.
C. Retention of Existing Vegetation
1. The boundary of areas to be cleared will be well defined on-site with tree markings,
construction fencing, snow fencing or silt fencing as appropriate to avoid unnecessary cutting
or removal. Care should be taken to protect root systems from damage due to excavation or
compaction. Individual trees, rock formations and other landscape features to be retained
should also be clearly marked and bounded on-site.
2. Where an applicant proposes leaving a significant portion of healthy non-invasive species and
other mature vegetation within the proposed construction area, the Board may consider
alternative landscaping design.
3. Invasive species and/or toxic plants such as Poison Ivy, Poison Oak, Poison Sumac and/or
Giant Hog Weed shall be managed according to accepted horticultural techniques and
provisions created by the State of NH and the standards of ANSI A300.7.
D. Alternative Compliance
1. The requirements of this Section are intended to set minimum standards for high quality
development, the protection of property values, and environmental protection. The
requirements are not intended to be arbitrary or inhibit creative solutions. Difficult or unique
site conditions or other constraints may justify the need to request alternative methods of
compliance with the landscape requirements.
2. The Board may allow alternative compliance if it is warranted and the proposed compliance
measures are equal to or better than normal compliance in terms of quality, effectiveness,
durability, hardiness, ecological benefit, and ability to fulfill the intent of the regulation. The
Board encourages the use of creative and sustainable designs, materials, techniques,
concepts, and technologies, for both standard compliance measures and as part of alternative
compliance proposals. Proposals must demonstrate a clear commitment to the standards for
the proper installation and long-term maintenance of designs or elements involving emerging
technologies, techniques, or materials, to ensure their ability to function as intended into the
future.
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
51
2011 Printing
The Board will consider alternative compliance proposals in the context of each specific site.
Alternative compliance will be limited to the specific project under consideration and will not
establish precedent for acceptance in other cases.
It is preferred that alternative compliance be achieved within the developed area. Where the
requirements cannot be satisfied within the developed area, the method of alternative
compliance may be achieved elsewhere within the project site. Where alternative compliance
cannot be achieved within the project site, alternative compliance may be achieved on an
alternate site within Milford, approved by the Board as well as any other necessary Town
departments. A fee-in-lieu, as determined by the Board, will only be accepted as a form of
alternative compliance if none of the above options for alternative compliance can be
achieved.
6.08.9 LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT LANDSCAPING
Landscaping that incorporates Low Impact Development (LID) strategies for storm water management
should serve to meet the requirements of the Town of Milford’s Storm water Management and Erosion
Control Regulations by absorbing and treating storm water runoff to the greatest extent possible onsite.
LID landscaping includes the use of bio-filters, raingardens, shallow swales, drywells and other features
and functions. High organic content of soils encourages healthy growth and absorbs and retains
rainwater on site as soil moisture, minimizing irrigation needs and runoff quantities. The applicant should
consider the estimated seasonal high water table elevation during the design process to decrease the
likelihood of groundwater contamination. Adequate separation is needed between infiltrating structures
and the groundwater table.
Landscape areas shall include all areas on site that are not covered by buildings, structures, paving or
impervious surface. The selection and location of turf, trees, ground cover (including shrubs, grasses,
perennials, flowerbeds and slope retention), pedestrian paving and other landscaping elements shall be
designed to absorb rainfall, prevent erosion, encourage biodiversity and meet functional and visual
purposes such as defining spaces, accommodating and directing circulation patterns, managing
hardscape impacts, attracting attention to building entrances and other focal points and visually
integrating buildings with the landscape area. Where possible, the landscaping design should combine
form and function, incorporating drainage features invisibly into the landscape such as through shallow
detention areas and parking lot islands for infiltration of parking lot runoff and sheet flow.
6.08.10 LANDSCAPING STANDARDS – SUBDIVISIONS – NEW ROADS
Where cul-de-sacs are permitted, the island or center area of the cul-de-sac shall remain in a natural
vegetated state, with any invasive species removed. If it will be used as a bio-filter for storm water
treatment, the area shall be vegetated with a combination of living plant material including trees, shrubs
and groundcovers. Non-living landscape materials may cover up to twenty (20%) percent of the island or
center area. When planting of vegetation is required, cul-de-sac landscaping shall be installed after
construction of the road is complete.
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
52
2011 Printing
6.08.11 MAINTENANCE OF LANDSCAPING
Low maintenance, drought, insect and disease resistant plant varieties are encouraged so that buffer
areas and other required landscaping can be maintained with minimal care and the need for watering,
pesticide or fertilizer use is minimized. For these reasons, native, hybrid and naturalized non-invasive
species are preferred since such plant species are well adapted to the local environment.
To avoid maintenance problems and excessive watering, organic matter such as compost or peat should
be added to the soil before planting as appropriate to increase the water holding capacity of the soil and
to provide nutrients. Proper plant selection and planting methods are critical to the longevity of the plants.
ANSI A300specifications are to be followed for plantings, installations and soil type selection.
The owner and their representative shall be responsible for providing, protecting and maintaining all
landscaping in healthy and growing condition, and replacing it when necessary to insure continuous
conformance with these guidelines. Any landscape element that dies, or is otherwise removed, shall be
promptly replaced with the same, if not similar to, height or texture element as originally intended. In
addition, landscaped areas shall be kept free of all debris, rubbish, weeds and overgrown turf grass.
If the ownership of a site is conveyed to a new property owner, the new owner shall be responsible for
maintaining all landscaping in accordance with the approved final landscaping plan.
6.08.12 ENFORCEMENT
An inspection of all plantings to ensure compliance with the approved landscaping plan shall be
conducted prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.
Ongoing inspections of landscapes shall be conducted to ensure compliance of landscape maintenance
in perpetuity.
6.08.13 LANDSCAPING TIME FRAME
All landscaping should be completed prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. If the
landscaping cannot be completed prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, the owner shall be
required to submit a security to the Community Development office to cover the complete cost of all
planting, materials and labor required to complete the landscaping plan as depicted on the approved
plan. A detail sheet itemizing the breakdown of costs shall accompany all bonds.
All landscaping shall be complete within one year of issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy or the
Planning Board may begin the process of revoking site plan approval.
6.08 SNOW STORAGE AND REMOVAL
Provisions shall be made for snow storage. Consideration shall be given to locating the snow storage
where melting will not create a hazard when refreezing occurs. Snow storage shall be located
appropriately to provide maximum protection to downstream sites from the accumulated ice control
materials and chemicals included in snow storage.
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
53
2011 Printing
The site plan shall indicate how and where snow will be stored or removed from the site to preclude large
accumulations of snow from blocking LID or drainage systems, causing flooding, or causing
contamination of ground and surface waters.
Snow storage is not permitted within required parking spaces. Snow shall be stored or removed to allow
continued safe passage of vehicles and pedestrians into, and through all travel lanes, parking areas, and
pedestrian routes.
All snow storage provisions shall comply with the Department of Environmental Services Best
Management Practices (DES BMP) for snow storage (See APPENDIX VII: TOWN DOCUMENT
RESOURCES LIST) and on-site LID Maintenance and Operations manual (if necessary).
6.09 WETLANDS
6.010.1 WETLAND BOUNDARY MARKERS
The Planning Board may require a portion or all of the wetland boundaries or buffers, be delineated in
accordance with the Zoning Ordinance requirements. Wetlands boundaries may also be required to be
marked with an identifiable permanent marking system.
6.010.2 WETLANDS
Ground control shall be marked by a certified wetlands scientist, both on the site and on the development
plan(s). The ground control shall consist of numbered flags, stakes, walls, trees or other easily
identifiable points on the property. These points will be well distributed throughout the site at a density of
not less than four (4) points per acre. The numbered points must be identified, by number, on the plan.
The purpose of this requirement is to provide easy identification for all parties required or interested in
examining the site.
All wetland areas, prior to tree cutting and clearing shall be staked and flagged twenty-five (25’) feet from
the wetland boundary or fifty (50’) feet if designated by the Planning Board. These stakes shall be a
minimum of fifty (50’) feet apart for straight boundaries and twenty-five (25’) feet apart for curved
boundaries.
Wetland Buffer widths are determined by Article 6.02.0 of the Zoning Ordinance. Wetland buffer areas
shall be preserved as a no construction disturbance zone except for temporary and minimal impacts due
to utility crossings, driveways and road crossings, or transmission lines. This area shall act as a natural
vegetated buffer for stormwater filtration, flood protection, and wildlife habitat. In special circumstances
the Planning Board may require an area extending an additional twenty-five (25’) feet out from the
wetland buffer as determined by Zoning, which may be adversely affected by the proposed development,
erosion or stormwater runoff.
6.010 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN
A Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Plan (SWMP) shall be provided when required by and in
conformance with the requirements of the Town of Milford’s Stormwater Management and Erosion
Control Regulation. (See APPENDIX VII: TOWN DOCUMENT RESOURCES LIST)
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
54
2011 Printing
For all plans requiring substantial new drainage facilities to be maintained by the Town once completed
the Director of Public Works may require a one (1) time cash security for the maintenance of the
drainage facilities. The amount of security shall be determined once the facility is completed and must be
paid prior to road acceptance or final CO.
6.011 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
For applicants that are not subject to Town of Milford Stormwater Permitting requirements, the applicant
is expected to provide basic erosion control measures and construction details as part of any plan
submittal involving soil disturbance. Erosion control measures must be maintained during construction
until site stabilization is achieved.
6.012 OTHER STORMWATER AND EROSION CONTROL PERMITS
In addition to local approval, the applicant may be responsible for obtaining Town, State and Federal
permits. Permits may include a Town, State or Federal Stormwater Permit or other permits as required
by the Federal NPDES program, NH Site Specific permit, State and Federal wetlands permits, and/or
EPA’s dewatering permit.
Terrain Alteration (Site Specific Permit). RSA
485-A:17
Requires a permit from the Department of
Environmental Services (DES) for “…any person
proposing to significantly alter the characteristic of the
terrain, in such a manner as to impede natural runoff
or create an unnatural runoff…” Regulations require
this permit for any project involving more than
100,000 contiguous square feet of disturbance or
50,000 contiguous square feet in the protected
shoreland.
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge
Permit
A permit issued by the Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) or by the State under authority
delegated pursuant to 33 USC, section 1342 (b) that
authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the
United States. For a cumulative disturbance of one
acre of land that EPA considers “construction activity”,
which includes, but is not limited to clearing, grading,
excavation and other activities that expose soil
typically related to landscaping, demolition and
construction of structures and roads, a Federal Permit
will be required. Consult the EPA for specific rules.
This EPA Permit is in addition to any State or local
permits required.
Wetlands Permit. RSA 482-A
Requires a permit from DES for any person desiring
to “…excavate, remove, fill, dredge or construct any
structures in or on any bank, flat, marsh, swamp in
and adjacent to any waters of the State.”
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
55
2011 Printing
Dewatering Permit (EPA)
A permit issued by the EPA for construction
dewatering for dewatering of groundwater intrusion
and/or stormwater accumulation; flushing of potable
water lines; short-term and long-term dewatering of
foundation sumps; and pump testing of water wells.
The permit should be in accordance with the current
General NPDES Permit for Construction Dewatering
Activities in MA and NH or the most recent version of
the EPA Dewatering General Permit. Consult EPA for
specific rules.
6.013 SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
All applications for development governed by these Regulations having lands identified as Special Flood
Hazard Areas (SFHA) by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in “Flood Insurance
Study for the Town of Milford, NH” together with the associated Flood Insurance Rate Maps, as
amended, shall meet the requirements of these regulations.
All development applications shall be reviewed to determine whether such applications will be
reasonably safe from flooding and are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. Development
review shall assure that the following minimum standards are met:
A. The application is designed consistent with the provisions set forth in Section 6.03.1
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT DISTRICT of the Milford Zoning Ordinance and the need to
minimize flood damage.
B. All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, shall be located
and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
C. Adequate drainage systems shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
D. All necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval
is required by Federal or State law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control
Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334.
E. Base flood elevation (the floodplain boundary and 100 year flood elevation) data shall be provided
for all development greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is the lesser, and that portion of
applications within the Special Flood Hazard Area.
6.014 MUNICIPAL AND PUBLIC UTILITIES
6.015.1 GENERAL
Municipal utilities shall include but not be limited to sanitary sewer, stormwater, drainage, fire
suppression and water supply.
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
56
2011 Printing
Non-municipal utilities shall include but not be limited to gas, electric, telephone, cable television,
sanitary sewer, stormwater, drainage, and water supply.
All applications which include the creation of a new or upgraded road or a subdivision shall have
underground utilities.
If utilities are proposed to be constructed within a designated scenic road right-of-way, all applicable
Town scenic road requirements must be met.
All new or upgraded utilities shall comply with the Town of Milford’s Water Utility and Public Works
Departments standards as listed in APPENDIX VII: TOWN DOCUMENT RESOURCES LIST.
All applicants who propose to do sewer and water work or construction within a Town right-of-way should
consult the Town of Milford’s Water Utility and DPW Departments' construction specifications to
determine if an on-site inspector shall be required during construction; the cost of which shall be borne
by the applicant/developer.
6.015.2 UTILITY PLAN
The location and size of all existing underground and overhead municipal and non-municipal utilities
intended to serve the development shall be shown on the plan or in the plan set, inclusive of:
A. Water supply details
B. Wastewater disposal including the size and location of all piping, pump stations, holding tanks,
leach field, etc.
C. Location, size, grade and invert elevations of sanitary, storm and/or combined sewers
D. Location and size of water mains including location of fire hydrant and valves
E. Location of gas lines, storage tanks and utility poles
F. Location of manholes, transformer poles, and appurtenant structures
G. Location of all fire cisterns, hydrants or other apparatus
H. A layout indicating how the site will be served by electric, telephone and any other public utility
must be provided. If the utility company(s) requires an easement to provide service, no final
approval shall be granted by the Planning Board until such easements are secured.
6.015 SANITARY SYSTEMS – GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
The applicant must meet NHDES Subsurface Disposal Regulations for any application which requires or
will require an on-site subsurface disposal system.
In areas not currently served by public sewer systems, it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to
provide adequate information to prove that the area of each lot is adequate to permit the installation and
operation of an individual sewage disposal system (septic tank and leach field). Individual Test Pit data is
required along with any other tests the health officer may require regarding seepage or other tests.
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
57
2011 Printing
The applicant shall certify on the Final Plan that the test-pits dug for percolation tests have been
performed per the requirements set forth by the New Hampshire Water Supply and Pollution Control
Commission.
The Planning Board, when it deems necessary, may require that said plan contain a certification by a
certified soils engineer as to the information therein contained. All fees shall be paid by the applicant.
NH Department of Environmental Services approval is required for all lots less than 5 acres in size which
will not be served by the public sewer system.
Any new development within 100 feet of a sewer line is required to hook-up to the municipal system
unless the applicant is granted a waiver by Milford’s Water and Sewer Commissioners. (See APPENDIX
VII: TOWN DOCUMENT RESOURCES LIST)
6.016 WATER SERVICES– GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
6.017.1 MUNICIPAL WATER
Construction and installation of water mains and facilities are subject to the approval of the Milford Water
and Sewer Commissioners and the Water Utilities Department.
Detailed design and construction standards for the installation of water mains can be found through the
Water Utilities Department specifications (See APPENDIX VII: TOWN DOCUMENT RESOURCES LIST).
The Milford Water Utilities Department shall approve and inspect all water mains and services on existing
Town roads from the existing main. The applicant will be responsible for obtaining all necessary permits
from the Department of Water Utilities.
When a public water system is proposed, the system shall be designed by a qualified engineer. Each
system shall be designed to handle the expected flows (domestic and fire) for present and future
development within the site. The Planning Board reserves the right to have its designated representative
inspect the installation of all public water systems in accordance with the Town or State’s installation
standards.
6.017.2 PRIVATE WATER SYSTEMS
When a private water system is proposed the system shall be designed by a qualified engineer. Each
system shall be designed to handle the expected flows (domestic and fire) for present and future
development within the site. The Planning Board reserves the right to have its designated representative
inspect the installation of all private water systems in accordance with the Town or State’s installation
standards.
6.017.3 ON-SITE WATER SUPPLY
The provision of on-site water supply shall conform to criteria of the Water Supply and Pollution Control
Division of the NH Department of Environmental Services. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
58
2011 Printing
provide adequate information to prove that the area of each lot is adequate to permit the installation and
operation of both individual on-site water supply and sewage disposal systems.
6.017 BRIDGES
Bridges must be built according to State of New Hampshire Department of Transportation specifications.
All bridge plans must be approved by Town and State engineers prior to construction.
6.018 SIGNAGE
The Planning Board may require a Signage Plan with any new development intending to use signage.
The Signage Plan shall contain the following:
A. A detail of the proposed signage to be utilized for the project including the location(s), dimensions,
and type of illumination, if any, to be utilized (i.e. internal, downcast, pole lighting, wall mounted).
B. The Signage Plan should be designed to complement the proposed development in terms of style,
color, and materials. Signage that provides attractive, consistent, and coordinated combinations
of styles and colors is encouraged. All signage should be designed to identify the location of the
development and provide directions through the site, as necessary and appropriate. The Planning
Board shall provide input on the Signage Plan to insure the above; however, all signage shall be
governed by the Milford Zoning Ordinance Article 7.06.0 Sign Ordinance.
All development with roads or utilities to be maintained by the Town upon completion, shall post a sign
as follows prior to the first Certificate of Occupancy being issued. The sign shall remain until formal Town
acceptance:
“This road has not been accepted by the Town of Milford. Until the road has been accepted, the Town
assumes no responsibility for maintenance including snow removal, nor any liability for damage resulting
from use of this road. Posted By Town of Milford. RSA 674.41.”
6.019 EASEMENTS, DEED RESTRICTIONS, DEDICATIONS, COVENANTS
Where the topography is such as to make difficult the inclusion of any utilities, drainage or other facilities,
within the right-of-ways so laid out, the submitted layout shall show the boundaries of proposed
permanent easements over or under private property.
All common driveways shall require access easements.
Easements shall be an appropriate width for their intended use and shall have satisfactory access to
existing or proposed public ways.
Any existing or proposed easements shall be shown, clearly labeled and identified on the plan. If the
easement is being dedicated by the plan, it shall be properly set out in an easement deed to be recorded
at the registry of deeds, by the Town at the time of plan recording. The costs shall be borne by the
applicant. If an easement shown on the plan is already of record, its recorded reference must be given.
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
59
2011 Printing
Copies of deed restrictions or protective covenants for each definitely restricted section shall be
submitted to the Planning Board and boundaries of such shall be accurately presented on the submitted
plan. The Town is not responsible for private covenants.
All easement documents may be reviewed by Town counsel, at the discretion of the Planning Board. All
costs shall be borne by the applicant.
All easement documents shall be submitted to the Planning Board for recording with the final plan. In
addition, easement documentation should provide a space for the recorded plan number to be written in
at the time of recording. All costs shall be borne by the applicant.
6.020 SELF-IMPOSED RESTRICTIONS AND/OR COVENANTS
If the owner places restrictions or covenants on any portion of the site or land within the development
greater than those required by these regulations, Planning Board or the Zoning Ordinance, such
restrictions or covenants shall be referenced on the plan.
The Planning Board reserves the right to review, or have its attorney review, the proposed restrictions or
covenants to ensure that they are designed to protect the public health, safety and general welfare and
that such restrictions or covenants do not violate any local regulations or ordinances. All costs of legal
review shall be paid by the applicant.
Private covenants or self-imposed restrictions are not enforced by the Town.
6.021 BOUNDS
Property bounds are to be set using the following minimum requirements:
A. Granite markers (4” x 4” x 24”) set to a depth of 18” or a depth as approved in detail by the
Planning Board shall be set at all front property boundaries.
B. Iron rods (1” x 24”) with caps set to a depth of 18” or a depth as approved in detail by the Planning
Board are acceptable for all side a rear property boundaries.
Prior to the release of the completion assurance, a certified plan shall be submitted noting that all lot
corner bounds have been set. If the location and type of bound noted on the approved plan has not
changed, then a certified stamped letter from the surveyor attesting that all bounds have been set for the
subdivision will be acceptable;
Benchmarks: As part of the subdivision plan a permanent reinforced granite marker may be required by
the Planning Board, and if so required, it shall be placed at the edge of each road boundary at their
terminus of the subdivision as reference for all locations and elevations and every 2,500-feet within the
subdivision or at other locations specified by the Department of Public Works. For all subdivisions
involving more than twenty acres, all benchmarks shall be tied to the “NH State Plane Coordinate
System”.
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
60
2011 Printing
For subdivisions that do not involve the construction of a roadway, and for lot line adjustments, all
property bounds must be set and firmly established or a security in place before the Planning Board will
give final approval to the plan.
ARTICLE VII: ROADWAY REGULATIONS
7.01 ROADWAYS – GENERAL
A The Town encourages roadway designs which facilitate walking, cycling and social interactions as
well as the movement of vehicles. All landscaping along roadways, and included in roadway design,
shall be safe pedestrians as well as traveling vehicles. Traffic calming techniques to promote the safe
movement of people and vehicles along roadways are encouraged. The minimum design and
construction standards for roadways and points of access are as follows:
1. For a complete listing of standards please see APPENDIX VII: TOWN DOCUMENT
RESOURCES LIST Department of Public Works Infrastructure, Design, Construction and
Administration Standards (document available at the Department of Public Works office at 289
South Street or; in the Community Development Office, or online.)
2. The Planning Board shall approve of the design for a proposed access point onto the public way.
Said point shall provide an adequate sight distance, grade, width and curb.
3. All permits for driveways and other access points onto a State road outside of the urban compact
shall be obtained from the NH Department of Transportation prior to final approval of the
development plan. Any permits required for driveways onto local roads or within the urban
compact shall be obtained from the Department of Public Works and shall comply with the Town’s
Residential Driveway Standards, as necessary.
4. In all cases, the number of access points to a given road shall be held to a minimum, preferably
one point of access in order to minimize turning movement conflicts.
5. The Planning Board may require improvement of existing access point(s) in order to provide safe
traffic flow onto abutting roads, should increased traffic be generated by the proposed
development.
6. Off-site improvements may be required, such as increasing pavement width or adding
deceleration lanes, curbing, drainage, sidewalks or signaling devices.
7. Traffic circulation, pedestrian access, parking and loading facilities, and emergency access shall
be designed and located in a manner that ensures maximum safety on-site.
8. Driveways shall be located in such a manner as not to unduly harm the owners or occupants of
neighboring parcels.
9. All proposed roadways, access points, fire lanes, and ancillary improvements for non-residential
and multi-family developments shall be constructed in accordance with the Department of Public
Works Infrastructure Design, Construction and Administration Standards. The Planning Board
may waive the above-referenced standards based upon the review and recommendation of the
Milford Department of Public Works.
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
61
2011 Printing
B All new roads shall meet the minimum standards as shown in ARTICLE VII: ROADWAY
REGULATIONS and shall become part of the Town road map, whether public or private.
C All construction within a Town right-of-way or future right-of-way should consult the Department of
Public Works to determine if an on-site inspector shall be required during construction; the cost of
which shall be borne by the applicant or developer.
D No road shall be recommended for acceptance by the Board of Selectmen until it has been approved
by the Planning Board, Community Development Director, and the Director of Public Works in
accordance with this Ordinance. (See APPENDIX VI: ROADWAY ACCEPTANCE INFORMATION)
E New roads shall be so laid out as to accommodate the continuation of the principal roads in adjoining
subdivisions or for their proper protection when adjoining property is not subdivided.
F Private Roads shall be built in accordance with ARTICLE VII: ROADWAY REGULATIONS. Private
roads shall remain in private ownership and the developer shall provide legal instruments to insure
their continued maintenance and ownership is not the responsibility of the Town to be recorded at the
Registry of Deeds.
G All proposed roads and /or utilities shall be maintained by the developer, or successor in interest,
until such time as formal acceptance by the Board of Selectmen. Maintenance of these
improvements shall be performed to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works and Town
Administrator. Until all applicable improvements have been accepted, the Town assumes no
responsibility for all maintenance, including but not limited to snow removal, nor any liability for
damage resulting from the use of the road, utilities and improvements.
H All development with roads and/or utilities agreed to be maintained by the Town upon formal
acceptance, shall have a sign(s) posted by the developer regarding developer responsibilities for
maintenance. Sign(s) shall be posted prior to the first Certificate of Occupancy being issued and
shall remain until formal Town acceptance. The required wording on the sign shall be: “This road has
not been accepted by the Town of Milford. Until the road has been accepted, the Town assumes no
responsibility for maintenance including snow removal, nor any liability for damage resulting from use
of this road. Posted By Town of Milford. RSA 674.41.”
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
62
2011 Printing
7.02 ROADWAY STANDARDS CHARTS TABLE 1: ROADWAY STANDARDS
Roadway Standards
Street
Type
ADT (Average
Daily Traffic)² Maximum Length
Minimum
Pavement Width
& Shoulders
Min/Max
Grade¹
Minimu
m ROW
Sidewalks/Bike Lanes
Required Other Requirements
Public:
Deadend
Less than 250
ADT
1,000 ft - measured from
center line of intersection
to midpoint of turnaround
20/4 1%/8% 50
Dependent upon location,
residential densities and
adjacent or nearby current
or future land uses
See DPW Infrastructure
Design, Construction and
Administration Standards
for typical cross-section and
all construction
requirements
Local
251 to 1,000
ADT
Must Provide a through
connection between
Local or Collector roads
22/4 1%/8% 50 Dependent upon location,
residential densities and
adjacent or nearby current
or future land uses
same as above
Collector
1,000 to 4,999
ADT
Must Provide a through
connection between
Local or Collector roads
24/8 1%/6% 50 Yes same as above
Arterial
5,000 or more
ADT
Must Provide a through
connection to Local or
Collector roads
24/8 1%/6% 75 Yes same as above
Private:
Deadend
Less than 250
ADT
1,000 ft - measured from
center line of intersection
to midpoint of turnaround
20/4 or may be
reduced by
agreement
between Board,
DPW and
Applicant
1%/8% 50 Dependent upon location,
residential densities and
adjacent or nearby current
or future land uses
See DPW Infrastructure
Design, Construction and
Administration Standards
for typical cross-section and
all construction
requirements
Local 251 to 1,000
ADT
Must Provide a through
connection between
Local or Collector roads
22/4 or may be
reduced by
agreement
between Board,
DPW and
Applicant
1%/8% 50 Dependent upon location,
residential densities and
adjacent or nearby current
or future land uses
same as above
¹Abrupt or sever transitions in grades, shall require the Director of Public Works approval. ²ADT rates for the development shall be determined using the
Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation standards. Trip generation rates from other local sources may be used if the applicant demonstrates
that these sources better reflect the local condition. Existing ADT shall be determined from actual counts.
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
63
2011 Printing
Table 2: Geometric and Structural Guides for Roadways
Geometric & Structural Guides for Roads
Roadway Types
Gravel
(Private
Only)
Deadend
Local Collector Arterial
Average Daily Traffic Count (ADT) 0-50 0-250
251-
1,000 1,001-4,999 5,000+
Pavement Width Minimum 20' 20' 22' 24' 24'
Shoulder Width 4' 4' 4' 8' 8'
Pavement 1.5" ATG¹
Binder Course N/A 2 1/2" 2 1/2" 2 1/2" 2 1/2"
Finish Wearing Course N/A 1 1/2" 1 1/2" 1 1/2" 1 1/2"
Slope of Roadway (min/max)² 1%/8% 1%/8% 1%/8% 1%/6% 1%/6%
Minimum Centerline Radii 100 ft 100 ft 200 ft 300 ft 400 ft
Base Course Gravel Depth 16" 16" 16" 16" 24"
Finish Course Depth 11/2" Crushed Gravel 8" 8" 8" 8" 8"
¹ADT = Asphalt Treaded Gravel of not less than 1 gallon asphalt per square yard.
²Abrupt or sever changes in grades shall require the Director of Public Works approval.
Note: These guides are intended to apply to both public and private roadways.
7.03 SIDEWALKS
The Planning Board may require sidewalks for pedestrian traffic to provide a connection between the
main entrances of business, housing or industrial establishments, parking areas and along public
roadways.
The Planning Board may also require sidewalks from the road to the main building entrance or along the
road frontage if there is a reasonable expectation pedestrian patrons, residents, neighbors, children,
shoppers or employees would be traveling to or from the site.
All sidewalks adjacent to parking areas or access drives shall be at least six inches (6) above grade and
curbed with vertical granite curbing.
All sidewalks shall include a means for handicapped access and comply with ADA standards.
Design details and construction standards for sidewalks can be found in the Department of Public Works
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards.
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
64
2011 Printing
ARTICLE VIII: PERFORMANCE AND MAINTENANCE SECURITIES
8.01 POSTING OF PERFORMANCE SECURITIES
A. At the discretion of the Planning Board, Community Development Director and the Director of Public
Works, all proposed Commercial, Industrial and Residential development shall require completion
assurances to cover costs such as, but limited to, the following: drainage, landscaping, work involving
public ways or utilities, offsite improvements, paving, erosion control measures, bounds and other
areas that may be deemed necessary.
B. The Planning Board will accept the following methods of posting a performance security:
1. Cash deposited with the Town Finance Director
2. A bond issued by a guarantee company authorized to do business within the State of New
Hampshire, in an amount and manner acceptable to the Planning Board
3. An irrevocable letter of credit in an amount and manner acceptable to the Planning Board after
consultation with Town Counsel
C. A performance or maintenance security is required to be sufficient to cover the cost of all construction
and improvements; including materials, labor and inspections.
D. Performance securities shall be submitted to the Town prior to the construction of any road, utility
work, and public improvement or to obtaining a building permit on a new road.
E. Proper performance or maintenance securities shall be maintained at all times by the developer or
successor in interest. A developer or successor in interest’s insolvency, commencement of
foreclosure proceedings against, appointment of a receiver or petition into bankruptcy shall constitute
default of security and shall entitle the Planning Board to draw upon any Letter of Credit or other
securities unless reasonable and comparable assurances regarding the completion of all
improvements have been provided to the Town.
F. Failure to maintain proper completion assurances shall result in the denial of a Certificate of
Occupancy and the revocation of all building permits outstanding for the subdivision. This does not
pertain to any lots within the subdivision that have previously received a Certificate of Occupancy.
8.02 RELEASE OF PERFORMANCE SECURITIES
Upon inspection of a partial completion of required improvements, the Community Development
Department may authorize in writing for approval by the Board of Selectmen, a reduction in the
performance security equal to the work completed. The Town shall retain sufficient funds for the current
cost to complete the remaining improvements and inspections plus a ten (10%) percent retainage, as
indicated by a qualified contractor’s bid estimate approved by the Planning Board. If the costs for
completing the required improvements exceeds the amount of the performance security held by the
Town, additional funds shall be required by the Planning Board in order to ensure completion before the
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
65
2011 Printing
development proceeds any further. The retainage shall be held until the completion of all required
improvements have been inspected and approved by the Planning Board.
Should progress toward the completion of all required improvements fall substantially behind the
approved phasing schedule or reasonable timetable, the Planning Board may obtain a completion cost
estimate from the developer’s contractor or a qualified contractor of the Planning Board’s choice. If the
estimated completion costs exceed the amount of the performance security posted with the Town, the
developer shall post an additional performance security as is necessary to complete the required
improvements. The developer shall post such security within 30-days of the notice thereof.
The final release of the performance security (or balance thereof) shall be released when:
A. The Director of Public Works has certified completion of all required site improvements in
accordance with the approved plan,
B. Complete As-Builts has been submitted and approved,
C. A maintenance security (if necessary) has been received by DPW, and;
D. All easements, deeds and required legal documentation has been submitted by the applicant and
reviewed by Town Counsel (as necessary) and approved by the Director of Community
Development.
Please see APPENDIX VI: ROADWAY ACCEPTANCE INFORMATION for complete road acceptance
guidelines.
8.03 MAINTENANCE SECURITIES
For public improvements within the Town right-of-way, or for roads intended to be turned over to the
Town, the Board will not release the performance security until a maintenance security is in place. The
maintenance security will cover the maintenance of public roads and other public improvements for a
period of one (1) year from the date of road acceptance by the Board of Selectmen. The amount will be
two (2%) percent of the original total performance security unless otherwise determined by the Director
of Public Works. All Road Maintenance Bonds are held by the Department of Public Works. If repair or
unusual maintenance is needed or additional improvements are required then such costs as are
necessary shall be drawn against said security.
ARTICLE IX: EXPIRATION, ENFORCEMENT, FINES, PENALTIES AND
APPEALS
9.01 ENFORCEMENT
These regulations shall be enforced by the Planning Board or its duly authorized enforcement authority.
Should the Planning Board or its duly authorized enforcement authority determine that an applicant is
proceeding contrary to these regulations or the terms of the approved site plan or subdivision plan signed
by the applicant and Planning Board, the Planning Board or its authorized representative shall notify the
applicant in writing of the specifics of such violation(s) and the appropriate steps, including a timetable,
for remedying said violation(s). This notification procedure shall, if deemed appropriate by the
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
66
2011 Printing
enforcement authority, include the issuance of a “cease and desist order”. The Town or its
representatives has the authority to enter the premises, to cause the violation to be abated and to
recover any direct or indirect expenses thereby incurred.
9.02 FINES AND PENALTIES
Any person, firm, or corporation violating the provisions of these regulations or the terms of an approved
site plan or subdivision plan, shall be subject to a civil penalty for each day that such a violation(s) is
found to continue after the conviction date or after the date on which the violator receives written notice
from the municipality that he is in violation, whichever is earlier.
Whoever, being the owner or representative of the owner of any land located within a subdivision,
including condominium conversion, transfers or sells a lot of a subdivision, before such lot has been
approved by the Planning Board and recorded or filed in the office of the appropriate Registrar of Deeds
shall forfeit and pay a penalty of one hundred ($100) dollars for each lot or parcel so transferred or sold;
and the description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the
process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties. Said municipality,
through its solicitor or other official designated by its counsel may enjoin such transfer or sale or
agreement and may recover the said penalty by civil action.
9.03 APPEALS
Any person(s) aggrieved by any decision of the Planning Board concerning an application may present to
the Superior Court a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal or unreasonable in
whole or in part and specifying the grounds upon which the same is claimed to be illegal or
unreasonable. Such petition shall be presented to the court within 30-days after the Planning Board’s
final decision regarding the application in question.
ARTICLE X: FEES
10.01 APPLICATION FEES
A set schedule of application fees shall be set by the Planning Board after due notice and public
hearing. A current listing of this schedule is available in the Community Development office.
10.02 ADMINISTRATIVE AND OTHER FEES
Reasonable fees may be imposed by the Planning Board to cover its administrative expenses and the
costs of special investigative studies, review of documents, filing and recording fees and other matters
which may be required by particular applications.
10.03 PUBLIC NOTICES AND HEARING FEES
All costs of notice whether mailed, posted or published shall be paid in full by the applicant. Failure to
pay such costs shall constitute valid grounds for the Planning Board to terminate further consideration
and to disapprove the application without a public hearing.
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
67
2011 Printing
10.04 INSPECTION SERVICE FEE
For all site improvements required as part of any approval by the Planning Board, including but not
limited to road construction, utility installation, drainage structures and the installation of erosion and
sediment control measures, there shall be deposited an inspection fee prior to final Planning Board
approval. This fee shall cover the cost of inspection services to be provided by a Town appointed
inspector (or his designated representative).
Town’s inspector shall monitor and inspect all required site improvements for compliance with the
approved plans and required engineering standards. The amount of said fee shall be determined by the
Community Development Department based upon a reasonable estimate of anticipated inspection costs.
All estimates shall be provided by the applicant and may be subject to review by the Town Engineer or
consultant. Site inspections shall be conducted for up to the amount of the fee collected. Should the
inspection fee collected be insufficient to cover the remaining required site inspections, the Town will
notify the developer to cease further site development until additional funds have been deposited with
the Town. Once all required site development and all required site inspections have been completed, any
unused portion of the inspection fee shall be returned to the applicant upon approval by the BOS.
Town of Milford Development Regulations 2017
68
ARTICLE XI: APPENDICES
APPENDIX I: CHECKLISTS (2014)
A. MINOR SITE PLAN CHECKLIST
B. MAJOR SITE PLAN CHECKLIST
C. MINOR SUBDIVISION CHECKLIST
D. MAJOR SUBDIVISION CHECKLIST
E. STORMWATER PERMIT CHECKLIST
APPENDIX II: MAJOR SUBDIVISION PROCESS
APPENDIX III: OPEN SPACE SUBDIVISION FLOWCHART
APPENDIX IV: ENVIRONMENTAL STUDY
APPENDIX V: SECURITIES SUBMISSION DOCUMENTATION
A. CASH
B. BOND
C. IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT
APPENDIX VI: ROADWAY ACCEPTANCE INFORMATION
APPENDIX VII: TOWN DOCUMENT RESOURCES LIST
69
TOWN OF MILFORD, NH
Application Checklist
MINOR SITE PLAN
Minor Site Plan: An application of six hundred (600) square feet, or less, of additional building
space.
For any boxes under “Required” checked “No” please submit written justification if the reasons are
not apparent. This checklist is for administrative efficiency. It does not take the place of the
comprehensive requirements of the Development Regulations, nor does it preclude the Board from
requesting additional information if deemed necessary for making an informed decision.
Waiver Requests: Provide written justification for any waiver requests, citing the appropriate
section number of the regulations. Waiver Forms are available at the Community Development
Office or online at: http://www.milford.nh.gov.
If you have any questions please contact the Community Development office at (603) 249-0620.
Name of Application ____________________________________________________________________________________
Map(s) _______________________________ Lot(s) _________________________________
Required Submitted Waived
YES NO General Submission Requirements YES NO
1. Complete, signed Application
2. Four (4) large 22” x34” copies and one (1) reduced 11” x
17” copy
Plan Information
A. Na me, address & signature of applicant
B. Na me, address & signature of owner (if different from
applicant)
C. Na me & address of person/firm preparing plan
D. Na mes & address of all abutters
E. No rth arrow
F. Sca le
G. Da te Prepared
H. Loc us map
I. Pro perty boundary lines with distances and angles to scale
J. Lot area, frontage & associated minimum zoning
requirements
K. Cur rent zoning of property
L. All existing buildings, parking & driveways
M. Bu ilding setback lines
70
Required Submitted Waived
YES NO General Submission Requirements YES NO
N. Location of proposed addition(s)
O. Flow of traffic
P. All existing utilities (i.e. sewer, water, electric & gas)
Q. Provisions for storage of recycling and refuse
R. Location, size and detail of signs
S. Location, size and detail of exterior lighting
T. Location, size and detail of storage tanks
U. Proposed and current landscaping with detail table
V. Snow storage locations
W. Note defining the Purpose of the plan
X. Note referencing and/or depictions on the plan of all
easements, rights-of-way and deeded property restrictions.
Y. Note detailing applicable impact fees
Z. Note detailing Open Space calculations
AA. Note detailing Flood Hazard information
BB. Note detailing Groundwater Protection District information
CC. Architectural details
DD. Note detailing any approved waivers
Other Information (as necessary)
1. Stormwater Management and Erosion Control permit if >
5000 SF of land disturbance (see Stormwater Management
and Erosion Control Regulation)
2. Alteration of Terrain Permit from NH DES
3. All new deeds, easements, covenants and rights-of-way on
property
4. Any other State/Federal Permits
Signature of person preparing the Minor Site Plan Application Checklist:
Name/Title: _____________________________________________________________________ Date: ____________________
71
TOWN OF MILFORD, NH
Application Checklist
MAJOR SITE PLAN
Major Site Plan: An application for greater than six hundred (600) square feet, of additional building
space.
For any boxes under “Required” checked “No” please submit written justification if the reasons are
not apparent. This checklist is for administrative efficiency. It does not take the place of the
comprehensive requirements of the Development Regulations, nor does it preclude the Board from
requesting additional information if deemed necessary for making an informed decision.
Waiver Requests: Provide written justification for any waiver requests, citing the appropriate
section number of the regulations. Waiver Forms are available at the Community Development
Office or online at: http://www.milford.nh.gov.
If you have any questions please contact the Community Development office at (603) 249-0620.
Name of Application ____________________________________________________________________________________
Map(s) _______________________________ Lot(s) _________________________________
Required Submitted Waived
YES NO General Submission Requirements YES NO
1. Complete, signed Application
2. Four (4) large 22” x34” copies and one (1) reduced 11” x 17”
copy
Plan Information
A. Name, address & signature of applicant
B. Na me, address & signature of owner (if different from
applicant)
C. Na me & address of person/firm preparing plan
D. Na mes & address of all abutters
E. No rth arrow
F. Sca le
G. Da te Prepared
H. Loc us map
I. Pro perty boundary lines with distances and angles to scale
J. Lot area, frontage & associated minimum zoning
requirements
K. Cur rent zoning of property
L. De lineation of all wetlands and wetland buffers
M. Exi sting & proposed topography at five (5’) ft intervals or two
(2’) ft intervals if major changes are proposed
72
Required Submitted Waived
YES NO General Submission Requirements YES NO
N. Scaled roadway centerline at 50’ increments for rural areas
and 10’increments in the Urbanized/Oval Sub-Dist area
O. Location of buildings within 50 ft
P. Location of all roads or driveways within 200 ft
Q. Locations of infiltrating drainage systems within 200ft
R. Existing access roads, recreational trails and boundaries
(such as stone walls, barbed wire, etc.)
S. Existing & proposed buildings, driveways, sidewalks,
parking spaces, loading areas, significant trees, vegetated
areas, open drainage courses & service areas
T. Building setback lines
U. Flow of traffic
V. Provisions for storage of recycling and refuse
W. Location, size and detail of signs
X. Location, size and detail of exterior lighting
Y. Location, size and detail of storage tanks
Z. Snow storage locations
AA. Note defining the Purpose of the plan
BB. Note detailing Open Space calculations
CC. Brief history of the property (i.e. previous disturbances)
DD. Gen eral description of existing characteristics such as:
developed, productive farmland, meadow, forest, viewshed,
archeological site, areas contiguous with other open space
and wildlife corridors.
EE. Brief description of drainage upstream onto property and
discharge downstream from property
FF. Note detailing applicable impact fees
GG. A note indicating: “Water, sewer, road (including parking
lot) and drainage work shall be constructed in accordance
with the Town of Milford’s Water Utilities Department and
Public Works Department Standards.”
HH. A n ote indicating: “As-built plans shall be delivered to the
Building Department prior to a Certificate of Occupancy
being issued.”
II. Note detailing Groundwater Protection District information
JJ. Note referencing and delineations on the plan of all
easements, rights-of-way and deeded property restrictions.
KK. Landscaping Plan
LL. Stormwater Management and/or Erosion Control Plan
MM Arc hitectural plans and details
NN. Util ity Plan
OO. Not e detailing any approved waivers
PP. Note detailing Flood Hazard information
73
Other Information (as necessary)
1. Stormwater Management and Erosion Control permit if >
5000 SF of land disturbance (see Stormwater Management
and Erosion Control Regulation)
2. Alteration of Terrain Permit from NH DES
3. NH Wetlands Bureau and/or Milford Zoning Board of
Adjustment for the relocation, filling, or dredging of
wetlands or wetlands buffers
4. NH Water Supply and Pollution Control Commission for
septic systems
5. All new deeds, easements, covenants and rights-of-way on
property
6. NH DOT or Milford DPW Driveway Permit
7. NH DES Shoreland Protection Permit
8. Any other State/Federal Permits
Signature of person preparing the Major Site Plan Application Checklist:
Name/Title: _____________________________________________________________________ Date: ____________________
74
TOWN OF MILFORD, NH
Application Checklist
MINOR SUBDIVISION
Minor Subdivision: An application for subdivision which creates three or fewer new building lots
and which does not require the installation of any new roads (public or private) or the extension of
municipal owned utilities (sewer and water) .
Lot Lint Adjustment: An application for to adjust the lot lines of two or more parcels where no new
lots are created.
For any boxes under “Required” checked “No” please submit written justification if the reasons are
not apparent. This checklist is for administrative efficiency. It does not take the place of the
comprehensive requirements of the Development Regulations, nor does it preclude the Board from
requesting additional information if deemed necessary for making an informed decision.
Waiver Requests: Provide written justification for any waiver requests, citing the appropriate
section number of the regulations. Waiver Forms are available at the Community Development
Office or online at: http://www.milford.nh.gov.
If you have any questions please contact the Community Development office at (603) 249-0620.
Name of Application ____________________________________________________________________________________
Map(s) _______________________________ Lot(s) _________________________________
Required Submitted Waived
YES NO General Submission Requirements YES NO
1. Complete, signed Application
2. Four (4) large 22” x34” copies and one (1) reduced 11” x 17”
copy
Plan Information
A. Name, address & signature of applicant
B. Name, address & signature of owner (if different from
applicant)
C. Name & address of person/firm preparing plan
D. Names & address of all abutters
E. North arrow
F. Scale
G. Date Prepared
75
Required Submitted Waived
YES NO General Submission Requirements YES NO
H. Locus map
I. Property boundary lines with distances and angles to scale
J. Areas of proposed lots in square feet and acres
K. Delineation of all wetlands and wetlands buffers
L. Delineation of slopes over twenty-five (25%) percent
M. Location of buildings within 50 ft
N. Location of all roads or driveways within 200 ft
O. Existing access roads, recreational trails and boundaries (such
as stone walls, barbed wire, etc.)
P. Existing & proposed buildings & driveways
Q. Current zoning and location of district boundaries if located in
two or more zones
R. Building setback lines
S. Flow of traffic
T. All existing utilities (i.e. sewer, water, electric & gas)
U. Note defining the Purpose of the plan
V. Brief history of the property (i.e. previous disturbances)
W. General description of existing characteristics such as:
developed, productive farmland, meadow, forest, viewshed,
archeological site, areas contiguous with other open space and
wildlife corridors.
X. Brief description of drainage upstream onto property and
discharge downstream from property
Y. Note detailing Flood Hazard information
Z. Note detailing Groundwater Protection District information
AA. Note referencing and delineations on the plan of all easements,
rights-of-way and deeded property restrictions.
BB. Deleted (Note referencing the GMO)
CC. State of NH Site Specific permit numbers, if required
DD. Pa rcels numbered consecutively with no omissions or
duplications.
EE. Planning Board approval block with space for Chairman’s
signature and date, Approval number and Approval date
FF. The seal of a NH Licensed Land Surveyor
GG. Note detailing any approved waivers
HH. Th e seal of a NH Licensed Civil Engineer, as necessary
II. The seal of a NH Licensed Soil Scientist, as necessary
JJ. The seal of a NH Licensed Wetlands Scientist, as necessary
76
Signature of person preparing the Minor Subdivision Application Checklist:
Name/Title: _____________________________________________________________________ Date: ____________________
Other Information (as necessary)
1. Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Plan and a
permit if > 5000 SF of land disturbance (see Stormwater
Management and Erosion Control Regulation)
2. Alteration of Terrain Permit from NH DES
3. State Subdivision approval from NH DES
4. NH Wetlands Bureau and/or Milford Zoning Board of
Adjustment for the relocation, filling, or dredging of wetlands
or wetlands buffers
5. NH Water Supply and Pollution Control Commission for septic
systems
6. All new deeds, easements, covenants and rights-of-way on
property
7. NH DOT or Milford DPW Driveway Permit
8. NH DES Shoreland Protection Permit
9. Any other State/Federal Permits
77
TOWN OF MILFORD, NH
Application Checklist
MAJOR SUBDIVISION
Major Subdivision: An application which creates four or more new building lots or an application
which requires the installation of new roads (public or private) or the extension of municipal
owned utilities (sewer and water) .
For any boxes under “Required” checked “No” please submit written justification if the reasons are
not apparent. This checklist is for administrative efficiency. It does not take the place of the
comprehensive requirements of the Development Regulations, nor does it preclude the Board from
requesting additional information if deemed necessary for making an informed decision.
Waiver Requests: Provide written justification for any waiver requests, citing the appropriate
section number of the regulations. Waiver Forms are available at the Community Development
Office or online at: http://www.milford.nh.gov.
If you have any questions please contact the Community Development office at (603) 249-0620.
Name of Application ____________________________________________________________________________________
Map(s) _______________________________ Lot(s) _________________________________
Required Submitted Waived
YES NO General Submission Requirements YES NO
3. Complete, signed Application
4. Four (4) large 22” x34” copies and one (1) reduced 11” x
17” copy
Plan Information
A. Name, address & signature of applicant
B. Name, address & signature of owner (if different from
applicant)
C. Name & address of person/firm preparing plan
D. Names & address of all abutters
E. North arrow
F. Scale of not more than 1” = 100’. Overview plans may be
1” = 200’
G. Date Prepared
H. Current zoning of property
I. Lot area in square feet and acres, frontage & associated
minimum zoning requirements
J. Locus map
K. Property boundary lines with distances and angles
plotted to scale
78
Required Submitted Waived
YES NO General Submission Requirements YES NO
L. Delineation of all wetlands and wetlands buffers
M. Delineation of slopes over twenty-five (25%) percent
N. Existing & proposed topography at 5 ft intervals or 2 ft
intervals if major changes are proposed
O. Balance sheet of proposed cut and fill quantities
P. Scaled roadway centerline at increments of 50’ for rural
areas and 10’ in the Urbanized/Oval Sub-district area
Q. Location of buildings within fifty (50’) feet of property
R. Location of all roads or driveways within 200’ of site
S. Locations of infiltrating drainage sys within 200’ of
property
T. Existing access roads, recreational trails and boundaries
(such as stone walls, barbed wire, etc.)
U. Existing & proposed buildings, driveways & roads on-site
V. New roads shall have centerline marked at 50’ intervals
W. Building setback lines
X. Flow of traffic
Y. All existing utilities (i.e. sewer, water, electric & gas)
Z. Provisions for storage of recycling and refuse
AA. Location, size and detail of signs
BB. Location, size and detail of exterior lighting
CC. Location, size and detail of storage tanks
DD. No te defining the Purpose of the plan
EE. Brief history of the property (i.e. previous disturbances)
FF. General description of existing characteristics such as:
developed, productive farmland, meadow, forest,
viewshed, archeological site, areas contiguous with other
open space and wildlife corridors.
GG. Brief description of drainage upstream onto property and
discharge downstream from property
HH. No te detailing Flood Hazard information
II. Note detailing Groundwater Protection District
information
JJ. Deed references for property
KK. Note referencing and/or depictions on the plan of all
easements, rights-of-way and deeded property
restrictions.
LL. A note detailing applicable Impact Fees
MM. De leted Note pertaining to GMO
NN. A note indicating: “All water, sewer, road (including
parking lot) and drainage work shall be constructed in
accordance with the Town of Milford’s Water Utilities
Department and Public Works Department Standards.”
OO. A note indicating the ownership of open space
79
Required Submitted Waived
YES NO General Submission Requirements YES NO
PP. A note stating that a sign is required at the entrance to a
new road or set of roads reading as follows: “This road
has not been accepted by the Town of Milford. Until the
road has been accepted, the Town assumes no
responsibility for maintenance including snow removal,
nor any liability for damages resulting from use of the
street. RSA 674:41.”
QQ. Ut ility Plan
RR. Road, sidewalk, and drainage cross-sections, profiles and
engineering specifications
SS. Parcels numbered consecutively with no omissions or
duplications. In addition, the Notes Sections shall contain
a list of the map and lot numbers of the parent tract(s).
TT. Planning Board approval block with space for Chairman’s
signature and date, Approval number and Approval date
UU. Th e seal of a NH Licensed Land Surveyor. All bounds or
pints are required to be set on each lot prior to the
issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy and all roadway
bounds must be set prior to road acceptance.
VV. A note indicating the details of any approved waivers
WW Th e seal of a NH Licensed Civil Engineer, as necessary
XX. The seal of a NH Licensed Soil Scientist, as necessary
YY. The seal of a NH Licensed Wetlands Scientist, as
necessary
Signature of person preparing the Major Subdivision Application Checklist:
Name/Title: _____________________________________________________________________ Date: ____________________
Other Information (as necessary)
1. Conventional Subdivision layout for OSCD subdivisions
2. Phasing Plan
3. Impact studies as required by Board
4. SWP and permit if > 5000 SF of land disturbance (see
Stormwater Management & Erosion Control Regulations)
5. Alteration of Terrain Permit from NH DES
6. NH Wetlands Bureau and/or Milford ZBA approval for
the relocation, filling, or dredging of wetlands or buffers
7. State Subdivision approval from NH DES
8. All new deeds, easements, covenants & rights-of-way onsite
9. NH DOT or Milford DPW Driveway Permit
10. NH DES Shoreland Protection Permit
11. Architectural plans and details
12. Any other State/Federal Permits
80
CHECKLIST FOR STORMWATER PERMIT APPLICATIONS
THIS CHECKLIST IS TO BE USED AS A GUIDE FOR COMPLYING WITH THE TOWN OF MILFORD STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT AND EROSION CONTROL REGULATIONS. A COMPLETED CHECKLIST MUST BE SUBMITTED AS PART
OF THE REQUIRED STORMWATER APPLICATION. THE PLANNING BOARD OR CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER SHALL
MAKE A DETERMINATION TO ACCEPT, REJECT, OR TABLE AN APPLICATION BASED ON BOTH ITS REVIEW AND THE
REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATION OF THE COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT.
Please fill out this Checklist thoroughly by checking the appropriate box and providing the necessary information. Provide written justification for any
waiver requests (including citing the appropriate section number of the regulations), or for any boxes checked “not applicable” if the reasons are not
apparent. A Waiver Request form is available through the Town of Milford website (http://www.milford.nh.gov) or through the Milford Community
Development Office.
The Milford Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Regulations are available for a fee at the Milford Community Development Office or on
the Web at: http://www.milford.nh.gov. If you have any questions, please contact this Office for assistance, at (603) 249-0620. General construction
standards for storm drainage, roadways, water, and sanitary sewer are available for a fee at the Department of Public Works, the Water Utilities
Department or on the Web at: http://www.milford.nh.gov .
NOTE: If greater than 43,560 square feet of disturbance is proposed for any use, the applicant IS REQUIRED to check Federal EPA NPDES
permitting requirements.
Name of Stormwater Application Map(s) Lot(s)
81
TYPE OF PROJECT (The project involves):
Disturbance or impact less than 5,000 square feet
** No Permit Required at this time. No further action
required. **
Disturbance or impact greater than 5,000 square feet and
less than 20,000 square feet
Review the conditions below. If any of the five boxes below
are checked, you are not currently required to apply for a
permit.
Normal Maintenance of Land in Agricultural Use
utilizing BMP’s
Maintenance of property associated with a singlefamily
dwelling
Construction of a fence that will not alter drainage
patterns
Construction of utilities within an exisitng paved
roadway that will not permanently alter drainage
patterns
Emergency repairs to any stormwater management
facility per listed conditions
If the project proposes a disturbance greater than 5,000 square feet,
and at least one of the five boxes above are not checked, a Permit
Application is required. Continue this checklist.
Disturbance of impact greater than 20,000 square
feet
Impact is not solely related to construction or
reconstruction of a roadway
(If solely related to Roadway reconstruction, no
application is required unless greater than 43,560
square feet of disturbance is required.)
Subdivision or phasing of more than three lots
Proposed work in or adjacent to a wetlands or
wetlands buffer
Construction of utilities requiring contiguous
ground disturbance greater than 20,000 square feet
The utility work is completely contained within the
limits of an existing paved roadway (A Permit is
required, however, no Plan is required)
Disturbance or impact greater than 43,560 square
feet and is only related to construction or
reconstruction of a roadway
Proposed work in or adjacent to disturbed critical
areas
If any of the above boxes are checked, a Permit Application and
Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Plan ARE
required.
82
INITIAL (AND FINAL) APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS (5.32.090.A)
ON
PLAN
NOT
APPLICABLE
WAIVER
REQUESTED EXPLANATION
1. Drawings Shall Include:
a. Locus Map showing property
boundaries
b. North arrow, scale and date
c. Property lines
d. Easements
e. Structures, utilities, roads and
other paved areas
f. Topographic contours
g. Critical Areas
h. Drainage Features
i. Surface water
ii. Wetlands
iii. Drainage patterns
iv. Watershed boundaries
i. Vegetation
j. Limits of work
83
2. NCSS/SSSNNE Soils information
related to highly erodible soils
3. Construction details & application
procedures for temporary and permanent
stormwater management and erosion and
sediment control BMP's
4. Areas and timing of soil disturbance
5. A schedule for self-inspection and
maintenance of all BMP's
6. Narrative section including discussion of
each measure, its purpose, construction
sequence, and installation timing as they
apply to the site
7. If no Infiltration or Exfiltration is
proposed skip to question 9
a. Test pit information
b. Estimated seasonal high water
table elevations
8. Calculations for the infiltration or
exfiltration system
9. Any requested studies
10. Name, address, stamp, and signature of
-Licensed Surveyor
-Licensed Civil Engineer
-Licensed Soil Scientist
-Licensed Wetland Scientist
84
ADDITIONAL FINAL APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS (5.32.090.B) (If initial application, skip to question 13)
ON
PLAN
NOT
APPLICABLE
WAIVER
REQUESTED EXPLANATION
11. Construction Drawings/Supporting
Documents:
a. A project narrative
b. Plan for stump and debris removal
c. Topographic contours at two-foot
(2’) intervals
d. Surface waters, wetlands, and
drainage patterns and watershed
boundaries within the project area
and within 200 feet of project
boundary
e. Extent of 100-year floodplain
boundaries if published or
determined
f. Easements
g. Areas of cut and fill
h. Locations of earth stockpiles
i. Locations of equipment storage and
staging
j. Locations of proposed construction
and/or permanent vehicle or
equipment fueling
k. Stump disposal plan
l. Highlighted areas of poorly and very
poorly drained soils
85
ON
PLAN
NOT
APPLICABLE
WAIVER
REQUESTED EXPLANATION
m. Highlighted areas of poorly and/or
very poorly drained soils proposed to
be filled
n. Construction and earth movement
schedule
o. Locations, descriptions, details, and
design criteria and calculations for all
sedimentation control measures and
BMP’s
p. Identification of all permanent
control measures
q. Identification of permanent snow
storage areas
r. Identification of snow management
measures during construction
s. Description of the combination of
sediment and erosion control
measures which are required to
achieve maximum pollutant removal
12. SWMP Contents must also include:
a. Design calculations for all BMP
measures
b. A proposed schedule for the
inspection and maintenance of all
BMP's
86
ON
PLAN
NOT
APPLICABLE
WAIVER
REQUESTED EXPLANATION
c. Identification of all permanent
control measures and responsibility
for continued maintenance
d. Drainage report with calculations
e. Plans showing the entire drainage
area affecting or being affected by
the development of the site.
Proposed lot boundaries and drainage
areas shall be clearly shown on the
plan
f. The direction of flow of runoff
g. The location, elevation, and size of
all existing and proposed drainage
features
h. When detention structures are
planned to reduce future condition
peak discharge, the soil cover
complex method shall be used to
compute the runoff volume and peak
discharge for designing the structure
i. Copies of pertinent State and Federal
Permits
87
OUTSIDE AGENCY REVIEW, PERMITTING AND APPROVALS
Depending on the jurisdiction of outside agency authority, and prior to the acceptance of the Stormwater Application by the Planning
Board, the applicant may be required to obtain approvals and permits for various aspects of the development from:
REQUIRED COMMENTS
A. Milford Zoning Board of Adjustment
B. Milford Conservation Commission
C. Milford Water and Sewer Commissioners
D. Milford Heritage Commission
E. NH Department of Environmental Services (DES)
1. State subdivision approval
2. Site specific
3. Utility extensions
4. Wetlands dredge and fill
F. NH Department of Transportation (NHDOT)
G. US Army Corps of Engineers
H. “Regional Impact” review
I. Other agencies as required (please list)
Note: Depending upon the type of review and permit, the Planning Board may require that the permit be obtained prior to final approval or
as a condition of approval to be met prior to the signing of the final Subdivision or Site plan but not requiring a final meeting with the
Planning Board.
Signature of person preparing the Stormwater Application Checklist:
The Town has the right to deny a permit if any information is missing and that by signing; the applicant is stating the information is accurate to the best
of their knowledge.
Name / Title Date
87
APPENDIX II: MAJOR SUBDIVISION PROCESS
88
APPENDIX III: OPEN SPACE SUBDIVISION FLOWCHART
89
90
APPENDIX IV: ENVIRONMENTAL STUDY
The natural world provides the foundation for human health and economic vitality. Natural systems store
floodwaters, cleanse air and water, maintain productive soils, support wildlife, recycle wastes, moderate
temperature extremes, and more. The free benefits provided by nature are called natural services.
A. Purpose
1. To protect and maintain the natural environment.
2. To provide for the harmonious and aesthetically pleasing development of the municipality and its
environs.
3. To protect the public benefits of habitat protection, including flood control, water recharge, carbon
sequestration, food web integrity, and nutrient cycling.
B. Legal Basis and Considerations for New Hampshire
1. Protection of the natural environment is referenced and or supported in the following RSA
sections.
2. Environmental Characteristics Zoning. RSA 674:21
3. Village Plan Alternative Subdivision. RSA 674:21
4. Master Plan; Purpose and Description RSA 674:2
5. Subdivision Regulations. RSA 674:36l(l) and (m)
6. Comprehensive Shoreland Protection Act. RSA 483-B:2
7. Rivers Management and Protection Program. RSA 483:6
C. The Environmental Study Provides:
1. Justification for decisions regarding waivers to a Development Regulation
2. Justification for decisions regarding special exceptions or variances to the Zoning Ordinance
3. Basis for recommending the use of an Innovative Land Use Planning Technique
D. Submittal Requirements of the Environmental Study
1. The environmental study shall be presented as a series of maps showing the listed features. For
some features a written description may also be needed.
a. Base map of the Property
b. Property location, tax map and lot number, acreage
c. Existing conditions of the site - [i.e. developed, productive farmland, meadow, forest, view
shed, archeological site, areas contiguous with other open space, wildlife corridors.]
d. Access roads, recreational trails, boundaries
e. Aesthetic, cultural, historical features, unique natural features (specimen trees, water rapids,
lush vegetation), prehistoric and historic remains (paths, walls, excavations)
f. Location and description of previous site disturbances
2. Soils
a. Site Specific Soil Survey
b. Productive soils – [prime (federal) agricultural soils, important (state) agricultural soils, active
and historic farms]
3. Water
a. Intermittent and perennial streams, natural and man-made ponds
91
b. Source of flow, direction, and destination
c. Water supply lands, including highly transmissive aquifers identified by the US Geological
Survey and favorable gravel well sites identified by the NH Department of Environmental
Services.
d. Flood storage areas, including 100-year floodplains identified by FEMA and lacustrine
(associated with lakes), riverine (associated with rivers), and palustrine (other non-tidal)
wetlands identified by a Site Specific Soil Survey.
4. Vegetation
a. Locations of major plant communities listed in the Wildlife Action Plan;
b. Plant species of concern and Rare, Threatened or Endangered (RTE) species.
c. Vegetation communities that are unique to the development site.
5. Wildlife
a. Identify wildlife species and evidence of wildlife observed in each vegetation community.
Identification may include sightings, calls/sounds, tracks, scat, burrows, browse marks, nests,
feathers, bone fragments, etc. Field visits should occur within one hour of sunrise and within
one hour of sunset during good weather.
b. Identify presence of wildlife migration areas and corridors, denning, nesting and breeding
areas, deer yards.
c. Note presence of snags and significant dead vegetation that may serve as nesting sites for bird
species.
d. Note presence of fish, amphibians, and other species associated with wetlands and water
bodies located on the site.
e. Note presence of kettle hole depressions and other areas that may function as Vernal Pools.
When possible, Vernal Pool surveys shall be conducted during April, May and June.
f. Note animal species of concern and Rare, Threatened or Endangered (RTE) species.
E. Environmental Impact Statement
1. Impacts: Describe and quantify impacts to wildlife, habitat and natural services as a result of the
site changes.
2. Avoidance: Demonstrate how the proposed development was planned to minimize the destruction
of plant and wildlife habitat, including habitat fragmentation.
3. Mitigation: For unavoidable impacts list any measures designed to enhance existing plant and
wildlife habitat. Where appropriate, describe any revegetation and restoration that is planned
after development and associated monitoring. Revegetation should emphasize plant species
indigenous to the region.
4. Recommendations: Propose modifications to the existing plan using innovative land use planning
techniques, and conservation strategies to further reduce impacts.
F. Resources
1. Wildlife Action Plan – NH Fish and Game Department www.wildlife.state.nh.us
2. Milford Conservation Commission – Aerial photos, maps of cover types, wetlands, etc.
3. NH Wetlands Bureau – www. des.nh.gov.
92
APPENDIX V: SECURITIES SUBMISSION DOCUMENTATION
The following is a list of the necessary documentation required for each type of Performance or
Maintenance security:
A. Cash
1. Cash Escrow Agreement Form (attached)
2. W-9 Form (attached)
B. Bond - original Bond document from the guarantee company
C. Irrevocable Letter of Credit - a draft copy should be submitted for review and approval by the
Community Development Director. Once approved the original Letter of Credit shall be submitted.
At such time as the applicant would like to request a release of guarantee the attached Request for
Release of Security form shall be submitted.
93
Cash Escrow Agreement Form
For Subdivision/Site Plan Improvements, Maintenance and Performance Guarantees
and Improvements Subsequent to Certificates of Occupancy
Tax Map No. _______ Lot(s): ________
AS SECURITY for the project described as,
______________________________________________,
outlined and detailed on the attached Subdivision/Site Plan Improvement Guarantee Worksheet,
________________________________________
(applicant / developer)
has provided the Town of Milford the sum of $______________________ cash escrow.
These funds shall be deposited in an insured bank account of the Town’s choosing and shall
require the approval of the Town of Milford Board of Selectmen and the signature of the Treasurer of the
Town of Milford for withdrawal. The undersigned hereby agree and covenant that if, for any reason, they
shall fail to carry out the promises and obligations as detailed above by midnight on
_________________, the said Town of Milford shall be empowered and shall have the right to withdraw
said funds or any part thereof from the aforementioned account, in order that the Town may complete the
obligations of the applicant/developer as stated above.
The applicant/developer is required to complete an IRS Form W-9 (Request for taxpayer identification
number) to establish an escrow account.
______________________________
Witness
By: _________________________________
Title: ________________________________
Date: ________________________________
94
REQUEST FOR RELEASE OF SECURITY
Tax Map __________ Lot(s) __________ Date ____ / ____ / ________
The following items, as listed on the Subdivision/Site Plan Improvement Guarantee Worksheet, have
been completed in accordance with Town standards and the total security amount as shown below is
being requested for release (attach additional sheets if necessary):
ITEM AMOUNT FROM WORKSHEET
1. _____________________________ $_____________________
2. _____________________________ $ _____________________
3. _____________________________ $ _____________________
4. _____________________________ $ _____________________
5. _____________________________ $ _____________________
6. _____________________________ $ _____________________
7. _____________________________ $ _____________________
8. _____________________________ $ _____________________
9. _____________________________ $ _____________________
10. _____________________________ $ _____________________
Total Amount Requested to be Released: $ _____________________
Signature of applicant/developer: _________________________________________
Date: _________________________________________
For Departmental Use:
Planning Department Approval: _________________________________________
Public Works Department Approval: _________________________________________
Letter of Credit #___________________ Cash Escrow Account # ________________________
Previous Authorizations for Release _______________, ________________, ______________
Date of Board of Selectmen Approval on Above Request: _____________________________
Amount remaining in Security after above Approval:_____________________________
95
96
APPENDIX VI: ROADWAY ACCEPTANCE INFORMATION
Acceptance of New Town Road(s) – Developer Checklist
Name of Applicant: ________________________________________________
Project Name: ____________________________________________________
Documents required:
1. Two copies of final, stamped As-Built Plans with all bounds set
2. Original roadway deed and all necessary easements including but not limited to
access, drainage, slope, cistern, water, sewer, utility and open space.
3. Affidavit from a Title Attorney on behalf of the Developed/Owner citing that the
roadbed is clear of all encumbrances
Information Required:
4. Registry number of recorded Subdivision Plan: _______________________.
5. Width of pavement _________________and width of Right-of-way (ROW) _________________.
6. Length of roadway(s): __________________________________________.
7. Number of cisterns to be accepted: _____________________________.
8. Cost per linear foot of road $___________________________.
9. Total cost of all water services $________________________ and sewer services
$____________________, if applicable.
Please submit the completed checklist with all necessary documentation to the Department of Planning
and Community Development to start the Road Acceptance process. A Road Maintenance Bond will be
required prior to acceptance by the Board of Selectmen in a form and amount to be determined by the
Department of Public Works.
Signature of Applicant Date
Road Acceptance Procedure
97
Once all documents have been completed and submitted to the Planning Department the following
steps are taken:
1. Legal Counsel review of Roadway Deeds and As-Builts
2. Road maintenance bond, if required, be in place.
3. Signatures of Planning and Public Works Director
4. All information is compiled into Road Acceptance Form, reviewed by Road Researcher and sent
to the Board of Selectman for approval at a regularly scheduled meeting.
Once the BOS has accepted the road the following needs to be done:
1. Two final copies of As-Builts delivered to the Planning Department.
2. One copy of As-Built is delivered to Lorraine Carson with the original Road Acceptance Form and
any applicable deeds, etc.
3. One copy of As-Built is delivered to DPW.
Copy of all Road Acceptance paperwork, including deeds, is distributed to the following departments:
Ambulance, Building, DPW, Fire, Planning, Police, and Water Utilities.
Road Acceptance Time Schedule
From the date upon which all documentation, plans, As-Builts, deeds, etc. are received in the Community
Development Office, there will be a ten (10) working day period for review prior to submission for
acceptance of the road(s) to the next available Board of Selectmen meeting.
Should any items be found mission or containing errors or omissions during that review period, an
additional seven (7) working day review period will commence from the date of receipt of the corrected
document(s), prior to submission for acceptance of the road(s) to the next Board of Selectmen’s meeting.
98
Information Required for As-Built Plans
? Existing driveways and houses
? Drainage utilities
? Water utilities (public or private)
? Sewer utilities (private or public)
? Lot lines – direction and distance labeled
? Monumentation with type labeled
? Limits of Right-of-way (ROW)
? Limits of pavement and curbing
? Wetlands and buffers
? Lot numbers and sizes
? Proposed and actual elevations of drainage, water and sewer utilities
? Easements – type and boundaries clearly labeled
? Underground and/or overhead utility lines
? Size and type information for all piping
? Street names and signage locations
? Lighting fixtures
? Sidewalks
? Guardrails
This list is intended as a guideline for applicable items and may not be comprehensive. Any
additional information within the ROW to be accepted by the Town of Milford should be included on
As-Built plans.
99
APPENDIX VII: TOWN DOCUMENT RESOURCES LIST
A. Department of Public Works Infrastructure, Design, Construction and Administration Standards –
document available at the Department of Public Works office at 289 South Street or by calling
673-1662.
B. Standard Regulations and Specifications for Design and Construction of Water and Sewer
Infrastructure – documents available at the Water Utilities Department at 564 Nashua Street or by
calling 249-0660.
C. Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Ordinance – document available in the Community
Development office in Town Hall or online through the Planning Department’s website at:
www.milford.nh.gov.
D. Gravel Removal Ordinance - document available in the Community Development office in Town
Hall or online through the Planning Department’s website at: www.milford.nh.gov.
E. Residential Driveway Permit Regulations – document available in the Community Development
office in Town Hall or online through the Planning Department’s website at: www.milford.nh.gov.
TOWN OF MILFORD
FIRE DEPARTMENT
Chapter 5.11
EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING REGULATIONS
In accordance with New Hampshire State Law, RSA 154:18, the following regulations are
established relative to the transportation, storage, possession, and use of explosive materials in
the Town of Milford, New Hampshire.
5.11.10 Short title of regulations.
These regulations shall be known and may be cited as “Explosives and Blasting Regulations.”
5.11.20 Applicability.
The Explosives and Blasting Regulations shall apply to the transportation, storage, possession,
and use of explosive materials in the Town of Milford.
5.11.21 These regulations shall not apply to:
A. Explosive materials while in the course of transportation via railroad, water,
highway, or air when explosive materials are moving under the jurisdiction of and
in conformity with regulations adopted by any federal or state department or
agency.
B. The normal and emergency conditions of any government, including all
departments, agencies, and divisions thereof, provided that they are acting in their
official capacity and in the proper performance of their duties.
C. Explosive materials for delivery to any government or any department, agency, or
division thereof.
D. Pyrotechnics commonly known as “fireworks” including signaling devices such
as flares or fuses.
E. Small arms, ammunition and components thereof which are subject to the Gun
Control Act of 1968 (Title 18, Chapter 44 of the United States Code) and
regulations promulgated there under.
F. Gasoline, fertilizers and propellants used in propellant activated power devices or
tools.
5.11.30 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AUTHORIZED, APPROVED, OR APPROVAL – Authorized, approved, or approval by
the Fire Chief of the Town of Milford, NH.
BLAST AREA – The area of the blast within the influence of flyrock, gasses and
concussion.
Town of Milford, NH
EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING REGULATIONS
Page 2 of 16
BLASTER – That qualified person in charge of and responsible for the loading and firing
of a blast.
BLASTING AGENT – An explosive material which meets prescribed criteria for
insensitivity to initiation in conformity with Title 27 of the Code of Federal Regulations,
Section 55.11 for storage, and, Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations for
transportation.
DETONATING CORD – A flexible cord containing a center core of high-velocity
explosive and used to initiate other explosives.
DETONATOR – Any device containing any initiating or primary explosive that is used
for initiating detonation. This term includes, but is not limited to, electric blasting caps of
instantaneous and delay types, blasting caps for use with safety fuses, detonating cord
delay connectors and non-electric instantaneous and delay blasting caps which use
detonating cord or other replacement for electric lag wires.
EXPLOSIVE – Any chemical compound mixture or device, the primary or common
purpose of which is to function by explosion.
EXPLOSIVE MATERIALS – These include explosives, blasting agents and detonators.
The term includes but is not limited to, dynamite and other high explosives, safety fuses,
detonating cord and igniters. Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Parts 1 through
999, subdivide these materials into:
a. Class A explosives: detonating or otherwise maximum hazards.
b. Class B explosives: flammable hazard.
c. Class C explosives: minimum hazard.
d. Blasting agents: See definition,
FIRE CHIEF – The Fire Chief of the Town of Milford, NH, or his designee.
HIGH EXPLOSIVES – Explosives which are characterized by a very high rate of
reaction, high pressure development, and the presence of a detonation wave in the
explosive.
PERSON – Any individual, corporation, company, association, firm, partnership,
society, or joint stock company.
PYROTECHNICS – Any combustible or explosive compositions or manufactured
articles designed and prepared for the purpose of producing audible or visible effects.
Pyrotechnics are commonly referred to as fireworks.
SAFETY FUSE – A flexible cord containing an internal burning medium by which fire
or flame is conveyed at a continuous and uniform rate from the point of ignition to the
point of use, usually a fuse detonator.
5.11.40 Forms and procedures.
Town of Milford, NH
EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING REGULATIONS
Page 3 of 16
The Fire Chief shall issue forms necessary or useful for carrying out the purposes of this chapter.
He may also establish procedures necessary or useful for carrying out the purposes of this
chapter which are consistent with the provisions of this chapter.
5.11.50 Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter commits a separate violation of this
chapter and shall be subject to a civil fine of not more than $500.00 for each separate violation.
5.11.60 Licenses and Permits.
5.11.61 Applicability of Chapter.
Safety and security are primary considerations in the manufacture, transportation, storage, sale,
possession, and use of explosive materials. An appropriate and thorough system of licensing or
permitting is designed to promote these considerations by assuring that these products come only
into the hands of qualified persons who require them in their own occupation.
A. The license and permit requirements of this chapter shall apply to all explosive
materials.
B. This chapter is intended to supplement existing federal and state laws and
regulations.
C. This chapter shall not apply to hand loading of small arms ammunition for
personal use and not for resale.
5.11.62 Dealers, Wholesale/Retail sale of explosives.
Persons intending to act as dealers, and/or in the wholesale or retail activity of explosives shall:
A. Possess an appropriate federal license from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and
Firearms.
B. Possess any appropriate required licenses from the State of New Hampshire
where applicable.
C. Apply for and obtain a permit from the Fire Chief for the storage, use, possession
and/or sale of explosives prior to said activity. This permit may only be issued
upon proof of the applicant’s possession of all federal and state approvals,
licenses, permits etc.
D. No permit for the wholesale or retail activity of explosives shall be issued unless
all necessary other approvals are received by the Town of Milford to include, but
not be limited to, compliance with all planning, zoning, building, health, fire and
life safety requirements.
E. The sale of explosive materials within the Town of Milford shall be prohibited
when such sale presents undue hazard to life and property as determined by the
Fire Chief.
5.11.63 Blaster’s license required.
Town of Milford, NH
EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING REGULATIONS
Page 4 of 16
A. No person may load or fire explosive materials unless such person or his
supervisor is a licensed blaster in conformance with the rules and regulations
promulgated under RSA 158:9 of the State of New Hampshire.
B. Proof of said license shall be provided upon request of the Fire Chief.
5.11.64 Permit required.
A. No person shall use explosives within the Town of Milford without first obtaining
the proper permit which authorizes him to use such materials.
B. The authorized agent or person conducting an operation or activity requiring the
use of explosive materials shall obtain a permit to use explosive materials and
shall be responsible for the results and any other consequences of any loading and
firing of explosive material and shall permit the loading and firing to be
performed or supervised only be a licensed blaster.
5.11.65 Permit applications; fees; pre-blasting conference; renewal.
A. Application for permit or its renewal shall be made to the Fire Chief on forms
provided by him and shall contain such information as may be required.
B. Applications shall have attached proof of the following:
1. State of New Hampshire license to use, purchase, and transport explosive
materials.
2. State of New Hampshire certificate of competency to conduct blasting
operations.
3. An original certificate of insurance showing minimum coverage of
$1,000,000 bodily injury and $500,000 property damage by a carrier
authorized by the State of New Hampshire Insurance Commissioner to do
business in the State of New Hampshire.
4. The blaster’s license of the person in charge of or supervising the use of
explosives.
C. Applications must be received by the Fire Chief at least five (5) business days
prior to the estimated start date of the blasting operations.
D. A fee shall be assessed for each permit. Checks shall be made payable to the
Town of Milford Fire Department and must be received by the Fire Department
prior to permit approval and issuance. The permit fees shall be established by the
Board of Selectmen of the Town of Milford.
E. Pre-blasting conferences may be scheduled by the Fire Chief prior to the approval
of the permit application. Conference attendees may include, but not be limited
to, representatives of the blaster, other town officials, and/or individuals likely to
be affected by blasting operations. The Fire Chief may require a pre-blasting
conference based upon the following criteria;
1. Overall size and scope of the project and/or site.
Town of Milford, NH
EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING REGULATIONS
Page 5 of 16
2. Anticipated duration of the blasting operation.
3. Proximity to abutters, important utilities or facilities.
F. If an application for renewal of a permit is filed after the expiration of the old
permit, it shall be considered as an application of a new permit.
5.11.66 Permit restrictions.
A. No permit shall be assigned or transferred.
B. Approved permits shall be dated and be valid for no more than sixty (60) days
from the date of issue.
F. The permit expiration date shall be no later than the expiration date of the
blaster’s insurance certificate and certificate of competency.
G. The permit shall bear the name and address of the person who applied for the
permit, the name and address of the person(s) with a blaster’s license who will
supervise the use of explosives and the signature of the approving authority.
5.11.67 Denial, revocation or suspension of permit.
A. A permit for use of explosive materials may be denied, revoked or suspended for
any of the following reasons:
(1) Noncompliance with any order of the issuing authority.
(2) If it is determined that any applicant or permit holder was or is under the
influence of any drug (prescription or nonprescription) or alcohol that may
have impaired their judgment or ability to transport, store, possess or use
any explosive material under the jurisdiction of the Town of Milford in a
safe and prudent manner while operating under such permit, their permit
to operate in the Town shall be suspended immediately. The Fire Chief
shall contact the Milford Police Department and the New Hampshire
Department of Safety if he feels that any applicant or permit holder has or
is suspected of violating this, or any part of this chapter, because they may
have been or were impaired by any drug(s) or alcohol. No permit shall be
reissued until the matter is fully investigated and the Fire Chief’s office
provided with the findings of any investigation into the matter.
(3) Proof that the permit holder or applicant suffers from a mental or physical
defect that would interfere with the safe handling and use of explosive
materials.
(4) Violation by the applicant or permit holder of any provision of any law or
regulation relating to the explosive materials or proof that false
information was willfully given or a misrepresentation was willfully made
to obtain the permit.
Town of Milford, NH
EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING REGULATIONS
Page 6 of 16
(5) Determination by the Fire Chief that blasting operations pose a hazard to
the health, safety, or property of any person, or, have or will cause an
unnecessary nuisance to any person.
(6) For other good cause.
B. Notification; hearing.
(1) In any case where the Fire Chief determines that it is appropriate to deny a
permit he shall promptly notify the applicant. Said notice will set forth
specific basis for the denial and state that upon written request, a hearing
before the Chief will be held within ten (10) business days after the date of
receiving this request. Following said hearing, the Chief will make a final
determination as to whether to grant or deny the applicant a permit.
(2) In any case where the Fire Chief determines that it may be appropriate to
revoke a permit from a permit holder, he shall promptly notify the
applicant that his permit is temporarily suspended pending a hearing. Said
notice will set forth specific basis for the suspension and anticipated
revocation and state that, upon written request, a hearing before the Chief
will be held within ten (10) business days after receiving the request.
Following said hearing, the Chief will make a final determination as to
whether to revoke the permit.
(3) Within fifteen (15) business days after such hearing, the Fire Chief shall
state his findings and conclusions in writing and transmit a copy to the
applicant and former permit holder.
(4) Upon notice of the revocation or suspension of any permit, the former
permit holder shall immediately surrender to the Fire Chief the permit and
all copies thereof.
5.11.68 Licenses and permits available for public inspection; protection of permits.
A. Licenses or copies thereof to deal in explosive materials shall be kept available
for inspection at each place of operation.
B. A permit to blast or copies thereof shall be kept available for inspection at each
place of operation.
C. Permit holders shall take every reasonable precaution to protect their permits from
loss, theft, defacement, destruction, or unauthorized duplication, and any such
occurrence shall be immediately reported to the Fire Chief.
5.11.69 Recordkeeping and reporting.
A. A holder of a permit to use explosive materials shall make a record of all
operations within the Town of Milford. Such record shall be made available to
the Fire Chief upon request and shall be retained for five years.
B. All persons holding a blasting permit shall make daily records of each blast that at
a minimum contains the information required by the current version of the
Town of Milford, NH
EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING REGULATIONS
Page 7 of 16
Milford Fire Department’s Record Requirements for Blasting, Appendix B.
These records shall be retained for five years.
C. The Fire Chief shall be notified promptly by any permit holder of a change in
business address or telephone number and home address if applicable.
D. The theft or loss of explosive materials shall be reported immediately to the Fire
Chief and to the Milford Police Department.
E. Records made and kept pursuant to regulations promulgated by any federal or
state agency need not be duplicated to satisfy the requirements of this section.
5.11.70 General regulations.
A. The conduct of all blasting operations shall be governed by the New Hampshire
Code of Administrative Rules Chapter Saf-C 1600.
B. In the case of conflicting rules or regulations, the most stringent rule or regulation
shall apply.
C. While explosive materials are being handled or used, smoking shall not be
permitted, and no one near the explosive material shall possess matches, open
flame or fire or flame producing devices, except that the blaster may possess a
device for the specific purpose of igniting safety fuses.
D. No one shall handle explosive materials while under the influence of alcohol,
narcotics, or other substances that may impair one’s judgment.
E. For all blasts, the blaster shall exercise precautions to prevent injury to persons
and damage to property and to prevent earth vibrations and atmospheric sounds
from exceeding regulatory limits.
F. When conducting blasting operations, the holder of the permit shall use
reasonable precautions, including but not limited to, warning signals, flags,
barricades or mats as may be required or appropriate to maximize safety.
G. Blasting operations shall be conducted during daylight hours only. Basting
operations shall not take place on weekends or holidays unless specifically
approved by the Fire Chief.
H. No open faced quarry blasting shall take place on any overcast day. Overcast
weather shall be determined by the Milford Fire Department.
I. No explosive materials shall be intentionally abandoned in any location for any
reason, nor left in such a manner that they may be obtained by children or other
unauthorized persons. All unused explosive materials shall be returned to proper
storage facilities.
Town of Milford, NH
EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING REGULATIONS
Page 8 of 16
J. Explosive materials shall be loaded and used in a manner that is consistent with
any recommendations or instructions of the manufacturer for that explosive
material.
K. The use of blasting pads/mats shall be used for all blasting operations to cover all
exposed bedrock or locations with less than two feet (2’) of covered materials in
the blast area. This does not to apply to quarry blasting operations.
L. The use of soil shall be used to berm all open faces. The soil depth shall be at
least three feet (3’). This does not apply to quarry blasting operations.
M. Transportation, storage and possession of explosive materials in the Town of
Milford shall be governed by the New Hampshire Code of Administrative Rules,
Chapter Saf-C 1600 Explosives.
5.11.80 Notification.
A All property owners and occupants subject to a pre-blast survey shall be notified
in writing by U.S. Certified Mail Return Receipt Requested, , of the pre-blast
survey activity and impending blasting operations by the blasting company or his
duly authorized representative. This notification shall consist of the name of the
blasting company, contact telephone number for the blasting company and
estimated duration of the blasting operation. The intent of this written
notification is to give the property owner/occupants advance notice and
explanation of the pre-blast survey. A list of all property owners and occupants
who receive this notification shall be attached to the blasting permit application
and submitted to the Fire Chief.
B. In the event a pre-blast conference is scheduled the blasting company or his duly
authorized representative shall notify all property owners and occupants of the
date, time and location of the pre-blast conference in writing. This notification
shall be given by U.S. mail at least seven (7) days in advance of the pre-blast
conference and shall be given to all parties subject to a pre-blast survey.
C. Persons intending to conduct blasting operations within the Town of Milford shall
submit written notification of such intent to the Chief of the Police Department.
This notification shall be made no less than 24 hours prior to the estimated start
date of the blasting operation.
D. The blaster shall notify the Milford Fire Department dispatch center (Milford
Area Communication Center) no less than 1 hour prior to each blast. The blaster
shall provide:
1. The name of the company conducting the blasting;
2. The address of the blasting operation;
3. The time of the blasting; and
4. The amount of the explosive material being used.
5.11.90 Preblast surveys.
Town of Milford, NH
EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING REGULATIONS
Page 9 of 16
Prior to conducting any blasting operations, the applicant or their agent shall conduct a preblast
structural inspection condition survey of all existing structures and conditions on the site,
adjacent to the site or in the vicinity of the site at no cost to the property owner or the Town of
Milford. This survey shall extend to the structures or conditions as may be affected by the
applicant’s blasting operations. As a minimum, pre-blast structural inspection condition surveys
shall be performed on all structures, including but not limited to, homes, foundations, driveways,
roadbeds, swimming pools, wells, and mobile homes within 500’ radius of the blasting hole(s).
The permit applicant as well as the owner of the property being surveyed shall sign all such
surveys once completed. If an owner refuses to allow for or sign a pre-blast survey form for
whatever reason the applicant shall note this on the form. The applicant shall make at least three
attempts to notify the owner of the need for such surveys, the last attempt shall include written
notification and name and contact number of a person that they may contact.
A. The pre-blast structural inspection condition survey shall consist of a written
description of the interior and exterior of each of the structures examined.
Descriptions shall locate any existing cracks, damage or other defects and shall
include such information so as to make it possible to determine the effect, if any,
of the blasting operations on the defect. Where significant cracks or damage
exist, or for defects too complicated to describe in words, photographs shall be
taken. A good quality videotape survey with appropriate audio description of
locations, conditions, and defects can be used in lieu of a written form. Prior to
the start of the work, a copy of the pre-blast condition survey shall be submitted to
the Fire Chief and the homeowner or occupant.
B. The individual person conducting the survey shall give written notice to the owner
of the property concerned and tenants of the property. This notice shall state the
dates on which the surveys are to be conducted. Copies of all notices shall also be
provided to the Fire Chief.
5.11.100 Blasting operations.
A. During the time that holes are loaded or are being loaded with explosives, blasting
agents or detonators, the blast site shall be barred to all but those authorized
personnel engaged in the drilling and loading operations or otherwise authorized
to enter the site. The blast site shall be guarded or barricaded and posted.
B. After loading for a blast is completed, and before firing, all excess explosives
materials shall be removed from the area and returned to the proper facilities.
C. As soon as practical after all blast holes are connected, prior to connecting to a
source of initiation, such as a blasting machine, and until the shot has been fired
and subjected to a post blast examination, the blast area shall be guarded or
barricaded and posted or flagged against unauthorized entry.
5.11.101 Warning required.
A. No blast shall be fired until the blaster in charge has made certain that all surplus
explosive materials are in a safe place, all persons and equipment are at a safe
distance or under sufficient cover and that an adequate warning signal has been
given.
Town of Milford, NH
EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING REGULATIONS
Page 10 of 16
B. The blaster shall inform the Fire Chief of the method by which a signal is sounded
and the type of signal prior to starting the blasting operations.
5.11.102 Supervision of operations.
A. Loading and firing shall be performed or supervised only by a person possessing
an appropriate blaster’s permit.
B. The Fire Chief may at his discretion monitor at or near the blast site any blasting
operations conducted within the Town of Milford.
C. If making the required one hour notification (5.12.70 C) the blaster is informed
that the blast will be monitored, the blaster shall delay initiation of the shot until
such time as the Fire Department representative is in position to monitor the blast.
5.11.103 Seismographic monitoring.
A. The Fire Chief may, at his discretion, require that seismographic monitoring be
conducted by the blaster for any or all blasts initiated.
B. The location of seismographic equipment for tests may be determined by the Fire
Chief in coordination with the blaster.
C. The seismographic instrumentation shall, at a minimum, meet the specifications
as outlined by the Milford Fire Department in Appendix A. The Chief has the
option of requiring that the original seismographic strip chart, digital
seismographic data and calibration be provided.
D. All seismographic test results shall be made available in writing to the Fire Chief
upon request. The Chief has the option of requiring that the original
seismographic strip be provided.
5.11.110 Complaints.
A. The Fire Chief shall have the responsibility of coordinating all activities relative
to complaints received concerning blasting operations within the Town of
Milford.
B. Complaints received may be grouped into two categories:
1. Complaints of an informational nature or of a nuisance nature relative to
blasts.
2. Complaints wherein possible damage is claimed as a result of blasting
operations.
C. All complaints shall be submitted in writing to the Fire Chief on the form entitled
“Blasting Complaint Form” attached at the end of these Rules and Regulations.
5.11.111 Nuisances.
A. Complaints of an informational nature or reporting a nuisance factor relating to
blasting operations shall be handled by the Fire Chief. The Chief shall contact the
Town of Milford, NH
EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING REGULATIONS
Page 11 of 16
complainant in a timely manner and attempt to resolve the complaint. In the
event that the complainant is not satisfied after contact by the Chief, the Chief
shall require the blaster or blasting company to contact the complainant directly.
B. If, in the determination of the Fire Chief, sufficient complaints have been receive
in reference to a specific blasting operation, the Fire Chief may direct such actions
as may reduce the possible nuisance factor. Such actions may include, but not be
limited to, reductions in the amount of explosive materials used, change in the
time of the blast initiation and monitoring of blasts by noise level or earth
vibration equipment to determine the extent of existence of the nuisance factor.
5.11.112 Damage complaints.
A. Complaints received by the Fire Department which allege damage to property as a result
of blasting operations shall be reported immediately to the Fire Chief.
B. The complainant shall be contacted directly by the Fire Chief to ascertain
pertinent information relative to the alleged damage.
C. The complainant shall also receive written instructions outlining the procedures to
follow in order to seek compensation for possible damage.
D. The Fire Chief may elect to inspect the alleged damage and is authorized to
document and/or photograph such evidence as he deems necessary.
E. If in the determination of the Fire Chief, the blaster the blasting company or their
insurance representatives are not dealing with the complainant in a satisfactory
manner, the Chief may exercise any option provided under this Code, including
ordering suspension of blasting operations until such time as a satisfactory
resolution is attained.
5.11.120 Manufacture of explosives.
The manufacture of explosives within The Town of Milford shall be prohibited.
These regulations are established by the authority granted to me in accordance with New
Hampshire State Law, RSA 154:18 and shall take effect on July 1, 2007
_________________________
Francis X. Fraitzl, III
Fire Chief
Town of Milford
July 19, 2002 (Pauley)
Amended: February 16, 2007 (Pauley)
Amended: May 1, 2007
Town of Milford, NH
EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING REGULATIONS
Page 12 of 16
MILFORD FIRE DEPARTMENT
EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING REGULATIONS
APPENDIX A
Seismographic Instrumentation Minimum Specifications
The seismographic instrumentation shall at a minimum meet the following specifications:
A. Capability to measure, display and record digitally three mutually perpendicular
components of particle velocity.
1. Frequency response of 8 to 150 Hz
2. 12-bit A/D converter
3. Trigger levels from .02 to .25 ips.
4. Particle velocity range of 0.00 to 9.00 ips.
5. Digital storage capacity of 100 events.
6. Analysis capabilities for OSM alternative criteria.
7. Printing of records on a permanent strip chart.
B. The seismograph shall have been calibrated within 12 months of any blast
monitored by it, and, such calibration shall been performed with standards
traceable to NIST.
Town of Milford, NH
EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING REGULATIONS
Page 13 of 16
MILFORD FIRE DEPARTMENT
EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING REGULATIONS
APPENDIX B
Records Requirements for Blasting
A. The following Records Requirements for Blasting Operations shall be adhered to
by all individuals and companies that perform blasting operations or other
operations utilizing explosives in the Town of Milford. Any violation shall result
in the immediate suspension of the individual’s or company’s blasting privileges
in the Town of Milford.
B. Each holder of a blaster’s permit shall keep a record of explosive material fired or
otherwise disposed of for all operations. The records shall be kept for a minimum
of five years, and they must be made available immediately upon the request of
the Fire Chief. These records shall include:
1. A daily log which shall contain:
a. The manufacturer’s name.
b. The type, size and identification number of the explosives.
2. A record of each blast completed prior to or immediately following
detonation, that includes the following:
a. Name and certificate of competency number of the person setting
off the blast.
b. The date, time and location of the blast.
c. Total amount of explosive detonated.
d. Amount of explosive in each hole.
e. Amount, type and delay time of initiators.
f. Maximum weight of explosive used in each delay period.
g. Diameter of each hole and the distance between the last loaded
explosive and the surface of the hole.
h. Distance between the closest explosive and nearest structure.
i. Type of matting or cover used to contain fragments and to prevent
particles from being discharged in the direction of workers and the
general public.
Town of Milford, NH
EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING REGULATIONS
Page 14 of 16
j. Whether vibration recording instruments were used or the scaled
distance of 50 was followed.
k. Written description or diagram showing the:
1. Location and spacing of loaded holes.
2. Location and amount of each delay period.
3. Location of blast site and distance to:
a. The nearest structures.
b. Overhead wires.
c. Underground pipes or wires.
d. Highways which are close enough to be affected by ground
vibration or air blast.
4. Location of and the distance from the blast site to the vibration recording
instruments if used.
Town of Milford, NH
EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING REGULATIONS
Page 15 of 16
Milford Fire Department
Explosives and Blasting Application
Date
Company requesting permit
Company Address
Company Phone Number
Location of Blasting
Survey Required Yes No
Estimated start date of blasting operations
(at least 5 business days from the Milford Cabinet’s Thursday Edition)
Property Owner
Property Owner Address
Property Owner Phone Number
Blasting must be conducted with compliance to State Law Rules and Regulations, BOCA Basic
Fire Prevention Code 1993, Article 30 and the Town of Milford Rules, Revised 4/1/97.
(Milford Fire Office Use)
Town of Milford, NH
EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING REGULATIONS
Page 16 of 16
BLASTING DAMAGE COMPLAINT FORM
PROPERTY OWNER INFORMATION
Date of Incident: ______ Time of Incident: ______
Location of Incident: ___________________________
(town)
Address of Structure: _____________________ Type of Structure: ______________
(street)
Property Owner’s Name: __________________ Phone Number: ________________
Property Owner’s Address: _________________________________________________
(Address, City, State, Zip)
Complainant’s Name if Different: _______________ Phone Number: _______________
Complaint’s Address if Different: ____________________________________________
(Address, City, State, Zip)
Did the property have a Pre-Blast Survey prior to the start of blasting? YES NO
DESCRIPTION OF ITEM(S) OR AREA OF ALLEGED DAMAGE
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________
This form must be returned to the head of the Fire Department within 30 days of the alleged incident)
CERTIFICATION OF DAMAGE- PLEASE READ AND SIGN
I declare under the penalty of perjury that the statements and information provided herein are
true as of the date of this complaint. I am aware that there are penalties for submitting false
information including possible fines, civil penalties and imprisonment.
Signature of Property Owner: _____________________________ Date Signed: _______
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
TOWN OF MILFORD, NH
INFRASTRUCTURE DESIGN,
CONSTRUCTION & ADMINISTRATION
STANDARDS
April 5, 2010
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 2
Table of Contents
APRIL 5, 2010 ........................................................................................................................... 1
TOWN OF MILFORD TELEPHONE LISTINGS..................................................................... 8
ARTICLE I: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION ADMINISTRATION .................................. 9
1.01 Introduction ............................................................................................................... 9
1.02 Contact Lists ............................................................................................................. 9
1.03 Water and Sewer Regulations/Water Utilities Regulations ................................. 10
1.04 Blasting & Cistern Specifications and Information ............................................. 10
1.05 Website .................................................................................................................... 10
1.06 As-Builts .................................................................................................................. 10
1.07 Approved Plans ....................................................................................................... 10
1.08 Stormwater Permit .................................................................................................. 10
1.09 Project Completion Surety ..................................................................................... 11
1.010 Construction Monitoring ........................................................................................ 11
1.011 Construction Monitoring Inspection Fees ............................................................ 12
1.012 Erosion Control Inspection Fees ........................................................................... 12
1.013 Street Opening Permit ............................................................................................ 12
1.014 Driveway Permit ...................................................................................................... 13
1.015 Roadway Construction ........................................................................................... 13
1.016 Preconstruction Meeting ........................................................................................ 14
1.017 Quality of Work ....................................................................................................... 14
1.018 Roadway Inspections ............................................................................................. 15
1.019 Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Regulations .............................. 15
1.020 Notice of Intent ........................................................................................................ 15
1.021 Certificate of Occupancy ........................................................................................ 15
1.022 Recommendation of Acceptance and Certificate of Final Completion .............. 16
1.023 Waivers and Appeals .............................................................................................. 16
ARTICLE II: ROADWAY AND TRENCHING CONSTRUCTION ................................ 17
2.01 GENERAL CONSTRUCTION .................................................................................. 17
2.01.1 Description of Work ............................................................................................... 17
2.01.2 References and Standards .................................................................................... 17
2.01.3 Work Sequence ..................................................................................................... 17
2.01.4 Use of Premises .................................................................................................... 18
2.01.5 Execution ............................................................................................................... 18
2.02 TRAFFIC CONTROL ................................................................................................ 18
2.02.1 Requirements ........................................................................................................ 18
2.02.2 Products ................................................................................................................ 18
2.02.3 Permits .................................................................................................................. 18
2.02.4 Removal ................................................................................................................ 18
2.03 CLEARING AND GRUBBING .................................................................................. 19
2.03.1 General .................................................................................................................. 19
2.03.2 Regulatory Requirements ...................................................................................... 19
2.03.3 Protection .............................................................................................................. 19
2.03.4 Clearing and Grubbing .......................................................................................... 19
2.03.5 Pruning Trees ........................................................................................................ 20
2.03.6 Removal ................................................................................................................ 20
2.04 DEWATERING ......................................................................................................... 20
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 3
2.04.1 System Performance Requirements ..................................................................... 20
2.04.2 Additional Provisions ............................................................................................. 21
2.04.3 Execution ............................................................................................................... 21
2.04.4 Job Conditions ....................................................................................................... 22
2.05 EXCAVATION SUPPORT ........................................................................................ 22
2.05.1 Work Included ....................................................................................................... 22
2.05.2 Reference Standards ............................................................................................ 22
2.05.3 System Description ............................................................................................... 22
2.05.4 Materials ................................................................................................................ 22
2.05.5 Execution ............................................................................................................... 23
2.05.6 Sheeting Left-In-Place ........................................................................................... 23
2.06 SITE PREPARATION .............................................................................................. 23
2.06.1 Work Included ....................................................................................................... 23
2.06.2 Preparation ............................................................................................................ 24
2.06.3 Topsoil Excavation ................................................................................................ 24
2.06.4 Subsoil Excavation ................................................................................................ 24
2.06.5 Tolerances ............................................................................................................. 25
2.07 LEDGE AND BOULDER EXCAVATION.................................................................. 25
2.07.1 Work Included ....................................................................................................... 25
2.07.2 Definitions .............................................................................................................. 25
2.07.3 Ledge and Boulder Blasting Submittal Requirements ........................................... 25
2.07.4 Limits of Ledge and Boulder Excavation ............................................................... 25
2.07.5 Notification ............................................................................................................. 26
2.07.6 Blasting .................................................................................................................. 26
2.07.7 Disposal and Removal of Ledge and Boulders ..................................................... 26
2.07.8 Backfilling Ledge and Boulder Excavations .......................................................... 26
2.08 EXCAVATING, BACKFILLING AND COMPACTING .............................................. 26
2.08.1 Work Included ....................................................................................................... 26
2.08.2 Reference Standards ............................................................................................ 27
2.08.3 Samples ................................................................................................................ 27
2.08.4 Testing ................................................................................................................... 27
2.08.5 Project Record Documents ................................................................................... 27
2.08.6 Materials - General ................................................................................................ 27
2.08.7 Filter Fabric ........................................................................................................... 30
2.08.8 Preparation of Site ................................................................................................. 30
2.08.9 Protection .............................................................................................................. 30
2.08.10 Topsoil Excavation ............................................................................................. 30
2.08.11 Pavement Excavation ........................................................................................ 31
2.08.12 Subsoil Excavation ............................................................................................ 31
2.08.13 Backfilling Preparation ....................................................................................... 32
2.08.14 Bedding And Backfilling ..................................................................................... 32
2.08.15 Backfilling Tolerances ........................................................................................ 33
2.08.16 Compaction ........................................................................................................ 33
2.08.17 Grading .............................................................................................................. 33
2.08.18 Field Quality Control .......................................................................................... 34
2.08.19 Schedule Of Bedding, Backfill And Compaction ................................................ 34
2.09 SLOPE PROTECTION AND EROSION CONTROL ................................................ 36
2.09.1 Requirements ........................................................................................................ 36
2.09.2 Reference Standards ............................................................................................ 36
2.09.3 Project Conditions ................................................................................................. 37
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 4
2.09.4 Material Requirements .......................................................................................... 37
2.09.5 General Construction Sequence To Minimize Erosion .......................................... 38
2.09.6 Seeding and Mulching ........................................................................................... 38
2.09.7 Straw Bale Dikes ................................................................................................... 39
2.09.8 Damage And Repair .............................................................................................. 39
2.010 ROADWAY STABILIZATION FABRIC .................................................................... 39
2.010.1 Work Included .................................................................................................... 39
2.010.2 Submittals .......................................................................................................... 39
2.010.3 Manufacturer’s Warranty ................................................................................... 39
2.010.4 Developer’s Guarantee ...................................................................................... 40
2.010.5 Materials ............................................................................................................ 40
2.010.6 Storage .............................................................................................................. 40
2.010.7 Handling and Placement of Stabilization Fabric ................................................ 41
2.011 CURBING ................................................................................................................. 41
2.011.1 Description ......................................................................................................... 41
2.011.2 Materials ............................................................................................................ 41
2.011.3 Construction Requirements ............................................................................... 41
2.012 BITUMINOUS CONCRETE PAVING ....................................................................... 43
2.012.1 Work Included .................................................................................................... 43
2.012.2 Reference Standards ......................................................................................... 43
2.012.3 Submittals .......................................................................................................... 44
2.012.4 Materials ............................................................................................................ 44
2.012.5 General Execution Requirements ...................................................................... 44
2.012.6 Compaction Testing ........................................................................................... 45
2.012.7 Equipment .......................................................................................................... 45
2.012.8 Execution of Paving ........................................................................................... 45
2.012.9 Temporary Trench Patch ................................................................................... 46
2.012.10 Permanent Trench Patch ................................................................................... 47
2.012.11 Replacement of Course ..................................................................................... 47
2.012.12 Cleanup ............................................................................................................. 47
2.012.13 Overlay and New Bituminous Pavement For Roads.......................................... 48
2.012.14 Approvals ........................................................................................................... 48
2.013 SUBSURFACE DRAINAGE SYSTEMS ................................................................... 48
2.013.1 Work Included .................................................................................................... 48
2.013.2 Reference Standards ......................................................................................... 48
2.013.3 Pipe Protection .................................................................................................. 49
2.013.4 Acceptable Manufacturers ................................................................................. 49
2.013.5 Pipe Material ...................................................................................................... 49
2.013.6 Fabric ................................................................................................................. 49
2.013.7 Coarse Filter Aggregate ..................................................................................... 49
2.013.8 Installation .......................................................................................................... 50
2.014 STORM DRAINS ...................................................................................................... 50
2.014.1 Work Included .................................................................................................... 50
2.014.2 Reference Standards ......................................................................................... 50
2.014.3 Submittals .......................................................................................................... 51
2.014.4 Quality Control ................................................................................................... 51
2.014.5 General Products ............................................................................................... 51
2.014.6 Materials ............................................................................................................ 51
2.014.7 Handling Pipe .................................................................................................... 52
2.014.8 Control Of Alignment and Grade ....................................................................... 52
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 5
2.014.9 Excavating Trench and Installing Pipe ............................................................... 53
2.014.10 Jointing Pipe ...................................................................................................... 53
2.015 STEEL BEAM GUARDRAIL .................................................................................... 54
2.015.1 Work Included .................................................................................................... 54
2.015.2 Reference Standards ......................................................................................... 54
2.015.3 Materials ............................................................................................................ 54
2.016 RESTORATION OF GROWTH - CLASS A (LAWN) ............................................... 55
2.016.1 Reference Standards ......................................................................................... 55
2.016.2 Work Included .................................................................................................... 55
2.016.3 Product Delivery and Storage ............................................................................ 56
2.016.4 Materials ............................................................................................................ 56
2.016.5 Execution of Growth Restoration ....................................................................... 57
2.016.6 Application Rates ............................................................................................... 58
2.016.7 Maintenance ...................................................................................................... 58
2.017 RESTORATION OF GROWTH - CLASS B (FIELD) ................................................ 58
2.017.1 Reference Standards ......................................................................................... 58
2.017.2 Work Included .................................................................................................... 58
2.017.3 Product Delivery and Storage ............................................................................ 59
2.017.4 Materials ............................................................................................................ 59
2.017.5 General Execution ............................................................................................. 60
2.017.6 Application Rates ............................................................................................... 61
2.017.7 Maintenance ...................................................................................................... 62
2.018 TREES AND SHRUBS ............................................................................................. 62
2.018.1 Work Included .................................................................................................... 62
2.018.2 Reference Standards ......................................................................................... 62
2.018.3 Delivery, Storage, and Handling ........................................................................ 62
2.018.4 Warranty ............................................................................................................ 63
2.018.5 Materials ............................................................................................................ 63
2.018.6 Preparation ........................................................................................................ 64
2.018.7 Installation .......................................................................................................... 64
2.018.8 Plant Support and Wrapping .............................................................................. 65
2.018.9 Maintenance Service ......................................................................................... 65
2.019 CAST-IN-PLACE CONCRETE ................................................................................. 66
2.019.1 Work Included .................................................................................................... 66
2.019.2 Reference Standards ......................................................................................... 66
2.019.3 Submittals .......................................................................................................... 66
2.019.4 Quality Assurance .............................................................................................. 66
2.019.5 Scheduling ......................................................................................................... 66
2.019.6 Cement .............................................................................................................. 67
2.019.7 Aggregates ........................................................................................................ 67
2.019.8 Admixtures ......................................................................................................... 67
2.019.9 Concrete ............................................................................................................ 67
2.019.10 Reinforcing ......................................................................................................... 67
2.019.11 Forms And Accessories ..................................................................................... 67
2.019.12 General Execution ............................................................................................. 68
2.019.13 Reinforcing ......................................................................................................... 68
2.019.14 Inspection .......................................................................................................... 69
2.019.15 Concrete Mixing and Placement ........................................................................ 69
2.019.16 Concrete Testing ............................................................................................... 70
2.019.17 Curing ................................................................................................................ 70
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 6
2.019.18 Removal of Forms ............................................................................................. 70
2.019.19 Finishing Concrete ............................................................................................. 71
2.019.20 Protection ........................................................................................................... 71
2.020 PRECAST CONCRETE CATCH BASINS................................................................ 71
2.020.1 Work Included .................................................................................................... 71
2.020.2 Reference Standards ......................................................................................... 71
2.020.3 Materials and Design ......................................................................................... 72
2.020.4 Installation .......................................................................................................... 72
2.021 CASTINGS ............................................................................................................... 73
2.021.1 Work Included .................................................................................................... 73
2.021.2 Reference Standards ......................................................................................... 73
2.021.3 Quality Control Inspection .................................................................................. 73
2.021.4 Acceptable Manufacturers ................................................................................. 73
2.021.5 General Products .............................................................................................. 73
2.021.6 Manhole Frames and Covers ............................................................................ 74
2.021.7 Polyliners ........................................................................................................... 74
2.021.8 Catch Basin Frames and Grates ....................................................................... 74
2.021.9 Setting Frames, Covers and Grates .................................................................. 74
APPENDIX I: ADMINISTRATIVE DOCUMENTS................................................................. 75
A. Application For Start of Construction .......................................................................
B. Subdivision/Site Plan Improvements Guarantee Worksheet ..................................
C. DPW Construction Monitoring Approach .................................................................
D. Application/Permit For Street Opening .....................................................................
E. Stormwater Permit and Checklist ..............................................................................
F. Driveway Permit Application .....................................................................................
G. Inspection Fee Agreement Form ...............................................................................
H. Release of Inspection Fee ..........................................................................................
I. Cash Escrow Agreement Form ..................................................................................
J. Bond/Letter of Credit Agreement Form ....................................................................
K. Release of Security or Escrow Form ........................................................................
APPENDIX II: CONSTRUCTION DESIGN DETAILS ........................................................ 100
A. Catch Basin .................................................................................................................
B. Precast Concrete Catch Basin with Oil Separator ...................................................
C. Catch Basin/Drop Inlet ...............................................................................................
D. Catch Basin Liner .......................................................................................................
E. Torrent Frame and Grate ............................................................................................
F. Reinforced Concrete Headwall ..................................................................................
G. Trench Section For Drainage Pipe ............................................................................
H. Roadway Section – Granite Curb ..............................................................................
I. Roadway Section – Open Drainage ...........................................................................
J. Roadway Section – Closed Drainage ........................................................................
K. Circular Cul-De-Sac ....................................................................................................
L. Offset Cul-De-Sac .......................................................................................................
M. Hammerhead Turn-Around ........................................................................................
N. Tomahawk Turn-Around ............................................................................................
O. Utility Roadway Cross Section ..................................................................................
P. Roadway Delineation ..................................................................................................
Q. Ironwood Guardrail .....................................................................................................
R. Pavement Restoration ................................................................................................
APPENDIX III: ROADWAY STANDARDS CHARTS ......................................................... 119
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 7
APPENDIX IV: SEED MIXTURES – NH STORMWATER MANUAL ................................. 121
APPENDIX V: BLASTING & EXPLOSIVE REGULATIONS ............................................. 123
APPENDIX VI: FIRE CISTERN REQUIREMENTS ............................................................ 140
APPENDIX VII: RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAY REGULATIONS .......................................... 148
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 8
TOWN OF MILFORD TELEPHONE LISTINGS
Town of Milford Telephone Listings
Department
Telephone
# Fax #
Administration Department 249-0600 673-2273
Ambulance Service 249-0610 673-4292
Assessing Department 249-0615 673-2273
Building & Code Enforcement Department 249-0620 673-2273
Community Media 249-0670 673-2273
Conservation Commission 249-0628 673-2273
Emergency Management 249-0680 673-2273
Finance Department 249-0640 673-2273
Fire Department 249-0680 673-0657
Human Resources 249-0605 673-2273
Information Technology 249-0612 673-2273
Library 673-2408 672-6064
MACC Base 673-1414 N/A
Planning Board 249-0620 673-2273
Planning Department 249-0620 673-2273
Police Department 249-0630 672-6025
Public Works Department Office 673-1662 673-2206
Public Works Garage 673-1770 N/A
Recreation Department Office 249-0625 673-2273
Selectman's Office 249-0600 673-2273
Tax Collector 249-0655 673-2273
Town Clerk 249-0650 673-2273
Transfer Station Office 673-8939 N/A
Welfare Department 673-3735 672-1077
Water Utilities Department 249-0660 672-1071
Water Office 249-0667 672-1071
Sewer Office 249-0660 672-1071
Zoning Board of Adjustment 249-0620 673-2273
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 9
ARTICLE I: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION ADMINISTRATION
1.01 INTRODUCTION
The specifications herein are compiled with the intent of providing the user design and
construction specifications for work in the Town of Milford, NH. The specifications in this
document include those for roadway, drainage, utilities and fire cistern construction in the Town.
Questions should be directed as follows:
Questions regarding:
Road Construction
Sewer Works
Fire Cisterns
Water Distributions Systems
Code Enforcement/Building inspections
Traffic Control
Subdivisions/Site Plans
Direct Questions to:
Director of Public Works
Water Utilities Superintendent
Fire Prevention Officer
Water Utilities Superintendent
Code Enforcement/Building Inspector
Police Department and/or NH DOT
Community Development Department
1.02 CONTACT LISTS
Listed below are Town Department contact names and telephone numbers. This contact list will
be issued to all contractors and developers performing construction work in the Town of Milford.
At the preconstruction meeting, the contractor, developer and/or owner shall provide a complete
contact list of responsible personnel and emergency contact personnel with addresses, cell
phone numbers, office telephone and fax numbers and home phone and fax numbers.
General Contacts are as follows:
Milford Department of Public Works
(DPW)
Contact: Director of Public Works
289 South Street
Milford, NH 03055-3737
Phone: 673-1662
Fax: 673-2206
Milford Fire Department
Contact: Fire Prevention Officer
39 School Street
Milford, NH 03055
Phone: 249-0680
Fax: 672-6025
Milford Police Department
Contact: Police Chief
19 Garden Street
Milford, NH 03055
Phone: 249-0630
Fax: 673-0625
Milford Water Utilities: Water distribution
systems and sewer works
Contact: Superintendent of Water Utilities
564 Nashua Street
Milford, NH 03055
Phone: 249-0660
Fax: 672-1071
Milford Community Development
Department: Planning/GIS, Code
Enforcement, Building Inspections, Zoning
and Health
Contact: Director of Community
Development
Milford Town Hall
1 Union Square
Milford, NH 03055
Phone: 249-0620
Fax: 673-2273
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 10
NHDOT, District 5
Driveways and utilities in the state highway
or ROW
Contact: District Engineer
16 East Point Drive
Bedford, NH03110
Phone: 666-3336
1.03 WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS/WATER UTILITIES REGULATIONS
This document does not include the Water Department Rules and Regulations or the Sewer
Use Ordinance. Said regulations and construction specifications must be obtained from the
Milford Water Utilities Department.
1.04 BLASTING & CISTERN SPECIFICATIONS AND INFORMATION
This document includes the Town of Milford Blasting Regulations and Milford Fire Department
Fire Cistern Requirements as appendices. Any addition information or questions should be
obtained from the Milford Fire Department.
1.05 WEBSITE
Additional Town information may be obtained from the Town web site located at
www.milford.nh.gov
1.06 AS-BUILTS
At the completion of the work, the contractor, developer, owner and/or engineer shall submit a
set of working drawings (red-lines) and as-built drawings to all applicable departments, as
determined by Department of Public Works (DPW) Director. The as-built drawings shall indicate
any field adjustments, all buried structures, utilities and services. The as-built drawings shall be
submitted to the Community Development Department in triplicate hard copy, 24" x 36" size,
and electronically in PDF and AutoCad 2000 or most recent version.
1.07 APPROVED PLANS
Prior to the start of construction, the contractor, developer and/or engineer must provide (6) six
sets of approved plans. Site plans and subdivisions plans must be signed by the Planning
Board. Facility improvement plans must be approved by the DPW Director. An approved set of
plans, signed by the Planning Board or DPW Director, as appropriate, shall be on-site at all
times.
During the construction of the project, all changes relating to off-site improvements roadway
construction and facilities construction in the Town right-of-way (ROW) or affecting the function
of facilities within the Town ROW, must be submitted in writing by the project design engineer
for review and approval by either the Community Development Director, or DPW or designated
representative, as appropriate.
1.08 STORMWATER PERMIT
Prior to the start of construction of any project in a proposed or existing Town roadway or
ROW, the contractor, developer and/or owner is required to submit an application for a
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 11
Stormwater Permit, to Community Development for approval by a Code Enforcement Officer.
This document must be completed prior to the Preconstruction Meeting.
1.09 PROJECT COMPLETION SURETY
All construction projects that include roadway or utility work within a Town ROW or off-site
improvements must have an acceptable completion surety submitted to the Community
Development and/or Public Works Department, as applicable. An estimate of any proposed
construction work requiring completion surety must be also submitted with the surety, utilizing
the Completion Surety Estimate form included in the Administrative Documents section of this
document.
As work is completed on a project, the party named on the completion surety may request a
reduction of the surety amount to the Community Development and/or Public Works
Department, as applicable. The request must be in writing. The request must clearly show the
percentages and costs of items completed compared to the original construction cost estimate.
The party requesting the reduction in surety is responsible for all costs incurred by the Town to
review the reduction.
1.010 CONSTRUCTION MONITORING
Construction monitoring is required on all construction projects, including:
A. Proposed Town roads
B. Proposed private roads
C. Onsite improvements, including utilities or work associated with utilities
D. All off-site improvements
E. All buried utilities
The Town’s intent is to have all public and private utility installation work monitored and
inspected prior to backfilling. Installation of utilities on private property will be inspected with 24
hours advance notice by the Community Development or Public Works Department, as
appropriate. The Town reserves the right to utilize a consultant for this work, if determined
necessary by the Town. The project contractor, developer and/or owner will be responsible for
consultant construction monitoring costs incurred by the Town.
All construction activity within the Town’s roadway, ROW or related easements shall have
construction monitoring performed by the DPW or designated representative. Construction
monitoring shall be required in accordance with the construction monitoring approach included
in the Administrative Documents, Appendix I.
The developer, contractor, owner or utility shall provide a complete construction schedule,
including quantities, to DPW. DPW shall then provide an estimate of construction monitoring
costs based on the schedule supplied by the developer, contractor, owner or utility. The
developer, contractor, owner or utility is responsible for all construction monitoring and
administration costs incurred by the Town at the noted rates.
The DPW or designated representative, shall be notified at least two (2) working days prior to
the requested time of inspection. The scheduled inspection time shall be confirmed by the
inspector. The requirements of this notification are as follows:
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 12
• Two (2) working days to not include holidays and weekends.
• Inspectors will be available between 7:00 am and 5:00 pm Monday through Friday.
• No inspections will be made on weekends or holidays, except as approved by the DPW
Director.
• Cancellation of scheduled inspection: In cases where the DPW or a designated
representative, is not notified that an inspector’s services are not required by 12:00 pm
(noon) the day prior to the requested inspection, a minimum charge of four (4) hours will
be assessed to the requesting person or company.
1.011 CONSTRUCTION MONITORING INSPECTION FEES
Prior to the start of construction for a project required to have construction monitoring performed
by a consultant of the Town, the developer, owner, contractor or utility company must provide
cash deposits to pay for construction monitoring. The funds shall be placed in an account with
the Department of Public Works. The DPW Director shall determine the required initial deposit
amount for the Inspection Fee account, based on a construction monitoring estimate. After the
initial deposit, the account must be replenished with funds when the account balance falls below
$5,000, within 7-days of notice by the DPW.
Any funds unused in the inspection fee account shall be returned to the depositor upon
submittal and approval by DPW of a Request for Release of Inspection Fee form, to process a
refund of balance.
1.012 EROSION CONTROL INSPECTION FEES
The Departments of Public Works and Community Development reserve the right to require any
contractor, developer, owner and/or utility company to provide a cash deposit to be placed in an
Inspection Fee account with the Town, which is a surety for placement and maintenance of
erosion control measures on any and all projects. The intended use of the Inspection Fee funds
will be to pay for the Town to perform, or hire a contractor to perform, placement of and
maintenance of erosion control measures not effectively performed on a project by the
responsible contractor, developer, owner and/or utility company, after notification of a deficiency
by Code Enforcement, DPW Director or designated agent.
The existence and use of this Inspection Fee account in no way relieves the contractor,
developer, owner and/or utility company of their responsibilities relating to the proper
implementation of effective erosion control requirements, applicable permits, and local, state
and federal regulations.
1.013 STREET OPENING PERMIT
An approved Street Opening Permit by DPW is required for all construction activity proposed in
a Town roadway, ROW or easement. The permit must be completed and submitted to the
Town with the required form of surety one week in advance of any construction activity.
The following are prerequisite conditions to obtaining a Street Opening Permit:
A. Call Dig Safe (1-888-DIG-SAFE or 1-888-344-7233).
B. Posting of the appropriate surety(s).
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 13
C. Written notice to, and consent of, authorities with underground structures/utilities in the
vicinity of the work.
D. Approval by Police Department for traffic control and warning devices, and a suitable
traffic maintenance plan as necessary.
E. Payment of the permit fee.
F. Certificates of insurance and contact persons for ALL contractors working in the street
ROW.
G. Inspection and testing fees for installation and restoration (see 1.010 CONSTRUCTION
MONITORING for amount determination process).
H. Plan of Street Opening project.
No excavation or other construction will be allowed in the Town roadway, ROW or easement
until a Roadway Opening Permit has been issued.
Note: No trenching is allowed in existing roadways after November 1st or before April 15th unless
prior approval is given by the DPW Director.
No excavation, open trenches or other construction are allowed in a Town ROW before 7:00 am
and after 5:00 pm, or dusk, whichever is earlier, at the discretion of the DPW Director.
1.014 DRIVEWAY PERMIT
An approved Driveway Permit by the DPW, is required for all proposed driveways prior to
construction and issuance of Building Permit. Residential driveways must comply with the
Residential Driveway Permit Regulations (See Appendix VII).
All driveways must be field inspected and approved by the DPW prior to issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy (CO).
1.015 ROADWAY CONSTRUCTION
On all roads, gravel base must be tested for compaction and meet the minimum compaction
rate as set by the NH DOT and reported to the Town prior to paving. All buried utilities and
drainage infrastructure must be in place prior to placement of the roadway gravels.
For new roadways, final pavement will not be allowed until the binder course has been in place
for one winter season.
No permanent paving will be allowed on existing Town roads or new roadways after November
1 and prior to April 15. If trenching is necessary and approved by the DPW Director, temporary
hot bituminous pavement is required.
Construction shall not be permitted on weekends or holidays within 1,000 ft of residential
dwellings without approval from the DPW Director. Construction hours shall be limited to 7:00
am to 5:00 pm within 1,000 ft of residential dwellings unless otherwise determined by the
Planning Board at the time of approval, or by DPW Director. No equipment may be started or
operated outside the designated construction hours. Blasting shall take place in accordance
with the Fire Department’s Blasting Regulations (See Appendix V).
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 14
1.016 PRECONSTRUCTION MEETING
The Public Works and Community Development Departments reserve the right to require a
preconstruction meeting for all proposed construction projects that will include construction
activity in a proposed or existing Town ROW, or will affect the Town’s ROW or municipal
facilities.
Representatives from each of the following departments and stakeholder groups attend the
preconstruction meeting, as applicable:
• Public Works
• Water Utilities
• Construction Monitoring Consultant
• Code Enforcement Department
• Planning Department
• Police Department
• Fire Department
• Ambulance Department
• Owner/Applicant/Developer
• Design Engineer
• Contractor(s)
• Public Utilities (Cable, Power, Tel.
Co., Gas)
The following agenda items shall be discussed:
A. Introductions
B. Approved plans – overview by design engineer
C. Design changes
D. Construction schedule/approach
E. Erosion control
F. Fire Department concerns
G. Code Enforcement Department concerns
H. DPW concerns
I. Water Utilities concerns
J. Planning Department concerns
K. Police Department concerns
L. Ambulance Department concerns
M. Permits such as but not limited to:
a. Blasting
b. NOI for Stormwater Discharge Relating to Construction Activity
c. Road Opening Permit
d. Building Permit
e. Stormwater Permit
N. Shop drawings and certification
O. Construction monitoring
P. Completion bond
Q. Construction monitoring inspection fee account and charges
R. Erosion control inspection fee account
1.017 QUALITY OF WORK
All work shall comply with Town ordinances and regulations, and material installed to
manufacturer specifications and accepted engineering practices.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 15
1.018 ROADWAY INSPECTIONS
A daily roadway inspection sheet shall be required by the DPWfor each project or phase of a
project. One copy shall be maintained by the contractor, developer and/or owner and one copy
by the DPW or designated representative. As work is completed, the contractor, developer
and/or owner must request sign-off of listed inspection milestone items by the DPW or
designated representative.
1.019 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION CONTROL REGULATIONS
The most current version of the Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Regulations is
available at the Community Development office or online at the Planning Department’s website
www.milford.nh.gov.
1.020 NOTICE OF INTENT
In accordance with the federal Notice of Intent (NOI) for Stormwater Discharges Relating to
Construction Activity regulation, the required documentation must be submitted to the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and NH DES for all construction projects that will affect
more than one acre of land. Confirmation of acceptance of an NOI for the project must be
provided to the Town at the preconstruction meeting.
1.021 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
When the contractor, developer and/or owner for a project wishes to obtain Certificates of
Occupancy for residences/buildings on any of the project roadways, notification shall be made
to the Department of Community Development, Code Enforcement Office. The following must
be complete on the roadway prior to issuance of the certificate:
A. All buried utilities in place, tested and operational, with sign-off by private utilities.
B. Required fire protection systems are in place and operationally approved by the Fire
Department.
C. Roadway engineering inspection(s) daily log is up-to-date.
D. The binder pavement is in place for the entire roadway or phased roadway(s) servicing
occupancy.
E. The binder pavement is in place for any sidewalk(s) servicing occupancy.
F. Required off-site improvements are complete or sufficient bond in place.
G. The drainage system is clean and functioning as intended.
H. The site and/or roadway right-of-way (ROW), including slopes, is stabilized and proper
erosion control measures are in place.
I. Protective measures, such as guardrails, are in place.
J. The roadway surface is clean and clear of all debris, construction materials, equipment,
etc.
K. Street signs, including the New Road Constructions sign for future public roadways and
Stop signs are in place.
L. Finish wear course of pavement and markings in place.
M. ROW property bounds are in place (this may be deferred until time of road acceptance),
and all property pins outside of ROW.
N. The roadway surface up to occupied structure is clean and clear of all debris and
obstruction such as construction materials, equipment, storage boxes, etc.
O. All necessary bonding in place.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 16
1.022 RECOMMENDATION OF ACCEPTANCE AND CERTIFICATE OF FINAL
COMPLETION
When the construction of new Town roadways and off-site improvements of Town facilities is
considered complete, it is required that the contractor, developer and/or owner to apply for
acceptance of the roadway and off-site improvements by the Town. The request shall be made
through the Community Development Department. Once the request has been made DPW will
schedule a final inspection. If all related work and improvements are acceptable to the DPW
Director or designated representative, a recommendation for acceptance of the work will be
included in the roadway and off-site improvements acceptance application. This applications is
signed off by and transmitted from the Community Development Department to the Board of
Selectmen for final approval.
1.023 WAIVERS AND APPEALS
1.021.1 WAIVERS
When the contractor, developer and/or owner for a project seeks a waiver of any portion of
these regulations a waiver request should be made in writing and submitted as follows:
A. During the Planning Board approval process all requested waivers must be submitted to
the Planning Board on a Waiver Request Form available through the Planning
Department website at www.milford.nh.gov or through the Community Development
office.
B. After final plans have been approved, all waivers shall be requested in writing and
submitted to both the DPW Director and the Director of Community Development for
approval.
a. The waiver request shall state the numbered section of this document to be waived
and the reasons why the waiver is needed.
b. The waiver request shall be date stamped once received.
c. The directors of Public Works and Community Development have 10 business days
to jointly render a decision on the waiver request.
d. At the end of the 10 business day period the applicant may apply to the Board of
Selectmen for relief if no decision has been made. The Board of Selectmen will
render a decision within 10 business of receipt of the non-acted on waiver request.
e. The 10 business day timeline may be extended, with permission from the applicant if
outstanding weather, design or other circumstances require more time for the
decision to be rendered.
1.021.2 APPEALS
When the contractor, developer and/or owner for a project wishes to appeal a decision made by
the Community Development Director, or the DPW Director or designated representative, an
appeal request shall be submitted in writing, stating the specific decision to be appealed and
reasons why to the Directors of Community Development or Public Works, as appropriate.
The Director the appeal was filled with will have 10 business days to render a decision on the
appeal. At the end of the 10 business day period if no decision has been made, the applicant
may apply to the Board of Selectmen for a decision. The Board of Selectmen will render a
decision within 10 business days of receipt of the appeal request. The 10 business day timeline
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 17
may be extended, with permission from the applicant if outstanding weather, design or other
circumstances require more time for the decision to be rendered.
ARTICLE II: ROADWAY AND TRENCHING CONSTRUCTION
2.01 GENERAL CONSTRUCTION
2.01.1 DESCRIPTION OF WORK
Work in this section comprises general construction, including but not limited to, excavation,
backfilling, grading, seeding, paving, construction of storm drain systems and guard rails.
2.01.2 REFERENCES AND STANDARDS
A. No work shall begin prior to approval of proposed plans by the DPW Director or Town of
Milford Planning Board, as appropriate, and a preconstruction meeting is held, as
necessary.
B. The contractor, developer and/or owner is responsible for obtaining any approvals or
permits from other federal, State or local authorities, as applicable.
C. The State of New Hampshire Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction, as amended latest edition, shall be used as the standard
for any work not addressed in these specifications.
D. All work shall conform to OSHA approved practices.
E. The contractor, developer and/or owner is responsible for contacting Dig-Safe (1-888-
DIG-SAFE or 1-888-344-7233).
2.01.3 WORK SEQUENCE
The Contractor, developer and/or owner shall:
A. Coordinate construction schedule and performance with the DPW or designated
representative during construction.
B. Not close off usage of or access to existing facilities and roadways.
C. Limit work to between the hours of 7:00 am and 5:00 pm. No work shall be permitted on
weekends or holidays, unless days and times are specified otherwise on approved plans
or by the DPW Director. Start of construction shall be defined as starting of any
equipment at the construction site.
D. Be allowed blasting in accordance with the Town of Milford Blasting Regulations and
Permit (see Appendix V).
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 18
2.01.4 USE OF PREMISES
A. Contractor, developer and/or owner shall limit use of premises work, storage, and for
access, to allow:
1. Normal public use of public property, rights-of-way, etc.
2. Access to private property.
B. Coordinate use of premises under direction of the DPW Director or designated
representative.
C. Assume full responsibility for protection and safekeeping of products under this project.
2.01.5 EXECUTION
Throughout the construction of any roadway project in the Town of Milford, the DPW has the
authority to alter any aspect of the road construction which it deems necessary for the proper
completion of that roadway. Major deviations from a Planning Board approved plan may require
Planning Board approval per the Community Development Director.
2.02 TRAFFIC CONTROL
2.02.1 REQUIREMENTS
The contractor, developer and/or owner shall:
Provide, erect, and maintain all necessary barricades, lighting, signals, signs, traffic control
devices, and employ flagging personnel and uniformed officers as required for the protection of
the work and safety of the public. All work shall be done in strict accordance with the
requirements of the governing authority and be in place prior to the commencement of
construction.
The contractor’s methods for routing of traffic during construction shall be presented to the
Police Chief, coordinated with Fire, Ambulance and MACC Base, and once approved, submitted
to the DPW Director. If necessary, the approved methods for routing of traffic shall be submitted
to the NH DOT. Plans shall be reviewed at the preconstruction meeting.
2.02.2 PRODUCTS
All barricades, warning signs, lights, temporary signals, and other protective devices must be in
conformance with NHDOT and Town Standards, and with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control
Devices for Streets and Highways published by the U.S. Government Printing Office.
2.02.3 PERMITS
All work in, upon, under, or across roadways, ROWs and public easements shall be accordance
with the Road Opening Permit, Driveway Permit and approved plans. The contractor shall work
with the owner to obtain the required permits from the Departments of Public Works and
Community Development, and if necessary NH DOT.
2.02.4 REMOVAL
Upon completion of the work, the contractor shall remove and properly dispose of all remaining
temporary and construction materials required under this Section.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 19
All areas and utilities shall be restored to original or specified conditions at the completion of the
work.
2.03 CLEARING AND GRUBBING
2.03.1 GENERAL
The contractor, developer and/or owner shall:
A. Delineate boundaries of project areas to be cleared onsite with tree markings,
construction fencing, snow fencing or silt fencing as appropriate to avoid unnecessary
cutting or removal. Care should be taken to protect root systems from damage due to
excavation or compaction. Individual trees, rock formations and other landscape features
to be retained should also be clearly marked and bounded onsite.
B. Clear project area of plant life and grass.
C. Remove root systems of trees and shrubs in project area to be cleared.
D. Prune trees to remain where branches or roots will interfere with construction operations.
E. Remove debris.
2.03.2 REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS
Contractor, developer and/or owner shall comply with all applicable local, State and federal
regulations for disposal of debris. Storage and disposal of debris onsite shall conform to
approved plans. Burning of debris onsite is prohibited per state statue.
2.03.3 PROTECTION
Contractor, developer and/or owner shall:
A. Protect plant growth and features to remain from damage, excavation or compaction.
B. Protect benchmarks and existing work from damage or displacement.
C. Maintain approved site access for vehicle and pedestrian traffic.
D. Maintain designated stock pile areas with appropriate stormwater and erosion controls.
E. Protect existing trees and other vegetation to remain in place against unnecessary
cutting, breaking, skinning of roots, skinning and bruising of bark, compaction,
smothering of trees by stockpiling construction materials or excavated materials within
drip line and excess foot or vehicular traffic, or parking of vehicles within drip line.
2.03.4 CLEARING AND GRUBBING
Contractor, developer and/or owner shall:
A. Clear project areas required for access to site and execution of work.
B. Remove trees and shrubs within marked project areas and where shown on approved
plans. Grub out stumps and roots.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 20
C. Clear undergrowth and deadwood, without excavating topsoil and subsoil.
D. Remove and dispose of all materials used for mulch and/or ground cover. Do not
stockpile or reuse the material.
E. Use only non-mechanical methods for grubbing inside drip lines of trees that are to
remain in place.
2.03.5 PRUNING TREES
Contractor, developer and/or owner shall:
A. Carefully and cleanly cut roots and branches of trees indicated to remain, where such
roots and branches obstruct the construction.
B. Prune trees in accordance with standard horticultural practice. Do not cut tree leaders.
C. Repair and paint tree wounds in accordance with standard horticultural practice.
2.03.6 REMOVAL
Contractor, developer and/or owner shall:
A. Remove debris from site.
B. Dispose of debris in accordance with local, State and federal regulations.
2.04 DEWATERING
2.04.1 SYSTEM PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Contractor, developer and/or owner shall insure that:
A. Dewatering shall include all necessary control and disposal of groundwater on a
continual basis during construction.
B. Dewatering shall include the lowering of the groundwater table to relieve any hydrostatic
head that could cause a decrease in the stability of the excavated subgrade. It shall also
include the intercepting of seepage which could otherwise emerge from the slope or
sides of excavations which could cause a decrease in the stability of the excavated
subgrade or the slopes or sides of the excavations.
C. Dewatering shall utilize a sediment trap, dirt bag or other currently approved BMP
application to avoid sediment being pumped into wetlands. Dewatering is not allowed to
outlet directly into a wetland.
D. Dewatering shall be performed during construction to temporarily protect against the
following:
1. The loss of any material beneath the excavated subgrade or from the slopes or sides
of the excavations or the movement of any fine particle materials from the soil.
2. Any increased vertical or lateral loads on the excavation support systems.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 21
3. Any disturbance, rupture, instability, boiling or heaving of the bottom of excavated
subgrade during:
a. Excavation.
b. Placement of foundation or bedding materials.
c. Construction of slabs, footings, pipes, conduits, under-drains and any other
structures.
d. Backfilling operations.
2.04.2 ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS
Contractor, developer and/or owner shall:
A. Provide, operate and maintain any dewatering system required to lower and control
groundwater levels and groundwater hydrostatic pressure during construction as
required by these specifications. The contractor, developer and/or owner shall assume
full responsibility and expense for the dewatering system.
B. Remove and dispose of water resulting from activities described in section 2.04. Provide
siltation settling basins for all discharges from dewatering systems. Submit plan of
settling basins and discharge facilities for review by the Town prior to dewatering system
installation.
C. Remove dewatering systems and equipment when no longer required.
2.04.3 EXECUTION
The dewatering system shall be capable of developing an excavated subgrade relieved of any
hydrostatic pressure that could cause a decrease in the stability of the excavated subgrade. The
dewatering system shall provide the necessary groundwater control for the proper performance
required for completion of the work.
The dewatering system shall not cause damage to newly constructed or existing properties,
buildings, utilities and other work due to the loss of support from incompletely drained soils or
from removal of soil particles resulting from the dewatering system operation.
Dewatering facilities shall be located where they will not cause interference with work performed
by others.
If the dewatering system utilized by the contractor, developer and/or owner causes or threatens
to cause damage to new or existing facilities, the dewatering system shall be modified. The
contractor, developer and/or owner shall be responsible for any necessary modifications and
shall repair all damage caused by the dewatering system operation.
All subsurface water collected must be disposed in a manner which conforms to all applicable
local and state ordinances, statutes and laws.
Dewatering systems shall maintain the groundwater table at a level necessary for the type of
construction performed based on appropriate engineering; as well as be continually maintained
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 22
to provide a firm, stable, excavated subgrade at all times as required for propose performance
of work.
2.04.4 JOB CONDITIONS
Contractor, developer and/or owner shall:
A. Erosion Control: Provide adequate protection, in conformance with the Stormwater
Management and Erosion Control Regulations from erosion from any of the dewatering
operations utilized during the course of the construction. Any damage, disruption or
interference to newly constructed work or existing properties, buildings, structures,
utilities and/or other work resulting directly or indirectly from dewatering operations
conducted by the contractor, developer and/or owner shall be remedied by the same.
B. Treatment of Dewatering Operations Discharges: Provide such additional treatment
devices as may be required. This may include the construction of sumps and/or settling
basins, stone rip-rap, silt fences or other requirements. The treatment devices shall be
later removed and/or filled in with acceptable backfill material, stabilized and restored to
original conditions once they are no longer needed.
2.05 EXCAVATION SUPPORT
2.05.1 WORK INCLUDED
Contractor, developer and/or owner shall be responsible for designing, furnishing, installing,
maintaining and removing excavation support systems for the following:
A. Excavation.
B. Trench excavation.
2.05.2 REFERENCE STANDARDS
The following standards shall be adhered to:
A. ASTM A328 - Steel Sheet Piling.
B. NFPA - National Forest Products Association.
2.05.3 SYSTEM DESCRIPTION
The construction of the excavation support systems shall be submitted on a Professional
Engineer (PE) stamped plan and may include, but not be limited to soldier piles, lagging, trench
boxes, wood sheeting and steel sheeting, including bracing members such as walers, struts,
shores and tieback anchors and all other system members.
2.05.4 MATERIALS
At a minimum, materials may include but not be limited to:
A. Wood: Tongue and groove; #3 common Douglas Fir or Hemlock; or Utility Grade
Southern Pine; NFPA grading.
B. Steel: ASTM A328.
C. Trench Boxes: Fabricated steel.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 23
2.05.5 EXECUTION
The contractor, developer and/or owner shall be totally responsible for the means and methods
of the excavation, and support system. The design and construction of the excavation support
systems shall be stamped by a PE.
The support system shall be designed to support the maximum loads that will occur during
construction.
Excavation support systems shall be constructed so as to be able to support all vertical and
lateral loads and other surcharge loads imposed on the system during construction including
earth pressures, utility loads and other surcharges and construction loads in order to provide
safe construction of the permanent structures and prevent movement and/or damage to
adjacent soil, buildings, structures and utilities.
The contractor, developer and/or owner shall not brace to concrete unless authorized by the
DPW or designated representative and then only if concrete has reached its design strength as
determined by compressive test of representative concrete cylinders which have been cured on
site for a period of at least 14 days.
The contractor, developer and/or owner shall not embed any part or portion of excavation
support system in the work. Do not construct sleeves or openings in the structures to permit
bracing through the structures unless authorized by the DPW or designated representative.
The contractor, developer and/or owner shall not perform excavations in unstable earth.
Stabilization of all earth materials behind support walls must be done before excavation is
allowed to proceed.
The contractor, developer and/or owner shall monitor all excavations and provide a means of
determining movement of adjacent soil, buildings, structures and utilities.
Where movement or damage is observed, the contractor, developer and/or owner shall
immediately cease excavation operations and correct deficiency in the excavation support
system that allowed for movement or damage, and repair all damage.
The contractor, developer and/or owner shall be responsible for and shall repair any damage
resulting from excavations.
During construction, the contractor, developer and/or owner shall be responsible for meeting all
requirements and standards of OSHA (Occupational Safety and Health Administration).
2.05.6 SHEETING LEFT-IN-PLACE
Cut off all sheeting left-in-place at least three feet below the ground surface, whether such
sheeting is ordered left in place by the DPW or designated representative, or is left in place for
the convenience of the contractor, developer and/or owner. Sheeting left-in-place shall be
detailed on As-built plans.
2.06 SITE PREPARATION
2.06.1 WORK INCLUDED
The contractor, developer and/or owner shall:
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 24
A. Remove topsoil and stockpile suitable material for later reuse in accordance with the
approved plan and the Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Ordinance.
Remove excess or unsuitable topsoil from site.
B. Excavate subsoil and stockpile suitable material for later reuse in accordance with the
approved plan and the Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Ordinance.
Remove excess or unsuitable topsoil from site.
C. Grade and rough contour site.
2.06.2 PREPARATION
The contractor, developer and/or owner shall:
A. Identify required lines, levels, contours, and datum.
B. Identify known below grade utilities and stake and flag locations.
C. Identify and flag above grade utilities.
D. Upon discovery of utility or concealed conditions which affect the progress of the work of
this section, notify the approving engineer, DPW Director and utility.
E. Protect trees, shrubs, lawns, and other features remaining as portion of final
landscaping, as specified in Section 2.03 Clearing and Grubbing.
F. Protect bench marks, property boundary markers, existing structures, fences, roads,
sidewalks and paving and curbs.
G. Ensure erosion control and water quality protection measures are in place and
functioning.
H. Protect above or below grade utilities which are to remain.
2.06.3 TOPSOIL EXCAVATION
The contractor, developer and/or owner shall:
A. Excavate topsoil from areas to be further excavated, re-landscaped, or re-graded and
stockpile on site in accordance with the approved plan and the Stormwater Management
and Erosion Control Ordinance. All excess topsoil not being reused onsite shall be
removed.
B. All stockpiled loam remaining idle for more than 30 days shall be stabilized to reduce
erosion.
2.06.4 SUBSOIL EXCAVATION
The contractor, developer and/or owner shall:
A. Excavate subsoil from areas to be re-landscaped or re-graded and stockpile on site and
remove excess subsoil not being reused from site.
B. When excavation through roots is necessary, perform work by hand and cut roots in
accordance with Section 2.03 Clearing and Grubbing.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 25
2.06.5 TOLERANCES
Allowed: Top Surface of Subgrade - Plus or minus one (1”) inch.
2.07 LEDGE AND BOULDER EXCAVATION
2.07.1 WORK INCLUDED
The contractor, developer and/or owner shall include the following when excavating ledge and
boulders:
A. Conducting preconstruction survey.
B. Excavating and disposing of ledge.
C. Excavating and disposing of boulders.
D. Backfilling of ledge and boulder excavation.
E. Compliance with OSHA standards.
2.07.2 DEFINITIONS
Ledge shall mean:
A. solid igneous, sedimentary, metamorphic, conglomerate boulder which requires for its
removal drilling and blasting, wedging, sledging or barring; or,
B. single pieces of solid rubble masonry and Portland cement concrete two (2) cubic yard in
volume or larger.
Rock excavation shall consist of all solid rock that cannot be removed without blasting or
ripping. It shall also consist of boulders and parts of masonry structures, except unreinforced
concrete slabs less than 6 inches in depth, when found to measure two cubic yard (1.5 m³) or
more.
2.07.3 LEDGE AND BOULDER BLASTING SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
Refer to Appendix V for all blasting related permits and information and/or the Milford Fire
Department.
2.07.4 LIMITS OF LEDGE AND BOULDER EXCAVATION
Ledge excavation shall be performed, unless otherwise directed, so that no projection shall
come within vertical planes twelve (12”) inches outside of the structure being built, or as shown
on the plans. In trenches, the rock shall be removed to the limits shown on the typical trench
section. Where excavation is carried beyond the above defined limits, the additional space shall
be refilled with concrete for structures bearing, otherwise on rock, or backfill material, as
specified in Section 2.08 EXCAVATION, BACKFILLING AND COMPACTING.
If ledge below limits of excavation is shattered by blasting caused by holes drilled too deep, or
too heavy charges of explosives, or any other circumstance due to blasting, and if such
shattered ledge does not provide suitable foundation, the ledge shall be removed and the
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 26
excavation refilled with backfill material, as specified in Section 2.08 EXCAVATION,
BACKFILLING AND COMPACTING, at the expense of the contractor, developer and/or owner.
2.07.5 NOTIFICATION
When ledge or boulders are encountered, the material shall be uncovered and the DPW or
designated representative be notified.
2.07.6 BLASTING
The contractor, developer and/or owner shall obtain and adhere to the latest edition of the Fire
Department Explosives and Blasting Regulations (See Appendix V).
2.07.7 DISPOSAL AND REMOVAL OF LEDGE AND BOULDERS
Ledge and boulders considered unsuitable material for trench backfill shall be removed and
properly disposed of off-site.
2.07.8 BACKFILLING LEDGE AND BOULDER EXCAVATIONS
Ledge and boulders shall be replaced with backfill material as specified in Section 2.08
EXCAVATION, BACKFILLING AND COMPACTING.
2.08 EXCAVATING, BACKFILLING AND COMPACTING
2.08.1 WORK INCLUDED
Excavation, Backfilling and Compacting shall include, but not necessarily be limited to:
A. Ensuring erosion control and water quality protection measures are in place.
B. Excavating topsoil and stockpiling topsoil for later use.
C. Saw cutting pavement and excavating pavement for removal and proper disposal.
D. Excavating subsoil and stockpiling subsoil for later use.
E. Excavating unsuitable material for removal and proper disposal.
F. Replacing ledge and boulder excavation and excavated unsuitable material with select
fill material or common fill material.
G. Placing select fill materials below utilities, tankage and concrete structures.
H. Backfilling excavations with common fill materials.
I. Placing common fill materials for bringing site to subgrade.
J. Complying with compaction requirements.
K. Removing and disposing of excess topsoil and subsoil, excavated unsuitable material,
and excavated pavement, rock, boulders, solid rubble masonry and Portland cement
concrete off-site.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 27
L. Grading and rough contouring the site to the cut limits required for construction.
M. Removing unsuitable material from excavated material and making the excavated
material suitable for reuse.
2.08.2 REFERENCE STANDARDS
The following standards shall be adhered to:
A. ASTM C33 - Concrete Aggregates.
B. ASTM C136 - Sieve Analysis of Fine and Coarse Aggregates.
C. ASTM D75 - Sampling Aggregates.
D. ASTM D1557 - Tests for Moisture - Density Relations of Soils and Soil- Aggregate
Mixtures, Using 10-lb Rammer and 18-inch Drop: (Modified Proctor).
E. ASTM D2922 - Tests for Density of Soil and Soil-Aggregate in Place by Nuclear
Methods (Shallow Depth).
F. State of New Hampshire Department of Transportation (NHDOT) Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction (latest edition).
2.08.3 SAMPLES
Samples shall be obtained in accordance with ASTM D75 and submitted to, in 75-lb samples of
each type of materials, for testing to the DPW or designated representative.
2.08.4 TESTING
Tests and analysis of fill materials will be performed in accordance with the methods in ASTM
C136. The contractor, developer and/or owner shall be responsible for payment of costs
resulting from retesting of any soils.
2.08.5 PROJECT RECORD DOCUMENTS
The contractor, developer and/or owner shall accurately record location of utilities remaining,
rerouted utilities, and new utilities by horizontal dimensions, elevations or inverts, and slope
gradient. Records of utility locations shall be provided to the DPW prior to acceptance of a
roadway, and the Code Enforcement Department prior to issuance of a Certificate of
Occupancy, if necessary.
2.08.6 MATERIALS - GENERAL
The following standards shall be adhered to:
A. Topsoil: Friable, fertile, natural, free-draining loam typical of the locality; free of subsoil,
roots, grass, sticks, weeds, clay, sod lumps, debris and stones larger than one (1”) inch
in maximum dimension. Soil shall not be excessively acid or alkaline, nor contain toxic
material harmful to plant growth.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 28
B. Unsuitable Material: Cut or broken pavement, debris, concrete or other rubble, organic
materials; muck, peat, silty soils or clayey soil; rock over six (6”) inches in maximum
dimension; or any material which in the opinion of the DPW or designated
representative, will not provide sufficient support or maintain the completed construction
in a stable condition.
C. Common Fill Materials
1. Subsoil (suitable for reuse): Material excavated on site which is friable, natural
soil composed of gravel, sand, or silty or clayey gravel and sand; free from
debris, concrete or other rubble, organic matter, muck, peat, excavated rock and
boulders over six (6”) inches in maximum dimension.
2. Additional Fill: Imported material which is friable, natural soil composed of
gravel, sand, or silty or clayey gravel and sand; free from debris, concrete or
other rubble, organic matter, muck, peat, excavated rock and boulders over six
(6”) inches in maximum dimension.
D. Select Fill Materials
1. Bank Run Gravel: Material excavated from a suitable gravel bank and consisting
of stones, rock fragments and fine durable particles resulting from natural
disintegration of rock; meeting the following limits, as noted in NHDOT Standard
Specification Section 304, as modified herein, when tested in accordance with
ASTM C136:
Sieve Percentage by Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieve
Designation TOTAL SAMPLE
(Maximum size - 4 inches)
3-1/2-inch 95 - 100
No. 4 25 - 70
No. 200 (based on fraction 0 - 12
passing the No. 4 sieve)
2. Sand: Clean mineral aggregate with the following particle size limits when tested
in accordance with ASTM C136:
Sieve Percentage by Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieve
Designation TOTAL SAMPLE
No. 4 100
No. 100 0 - 30
No. 200 0 - 12
3. Crushed Gravel (structural fill): Clean, hard crushed gravel; free from silt, topsoil,
clay, and organic matter; uniformly graded from coarse to fine within the following
limits, as noted in NHDOT Standard Specification Section 304, when tested in
accordance with ASTM C136:
Sieve Percentage by Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieve
Designation TOTAL SAMPLE
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 29
3-inch 100
2-inch 95 - 100
1-inch 55 - 85
No. 4 27 - 52
No. 200 0 - 12
4. Crushed Stone: Clean mineral aggregate meeting the following limits when
tested in accordance with ASTM C136:
Sieve Percentage by Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieve
Designation TOTAL SAMPLE
3/4-inch 100
No. 4 0 - 5
5. Stone for Stone Fill: Hard, blasted angular rock other than serpentine rock
containing the fibrous variety chrysotile (asbestos); reasonably well graded from
smallest to maximum size stone so as to form a compact mass when in place:
note NHDOT Standard Specification Section 585.
a) Class A - Approximately 50 percent of the mass having a minimum
volume of 12 cubic feet, approximately 30 percent of the mass ranging
from 12 and 3 cubic feet, approximately 10 percent of the mass ranging
from 3 and 1 cubic feet, and the remainder of the mass composed of
spalls.
b) Class B - Approximately 50 percent of the mass having a minimum
volume of 3 cubic feet, approximately 40 percent of the mass ranging
from 1 and 3 cubic feet, and the remainder of the mass composed of
spalls.
c) Class C - Shall conform to the following gradation:
Sieve Percentage by Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieve
Designation TOTAL SAMPLE
12-inch 100
4-inch 50 - 90
1-1/2-inch 0 - 30
3/4-inch 0 - 10
d) Class D - Shall conform to the following gradation:
Sieve Percentage by Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieve
Designation TOTAL SAMPLE
2-inch 100
1-1/2-inch 95 - 100
3/4-inch 35 - 70
3/8-inch 10 - 30
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 30
No. 4 0 - 5
2.08.7 FILTER FABRIC
Filter fabric shall be applicable per appropriate engineering design. Substitution of a product
equal or better quality, detail, function and performance may be proposed for substitution, and
approved by DPW Director or designated representative, prior to use.
2.08.8 PREPARATION OF SITE
It is the responsibility of the contractor, developer and/or owner to verify the following:
A. Notification of DIG-SAFE (1-800-225-4977) prior to excavating, backfilling or
compaction.
B. Notification of utility companies to locate and temporarily support, remove, and/or
relocate utilities.
C. Identification of known underground utilities. Underground utilities must be staked and
flagged.
D. Identification and flagging of subsurface, surface and aerial utilities. All subsurface,
surface and aerial utilities must be staked and flagged.
E. Identification of required lines, levels, contours, and datum.
2.08.9 PROTECTION
The contractor, developer and/or owner shall:
A. Adhere to all OSHA requirements.
B. Protect all above and below grade utilities which are to remain.
C. Protect bench marks, existing structures, fences, stone walls, sidewalks, paving, and
curbs from equipment and vehicular traffic.
D. Protect trees, shrubs, lawns, and other features remaining as a portion of final
landscaping in accordance with Section 2.03 Clearing and Grubbing.
E. Protect excavations by shoring, bracing, sheet piling, underpinning, or other methods
required to prevent cave-in or loose soil from falling into excavation in accordance with
Sections 2.05, 2.07, & 2.08 .
F. Underpin adjacent structures which may be damaged by excavation work, including
service utilities and pipe chases.
G. Protect bottom of excavations and soil adjacent to and beneath foundations from frost.
2.08.10 TOPSOIL EXCAVATION
The contractor, developer and/or owner shall excavate topsoil from areas to be further
excavated, landscaped, or graded, and stockpile in accordance with the approved plan and the
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 31
Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Regulations. Remove excess topsoil not being
reused from site. Topsoil suitable for reuse shall be in conformance with paragraph 2.08.6.
Stockpiled topsoil shall be protected from erosion.
2.08.11 PAVEMENT EXCAVATION
When pavement must be excavated:
A. All pavement shall be cut with machines and/or other acceptable methods prior to
removal.
B. All pavement shall be excavated within the limits shown on the approved plans.
C. Keep excavated pavement separate from topsoil and subsoil stockpiles.
D. Remove and properly dispose of pavement excavated from site.
2.08.12 SUBSOIL EXCAVATION
The contractor, developer and/or owner shall:
A. Slope sides of excavation shall satisfy OSHA requirements.
B. Excavate subsoil from areas to be landscaped or graded to the limits shown on the
approved plans.
C. Excavate subsoil required for structures, utilities or yard piping and other work to the
limits necessary or as shown on the approved plans.
D. Stockpile excavated material to be reused and removed, and properly dispose of
unsuitable subsoil and excess subsoil not being reused, off-site. Subsoil suitable for
reuse shall be in conformance with paragraph 2.08.6C. Stockpiled subsoil shall be
protected from erosion.
E. Remove all muck, peat and other unsuitable material within trench limits or where
structures are to be located. Excavated unsuitable material shall be replaced with
backfill material as specified.
F. Notify the engineer and DPW or designated representative of unexpected subsurface
conditions, discovery of unknown utilities or concealed conditions, and discontinue
affected work in area until notified by DPW to resume work.
G. Ensure excavations do not interfere with normal 45 degree bearing influence of any
foundation, structures and utilities.
H. Grade the top perimeter of excavations to prevent surface water run-off into excavation.
I. Cleanly cut roots in accordance with Section 2.03 when excavation through roots is
necessary.
J. Maintain bottom of all excavations stable, dry and free of water on a continual basis.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 32
K. Remove rocks greater than six (6”) inches in maximum dimension, boulders, and ledge
from sub-soil.
2.08.13 BACKFILLING PREPARATION
The contractor, developer and/or owner shall:
A. Brace walls and slabs of structures to support surcharge forces and construction loads
to be imposed by backfilling operations.
B. Remove all water, snow, ice and debris from excavations and trenches before placing
pipe bedding, foundation material, under tankage or concrete structures or backfilling.
C. Compact subgrade surfaces disturbed by construction operations to density required for
backfill material. Do not place bedding, foundation material or backfill on porous,
unstable or unsuitable subgrade.
2.08.14 BEDDING AND BACKFILLING
The contractor, developer and/or owner shall:
A. Ensure bedding and backfilling materials do not contain frozen materials, ice or snow.
B. Utilize crushed stone or other applicable BMP beneath pipe where rock, boulders, or
unsuitable bearing materials have been removed.
C. Install pipe on shaped, undisturbed subgrade or on bedding material in accordance with
Section 2.08.19 SCHEDULE OF BEDDING, BACKFILL AND COMPACTION.
D. Support pipe during placement and compaction of bedding material.
E. Place filter fabric to completely enclose crushed stone used for bedding material or for
replacement material where rock, boulders or unsuitable material have been removed in
pipe trenches unless authorized otherwise by the DPW or designated representative.
Under structures, where crushed stone is used, the filter fabric shall enclose the material
on the sides and bottom, and on top, extend 2 feet under all edges of the proposed
structure.
F. Place and compact bedding for utilities and yard piping in accordance with the
specifications and typical trench details shown on the approved plans.
G. Backfill excavations and trenches to depths, contours and elevations required.
H. Each layer of backfill shall be compacted to the specified density the same day it is
placed.
I. Maintain optimum moisture content of backfill materials to attain required compaction
density.
J. Fill that is too wet for proper compaction shall be disced, harrowed or otherwise dried to
a proper moisture content for compacting to the required density. If the fill material
cannot be dried within 48 hours of placement, it shall be removed and replaced with drier
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 33
fill. This applies to both subsoil (suitable for reuse) and all imported select and/or
common fills.
K. Fill that is too dry for proper compaction shall be watered uniformly over the surface of
the loose layer. Sufficient water shall be added to allow compaction to the required
density.
L. Employ placement and compaction methods that will not disturb or damage work or
existing structures or utilities. Disturbed or damaged work, structures or utilities shall be
repaired.
M. Do not backfill against unsupported foundation walls or before required concrete
strength has been achieved. Backfill simultaneously on each side of unsupported
foundation walls.
N. Grade backfill to provide a smooth surface which will readily shed water and provide
positive drainage. Areas to receive compacted fill shall be graded to prevent ponding of
surface water runoff.
2.08.15 BACKFILLING TOLERANCES
Top Surface or Subgrade shall be: Plus or minus one inch.
2.08.16 COMPACTION
The maximum compaction density at optimum moisture content for bedding and backfill
materials shall be determined in accordance with ASTM D1557 (Modified Proctor).
All bedding and backfill materials shall be compacted to the density shown in Section 2.08.19
SCHEDULE OF BEDDING, BACKFILL AND COMPACTION.
Testing density of soil in place (compaction) shall be performed in accordance with ASTM
D1556, ASTM D2167, or ASTM D2922. If tests indicate compacted bedding and/or backfill
does not meet specified requirements, the contractor, developer, and/or owner shall remove,
replace and retest.
2.08.17 GRADING
The contractor, developer and/or owner shall:
A. Areas to be Loamed, Seeded and Landscaped:
1. Perform all rough grading required to attain the elevations indicated on the
approved plans or as required.
2. Grade to elevations shown on the approved plans or as required for landscaping.
Remove all material, including rock and boulders to a point at least four (4”)
inches below the finished grade of landscaped areas to be loamed and seeded.
3. Remove all ruts and other uneven surfaces by surface grading.
B. Grading Areas to be Paved or Surfaced:
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 34
1. Perform all rough grading, including shaping, sloping, and any work necessary to
prepare the subgrades of all roadways, walks and parking areas. Subgrade shall
be brought to the bottom elevation of the base course under paved or surfaced
areas.
2. Accomplish all grading within the slope and grade lines as indicated on the
approved plans, unless otherwise authorized in writing by the DPW or designated
representative. The roadway shall be graded to full cross section width at
subgrade before placing any type of subbase or pavement except that partial
width construction may be permissible where necessary for the maintenance of
traffic.
C. Slope grade away from structures to be a minimum of two (2”) inches in ten (10’) feet,
unless noted otherwise.
D. Make gradual changes in grade. Slopes shall transition gradually into level areas.
E. Grade all areas completely and remove and dispose of all excess excavated, bedding
and backfill materials from site.
F. Backfill to original grade or as indicated herein or on the approved plans. Deviations and
settlement shall be corrected.
2.08.18 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL
All subgrades must be inspected and accepted by the DPW or designated representative prior
to proceeding with final grading. Sufficient time must be allowed for the DPW or designated
representative to observe and to have any necessary tests performed on the subgrade.
2.08.19 SCHEDULE OF BEDDING, BACKFILL AND COMPACTION
The following schedule identifies location; bedding and/or backfill materials to be used
(identified from upper to lower fill type); loose thicknesses of each fill lift; and, compaction
expressed as a percentage of maximum density and optimum moisture determined in
accordance with ASTM D1557 (Modified Proctor).
Location Material/Thickness Lifts (Loose) Compaction
? Disturbed, Excavated
Subgrade
Natural Subgrade/Existing. Existing/95 percent or equal
to average density of
undisturbed material.
? Beneath Structures Crushed Stone/12" min.
w/filter fabric.
12" lifts/95 percent.
? Beneath Structures
from which Rock,
Boulders or
Unsuitable
Material has been
Removed
Crushed Stone/12" min.
w/filter fabric.
Structural Fill/as req'd. to 12"
below structure.
12" lifts/95 percent.
12" lifts/95 percent.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 35
? Slabs-on-Grade Crushed Gravel/4" min. on
natural subgrade or structural
fill.
Structural Fill/as req'd.
4" min./95 percent.
12" lifts/95 percent.
? Around Structures Common Fill/as req'd. 12" lifts to top of fill/95
percent.
? Around Structures
with Foundation
Perimeter
Drainage
Structural Fill/as req'd. 12" lifts to top of fill/95
percent.
? Underground Tanks Structural fill to top of fill.
Structural Fill/to 2' above
tank top.12" lifts/95 percent.
12" lifts/95 percent.
12" lifts/95 percent.
Pipe Bedding
? DI Water Pipe, DI
Sewage Force Main,
HDPE, Copper
Tubing and PVC
Water Pipe
Sand/6" min. below pipe to
springline of pipe.
Existing 95 percent or equal
to average density of
undisturbed material.
? DI Gravity Sewer,
PVC Gravity Sewer
and PVC Sewage
Force Main, HDPE,
High Density SPE
Storm Drain
Crushed stone/6" min. below
pipe to springline of pipe.
6" lifts/95 percent
? RCP Storm Drain,
HDPE Storm Drain
Crushed Stone/6" min. below
pipe to springline of pipe.
Existing 95 percent or equal
to average density of
undisturbed material.
? All Pipe in Area of
Rock Excavation
Crushed Stone/6" min. below
pipe to springline of pipe.
6" lifts/95 percent.
? All Pipe in Area of
Unsuitable Material
Excavation
Crushed Stone/As req'd, 6"
min. from excavation limits
below pipe to springline of
pipe.
6" lifts/95 percent.
Pipe Blanket
? DI & PVC Water Pipe,
DI & PVC Gravity
Sewer, DI & PVC,
Sewage Force Main,
HDPE, Copper
Tubing, and SPE
Sand/from springline of pipe
to 12" above pipe.
6" lifts/95 percent.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 36
Storm Drain
? RCP Storm Drain,
PVC Storm Drain,
HDPE Storm Drain
Crushed Stone/from
springline of pipe to 12"
above pipe.
6" lifts/95 percent.
Backfill
? Under Grassed Areas
Common Fill/From subgrade
or 12" above pipe to 4" below
finished grade.
15" lifts/90 percent.
? Under Landscaped
Areas
Common Fill/From subgrade
or 12" above pipe to 12"
below finished grade.
15" lifts/90 percent.
? Under Paved Areas Common Fill/From subgrade
or 12" above pipe to subbase
for roadbed
6" lifts/95 percent.
? Under Paved Areas No unprocessed blasted
Ledge or Rockfill within 5'-0"
of finish grade.
2'-0" lifts/mechanical
consolidation
Subbase
? Bituminous Pavement
Subbase
Bank Run Gravel 16" min.
Crushed Gravel 8" min.
6" lifts/95 percent.
2.09 SLOPE PROTECTION AND EROSION CONTROL
2.09.1 REQUIREMENTS
A. Plan and execute measures to prevent and control soil erosion in accordance with the
Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Ordinance and approved plans.
B. All Erosion control materials shall be furnished, installed and maintained in accordance
with the approved plans and maintenance schedules.
2.09.2 REFERENCE STANDARDS
Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Urban and
Developing Areas in New Hampshire, Rockingham County Conservation District, NH
Department of Environmental Services, Soil Conservation Service (now the Natural Resources
Conservation Service), August 1992, as amended.
NH Stormwater Management Manual, Vol. 1-3, NH Department of Environmental Services,
December 2008, as amended.
Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Ordinance, Town of Milford, NH, June 2007, as
amended.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 37
2.09.3 PROJECT CONDITIONS
The contractor, developer and/or owner shall:
A. Schedule temporary seeding, mulching and other erosion control measures to take place as
soon as possible. All temporary measures shall be permanently stabilized within thirty (30)
days unless conditions dictate otherwise as directed by DPW or designated representative.
B. When temporary seeding cannot be accomplished to have established or visible growth by
October 15, the disturbed areas shall be covered at a rate of three (3) to four (4) tons of
mulch per acre on in accordance with NH Stormwater Manual Volume 2 or other approved
BMP.
2.09.4 MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS
A. Straw Bales: Shall be securely tied by wire or string, baled straw shall be at least
fourteen (14”) inches by eighteen (18”) inches by thirty (30”) inches long.
B. Mulch Material: Shall be selected for erosion control that will best meet the site
conditions from the following:
1. Straw - Shall be dry, free of mold and weed seeds.
2. Wood Chips - Shall be dry, free of soil and other foreign material.
C. Mulch Anchoring: When mulch must be held in place, either Netting or Tackifier shall be
used: paper, twine, plastic, or plastic and wood fiber.
1. Netting – Install jute, wood fiber or biodegradable plastic according to
manufactures recommendation.
2. Tackifier – Apply polymer or organic tackifier according to manufactures
specifications.
D. Silt Fence: A filter fabric certified by manufacture attached to supporting posts and
entrenched in soil.
E. Filter Fabric: Pervious sheet of propylene, nylon, polyester or ethylene yarn with
ultraviolet ray inhibitors.
F. Mats or Blankets: Shall consist of machine-made mats made of organic, biodegradable
mulch (straw, curled wood fiber or coconut fiber) evenly distributed on or between
netting. Mats and blankets shall be installed according to manufactures specifications
and the type shall be chosen to be most appropriate product per site conditions and
project objectives.
G. Fertilizer: Complete fertilizer 10-20-20 (standard product).
H. Lime: Ground limestone containing not less than ninety-five percent (95%) total
carbonates (calcium or magnesium).
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 38
I. Temporary Seed Mixture: When it is impractical to establish permanent protective
vegetation on disturbed earth by October 15, use " Conservation Mix" or the following
seed mixture:
Kind of Seed lbs per Acre
Switchgrass (Blackwell or Shelter) 4.0
Big bluestem (Niagara or Kaw) 4.0
Little bluestem (Camper or Blaze) 2.0
Sand lovegrass (NE-27 or Blaze) 1.5
Birdsfoot trefoil (Viking) 2.0
Inoculum specific to Birdsfoot trefoil must be used with the above mixture. If seeding by hand, a
sticking agent such as milk or cola shall be used to stick inoculum to the seed. If seeding with
hydroseeder, use four (4x) times the recommended amount of inoculum.
2.09.5 GENERAL CONSTRUCTION SEQUENCE TO MINIMIZE EROSION
A. Erect straw bale dikes and/or silt fences as shown on approved plans and as may be
required in the field to protect property, waterways, wells and springs.
B. Commence excavation and stockpile soil so that erosion is minimized in accordance with
the approved plan. Extra precautions shall be taken when soil is saturated.
C. Control surface water and erosion.
D. Dewater all trenches to two (2’) feet below invert of pipe. Filter discharge using straw
bales, silt fence, settling basin or natural vegetated buffer as site conditions require and
as approved by the DPW or designated representative.
E. Backfill excavation to grade. Grade site so that soil erosion caused by runoff will be
minimized.
F. Seed and mulch exposed ground.
2.09.6 SEEDING AND MULCHING
All areas which will remain open shall be seeded and mulched within five (5) days of grading.
Soil samples may be sent to the Natural Resources Conservation Service for analysis to
determine the proper seed mixture and fertilizer requirements. Seeding shall be completed
between April 15th through June 1st and August 15th through October 14th of each year or as
permitted by the Department of Public Works.
The following procedures shall be followed for temporary seeding:
A. Lime Application Rate - apply lime at a rate of seventy-five (75lbs) to one hundred (100
lbs) pounds per one thousand (1000) square feet or as required based upon soil
analysis. Incorporate into top two (2) inches of soil.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 39
B. Fertilizer Application Rate - Apply fertilizer at a rate of thirty (30 lbs) pounds per one
thousand (1000) square feet or as required based upon soil analysis. Mix thoroughly
into the top two (2”) inches of soil.
C. Seed Application Rate - Apply seed mixture at a rate of two (2 lbs) pounds per one
thousand (1000) square feet evenly in two (2) intersecting directions or per suppliers
recommendations. Rake lightly (except when hydroseeding).
D. Mulch: Application Rate - Apply mulch material within twenty-four (24) hours after
seeding in accordance with the following:
1. Straw: Application rate - seventy-five (75 lbs) to one hundred (100 lbs) pounds
per one thousand (1000) square feet. Spread by hand or with machine. Anchor
on slopes and where subject to blowing or slipping.
2. Wood Chips: Application rate - two (2”) to six (6”) inches deep. Use for tree and
shrub planting.
E. Anchor mulch on all slopes exceeding five percent (5%) and other areas as required with
Mulch Netting. Mulch Netting: Spread over loose mulch and pin to the soil in accordance
with the manufacturer's instructions.
2.09.7 STRAW BALE DIKES
Embed straw bales into soil and anchor in place with stakes as required to control soil erosion.
Butt straw bales together tightly.
Straw bales shall be replaced when they become clogged with soil particles or as directed by
the DPW or designated representative.
2.09.8 DAMAGE AND REPAIR
Repair all damages caused by soil erosion or construction equipment at or before the end of
each working day.
2.010 ROADWAY STABILIZATION FABRIC
2.010.1 WORK INCLUDED
The contractor, developer and/or owner is responsible for:
A. Furnishing roadway stabilization fabric.
B. Installation of roadway stabilization fabric.
2.010.2 SUBMITTALS
Submit shop drawings and product data to the DPW or designated representative for approval if
information is not contained in previously approved plans.
2.010.3 MANUFACTURER’S WARRANTY
The following minimum warranty is required by the Town:
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 40
The manufacturer shall warranty the stabilization fabric against manufacturing defects and
material degradation in outdoor exposure for a period of two (2) years from the date of
installation. The manufacturer shall replace any material which fails from the above causes
within the warranty period. The manufacturer, contractor, developer and/or owner shall furnish
the Town of Milford with a written warranty covering the requirements of this paragraph.
2.010.4 DEVELOPER’S GUARANTEE
The manufacturer, contractor, developer and/or owner shall guarantee the stabilization fabric
against defects in installation and workmanship for the period of two (2) years commencing with
the date of final acceptance. The guarantee shall include the services of qualified service
technicians and all materials required for the repairs at no expense to the Town of Milford.
2.010.5 MATERIALS
A. The stabilization fabric shall be manufactured from new, first quality material of the type
specified in this document.
1. The stabilization fabric shall meet all requirements for the specified end use.
2. The stabilization fabric shall demonstrate the following minimum properties
(these properties are based on Mirafi 600x):
Property Test Value
Grab Tensile Strength ASTM D1682 300 lbs
Grab Tensile Elongation ASTM D1682 35% (max)
Modulus (at 10% elongation) ASTM D1682 140 lbs
Trapezoid Tear Strength ASTM D1117 120 lbs
Mullen Burst Strength ASTM D3786 600 psi
Puncture Resistance ASTM D3787 130 psi
Abrasion Resistance ASTM D3884 100 lbs
Coeff. Of Permeability, K CFMC-GET-2 0.01 cm/sec
Water Flow Rate CFMC - GET -2 50 gpm/sq ft
Apparent Opening Size (AOS) COE-CW-02215 #20-#45 Sieve size
2.010.6 STORAGE
Storage of the stabilization fabric shall be the responsibility of the contractor, developer and/or
owner. The manufacturer shall make recommendations as the storage procedure for the
stabilization fabric. The recommended storage procedures shall note any deviations from the
specifications listed in the following Handling and Placement Section 2.010.7.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 41
2.010.7 HANDLING AND PLACEMENT OF STABILIZATION FABRIC
Installation shall be in accordance with the manufacturer’s requirements.
The stabilization fabric shall be handled in such a manner as to ensure no damage.
On slopes, stabilization fabric shall be secured by means approved by the manufacturer and the
DPW or designated representative, and rolled down the slope so as to preclude folds and
wrinkles.
Fabric shall be installed over the full width of the roadway where indicated.
In the presence of wind, stabilization fabric shall be weighted with sandbags or the equivalent to
provide wind protection.
The stabilization fabric shall be cut using a cutter approved by the DPW or designated
representative. Care shall be taken during cutting to protect other material from damage.
A minimum overlap of two (2’) feet shall be required between different pieces of stabilization
fabric.
2.011 CURBING
2.011.1 DESCRIPTION
This work shall consist of constructing or resetting curbs as shown on the plans or as ordered.
2.011.2 MATERIALS
A. Curb shall be new granite, or salvaged granite, as indicated in the proposal.
B. Granite shall be hard, durable, reasonably uniform in appearance, and free from weak
seams. Solid quartz or feldspar veins will not be cause for rejection.
C. Surfaces of each stone shall be finished in accordance with the requirements of this
section. All comparable curbs on the project shall have similar finishes.
D. When the slope curb item description does not indicate a specific height, the size of the
stone shall be as shown on the construction detail entitled “granite slope curb”. The
setting reveal (the vertical height of the exposed face when set) shall be four (4”) in (100
mm) or as shown on the plans.
E. Salvaged granite curbing shall be dressed to obtain joints of the same width as specified
for new curb.
2.011.3 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS
Granite Curb: New and Reset.
A. Excavation for curb shall be made to the required depth, and the base upon which the
curb is to be set shall be compacted to a firm even surface.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 42
B. Installation of curbing shall be so that the front top arris line conforms to the line and
grade required. All spaces under the curbing shall be filled with material conforming to
the requirements for roadway base course. This material shall be thoroughly tamped.
C. Joints shall be of the width indicated in this section. They shall be pointed with mortar
and the exposed portions finished with a jointer.
D. Curbing to be salvaged and reset shall be carefully removed and stored. The Contractor
shall replace any curbing damaged or lost because of his negligence. All exposed
portions of reset curbing shall be cleaned by sand blasting.
E. Backfilling shall be accomplished immediately after the curb is set and jointed. Backfill
shall be of approved material, placed and thoroughly tamped.
F. Concrete Class B in accordance with 520 may be substituted for aggregate base course
and hot bituminous base courses in the curb patch on the roadway side of granite curb.
Concrete thickness shall be not less than that of the adjacent pavement.
G. Bridge curb shall be set on a mortar bed of non-shrink, non-metallic grout. The front face
shall be plumb and the top shall conform to the required line and grade. All joints shall
be grouted and the exposed portions finished with a jointer. Long and short lengths of
curb shall be laid alternately unless otherwise ordered.
H. Curb anchors shall be set and grouted as shown on the plans.
Type and Area Finished Surface Tolerance
STRAIGHT OR CURVED
• Top 5 inch wide or as otherwise shown, sawn
true plane. Front and back arris lines
pitched straight and parallel.
+1/8”, -1/8”
• Front face Right angle to top, approximately true
plane. No drill holes in top 10 inches.
+1”, -½”
• Back face exposed Plane parallel with front face. Straight split
to 1½ inch (40 mm) below exposed surface.
No larger than ¼ inch (6 mm) segment of
drill holes showing in arris lines.
+1”, -1”
• Concealed Below 1½ inch (40 mm) from exposed
surface.
+1 ½ ”, -1 ½ ”
• Bottom Approximately parallel to top. Minimum
width: 3 inches (75 mm).
See plans
ENDS
• Exposed portion Square with planes of top and face.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 43
JOINTS
• Exposed Optimum width: 1 inch
• Concealed To break back no more than 4 inches
SIZE
• Length of Stones 3 to 10 feet with 50% of sections to be 5
feet or greater, or as indicated
SLOPE AND END STONE
• Arris Lines Straight and true on top, front and lines
ends. Drill holes not deeper than ¼ inch.
+¼“, -¼“
FACES
• Exposed part Planes; no drill holes in faces longer than 8
inches or deeper than ¼ inch.
+1”, -1”
• Concealed part Drill holes not objectionable
• Ends Square with face except as indicated
• Joints One tangent, maximum width: 1 inch
(25mm). On curves over 15 feet (4.5m)
radius, widen top or bottom from 1 inch
(25mm) as necessary.
+½ ”, -½ ”
On curves with 4.5 meter (15ft) radius or
less use radial joints of Curved curb as
indicated. Optimum width: 1 inch (25mm).
+½ ”, -½ ”
• Length of Stones Minimum and maximum specified lengths See plan
2.012 BITUMINOUS CONCRETE PAVING
2.012.1 WORK INCLUDED
A. Bituminous concrete paving and associated preparatory work.
B. Gravel subbase.
C. Final grading of subbase.
D. Installation of subbase, binder course and wearing course.
2.012.2 REFERENCE STANDARDS
A. ASTM D1557 - Tests for Moisture - Density Relations of Soils and Soil - Aggregate
Mixtures, Using 10-lb Rammer and 18-Inch Drop; Modified Proctor.
B. ASTM D2922 - Tests for Density of Soil and Soil-Aggregate in Place by Nuclear
Methods (Shallow Depth).
C. State of New Hampshire Department of Transportation (NHDOT) Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction (latest edition).
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 44
2.012.3 SUBMITTALS
Submit job mix data to DPW as required by NHDOT Standard Specification Division 300 and
Division 400.
2.012.4 MATERIALS
A. Bankrun Gravel and Crushed Gravel: See Section 2.08 EXCAVATING, BACKFILLING
AND COMPACTING.
B. Bituminous binder course shall be Type B (3/4 inch) per NHDOT Specification Section
401; Sub-Section 2 - Materials.
C. Bituminous wearing course shall be Type F (3/8 inch minimum) per NHDOT
Specification Section 401; Sub-Section 2 - Materials.
D. Temporary Bituminous Trench Pavement shall be Type B (1/2 inch minimum) per
NHDOT Specification Section 401; Sub-Section 2 - Materials.
E. Bituminous Overlay shall be Type F (3/8 inch minimum) per NHDOT Specification
Section 401; Sub-Section 2 - Materials.
F. Emulsified Asphalt: NHDOT Section 410.
2.012.5 GENERAL EXECUTION REQUIREMENTS
A. Bituminous concrete material shall be placed in accordance with NHDOT requirements
and as specified herein. If there is a discrepancy between the requirements, the more
stringent requirement shall govern. The specific gravity of the compacted bituminous
pavement shall not be less than 97 percent of the specific gravity of the corresponding
daily job sample except as follows:
a. Pavement placed directly on gravel base - 95 percent.
b. Overlay paving less than 1-1/4 inch in compacted thickness - 95 percent.
B. Areas to receive bituminous paving shall be as shown on the approved plans. The edge
of the existing pavement, at the limits of the paving, shall be saw cut and cold planed.
All existing bituminous paving damaged by construction shall be repaired or removed.
C. Bituminous concrete paving mixture shall be placed only when the proper density can be
obtained. Precautions shall be taken at all times to compact the mixture while the
mixture is in the proper temperature range. The mixture shall not be placed on any wet
surface or when weather conditions prevent its proper handling or finishing.
D. The number of paving courses and the thickness of each course shall conform to the
approved plans or to the dimensions stated in this Section.
E. The wearing course shall not be installed on new development roadways until base has
been in place one (1) winter season.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 45
F. No permanent base pavement shall be placed after November 1 or prior to April 15 and
no wearing pavement shall be placed after October 15 or prior to April 15, unless given
specific written approval by the DPW Director.
G. On new roadways, there shall be no excavation within the roadway after placement of
the binder pavement for five (5) years except in an emergency, as approved by the DPW
Director.
H. Temporary pavement shall be hot bituminous pavement.
I. Base pavement shall be flush with a minimum of four (4”) inches of base or to match the
final road thickness. Prior to final pavement, plain out one and a half (1.5”) inches and
then cover with binder. Please see Appendix III for Roadway Standards Charts.
2.012.6 COMPACTION TESTING
Compaction testing will be performed in accordance with ASTM D1556, ASTM D1557, ASTM
D2167 or ASTM D2922.
2.012.7 EQUIPMENT
A. Paver: Shall be a self-contained, self-propelled paver capable of spreading the required
thickness and width of pavement. Short bodied pavers and hot boxes shall not be
allowed.
B. Roller: Eight (8) to twelve (12) ton self-propelled tandem vibratory drum roller and rubber
tire roller per NHDOT specifications.
2.012.8 EXECUTION OF PAVING
A. All humps in the pavement from blasting operations or caused by the equipment shall be
removed before paving. All loose pieces of pavement on the edge of the trench shall be
removed and the edges saw cut and cold planed before paving.
B. Edges of pavement removed during trenching or other excavations shall be saw cut and
cold planed to provide one (1’) foot minimum overlap of the final patch on undisturbed
material. The disturbed areas shall receive crushed gravel base course to the depth
equal to the existing depth or the depth shown on the approved plan, whichever is
greater.
C. During trenching, all remaining asphalt surfaces that are less than four (4’) feet wide
after the pavement has been cut back a minimum of one (1’) foot shall be removed and
replaced with new pavement.
D. Weather Limitations: Mixtures shall be placed only when the underlying surface is dry,
frost free and the surface temperature is forty (40) degrees F and rising, for courses
greater than one and one fourth (1¼) inches in compacted depth and above fifty (50)
degrees F and rising, for courses less than one and one fourth (1¼) inches in
compacted depth, or as determined by the DPW or designated representative.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 46
E. Clean edges of existing pavement and coat with emulsified asphalt prior to placement of
the new pavement in accordance with NHDOT Specification Section 401.
F. The temperature of the bituminous pavement shall be a minimum of two hundred and
seventy-five (275) degrees and a maximum of three hundred and fifty (350) degrees F
when it is placed.
G. Placing of any course shall be as nearly continuous as possible, keeping the number of
transverse joints at a minimum. Stopping of the paver shall only be done in
emergencies. If the DPW or designated representative determines that the paving
operations result in excessive stopping of the paver, he may suspend all paving
operations until the contractor, developer and/or owner makes arrangements to
synchronize the rate of paving with the rate of delivery of material.
H. All surfaces and trenches four (4’) feet wide and greater shall use an approved selfpropelled
paver to apply the mix.
I. Any displacement occurring as a result of reversing the direction of a roller, or from other
causes, shall be corrected at once by the use of lutes and addition of fresh mixture when
required. Care shall be exercised in rolling not to displace the line and grade of the
edges of the bituminous mixture.
J. All courses shall be rolled until all roller marks are eliminated.
K. All joints between existing and new pavement shall receive a bead of emulsified asphalt
and sand, after the new pavement has been placed, to ensure proper adhesion.
L. All valve boxes, catch basins, and manhole castings shall be reset as required.
M. Unless otherwise authorized by the DPW or designated representative, the final wearing
course shall not be placed until after guard rail posts have been set and general cleanup
has been completed.
N. Bituminous wearing and binder courses shall be constructed in full compliance with the
latest edition of NHDOT Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;
Section 401 - Pavements; Sub-Section 3 - Construction Requirements.
O. The minimum thickness of permanent pavement shall be two and a half (2½”) inches of
binder and one and a half (1½”) inches of wearing unless approved and specified
otherwise.
2.012.9 TEMPORARY TRENCH PATCH
A. All temporary trench patches shall be hot bituminous pavement.
B. A temporary trench patch shall be placed upon a properly installed subbase, on the day
that the existing pavement is removed.
C. The minimum thickness of temporary pavement shall be four (4”) inches on all roadways
and three (3”) inches on sidewalks.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 47
D. The contractor, developer and/or owner shall maintain and/or repair the trench as often
as necessary including placement of additional asphalt to fill any areas that have settled
so that the surface is flush with the existing pavement surface. Work shall be performed
by the direction of the DPW or designated representative.
E. Temporary pavement shall be placed in accordance to the specifications stated herein.
F. Temporary pavement shall remain in the trench for a minimum of thirty (30) days and a
maximum that will be determined by the DPW or designated representative, and
replaced immediately with permanent patch as specified herein.
2.012.10 PERMANENT TRENCH PATCH
A. The contractor, developer and/or owner shall remove temporary trench patch, regrade
subbase and install permanent trench patch as specified upon authorization by the DPW
or designated representative.
B. Permanent trench patch shall be a minimum of two and a half (2½”) inches of binder
course mix and a minimum of one and a half (1½”) inches of top course mix in two
separate and compacted layers for a minimum total of four (4”) inches or as shown on
the approved plans.
C. The contractor, developer and/or owner shall sweep the entire roadway surface just prior
to placing the wearing course, if the DPW or designated representative thinks there is
excess sand and/or debris on the road.
2.012.11 REPLACEMENT OF COURSE
A. If any imperfect places are found in any course, the contractor, developer and/or owner
shall remove the unsatisfactory material and replace it with satisfactory material after
coating the exposed edges with suitable emulsified asphalt.
B. If any high areas are found after placement of the base course the contractor, developer
and/or owner shall cut out the areas and refill them with approved material before the
final wearing course is placed to the approval of the DPW or designated representative.
C. If any low areas are found after placement of the base course the contractor, developer
and/or owner shall shim the areas before the final wearing course is placed to the
approval of the DPW or designated representative.
2.012.12 CLEANUP
Any bituminous material remaining on exposed surfaces of curbs, sidewalks, or other masonry
structures , as well as material left from truck cleanup area(s) shall be removed by the
contractor, developer and/or owner.
.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 48
2.012.13 OVERLAY AND NEW BITUMINOUS PAVEMENT FOR ROADS
A. Roadway centerline offset stakes shall be set one (1’) foot from the edge of the roadway
shoulder at fifty (50’) foot intervals so that the centerline can be replaced in its original
location.
B. The contractor, developer and/or owner shall then sweep all roadway surfaces just prior
to placing a shim, overlay or wearing course.
C. The contractor, developer and/or owner shall cold plane a joint in the existing pavement,
on all street tie-ins, to accept the new overlay material. The joint shall be one (1") inch
deep at the edge and slope up to the existing pavement surface at a point five (5’) feet
away from the joint edge and/or per direction of DPW or designated representative.
Place a two (2’) foot wide strip of emulsified asphalt along the joint.
D. For new road construction or complete width road reconstruction, the binder course shall
be placed prior to raising or adjusting manhole covers, catch basin grates and valve
boxes. The binder course shall be two and a half (2½") inch thickness of three-quarter
(¾”) inch binder (NHDOT Section 401 Type B).
E. The contractor, developer and/or owner shall raise all manhole covers, catch basin
grates, and valve boxes prior to the overlay or wearing course. The final elevation of
these fixtures shall be flush with final grade to a quarter-inch (¼”) below the final
pavement elevation.
F. Apply uniform emulsified asphalt tack coat over the entire binder course.
G. Place the bituminous overlay to the limits shown on the approved plan.
H. The overlay shall be placed the full width of the roadway, unless approved and specified
otherwise.
2.012.14 APPROVALS
All work shall be performed to the satisfaction of the DPW or designated representative.
2.013 SUBSURFACE DRAINAGE SYSTEMS
2.013.1 WORK INCLUDED
A. Furnishing pipe, cleanouts, fabric, coarse filter aggregate, wall drain, and other material
required for the installation of subsurface drainage system(s).
B. Installation of subsurface drainage systems.
2.013.2 REFERENCE STANDARDS
ASTM D3212 - Joints for Drain and Sewer Plastic Pipes Using Flexible Elastomeric Seals.
ASTM F667 - Smooth-Wall Corrugated High-Density Polyethylene (SPE) Plastic Underdrain
Systems.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 49
2.013.3 PIPE PROTECTION
Pipe and fittings stored on the site shall be stored in the protective unit packages provided by
the manufacturer. If packages need to be opened, the pipe shall be stored on a flat surface and
not in direct contact with the ground. Do not stack higher than four feet. Keep inside of pipe
and fittings free from dirt and debris. Care shall be exercised to avoid compression damage or
deformation to the pipe.
All pipe and fittings that are stored shall be covered to provide protection from the sunlight.
2.013.4 ACCEPTABLE MANUFACTURERS
Specifications are based on materials produced by the following manufacturers:
A. ADS pipe - Advanced Drainage System, Inc. or approved equal.
B. Filter fabric - Mirafi, Inc. or approved equal.
C. Or other engineered, approved materials as approved by DPW.
2.013.5 PIPE MATERIAL
Subsurface drainage pipe shall consist of perforated and solid wall pipe in the sizes indicated on
the approved plans. Drainage pipe shall be Smooth Wall Corrugated High-Density Polyethylene
(SPE) and shall meet the requirements of ASTM F667. Perforations shall be in two rows, one
row on each side, 60° degrees above bottom centerline of the pipe. Joints shall be single
rubber gasket bell and spigot type in accordance with ASTM D3212.
Fittings shall be suitable for use with the specified strength pipe and shall not deflect more than
the pipe when loaded and bedded in the same manner.
Couplings shall be flexible, non-hardening PVC sleeves with double stainless steel bands
including stainless steel hardware.
2.013.6 FABRIC
Fabric required as part of the subsurface drainage system shall be Mirafi 140N or other
engineered, approved materials as approved by DPW
2.013.7 COARSE FILTER AGGREGATE
Coarse filter aggregate shall be clean, well graded natural gravel or crushed stone; free from
shale, clay, organic materials and debris; graded within the following limits:
Sieve Size Percent Passing
1-1/2 inch 100
1 inch 90 - 100
3/4 inch 45 - 100
5/8 inch 30 - 85
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 50
2 inch 13 - 55
3/8 inch 0 - 30
3 inch 0 - 15
No. 4 0
2.013.8 INSTALLATION
A. Subsurface drainage systems shall be installed at the locations and depths shown on
the approved plans. Pipe shall be in sound, undamaged condition and shall be installed
in compliance with the manufacturer's recommendations.
B. Subsurface drainage systems shall be installed to insure that groundwater flowing in the
permeable material around the pipes is intercepted and carried to the drain system
unimpeded.
C. Perforated pipe shall be installed with perforations on the pipe aligned with the bottom of
the trench, symmetrical about the vertical axis.
D. Filter fabric shall be installed as shown on the approved plans and in accordance with
the manufacturer's recommendations. Overlaps of filter fabric shall be a minimum of
eighteen (18”) inches.
E. The contractor, developer and/or owner shall:
1. Provide for temporary diversion of water to permit the installation of pipe in a
reasonably dry trench.
2. Lay pipe and fittings in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations
and these specifications.
F. Excavation and backfill shall be in accordance with Section 2.08 Excavation, Backfilling
and Compacting.
2.014 STORM DRAINS
2.014.1 WORK INCLUDED
A. All work shall conform to OSHA standards.
B. Furnishing pipe for storm drains.
C. Installing and/or removing and replacing storm drains as shown on the approved plans.
2.014.2 REFERENCE STANDARDS
AASHTO M170 - Reinforced Concrete Pipe.
ASTM D3212 - Joints for Drain and Sewer Plastic Pipes Using Flexible Elastomeric Seals.
ASTM F405 - Standard Specifications for Corrugated Polyethylene pipe and fittings. ASTM
F667 Standard Specifications for large diameter Corrugated Polyethylene pipe and fittings.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 51
2.014.3 SUBMITTALS
Submit for approval manufacturer's certifications and shop drawings to the project engineer,
DPW or designated representative.
2.014.4 QUALITY CONTROL
A. The quality of all materials, the process of manufacture and the finished pipe shall be
subject to inspection by the DPW or designated representative. Such inspection may be
made at the place of manufacture, and or on the work site after delivery. Pipe shall be
subject to rejection at any time on account of failure to meet any of the Specification
requirements, even though sample pipe may have been accepted as satisfactory at the
place of manufacture. Pipe rejected after delivery to the site shall be marked for
identification and shall be removed from the site at once. All pipes which have been
damaged after delivery will be rejected, or if already installed, shall be repaired, or
removed and replaced by the contractor, developer and/or owner, as directed by the
DPW or designated representative.
B. All sections shall be inspected for general appearance, dimensions, soundness, etc. in
accordance with pipe manufactures specifications. The surface of concrete pipe shall be
dense, close-textured and free of blisters, cracks, roughness and exposure of
reinforcement.
C. Imperfections may be repaired, subject to the approval of the DPW or designated
representative, after demonstration by the manufacturer that strong and permanent
repairs would result. Repairs shall be carefully inspected before final approval. Cement
mortar used for repairs shall have a minimum compressive strength of 4,000 psi at the
end of seven (7) days and 5,000 psi at the end of twenty eight (28) days when tested in
two (2”) inch cubes stored in the standard manner.
D. Pipe shall not be shipped or subjected to interior or exterior loadings until five (5) days
after fabrication and/or repair and the concrete has attained a compressive strength of
3000 psi.
E. Care shall be exercised in unloading pipe from delivery trucks. Concrete pipe shall not
be dropped from trucks. An attached loading/unloading device or proper equipment
shall be used. Defective pipe which cannot be repaired to the satisfaction of the DPW or
designated representative shall be promptly removed from the project and replaced with
new pipe.
2.014.5 GENERAL PRODUCTS
All products included in this section shall conform to the requirements of the standard
specifications referenced herein. Pipe size and material shall be as shown on the approved
plans.
2.014.6 MATERIALS
Reinforced Concrete Pipe (RCP): Pipe and fittings shall conform to AASHTO M170, Class IV,
or Class V as appropriate, Wall B. Cement shall be Type II.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 52
Smooth Interior Corrugated High-Density Polyethylene Pipe (SPE): Pipe and fittings shall
conform to ASTM F405 or ASTM F667, AASHTO M252 and M294. HDPE pipe adaptors must
be used for transition to drainage structures.
A. Each length of pipe shall be marked or tagged with the nominal diameter, gauge or
class, the name of the manufacturer or his trademark, and in the case of reinforced
concrete pipe, the date of manufacture.
B. Backfill material shall be as specified in Section 2.08.
C. The pipe material to be used shall be determined after a site visit by the contractor/
developer, the Design Engineer, and the Department of Public Works. If in the opinion
of the Department of Public Works, perforated SPE pipe is required, the contractor,
developer and/or owner shall use said pipe.
2.014.7 HANDLING PIPE
Care shall be exercised in moving pipe to its final position. The use of slings, straps and/or
other devices to support pipe when lifted shall be required. Transporting pipe from storage
areas shall be restricted to operations which will not cause damage to the pipe. Pipe shall not
be dropped into the trench.
All pipe shall be examined before laying and no pipe shall be installed which is found to be
defective. Defective pipe which cannot be repaired to the satisfaction of the DPW or designated
representative shall be promptly removed from the project and replaced with new pipe.
2.014.8 CONTROL OF ALIGNMENT AND GRADE
A. Easement, property and other control lines necessary for locating the work, as well as
elevations and bench marks used in the design of the work shall be shown on the
approved plans. The contractor, developer and/or owner shall use this information to set
line and use a laser, level, or transit to set grade.
B. Laser equipment shall be used to assist in setting the pipe and the operator of the laser
must demonstrate satisfactory skill in its use. The use of string levels, hand levels,
carpenter's levels or other similar devices for transferring grade or setting pipe will not be
permitted.
C. The contractor, developer and/or owner shall not proceed until he has made timely
request of the DPW or designated representative, and has received back within two (2)
business days, such controls and instructions as may be necessary as work progresses.
The work shall be done in strict conformity with such controls and instructions.
D. The contractor, developer and/or owner shall carefully preserve bench marks, reference
points and stakes, and in case of willful, careless, or accidental destruction by own
employees, the contractor, developer and/or owner will be responsible for the resulting
cost to re-establish such destroyed control data and shall be responsible for any
mistakes or delay that may be caused by the loss or disturbance of such control data.
E. Proper alignment shall be maintained in laying pipe.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 53
2.014.9 EXCAVATING TRENCH AND INSTALLING PIPE
A. Pipe shall be laid in dry trench conditions. Temporary diversion of water shall be
required.
B. Trench shall be excavated to required depth sufficiently wide to allow for jointing of the
pipe and compaction of the material under and around the pipe. Excavation shall
conform to Section 2.08. If ledge rock, rocky soil, hard pan or other unyielding
foundation material is encountered at the normal grade of the pipe bed, excavate to six
(6”) inches below invert grade and one (1’) foot on each side of the interior face of the
pipe wall and refill with compacted crushed stone. Blocking is not permitted.
C. Disturbed trench bottom shall be compacted and shaped to fit pipe for a depth of not
less than ten (10%) percent of the total diameter of the pipe. The pipe shall rest firmly
on the shaped bottom for the entire length of pipe barrels. Excavate troughs to
accommodate bells or couplings to provide ample space for jointing pipe.
D. Laying of pipe shall begin at outlet and the lower segment of the pipe shall be in contact
with the shaped trench bottom throughout its full length. Each pipe section shall be
placed into position on the pipe bed in such a manner and by such means required to
avoid injury to persons, any property or the pipe.
E. Handling hole in concrete pipes shall be filled with a precast plug, seal and cover with
mastic or mortar.
F. Time shall be allowed for inspection and approval before any backfill is placed. Relay
any pipe out of alignment and remove any damaged pipe.
G. After placing pipe on shaped trench bottom, backfill material shall be placed and
compacted to the spring line (horizontal center line) of the pipe in continuous layers not
exceeding six (6”) inches loose depth. Additional backfill material shall then be placed
from the spring line to twelve (12”) inches above the crown of the pipe. This material
shall be placed and compacted in continuous layers not exceeding six (6”) inches loose
depth.
H. After placement of the material around and over the pipe, alignment and grade of the
pipe shall be checked. If the pipe has been properly installed, the contractor, developer
and/or owner may refill or backfill the remainder of the trench in conformance with
Section 2.08, and details shown on the approved plans.
I. At the end of each day's work or at other intervals, the DPW or designated
representative, with the contractor, developer and/or owner, may inspect the pipe
installation. Unsatisfactory work shall be dug up and reinstalled to meet the
requirements of the Town Construction Standards.
2.014.10 JOINTING PIPE
Reinforced concrete pipe: Bell and Spigot, or Tongue and Groove type reinforced concrete pipe
shall be used. When storm sewer is an extension of existing concrete pipe, joint type shall be
used to match. Ends of pipe shall be pushed home and the inner surfaces to be flush and even.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 54
Joints shall be made with oil resistant compression rings of an elastomeric material conforming
to ASTM C443. Manufacturer's installation instructions shall be followed.
Smooth Interior Corrugated High-Density Polyethylene Pipe (SPE): Pipe joints, fitting joints and
double-bell couplers shall be furnished with rubber gasketed connections.
2.015 STEEL BEAM GUARDRAIL
2.015.1 WORK INCLUDED
A. Furnishing single-face beam guardrail, composed of steel rail elements mounted on
pressure treated wood posts.
B. Roadway guardrail is required on all slopes greater than 3:1 and as directed by the
Department of Public Works.
C. Installation.
2.015.2 REFERENCE STANDARDS
AASHTO M180 - Corrugated Sheet Steel Beams for Highway Guardrail.
ASTM A123 - Zinc (Hot-Galvanized) Coatings on Products Fabricated from Rolled, Pressed,
and Forged Steel Shapes, Plates, Bars and Strips.
ASTM A153 - Zinc Coating (Hot-Dip) on Iron and Steel Hardware.
ASTM A307 - Carbon Steel Externally Threaded Standard Fasteners.
ASTM A606 - Steel Sheet and Strip, Hot-Rolled and Cold-Rolled, High Strength, Low-Alloy, with
Improved Atmospheric Corrosion Resistance.
State of New Hampshire Department of Transportation (NHDOT) Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction (latest edition).
2.015.3 MATERIALS
A. Wood posts and offset blocks shall be Red Pine, Pitch Pine, Norway Pine, Southern
Yellow Pine, or other approved wood, straight, sound and cut from live timber. Posts
and offset blocks shall be sawn to the nominal dimensions shown on the approved
plans. All wood posts and offset blocks shall be treated with preservative, full length in
accordance with the NHDOT, Section 606.
B. Standard steel beam guardrail, terminal sections, bolts, nuts and other fixtures shall
conform to the requirements of AASHTO M180, Class A and shall be zinc coated
(galvanized) after fabrication with Type II coating. In addition, the guardrail elements
shall be fabricated from steel sheet conforming to the requirements of ASTM A606, Type
4 (corrosion resistant). The effective length of beam shall be twelve (12’) feet, six (6”)
inches.
C. Steel beams shall be shop punched to allow for six (6’) foot, three (3”) inch post spacing.
Where the rail is on a curve having a radius of one hundred fifty (150’) feet or less, the
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 55
rail shall be shop curved. The plates at the splice shall make contact throughout the
area of the splice. Guardrail parts furnished under this specification shall be
interchangeable with similar parts, regardless of the source of manufacture.
D. Terminal end section shall be NHDOT approved G-2, EGERT or ELT units as follows:
1. Under 20 MPH Design Speed - G-2
2. Under 40 MPH, over 20 MPH - EGERT
3. Over 40 MPH - ELT
E. A twelve (12”) inch square adhesive reflective strip shall be placed at the end of all
terminal sections.
F. Plastic reflective devices on the guardrail center beam shall be provided at twelve (12’)
feet, six (6”) inches, on center.
INSTALLATION
Posts: Post spacing shall be six (6’) foot, three (3”) inch on center. Posts shall be set plumb to
full depth indicated, and accurately aligned and spaced as indicated on the approved plans.
Any space around the posts shall be backfilled with suitable material in six (6”) inch layers and
thoroughly compacted.
Rail elements: The rail elements and terminal pieces shall be erected to the required grade,
and the top of the rail shall be in a straight line or shall have a smooth continuous curve parallel
to the road and/or curb. All bolts, except adjustment bolts, shall be drawn tight. Bolts shall be
of sufficient length to extend beyond the nuts. No punching, drilling, reaming, cutting or welding
of rail elements or terminal pieces will be permitted in the field except where specifically
approved, in writing, by the DPW or designated representative.
FIELD PAINTING
Galvanized surfaces and fittings that have been abraded so that base metal has been exposed
and threaded portions of all fittings and fasteners and the cut end of all bolts shall be cleaned
and painted with two (2) coats of field galvanizing coating.
All posts shall have beveled top and shall be framed before being treated with preservatives.
2.016 RESTORATION OF GROWTH - CLASS A (LAWN)
2.016.1 REFERENCE STANDARDS
NH Stormwater Manual: Volume 3, Chapter 4 Construction Phase Erosion & Sediment Controls
Tables 4-2 & 4-3, as amended. (See Appendix IV. Full Manual available at Departments of
Public Works and Community Development or online at DES website: http://des.nh.gov)
A. Table 4-2 Seed Mixture Selection Based on Soil Type
B. Table 4-3 Seed Mixture for Permanent Vegetation
2.016.2 WORK INCLUDED
Finishing, loaming, grading, fertilizing, seeding and maintaining all seeded areas as shown on
the approved plans and/or specified herein, and any other areas disturbed by the contractor,
developer and/or owner’s operations.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 56
A. All work shall conform to OSHA standards.
B. Class A growth restoration shall apply to all lawn or park type areas disturbed during
construction.
C. Restore growth in all areas to a condition at least fully equal to that prevailing prior to the
construction.
D. Submit all seed tags to DPW for verification.
2.016.3 PRODUCT DELIVERY AND STORAGE
Fertilizer shall be delivered to the site in the original unopened containers showing the
manufacturer's guaranteed analysis, and stored so it shall be dry and free flowing when used.
Lime shall be delivered and maintained in a dry, free flowing condition until used.
Seed shall be delivered in sealed containers bearing the dealer's guaranteed analysis and
stored in a dry, protected place.
2.016.4 MATERIALS
A. Topsoil shall be friable, fertile, natural free-draining loam, typical of the locality; free of
subsoil, roots, grass, sticks, weeds, clay, sod lumps, debris and stones larger than one
(1”) inch in maximum dimension. Soil shall not be excessively acid or alkaline, nor
contain toxic material harmful to plant growth.
B. Fertilizer shall be a complete commercial fertilizer, 10-20-20 grade.
C. Lime shall be ground limestone containing not less than 95% calcium and magnesium
carbonates.
D. Seed shall be from the current year or previous year's crop and shall have not more than
1% weed content. Seed shall also meet the following requirements:
a. Grass seed of the specified mixtures shall be furnished in fully labeled, standard,
sealed containers.
b. Percentage and germination of each seed type in the mixture, purity and weed
seed content of the mixture shall be clearly stated on the label.
c. Seed tags shall be provided to DPW for verification.
d. The weight of Pure Live Seed (PLS) is computed by the labeled purity percent,
times the labeled germination percent, times the weight. To illustrate the method
of computing to PLS from the tag basis, the following example is given:
Required: 20 lbs PLS of a particular variety
Stock Available: 99.41% pure and 92% germination
20 lbs / (0.9941 x 0.92) = 21.87 lbs to be obtained
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 57
E. Class A shall normally be used on loam areas. This seed shall conform to the following
and shall be furnished on a PLS basis.
CLASS A
or see Appendix IV Seed Mixtures
Kind of seed PLS per Acre, lbs
Red Fescue (creeping) 21
Kentucky Bluegrass 21
Redtop 21
Perennial Ryegrass (Manhattan) 21
TOTAL 84
F. Straw mulch shall consist of mowed and properly cured grass or legume mowings,
reasonably free from swamp grass, weeds, twigs, debris or other harmful material. It
shall be free from rot or mold.
G. Mulch Anchoring: When mulch must be held in place, Mulch Netting shall be used to
anchor the mulch. Mulch Netting can be paper, twine, plastic, or plastic and wood fiber.
2.016.5 EXECUTION OF GROWTH RESTORATION
A. The subgrade of all areas to be loamed for seed or ground cover shall be raked and all
rubbish, sticks, roots, and stones larger than one (1”) inch in maximum dimension
removed. Loam shall be spread and lightly compacted to finished grade as shown on
the approved plans. When finished grades are not indicated, they shall be uniform
between the points for which finished grades are given, or from such points to existing
grades, except that the top and bottom of slopes shall be rounded. Compacted loam
shall not be less than the depth specified. No loam shall be spread in water or while
frozen or muddy.
B. After the loam is placed and before it is raked to true lines and rolled, lime shall be
spread evenly over loam surface and thoroughly incorporate into the loam by heavy
raking to at least one-half (½) the depth of the loam.
C. Fertilizer shall be uniformly spread and immediately mixed with the upper two (2”) inches
of loam.
D. Immediately following this preparation, the seed shall be uniformly applied evenly in two
(2) intersecting directions and the seed lightly rolled into the surface. The surface shall
then be lightly rolled and watered with a fine spray.
E. Seed or hydroseeding shall be sown in a favorable season, as approved by the DPW or
designated representative, typically between September 15 and October 15 and
between April 15 and June 1. Seeding shall not be done during windy weather when
ground is frozen, excessively wet or otherwise untillable.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 58
F. Promptly thereafter or within 24 hours after the seeding operation, the area shall be
lightly and uniformly mulched with straw. Straw shall be spread by hand or with
machine.
G. Mulch shall be anchored on all slopes exceeding 5% and other areas as required using
Mulch Netting. Mulch Netting shall be spread over loose mulch and pinned to the soil in
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
H. Washouts shall be protected against by an approved method. Any washout which
occurs shall be regraded and reseeded.
2.016.6 APPLICATION RATES
Loam: Loam shall be placed to a minimum depth of four (4”) to six (6”) inches compacted, or as
shown on the drawings.
Lime: Lime shall be applied at the rate of 75 to 100 lbs per 1,000 square feet.
Fertilizer: Fertilizer shall be applied at the rate of 30 lbs per 1,000 square feet.
Seed: Seed shall be applied at a rate of at least 87 lbs per acre or 2 lbs per 1,000 square feet or
per supplier’s recommendations. Seed used in hydroseeding applications shall be in
conformance with approved hydroseeding rates.
Mulch: Mulch shall be applied at the rate of 90 lbs per 1,000 square feet.
2.016.7 MAINTENANCE
All seeded areas shall be maintained and watered so as to be kept in healthy condition, and
reseeded if and when necessary until a good, healthy, uniform growth is established over the
entire area seeded. Areas shall be maintained in an approved condition until final acceptance
of growth by the DPW or designated representative. The maintenance shall include repairs for
damage caused by erosion.
2.017 RESTORATION OF GROWTH - CLASS B (FIELD)
2.017.1 REFERENCE STANDARDS
NH Stormwater Manual: Volume 3, Chapter 4 Construction Phase Erosion & Sediment Controls
Tables 4-2 & 4-3, as amended. (See Appendix IV. Full Manual available at Departments of
Public Works and Community Development or online at DES website: http://des.nh.gov)
A. Table 4-2 Seed Mixture Selection Based on Soil Type
B. Table 4-3 Seed Mixture for Permanent Vegetation
2.017.2 WORK INCLUDED
Finishing, furnishing and placing loam, grading, fertilizing, seeding and maintaining all seeded
areas within limits shown on the approved plans and/or specified herein, and any other areas
disturbed by the contractor, developer and/or owner’s operations.
A. Class B restoration shall apply to slope or field type areas disturbed during construction.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 59
B. Restore growth in all areas to a condition at least fully equal to that prevailing prior to the
construction.
2.017.3 PRODUCT DELIVERY AND STORAGE
Fertilizer shall be delivered to the site in the original unopened containers, each showing the
manufacturer's guaranteed analysis and stored so it shall be dry and free flowing when used.
Lime shall be delivered and maintained in a dry, free flowing condition until used.
Seed shall be delivered in sealed containers bearing the dealer's guaranteed analysis and
stored in a dry, protected place.
2.017.4 MATERIALS
A. Loam shall be the surface layer of natural workable soil containing a minimum of five
(5%) percent organic matter, or material of a nature capable of sustaining the growth of
vegetation, with no admixture of refuse or material toxic to plant growth. It shall be free
from stones, lumps, sterile soil, stumps or similar objects larger than two (2”) inches in
maximum dimension, roots and brush.
B. Fertilizer shall be a complete commercial fertilizer, 10-10-10 grade.
C. Lime shall be ground limestone containing not less than ninety-five percent (95%)
calcium and magnesium carbonates.
D. Seed shall be from the same or previous year's crop and shall have not more than one
(1%) percent weed content. Seed shall also meet the following requirements:
a. Grass seed of the specified mixtures shall be furnished in fully labeled, standard,
sealed containers.
b. Percentage and germination of each seed type in the mixture, purity and weed
seed content of the mixture shall be clearly stated on the label.
c. The weight of PLS is computed by the labeled purity percent, times the labeled
germination percent, times the weight. To illustrate the method of computing to
PLS from the tag basis, the following example is given:
Required: Twenty (20) pounds PLS of a particular variety
Stock Available: 99.41% pure and 92% germination
20 lbs / (0.9941 x 0.92) = 21.87 lbs to be obtained
E. This seed mixture shall be placed on all pasture areas. This seed shall conform to the
table below unless amended by the Town of Milford to suit special local conditions
encountered. This seed shall be furnished on a PLS basis.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 60
PASTURE RESTORATION
or see Appendix IV Seed Mixtures
Kind of Seed PLS per Acre, lbs
Bluegrass 23.6
Timothy 14.0
Ladino Clover 2.4
Redtop 15.0
TOTAL 55.0
F. Class B shall normally be used for all slope work. This seed shall conform to the table
below unless the change is approved by the DPW or designated representative to suit
special local conditions encountered. This seed shall be furnished on a PLS basis.
CLASS B
or see Appendix IV Seed Mixtures
Kind of Seed PLS per Acre, lbs
Tall Fescue (Alta or K-31) 20
Perennial Ryegrass (Manhattan) 15
Red Fescue (Creeping) 5
Red Clover 5
Birdsfoot Trefoil (Empire variety preferred) 5
TOTAL 50
G. Red clover and bird's-foot trefoil seed shall include not more than twenty-five (25%)
percent hard seed. If necessary, to meet this requirement, extra seed shall be supplied.
H. Inoculum specific to red clover and Birdsfoot trefoil must be used with this mixture. The
inoculum shall be a pure culture of nitrogen-fixing bacteria selected for maximum vitality
and the ability to transform nitrogen from the air into soluble nitrates and to deposit them
in the soil. The inoculum shall not be used later than the date indicated on the container
or later than specified. The inoculum shall be subject to approval. If seeding by hand, a
sticking agent such as milk or cola shall be used to stick inoculum to the seed. If
seeding with hydroseeder, use four (4) times the recommended amount of inoculum.
I. Straw mulch shall consist of mowed and properly cured grass or legume mowings,
reasonably free from swamp grass, weeds, twigs, debris or other deleterious material. It
shall be free from rot or mold.
J. Mulch Anchoring: When mulch must be held in place, Mulch Netting shall be used to
anchor the mulch. Mulch Netting can be paper, twine, plastic, or plastic and wood fiber.
2.017.5 GENERAL EXECUTION
A. Subgrade of all areas shall be raked to receive humus and all rubbish, sticks, roots and
stones larger than two (2”) inches in maximum dimension removed. Loam shall be
spread and lightly compacted to finished grade as shown on the approved plans. When
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 61
finished grades are not indicated, they shall be uniform between the points for which
finished grades are given, or from such points to existing grades, except that the top and
bottom of slopes shall be rounded. Compacted humus shall not be less than the depth
specified. No loam shall be spread in water or while frozen or muddy.
B. Lime shall be spread after the humus is placed and before it is raked to true lines and
rolled. Lime shall be evenly and thoroughly incorporated into the humus by heavy raking
to at least one-half (½) the depth of the humus.
C. Fertilizer shall be uniformly spread and immediately mixed with the upper two (2”) inches
of humus.
D. Immediately follow this preparation, seed shall be applied uniformly and evenly in two (2)
intersecting directions and lightly raked into the surface. The surface shall be lightly
raked and watered with a fine spray.
E. Seed shall be sown in a favorable season as approved by the DPW or designated
representative, typically between September 15 and October 15 and between April 15
and June 1. Seeding shall not be done during windy weather or when the ground is
frozen, excessively wet or otherwise untillable.
F. Promptly thereafter or within twenty-four (24) hours after the seeding operation, mulch
shall be spread lightly and uniformly throughout the area with straw. Straw shall be
spread by hand or with machine.
G. Mulch shall be anchored on all slopes exceeding five percent (5%) and other areas as
required using Mulch Netting. Mulch Netting shall be spread over loose mulch and
pinned to the soil in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
H. Protect against washouts by an approved method. Any washout which occurs shall be
regraded and reseeded.
2.017.6 APPLICATION RATES
Humus: Humus shall be spread over properly prepared areas to give a covering which will be a
minimum of four (4”) inches.
Lime: Lime shall be applied at the rate of fifty (50) pounds per one thousand (1000) square feet.
Fertilizer: Fertilizer shall be applied at the rate of twenty-five (25) pounds per one thousand
(1000) square feet.
Seed: Seed shall be applied at a rate of at least fifty (50) pounds (PLS) per acre or 1.2 pounds
(PLS) per one thousand (1000) square feet.
Mulch: Mulch shall be applied at the rate of ninety (90) pounds per one thousand (1000) square
feet.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 62
2.017.7 MAINTENANCE
All seeded areas shall be maintained and watered so as to be kept in healthy condition, and
reseeded if and when necessary until a good, healthy, uniform growth is established over the
entire area seeded. Areas shall be maintained in an approved condition until final acceptance
of growth by the DPW or designated representative. The maintenance shall include repairs for
damage caused by erosion.
2.018 TREES AND SHRUBS
2.018.1 WORK INCLUDED
A. Furnishing trees and shrubs.
B. Installation.
C. Maintenance service.
D. Warranty.
2.018.2 REFERENCE STANDARDS
American Joint Committee on Horticultural Standards: Standardized Plant Names.
American Association of Nurserymen.
ANSI 260.1 - USA Standards for Nursery Stock.
2.018.3 DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING
A. Plant materials shall be moved with solid root balls wrapped in burlap.
B. Plant materials shall be delivered to the site immediately prior to placement. Plant
materials shall be kept moist.
C. When root ball of earth surrounding roots has been cracked or broken plants shall be
rejected, prior to or during the process of planting.
D. When burlap, staves, and ropes required in connection with transplanting have been
displaced prior to acceptance plants shall be rejected.
E. Plants shall be dug with root balls having minimum sizes as specified in ANSI 260.1.
F. Plants shall be dug, transported and handled with the utmost care to insure against
injury and to provide adequate protection against wind and sun. Plants shall be securely
covered with tarpaulin, canvas or other cover to minimize wind whipping and drying.
The plant shall be kept moist at all times until planted. Under no circumstances shall
balled plants be dropped to the ground. A suitable method of handling shall be
employed to preclude cracked or mushroomed root balls at the point of delivery. All
plant material shall be protected from freezing at all times prior to transplanting.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 63
G. All plants shall have securely attached durable legible labels stating in weather resistant
ink the correct botanical plant name.
H. All plants shall be subject to inspection by the DPW or designated representative during
digging operations and after replanting. No plants shall be planted before inspection and
approval by the DPW or designated representative. Any plants damaged by the
contractor, developer and/or owner’s operations shall be removed from the site
immediately and replaced with acceptable plants without additional compensation.
2.018.4 WARRANTY
A one year warranty from date of final acceptance shall be provided to the Department of Public
Works. During the warranty period plant materials found dead, or not in a healthy growing
condition shall be replaced. Replacement plant materials shall be of same species, with the
warranty commencing on date of replacement.
2.018.5 MATERIALS
A. Plants shall not be listed on NH’s Invasive Species List or NH’s Invasive Species Watch
List.
B. Plants shall be of species and sizes called for on the approved plans and shall conform
to all applicable provisions of the Horticultural Standards published by the American
Association of Nurserymen. All plants shall have well developed and vigorous branch
and root systems and shall be healthy and free of injury or any form of damage. All plant
material will be subject to inspection and approval by the DPW or designated
representative.
C. Planting Soil: Topsoil specified in Section 2.08.6 mixed five (5) parts topsoil, one (1) part
peat moss. Fertilizer shall be added as required.
D. Peat Moss: Horticultural grade Class A decomposed plant material, elastic and
homogeneous. Free of decomposed colloidal residue, wood, sulphur, and iron; pH value
of 5.9 to 7.0, 60% organic matter by weight, moisture content not exceeding 15% and
water absorption capacity of not less than 300% by weight on oven dry basis.
E. Mulching Material: Red bark chip mulch shall consist of softwood bark platelets, 1/8 inch
to 3 inch nominal thickness, with 50 percent having an area of not less than one square
inch or more than two square inches. All bark chip mulch shall be reasonably free from
leaves, twigs, shavings, wood or other deleterious material.
F. Fertilizer shall be 5-10-10 delivered in standard manufacturer's bags, showing the
weight, chemical analysis of the contents and the name of the manufacturer. At least
50% of the nitrogen in the fertilizer shall be from natural organic sources. Fertilizer shall
be carefully stored and shall be dry and free-flowing at the time of application.
G. Bonemeal shall be commercial steamed bonemeal, finely ground with a minimum of
2.0% nitrogen and a minimum of 20% phosphoric acid, delivered in standard packages
of the manufacturer, showing weight, analysis and name of manufacturer.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 64
H. Tree wrap shall be burlap or special crepe weatherproof tree wrapping tape in two (2”) to
eight (8”) inch width rolls.
I. Antidesiccant emulsion for tree spraying shall be antitransparent wax or similar
concentrate specifically manufactured for horticultural use. It shall be delivered in
manufacturer's original containers and mixed and applied according to manufacturer's
label directions.
J. Support Stakes: Shall be wood.
K. Cables, Wire, Eye Bolts, and Turnbuckles: Shall be noncorrosive and of sufficient
strength to withstand wind pressure.
2.018.6 PREPARATION
The contractor, developer and/or owner shall:
A. Verify topsoil is ready to receive the work of this Section.
B. Prepare topsoil to receive plant materials.
2.018.7 INSTALLATION
A. Plant materials shall be placed for review as necessary by the DPW or designated
representative prior to installation.
B. Excavations for all plant material shall allow a minimum of one (1’) foot clearance around
the sides of the root ball and six (6”) inches below the root ball to receive the backfill
material.
C. All plants shall stand plumb and after settlement shall be at the same ground level at
which they were growing before digging. Burlap and twine shall be cut away from the
upper half of all root balls and the remaining burlap adjusted to prevent the formation of
air pockets. Exposed and curled roots shall be spread in a natural position.
D. Backfill around plant balls shall be planting soil as specified. The plant ball shall be
placed on a compacted planting base of the prepared planting soil with a minimum depth
of six (6”) inches. Bonemeal as specified shall be mixed in the compacted base soil
mixture at the rate of one (1) cup per diameter inch for trees and one-half (½) cup per
shrub. Planting soil shall be backfilled in six (6”) inch layers, firmly tamping and watering
each layer. Excess topsoil shall be used to form a berm approximately four (4”) inches
high around the pit planting area to provide a saucer for watering.
E. Fertilizer as specified shall be evenly distributed on the surface of the backfilled saucer
area at the rate of one (1) pound per tree before mulching.
F. Pruning shall be done with sharp tools which make a clean cut. Care shall be taken to
preserve the natural appearance of the plant. Pruning shall consist of removal of
selected small branches rather than a general cutting back of all branches. The pruning
shall be limited to removal of damaged branches and cutting back of longer lateral
branches. The central leader shall not be cut under any circumstances.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 65
G. Mulching material as specified shall be applied to all plants over the entire backfilled
saucer area to a depth of three (3”) inches. A slight saucer shall be maintained around
each plant for watering.
H. All stems and leaves of plant materials shall be uniformly covered with an antidesiccant
emulsion, using an approved low pressure power sprayer to apply an adequate film over
trunks, branches, twigs and/or foliage. The spray material shall not be applied at
temperatures below 32 degrees F and shall be protected from freezing at all times.
I. All plants shall be carefully and thoroughly watered during planting and as often as
necessary thereafter to provide the best growing conditions until acceptance of the work.
2.018.8 PLANT SUPPORT AND WRAPPING
All stakes or guying shall be done immediately after planting. Stakes and wire shall be
maintained. Plants shall stand plumb after staking.
Plants shall be braced upright in position by guy wires with turnbuckles or stakes according to
the following schedule:
Tree Caliper Tree Support Method
1 inch 1 stake with one tie
1 - 2 inches 2 stakes with two ties
2 - 4 inches 3 guy wires
over 4 inches 4 guy wires
Promptly after planting and inspection, the trunks of all deciduous trees shall be spirally
wrapped starting at the base with burlap or approved tree wrap. The wrap shall overlap half the
width of the tape and be securely tied around the tree stem at two (2’) foot intervals. The
wrapping shall cover the entire surface of the trunk to a height of six (6’) feet or the first main
branches.
2.018.9 MAINTENANCE SERVICE
Begin maintenance of plant materials shall begin immediately after planting and continue until
termination of warranty period. Maintenance shall include measures necessary to establish and
maintain plants in a vigorous and healthy growing condition. Maintenance shall include the
following:
A. Cultivating and weeding plant beds and tree pits. Herbicide use shall be minimized.
When herbicides are used for weed control, apply in accordance with manufacturer's
instructions. Remedy damage resulting from use of herbicides.
B. Watering sufficient to saturate root system.
C. Pruning, including removal of dead or broken branches, and treatment of pruning
wounds.
D. Disease and insect control.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 66
E. Maintaining wrappings, guys, turnbuckles, and stakes. Adjustment of turnbuckles to
keep guy wires tight. Repair or replacement of accessories when required.
2.019 CAST-IN-PLACE CONCRETE
2.019.1 WORK INCLUDED
Furnishing all labor, materials, equipment and incidentals required for all cast-in-place concrete,
including reinforcing steel, forms, water stops and miscellaneous related items such as sleeves,
reglets, anchor bolts, inserts and embedded items specified under other Sections.
2.019.2 REFERENCE STANDARDS
All work shall conform to OSHA approved practices.
ACI 301 - Structural Concrete for Buildings
ACI 305 - Recommended Practice for Hot Weather Concreting
ACI 306 - Recommended Practice for Cold Weather Concreting
ACI 315 - Details and Detailing of Concrete Reinforcement
ACI 347 - Recommended Practice for Concrete Formwork
ASTM A185 - Welded Steel Wire Fabric for Concrete Reinforcement
ASTM A615 - Deformed and Plain Billet-Steel Bars for Concrete Reinforcement
ASTM C33 - Concrete Aggregates
ASTM C94 - Ready-Mixed Concrete
ASTM C150 - Portland Cement
2.019.3 SUBMITTALS
Shop Drawings: Submit to the DPW or designated agent four (4) sets of completely detailed
working drawings and schedules of all reinforcing required.
2.019.4 QUALITY ASSURANCE
Concrete work shall conform to all requirements of ACI 301 and ACI 347, except as modified
herein.
Protection: Concrete reinforcement shall be stored in a manner to prevent excessive rusting
and fouling with dirt, grease, and other bond breaking coatings.
2.019.5 SCHEDULING
A. Call Dig Safe (1-888-DIG-SAFE or 1-888-344-7233)
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 67
B. Formwork and steel reinforcing installation shall be completed at least 24 hours in
advance of placing concrete.
C. The DPW or designated representative shall be notified upon completion of formwork
and completion of steel reinforcing installation.
D. The DPW or designated representative shall be notified at least 24 hours in advance of
placing concrete.
2.019.6 CEMENT
Cement: ASTM C150, Portland Type I; Type II if concrete will be in contact with wastewater
2.019.7 AGGREGATES
Fine Aggregate: ASTM C33
Coarse Aggregate: ASTM C33, 3/4 inch maximum size
2.019.8 ADMIXTURES
Air Entraining: "Darex AEA" by W.R. Grace, or equal
Water Reducing: "WRDA with Hycol" by W.R. Grace, or equal
All adamixtures shall be utilized in accordance with ACI Standards.
No other admixtures are permitted without prior acceptance by the DPW or designated
representative.
2.019.9 CONCRETE
The proportions of ingredients and compressive strength shall be selected in accordance with
ACI Standards.
The concrete compressive strength shall be as appropriate per application.
All concrete shall have a slump. The slump shall vary with design and be applied per ACI
standards for proposed application.
2.019.10 REINFORCING
The following shall be a minimum:
Reinforcing Steel: ASTM A615, Grade 60 deformed bars; stirrups and ties Grade 40, or other
reinforcing steel per ASTM standards.
Welded Wire Fabric: ASTM A185, or other welded wire fabric per ASTM standards
Reinforcing steel shall be fabricated in conformance with ACI 315
2.019.11 FORMS AND ACCESSORIES
The following shall be a minimum:
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 68
Lumber: All form lumber shall be in accordance with ACI 347.
Form Ties: Shall be removable metal of fixed length; cone type, one and a quarter (1-1/4) inch
maximum diameter; one (1) inch break back dimension; and waterproofing washer. Wire ties
and wood spreaders not permitted.
Form Release Agent: Shall be colorless material which will not stain concrete nor absorb
moisture nor impair natural bonding or color characteristics of coating intended for use on
concrete.
Dovetail Anchor Slots: Shall be galvanized steel; easily removed foam filler; bent tab anchors;
securable to concrete formwork.
Waterstop: Shall be Extruded Polyvinyl Chloride or cold joint waterstop (volclay) as shown on
the approved plans.
2.019.12 GENERAL EXECUTION
A. Design, and formwork construction, falsework, shoring, and bracing shall meet all loads
during placement and curing, so that cast-in-place concrete conforms to required
finishes, shapes, lines, and dimensions.
B. Inserts, openings, sleeves, offsets, recesses, anchorage, blocking, and other
penetrations and embedments shall be provided for.
C. Embedded Items: Steel frames, angles, bolts, inserts, and other items required to be
anchored shall be set in the concrete before the concrete is placed.
D. Form Release Agent: Form release agent shall not be applied where concrete surfaces
are scheduled to receive special finishes which may be affected by agent. Contact
surfaces of untreated forms shall be soaked with clean water and surfaces kept wet prior
to placing concrete. Application of form release agent shall be in accordance with
manufacturer's instructions.
2.019.13 REINFORCING
A. Fabrication:
1. Fabrication of all reinforcement shall be in strict accordance with the reviewed
and accepted shop drawings.
2. Bars with kinks or bends not shown on the approved plans or on the reviewed
and accepted shop drawings shall not be used.
3. Bending or straightening steel in a manner that will damage the material shall not
be allowed.
B. Placement: All concrete reinforcement shall be accurately placed, positively secured and
supported by concrete bricks, metal chairs or spacers, or by metal hangers.
C. Splicing:
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 69
1. Bars shall be placed with minimum thirty (30) bar diameter overlap at splices.
2. Lapped ends of bars may be placed in contact and securely wired or may be
separated one and a half (1½“) inches minimum to permit the embedment of the
entire surface of each bar in concrete.
3. Splices of adjacent bars shall be staggered.
Splice wire fabric at least one and a half (1½) meshes wide.
D. Dowels: All required steel dowels shall be placed and securely anchored into position.
E. Obstructions: If conduits, piping, inserts, sleeves, or any other items interfere with
placing reinforcement as indicated on the approved plans or as otherwise required, the
Design Engineer shall be immediately consulted for proper placement before placing
concrete.
F. Steel reinforcement shall be free from rust scale, loose mill scale, oil, paint, and all other
coatings which will destroy or reduce bond between steel and concrete.
2.019.14 INSPECTION
The contractor, developer and/or owner shall:
A. Verify that all formwork, reinforcing and work of other trades are complete and ready for
placement of concrete.
B. Notify the DPW or designated representative at least 48 hours before placing concrete.
No work can proceed without notifying the DPW or designated representative.
2.019.15 CONCRETE MIXING AND PLACEMENT
A. All cast-in-place concrete shall be transit-mix concrete in accordance with ASTM C94.
B. Retamping of concrete is not permitted.
C. Weather Conditions: Concrete shall not be placed when weather conditions are not
suitable for the proper placing, finishing or curing of the concrete. Unless otherwise
accepted by the DPW or designated representative, concrete shall only be placed during
dry weather. In the event of sudden rainstorms, cover exposed, freshly placed concrete
and protect from damage. When cold or hot weather concreting is authorized by the
DPW or designated representative, comply with ACI 305 and ACI 306.
D. Cold Weather Concrete: Concrete shall not be placed on the ground where the
temperature is below 35 degrees F or in forms where the form, reinforcing steel,
adjacent concrete, etc. are below 35 degrees F. Concrete shall be covered and heated
immediately after placement and only allowed to be covered to place the finish.
E. When Type II cement is used, elapsed time between initial contact of the cement with
water and the completed discharge of the batch at the Project site shall not exceed one
and a half (1-1/2) hours or 300 revolutions of the drum, whichever comes first. Reduce
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 70
the above limits when conditions result in quick-stiffening of the concrete, or when
directed by DPW Director or designated representative.
F. Conveying and Placing Concrete: Concrete shall be conveyed to the forms as rapidly as
practicable, utilizing methods which will not cause segregation or loss of ingredients.
Free fall from mixer or truck to conveyance shall not exceed three (3’) feet. When
placing concrete in final position, the free fall shall not exceed five (5’) feet. Concrete
shall be placed in horizontal layers approximately two (2’) feet thick and avoid the
formation of cold joints and poorly bonded sections between layers. The horizontal
distribution of concrete by spading or vibration is prohibited.
G. Vibration: Unless otherwise specified or directed by the DPW or designated
representative, all reinforced concrete shall be subject to vibration. Use only approved
mechanical vibrators operated by experienced operators. Vibrators shall be applied at
uniformly spaced points not further apart than the visible effectiveness of the machine.
Vibration of concrete shall be sufficient to produce satisfactory consolidation without
causing segregation. Vibrators shall not be used to transport concrete in the forms or
insert them into lower layers of concrete that have begun to set.
2.019.16 CONCRETE TESTING
A. Contractor shall prepare, cure and have tested by an independent laboratory, one (1) set
of four (4) test cylinders for each concrete placement in accordance with Chapter 16 of
ACI 301.
B. Contractor shall pay for all concrete testing including all supplemental testing required if
the cylinders break at lower than the required strength.
C. A minimum of one (1) slump test shall be performed for each batch of concrete and
when additional water is added.
2.019.17 CURING
Concrete shall be water cured, or cured using curing compounds or waterproof paper and
sheeting, or other acceptable methods. Minimum curing period shall be seven (7) days.
2.019.18 REMOVAL OF FORMS
A. Forms shall be removed in accordance with ACI 347 only after concrete has attained
sufficient strength to support its own weight, construction live loads placed thereon, and
lateral loads, all without excessive deflection or damage to the structure.
B. Contractor shall be fully responsible for the proper removal of forms, installing all shoring
and reshoring, and removal of shores and reshores. The Contractor shall, at no
additional cost to Owner, replace any work damaged due to improper or early removal of
forms, shores and reshores.
C. Metal spreader ties shall be removed on exposed concrete by removing or snapping off
inside the wall surface and pointing up and rubbing the resulting pockets to match the
surrounding areas.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 71
2.019.19 FINISHING CONCRETE
Finishes shall be provided in accordance with ACI 301 as follows:
A. Rough Form Finish: Concrete surfaces below grade and other surfaces not exposed to
view after construction, shall have fins and rough edges removed. All tie holes and
defects shall be patched. All channels and other surfaces used to convey liquids shall
be provided with a smooth form finish, whether or not it may be exposed to view.
B. Grout Cleaned Finish: Cement grout composed of one (1) part cement to two (2) parts
fine sand, mixed with water to the consistency of heavy cream shall be thoroughly wet
and brushed on. Cement shall be light colored to produce a finish matching the color of
the concrete. Grout shall be thoroughly rubbed over the entire area with clean burlap or
a sponge rubber float to fill pits and voids completely. While the grout is still plastic,
surfaces shall be rubbed with a dry mix of the grout until no materials remain on the
surface, except within pits and voids. The grouting operation for an area shall be
completed the day it is started.
C. Surfaces to Receive Epoxy Coatings: Oil and grease, and any curing compounds and
other materials which are incompatible with or may adversely affect the bonding of the
epoxy coatings shall be removed. Concrete surfaces as specified for smooth form finish
shall be prepared.
D. Floated Finish: Concrete floor slabs.
2.019.20 PROTECTION
A. Concrete shall be protected from damage due to sun, rain, flowing water, frost, weather
and mechanical injury.
B. Concrete temperature shall be maintained at a minimum of 50 degrees F for not less
than three (3) days and do not expose concrete to a temperature below 40 degrees F for
a minimum of seven (7) days after placement.
C. Concrete walls shall not be subject to lateral pressures until the supporting members are
placed and cured for a minimum of fourteen (14) days with the concrete attaining a
minimum of seventy-five (75%) percent of the required twenty-eight (28) day
compressive strength. Contractor shall be responsible for damage to, or misalignment
of, walls resulting from earth backfilling, trapped water or other causes.
2.020 PRECAST CONCRETE CATCH BASINS
2.020.1 WORK INCLUDED
A. Furnishing precast concrete catch basins and appurtenant materials.
B. Installation.
2.020.2 REFERENCE STANDARDS
ASTM C478 - Precast Reinforced Concrete Manhole Sections.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 72
AASHTO - Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges.
New Hampshire Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.
2.020.3 MATERIALS AND DESIGN
A. Precast Concrete Catch Basins: ASTM C478 or ASTM C 858, precast reinforced
concrete, of depth indicated as shown on the approved plans. Sections shall have
provision for rubber gasket joints. Base section slab shall have a minimum thickness of
six (6”) inches, riser sections shall have minimum thickness of four (4”) inches and be
forty eight (48”) inches inside diameter, and top section and grade rings shall match
twenty four (24”) inch frame and grate, unless otherwise approved by DPW Director or
designate representative.
1. Base Section: Base riser section with integral floor
2. Riser Section: Sections shall be of lengths to provide depth indicated.
3. Top Section: Flat slab type with openings to match grade rings.
4. Grade Rings: Provide two (2) or three (3) reinforced concrete rings, of six (6”) to
(9”) inches total thickness.
5. Gaskets: ASTM C 443, rubber.
6. Pipe Connectors: ASTM C 923, resilient, of size required, for each pipe
connecting to base section.
7. Channel and Bench: Concrete
B. Precast Concrete Catch Basins shall:
1. Be constructed of minimum 5,000 psi reinforced concrete using Type II cement.
2. Shall be capable of withstanding H-20 wheel loadings.
3. Be cured five (5) days before shipping.
4. Have a minimum of two (2’) foot deep sump or as approved per application.
2.020.4 INSTALLATION
A. Installation shall be performed in accordance with approved plans.
B. Backfilling and compaction shall be performed in accordance with approved plans.
C. The base on which the precast concrete catch basin is set shall be dry, firm and level.
D. Catch basin sections shall be set vertical with sections in true alignment within a three
(3”) inch maximum tolerance.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 73
E. Holes in the concrete sections and around pipe entrances shall be plugged with a nonshrinking
grout.
F. Inlet frames shall be brought to grade using brick type SS, grade N and mortar.
2.021 CASTINGS
2.021.1 WORK INCLUDED
A. Furnishing catch basin frames and grates, drain and miscellaneous manhole frames and
covers.
B. Installation.
2.021.2 REFERENCE STANDARDS
ASTM A48 - Grey Iron Castings.
2.021.3 QUALITY CONTROL INSPECTION
All castings shall be subject to a hammer inspection by the DPW or designated representative.
Castings rejected upon delivery to the site shall be marked as such and removed from the site.
All castings damaged after delivery or after installation shall be removed and replaced as
directed by the DPW or designated representative.
2.021.4 ACCEPTABLE MANUFACTURERS
Manhole Frames and Covers: Neenah Foundry Co., Catalog No. R-1743.
Waterproof Manhole Frames and Covers: Neenah Foundry Co., Catalog No. R-1916.
Catch Basin Frames and Grates: E.L. LeBaron Foundry Co., Neenah Foundry Co., Catalog R-
3570, or approved equal.
In areas with roadway slopes of 6% or greater, the catch basin frames and grates shall be
Neenah Foundry Co., Type R-3210L or approved equal
Substitutions: Products of equal or better quality, detail, function, and performance may be
proposed for substitution.
2.021.5 GENERAL PRODUCTS
The castings shall be of good quality, even-grained cast iron, free from scale and defects of any
nature which would render them unfit for the service for which they are intended. Contact
surfaces of covers and frame seats shall be machined at the foundry, before shipment to
prevent rocking of covers in any orientation.
All castings shall be thoroughly cleaned and subject to a careful hammer inspection.
Castings shall be Class 30 minimum, conforming to the ASTM A48.
Before being shipped from the foundry, castings shall be sandblasted.
All castings shall be heavy duty suitable for H-20 loadings.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 74
All manhole covers for installation on drain manholes shall have the word "DRAIN" cast into a
diamond design on the top surface.
2.021.6 MANHOLE FRAMES AND COVERS
Manhole frames and covers shall provide thirty (30”) inch diameter clear opening.
2.021.7 POLYLINERS
Polyethylene Liners:
A. Materials shall conform to the requirements of ASTM M 294, Section 6, but not have a
wall thickness less than a quarter (¼”) inch.
B. Liners shall be fabricated at the shop. Downspout shall be extrusion fillet welded to the
polyethylene sheet.
C. Installers shall place a continuous bead of an approved silicone sealant between the
frame and polyethylene sheet.
D. Liners shall only be used on drainage structures with a minimum of four (4’) feet
diameter.
E. The polyethylene sheet shall be trimmed to a maximum of the outside flange on the
frame for the catch basin before placing concrete (except when used with curb).
F. The center of the grate and frame must be centered over the center of the downspout.
2.021.8 CATCH BASIN FRAMES AND GRATES
Catch basin frames and grates shall have twenty-four (24”) inch-square grates with two (2”) inch
square openings suitable for H-20 loadings.
In non-residential green areas, the contractor, developer and/or owner may propose the use of
type "C" inlet catch basins subject to the approval of the DPW Director or designated agent.
2.021.9 SETTING FRAMES, COVERS AND GRATES
A. Frames shall be set with the tops conforming accurately to the grade of the pavement or
finished ground surface or as indicated on the approved plans. Frames shall be
adjusted to grade with a precast concrete grade ring or a maximum of three (3) courses
of mortared red, type SS, sewer brick. Exterior of sewer brick shall be plastered with
mortar. Frames shall be set concentric with the top of the masonry and in a full bed of
mortar so that the space between the top of the manhole masonry and the bottom flange
of the frame shall be completely filled and made watertight. A thick ring of mortar
extending to the outer edge of the masonry shall be placed all around and on the top of
the bottom flange. The mortar shall be smoothly finished and have a slight slope to shed
water away from the frame.
B. Manhole covers and grates shall be left in place in the frame, upon completion of other
work at the manholes or catch basins.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 75
APPENDIX I: ADMINISTRATIVE DOCUMENTS
A. Application for Start of Construction
B. Subdivision/Site Plan Improvements Guarantee Worksheet
C. DPW Construction Monitoring Approach
D. Application/Permit for Street Opening
E. Stormwater Permit and Checklist
F. Driveway Permit Application
G. Inspection Fee Agreement Form
H. Release of Inspection Fee
I. Cash Escrow Agreement Form
J. Bond/Letter of Credit Agreement Form
K. Release of Security or Escrow Form
Page 76
TOWN OF MILFORD
APPLICATION FOR START OF CONSTRUCTION
Approved Name(s) of Road(s) or Drive(s)
Subdivision Name:
Location:
Developer:
Contracted Road Contractor:
Subcontractors:
Date of Application:
Developer's Authorized Agent:
Public Works Department’s Authorized Agent:
Fire Department’s Authorized Agent:
Surety Amounts: Surety Received (signatures required):
Public Works Dept. $____________
Director of Public Works
Escrow Accounts Established (signatures required):
Director of Public Works Initial Amount in Escrow Date
Estimate Amount Date
Submit completed, authorized, form to the Director of Public Works. Do not proceed with
construction without a Notice to Proceed.
ITEM QUANTITY MEASURE UNIT PRICE PRICE
1. Site Work
a. Clearing and Grubbing 0 Acre $7,500.00 $0.00
b. Excavation (assumes 6" topsoil) 0 CY $7.00 $0.00
c. Grading 0 SY $0.20 $0.00
d. Erosion Control 0 LF $5.00 $0.00
e. Other: Construction Entrance 0 LS $1,000.00 $0.00
f. Ledge Excavation - assume 10% of Item 1b 0 CY $75.00 $0.00
2. Roadway Construction
a. Bank Run Gravel 0 CY $20.00 $0.00
b. Crushed Gravel 0 CY $25.00 $0.00
c. Crushed Stone 0 CY $20.00 $0.00
d. 2½" Paving, Binder Course 0 EA $85.00 $0.00
h I hereby certify that, in addition to any work already completed, the following itemized statement and
estimated unit costs will complete all improvements required by the Milford Department of Public Works
Infrastructure Design, Construction and Administration Standards and the Development Regulations for
the following lot(s):
SUBDIVISION/SITE PLAN IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEE WORKSHEET
TOWN OF MILFORD, NEW HAMPSHIRE
Map _______ Lot(s) __________ Name of Project: _____________________________________
Date: _____________________
1
e. 1½" Paving, Finish Course 0 EA $ 85.00 $
0.00
f. Vertical Granite Curbing 0 LF $17.50 $0.00
g. Striping 0 LF $1.00 $0.00
h. Prep Work 0 LF $1.00 $0.00
i. Tack Coat 0 SY $1.25 $0.00
j. Filter Fabric (under aprons) 0 SY $2.00 $0.00
k. Other: Sand 0 CY $3.00 $0.00
l. Retaining Wall 0 CY $5.00 $0.00
m. Trench Patch 0 TON $150.00 $0.00
PAGE SUBTOTAL $0.00
ITEM QUANTITY MEASURE UNIT PRICE PRICE
3. Drainage Work
a. Pipe: Size Type
12" HDPE 0 LF $18.00 $0.00
12" RCP 0 LF $18.00 $0.00
15" HDPE 0 LF $20.00 $0.00
15" RCP 0 LF $20.00 $0.00
18" HDPE 0 LF $25.00 $0.00
18" RCP 0 LF $25.00 $0.00
24" HDPE 0 LF $35.00 $0.00
24" RCP 0 LF $35.00 $0.00
36" HDPE 0 LF $50.00 $0.00
36" RCP 0 LF $50.00 $0.00
6" Underdrain 0 LF $20.00 $0.00
b. Catch Basins/Inlets 0 EA $1,750.00 $0.00
c. Driveway Culverts 0 EA $1,000.00 $0.00
d. Retention/Detention Basins
Excavation 0 CY $10.00 $0.00
Loam and Seed 0 SY $4.00 $0.00
Inlet/Outlet 0 EA $3,500.00 $0.00
e. End Section 0 EA $500.00 $0.00
f. Wingwall/Headwall 0 LF $250.00 $0.00
g. Swales
Excavation 0 LF $4.00 $0.00
Loam and Seed 0 SY $4 00 $0 00
2
4.00 0.00
h. Rip Rap/Filter Material 0 CY $25.00 $0.00
i. Other:
4. Misc. Utilities
a. Gas Mains 0 LF $20.00 $0.00
b. Gas Services 0 EA $500.00 $0.00
c. Buried Utilities 0 LF $20.00 $0.00
5. Misc. Improvements
a. Street Signs 0 EA $400.00 $0.00
b. Stop Signs 0 EA $500.00 $0.00
c. Guardrail 0 LF $17.50 $0.00
d. Guardrail Terminus End Units 0 EA $1,200.00 $0.00
e. Paved Sidewalks 0 LF $20.00 $0.00
f. Parking Space Bumpers 0 EA $250.00 $0.00
g. Landscaping
Loam and Seed 0 SY $4.00 $0.00
Trees 0 Per Caliper $0.00
Shrubs 0 EA $0.00
h. Fire Cisterns 0 Gallon $2.50 $0.00
ITEM QUANTITY MEASURE UNIT PRICE PRICE
6. Misc. Items
a. ROW Bounds 0 EA $175.00 $0.00
b. Property Bounds 0 EA $125.00 $0.00
c. As-Built Drawings 0 Sheet $750.00 $0.00
d. ROW Deeds 0 LS $1,000.00 $0.00
$0.00
$0.00
7. Contingencies (10% of Subtotal) $0.00
8. Construction Monitoring (3% of Subtotal) $0.00
Total $0.00
Estimated by : __________________________________
Signature:
Concurrance by Applicant/Developer
Signature:
PAGE SUBTOTAL
TOTAL (2 PAGES)
3
_________________________________
Title: ______________________________________
Date: _____________________________________
Tel #: _____________________________________
Date Improvements to be completed by: __________________________________________________
Approved by :
Director of Public Works Date
Note: Unit price numbers are sample values which will vary by size and complexity of a project. All
estimates should be completed by qualified profession using current unit pricing values.
_________________________________
Title: ______________________________________
Date: _____________________________________
Tel #: _____________________________________
Page 80
Page 81
Page 82
Page 83
Page 84
Page 85
Page 86
Page 87
Page 88
Page 89
Page 90
Page 91
Page 92
Page 93
Page 94
Page 95
Page 96
Page 97
Page 98
Page 99
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 100
APPENDIX II: CONSTRUCTION DESIGN DETAILS
A. Catch Basin
B. Precast Concrete Catch Basin With Oil Separator
C. Catch Basin/Drop Inlet
D. Catch Basin Liner
E. Torrent Frame And Grate
F. Reinforced Concrete Headwall
G. Trench Section For Drainage Pipe
H. Roadway Section – Granite Curb
I. Roadway Section – Open Drainage
J. Roadway Section – Closed Drainage
K. Circular Cul-De-Sac
L. Offset Cul-De-Sac
M. Hammerhead Turn-Around
N. Tomahawk Turn-Around
O. Utility Roadway Cross Section
P. Roadway Delineation
Q. Ironwood Guardrail
R. Pavement Restoration
Page 101
Page 102
Page 103
Page 104
Page 105
Page 106
Page 107
Page 108
Page 109
Page 110
Page 111
Page 112
Page 113
Page 114
Page 115
Page 116
Page 117
Page 118
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 119
APPENDIX III: ROADWAY STANDARDS CHARTS
Table 1: Roadway Standards
Roadway Standards
Street
Type
ADT (Average
Daily Traffic)² Maximum Length
Minimum
Pavement
Width &
Shoulders
Min/Max
Grade¹
Minimu
m ROW
Sidewalks/Bike Lanes
Required Other Requirements
Public:
Deadend
Less than 250
ADT
1,000 ft - measured from
center line of
intersection to midpoint
of turnaround
20/4 1%/8% 50
Dependent upon location,
residential densities and
adjacent or nearby current
or future land uses
See DPW Infrastructure
Design, Construction and
Administration Standards
for typical cross-section
and all construction
requirements
Local
251 to 1,000
ADT
Must Provide a through
connection between
Local or Collector roads
22/4 1%/8% 50 Dependent upon location,
residential densities and
adjacent or nearby current
or future land uses
same as above
Collector
1,000 to
4,999 ADT
Must Provide a through
connection between
Local or Collector roads
24/8 1%/6% 50 Yes same as above
Arterial
5,000 or more
ADT
Must Provide a through
connection to Local or
Collector roads
24/8 1%/6% 75 Yes same as above
Private:
Deadend
Less than 250
ADT
1,000 ft - measured from
center line of
intersection to midpoint
of turnaround
20/4 or may be
reduced by
agreement
between Board,
DPW and
Applicant
1%/8% 50 Dependent upon location,
residential densities and
adjacent or nearby current
or future land uses
See DPW Infrastructure
Design, Construction and
Administration Standards
for typical cross-section
and all construction
requirements
Local 251 to 1,000
ADT
Must Provide a through
connection between
Local or Collector roads
22/4 or may be
reduced by
agreement
between Board,
DPW and
Applicant
1%/8% 50 Dependent upon location,
residential densities and
adjacent or nearby current
or future land uses
same as above
¹Abrupt or sever transitions in grades, shall require the DPW Director approval. ²ADT rates for the development shall be determined using the Institute of
Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation standards. Trip generation rates from other local sources may be used if the applicant demonstrates that these
sources better reflect the local condition. Existing ADT shall be determined from actual counts.
Table 2: Geometric & Structural Guides for Roads
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 120
Geometric & Structural Guides for Roads
Roadway Types
Gravel
(Private
Only)
Deadend
Local Collector Arterial
Average Daily Traffic Count (ADT) 0-50 0-250
251-
1,000 1,001-4,999 5,000+
Pavement Width Minimum 20' 20' 22' 24' 24'
Shoulder Width 4' 4' 4' 8' 8'
Pavement 1.5" ATG¹
Binder Course N/A 2 1/2" 2 1/2" 2 1/2" 2 1/2"
Finish Wearing Course N/A 1 1/2" 1 1/2" 1 1/2" 1 1/2"
Slope of Roadway (min/max)² 1%/8% 1%/8% 1%/8% 1%/6% 1%/6%
Minimum Centerline Radii 100 ft 100 ft 200 ft 300 ft 400 ft
Base Course Gravel Depth 16" 16" 16" 16" 24"
Finish Course Depth 11/2" Crushed Gravel 8" 8" 8" 8" 8"
¹ADT = Asphalt Treaded Gravel of not less than 1 gallon asphalt per square yard.
²Abrupt or sever changes in grades shall require the Director of Public Works approval.
Note: These guides are intended to apply to both public and private roadways.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 121
APPENDIX IV: SEED MIXTURES – NH STORMWATER MANUAL
Table 1: Seed Mixture Selection Based on Soil Type
Use
Seed
Mixture
See
Table 2
Soil Drainage
Droughty Well
Drained
Moderately
Well Drained
Poorly
Drained
Steep cuts and fills,
borrow and disposal
areas
A
B
C
D
E
Fair
Poor
Poor
Fair
Fair
Good
Good
Good
Fair
Excellent
Good
Fair
Excellent
Good
Excellent
Fair
Fair
Good
Excellent
Poor
Waterways,
emergency spillways
and other channels
with flowing water
A
C
D
Good
Good
Good
Good
Excellent
Excellent
Good
Excellent
Excellent
Fair
Fair
Fair
Lightly used parking
lots, odd areas,
unused lands, and
low intensity use
recreation sites
A
B
C
D
Good
Good
Good
Fair
Good
Good
Excellent
Good
Good
Fair
Excellent
Good
Fair
Poor
Fair
Excellent
Play areas and
athletic fields.
(Topsoil is essential
for good turf.)
F
G
Fair
Fair
Excellent
Excellent
Excellent
Excellent
See Note 2
in Table 2
See Note 2
in Table 2
Gravel Pit
See source document for recommendations, or consult with USDA
Natural Resources Conservation Service.
Source: Minick, E.L. and H. T. Marshall. (August 1992)
Note: Poorly drained soils are not desirable for use as playing areas and athletic fields.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 122
Table 2: Seed Mixtures for Permanent Vegetation
Mixture Species Pounds per Acre Pounds per 1,000
Sq. Ft
A
Tall fescue
Creeping red fescue
Redtop
Total
20
20
2
42
0.45
0.45
0.05
0.95
B³
Tall fescue
Creeping red fescue
Crown Vetch
or
Flat pea
Total
15
10
15
-
30
40 or 55
0.35
0.25
0.35
-
0.75
0.95 or 1.35
C³
Tall fescue
Creeping red fescue
Birdsfoot trefoil
Total
20
20
8
48
0.45
0.45
0.20
1.10
D³
Bridsfoot trefoil
Retop
Reed Canarygrass¹
Total
10
5
15
30
0.25
0.10
0.35
0.70
E
Tall fescue
Flatpea
Total
20
30
50
0.45
0.75
1.20
F
Creeping red fescue²
Kentucky bluegrass²
Total
50
50
100
1.15
1.15
2.30
G Tall Fescue² 150 3.60
Source: Minnick, E.L. and H.T. Marshall. (August 1992).
Notes:
1. Reed canary grass is on the invasive species watch list due to its rapid, aggressive
growth and its ability to move into wetlands and out-compete other desirable wetland
plants. Caution should be used when planted near wetlands.
2. For heavy use athletic fields, consult University of New Hampshire Cooperative
Extension Turf Specialist for current varieties and seeding rates.
3. The University of New Hampshire Cooperative Extension recommends red clover to
substitute for crown vetch or birdsfoot trefoil if they are going to be mowed to a height of
4 inches or less. Red clover (Alsike variety) should be seeded at a rate of 20 pounds per
acre.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 123
APPENDIX V: BLASTING & EXPLOSIVE REGULATIONS
TOWN OF MILFORD
FIRE DEPARTMENT
Chapter 5.11
EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING REGULATIONS
In accordance with New Hampshire State Law, RSA 154:18, the following regulations are
established relative to the transportation, storage, possession, and use of explosive materials in
the Town of Milford, New Hampshire.
5.11.10 Short title of regulations.
These regulations shall be known and may be cited as “Explosives and Blasting Regulations.”
5.11.20 Applicability.
The Explosives and Blasting Regulations shall apply to the transportation, storage, possession,
and use of explosive materials in the Town of Milford.
5.11.21 These regulations shall not apply to:
A. Explosive materials while in the course of transportation via railroad, water,
highway, or air when explosive materials are moving under the jurisdiction of and
in conformity with regulations adopted by any federal or state department or
agency.
B. The normal and emergency conditions of any government, including all
departments, agencies, and divisions thereof, provided that they are acting in their
official capacity and in the proper performance of their duties.
C. Explosive materials for delivery to any government or any department, agency, or
division thereof.
D. Pyrotechnics commonly known as “fireworks” including signaling devices such
as flares or fuses.
E. Small arms, ammunition and components thereof which are subject to the Gun
Control Act of 1968 (Title 18, Chapter 44 of the United States Code) and
regulations promulgated there under.
F. Gasoline, fertilizers and propellants used in propellant activated power devices or
tools.
5.11.30 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AUTHORIZED, APPROVED, OR APPROVAL – Authorized, approved, or approval by
the Fire Chief of the Town of Milford, NH.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 124
BLAST AREA – The area of the blast within the influence of flyrock, gasses and
concussion.
BLASTER – That qualified person in charge of and responsible for the loading and firing
of a blast.
BLASTING AGENT – An explosive material which meets prescribed criteria for
insensitivity to initiation in conformity with Title 27 of the Code of Federal Regulations,
Section 55.11 for storage, and, Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations for
transportation.
DETONATING CORD – A flexible cord containing a center core of high-velocity
explosive and used to initiate other explosives.
DETONATOR – Any device containing any initiating or primary explosive that is used
for initiating detonation. This term includes, but is not limited to, electric blasting caps of
instantaneous and delay types, blasting caps for use with safety fuses, detonating cord
delay connectors and non-electric instantaneous and delay blasting caps which use
detonating cord or other replacement for electric lag wires.
EXPLOSIVE – Any chemical compound mixture or device, the primary or common
purpose of which is to function by explosion.
EXPLOSIVE MATERIALS – These include explosives, blasting agents and detonators.
The term includes but is not limited to, dynamite and other high explosives, safety fuses,
detonating cord and igniters. Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Parts 1 through
999, subdivide these materials into:
a. Class A explosives: detonating or otherwise maximum hazards.
b. Class B explosives: flammable hazard.
c. Class C explosives: minimum hazard.
d. Blasting agents: See definition,
FIRE CHIEF – The Fire Chief of the Town of Milford, NH, or his designee.
HIGH EXPLOSIVES – Explosives which are characterized by a very high rate of
reaction, high pressure development, and the presence of a detonation wave in the
explosive.
PERSON – Any individual, corporation, company, association, firm, partnership,
society, or joint stock company.
PYROTECHNICS – Any combustible or explosive compositions or manufactured
articles designed and prepared for the purpose of producing audible or visible effects.
Pyrotechnics are commonly referred to as fireworks.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 125
SAFETY FUSE – A flexible cord containing an internal burning medium by which fire
or flame is conveyed at a continuous and uniform rate from the point of ignition to the
point of use, usually a fuse detonator.
5.11.40 Forms and procedures.
The Fire Chief shall issue forms necessary or useful for carrying out the purposes of this chapter.
He may also establish procedures necessary or useful for carrying out the purposes of this
chapter which are consistent with the provisions of this chapter.
5.11.50 Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter commits a separate violation of this
chapter and shall be subject to a civil fine of not more than $500.00 for each separate violation.
5.11.60 Licenses and Permits.
5.11.61 Applicability of Chapter.
Safety and security are primary considerations in the manufacture, transportation, storage, sale,
possession, and use of explosive materials. An appropriate and thorough system of licensing or
permitting is designed to promote these considerations by assuring that these products come only
into the hands of qualified persons who require them in their own occupation.
A. The license and permit requirements of this chapter shall apply to all explosive
materials.
B. This chapter is intended to supplement existing federal and state laws and
regulations.
C. This chapter shall not apply to hand loading of small arms ammunition for
personal use and not for resale.
5.11.62 Dealers, Wholesale/Retail sale of explosives.
Persons intending to act as dealers, and/or in the wholesale or retail activity of explosives shall:
A. Possess an appropriate federal license from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and
Firearms.
B. Possess any appropriate required licenses from the State of New Hampshire
where applicable.
C. Apply for and obtain a permit from the Fire Chief for the storage, use, possession
and/or sale of explosives prior to said activity. This permit may only be issued
upon proof of the applicant’s possession of all federal and state approvals,
licenses, permits etc.
D. No permit for the wholesale or retail activity of explosives shall be issued unless
all necessary other approvals are received by the Town of Milford to include, but
not be limited to, compliance with all planning, zoning, building, health, fire and
life safety requirements.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 126
E. The sale of explosive materials within the Town of Milford shall be prohibited
when such sale presents undue hazard to life and property as determined by the
Fire Chief.
5.11.63 Blaster’s license required.
A. No person may load or fire explosive materials unless such person or his
supervisor is a licensed blaster in conformance with the rules and regulations
promulgated under RSA 158:9 of the State of New Hampshire.
B. Proof of said license shall be provided upon request of the Fire Chief.
5.11.64 Permit required.
A. No person shall use explosives within the Town of Milford without first obtaining
the proper permit which authorizes him to use such materials.
B. The authorized agent or person conducting an operation or activity requiring the
use of explosive materials shall obtain a permit to use explosive materials and
shall be responsible for the results and any other consequences of any loading and
firing of explosive material and shall permit the loading and firing to be
performed or supervised only be a licensed blaster.
5.11.65 Permit applications; fees; pre-blasting conference; renewal.
A. Application for permit or its renewal shall be made to the Fire Chief on forms
provided by him and shall contain such information as may be required.
B. Applications shall have attached proof of the following:
1. State of New Hampshire license to use, purchase, and transport explosive
materials.
2. State of New Hampshire certificate of competency to conduct blasting
operations.
3. An original certificate of insurance showing minimum coverage of
$1,000,000 bodily injury and $500,000 property damage by a carrier
authorized by the State of New Hampshire Insurance Commissioner to do
business in the State of New Hampshire.
4. The blaster’s license of the person in charge of or supervising the use of
explosives.
C. Applications must be received by the Fire Chief at least five (5) business days
prior to the estimated start date of the blasting operations.
D. A fee shall be assessed for each permit. Checks shall be made payable to the
Town of Milford Fire Department and must be received by the Fire Department
prior to permit approval and issuance. The permit fees shall be established by the
Board of Selectmen of the Town of Milford.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 127
E. Pre-blasting conferences may be scheduled by the Fire Chief prior to the approval
of the permit application. Conference attendees may include, but not be limited
to, representatives of the blaster, other town officials, and/or individuals likely to
be affected by blasting operations. The Fire Chief may require a pre-blasting
conference based upon the following criteria;
1. Overall size and scope of the project and/or site.
2. Anticipated duration of the blasting operation.
3. Proximity to abutters, important utilities or facilities.
F. If an application for renewal of a permit is filed after the expiration of the old
permit, it shall be considered as an application of a new permit.
5.11.66 Permit restrictions.
A. No permit shall be assigned or transferred.
B. Approved permits shall be dated and be valid for no more than sixty (60) days
from the date of issue.
F. The permit expiration date shall be no later than the expiration date of the
blaster’s insurance certificate and certificate of competency.
G. The permit shall bear the name and address of the person who applied for the
permit, the name and address of the person(s) with a blaster’s license who will
supervise the use of explosives and the signature of the approving authority.
5.11.67 Denial, revocation or suspension of permit.
A. A permit for use of explosive materials may be denied, revoked or suspended for
any of the following reasons:
(1) Noncompliance with any order of the issuing authority.
(2) If it is determined that any applicant or permit holder was or is under the
influence of any drug (prescription or nonprescription) or alcohol that may
have impaired their judgment or ability to transport, store, possess or use
any explosive material under the jurisdiction of the Town of Milford in a
safe and prudent manner while operating under such permit, their permit
to operate in the Town shall be suspended immediately. The Fire Chief
shall contact the Milford Police Department and the New Hampshire
Department of Safety if he feels that any applicant or permit holder has or
is suspected of violating this, or any part of this chapter, because they may
have been or were impaired by any drug(s) or alcohol. No permit shall be
reissued until the matter is fully investigated and the Fire Chief’s office
provided with the findings of any investigation into the matter.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 128
(3) Proof that the permit holder or applicant suffers from a mental or physical
defect that would interfere with the safe handling and use of explosive
materials.
(4) Violation by the applicant or permit holder of any provision of any law or
regulation relating to the explosive materials or proof that false
information was willfully given or a misrepresentation was willfully made
to obtain the permit.
(5) Determination by the Fire Chief that blasting operations pose a hazard to
the health, safety, or property of any person, or, have or will cause an
unnecessary nuisance to any person.
(6) For other good cause.
B. Notification; hearing.
(1) In any case where the Fire Chief determines that it is appropriate to deny a
permit he shall promptly notify the applicant. Said notice will set forth
specific basis for the denial and state that upon written request, a hearing
before the Chief will be held within ten (10) business days after the date of
receiving this request. Following said hearing, the Chief will make a final
determination as to whether to grant or deny the applicant a permit.
(2) In any case where the Fire Chief determines that it may be appropriate to
revoke a permit from a permit holder, he shall promptly notify the
applicant that his permit is temporarily suspended pending a hearing. Said
notice will set forth specific basis for the suspension and anticipated
revocation and state that, upon written request, a hearing before the Chief
will be held within ten (10) business days after receiving the request.
Following said hearing, the Chief will make a final determination as to
whether to revoke the permit.
(3) Within fifteen (15) business days after such hearing, the Fire Chief shall
state his findings and conclusions in writing and transmit a copy to the
applicant and former permit holder.
(4) Upon notice of the revocation or suspension of any permit, the former
permit holder shall immediately surrender to the Fire Chief the permit and
all copies thereof.
5.11.68 Licenses and permits available for public inspection; protection of permits.
A. Licenses or copies thereof to deal in explosive materials shall be kept available
for inspection at each place of operation.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 129
B. A permit to blast or copies thereof shall be kept available for inspection at each
place of operation.
C. Permit holders shall take every reasonable precaution to protect their permits from
loss, theft, defacement, destruction, or unauthorized duplication, and any such
occurrence shall be immediately reported to the Fire Chief.
5.11.69 Recordkeeping and reporting.
A. A holder of a permit to use explosive materials shall make a record of all
operations within the Town of Milford. Such record shall be made available to
the Fire Chief upon request and shall be retained for five years.
B. All persons holding a blasting permit shall make daily records of each blast that at
a minimum contains the information required by the current version of the
Milford Fire Department’s Record Requirements for Blasting, Appendix B.
These records shall be retained for five years.
C. The Fire Chief shall be notified promptly by any permit holder of a change in
business address or telephone number and home address if applicable.
D. The theft or loss of explosive materials shall be reported immediately to the Fire
Chief and to the Milford Police Department.
E. Records made and kept pursuant to regulations promulgated by any federal or
state agency need not be duplicated to satisfy the requirements of this section.
5.11.70 General regulations.
A. The conduct of all blasting operations shall be governed by the New Hampshire
Code of Administrative Rules Chapter Saf-C 1600.
B. In the case of conflicting rules or regulations, the most stringent rule or regulation
shall apply.
C. While explosive materials are being handled or used, smoking shall not be
permitted, and no one near the explosive material shall possess matches, open
flame or fire or flame producing devices, except that the blaster may possess a
device for the specific purpose of igniting safety fuses.
D. No one shall handle explosive materials while under the influence of alcohol,
narcotics, or other substances that may impair one’s judgment.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 130
E. For all blasts, the blaster shall exercise precautions to prevent injury to persons
and damage to property and to prevent earth vibrations and atmospheric sounds
from exceeding regulatory limits.
F. When conducting blasting operations, the holder of the permit shall use
reasonable precautions, including but not limited to, warning signals, flags,
barricades or mats as may be required or appropriate to maximize safety.
G. Blasting operations shall be conducted during daylight hours only. Basting
operations shall not take place on weekends or holidays unless specifically
approved by the Fire Chief.
H. No open faced quarry blasting shall take place on any overcast day. Overcast
weather shall be determined by the Milford Fire Department.
I. No explosive materials shall be intentionally abandoned in any location for any
reason, nor left in such a manner that they may be obtained by children or other
unauthorized persons. All unused explosive materials shall be returned to proper
storage facilities.
J. Explosive materials shall be loaded and used in a manner that is consistent with
any recommendations or instructions of the manufacturer for that explosive
material.
K. The use of blasting pads/mats shall be used for all blasting operations to cover all
exposed bedrock or locations with less than two feet (2’) of covered materials in
the blast area. This does not to apply to quarry blasting operations.
L. The use of soil shall be used to berm all open faces. The soil depth shall be at
least three feet (3’). This does not apply to quarry blasting operations.
M. Transportation, storage and possession of explosive materials in the Town of
Milford shall be governed by the New Hampshire Code of Administrative Rules,
Chapter Saf-C 1600 Explosives.
5.11.80 Notification.
A All property owners and occupants subject to a pre-blast survey shall be notified
in writing by U.S. Certified Mail Return Receipt Requested, , of the pre-blast
survey activity and impending blasting operations by the blasting company or his
duly authorized representative. This notification shall consist of the name of the
blasting company, contact telephone number for the blasting company and
estimated duration of the blasting operation. The intent of this written
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 131
notification is to give the property owner/occupants advance notice and
explanation of the pre-blast survey. A list of all property owners and occupants
who receive this notification shall be attached to the blasting permit application
and submitted to the Fire Chief.
B. In the event a pre-blast conference is scheduled the blasting company or his duly
authorized representative shall notify all property owners and occupants of the
date, time and location of the pre-blast conference in writing. This notification
shall be given by U.S. mail at least seven (7) days in advance of the pre-blast
conference and shall be given to all parties subject to a pre-blast survey.
C. Persons intending to conduct blasting operations within the Town of Milford shall
submit written notification of such intent to the Chief of the Police Department.
This notification shall be made no less than 24 hours prior to the estimated start
date of the blasting operation.
D. The blaster shall notify the Milford Fire Department dispatch center (Milford
Area Communication Center) no less than 1 hour prior to each blast. The blaster
shall provide:
1. The name of the company conducting the blasting;
2. The address of the blasting operation;
3. The time of the blasting; and
4. The amount of the explosive material being used.
5.11.90 Preblast surveys.
Prior to conducting any blasting operations, the applicant or their agent shall conduct a preblast
structural inspection condition survey of all existing structures and conditions on the site,
adjacent to the site or in the vicinity of the site at no cost to the property owner or the Town of
Milford. This survey shall extend to the structures or conditions as may be affected by the
applicant’s blasting operations. As a minimum, pre-blast structural inspection condition surveys
shall be performed on all structures, including but not limited to, homes, foundations, driveways,
roadbeds, swimming pools, wells, and mobile homes within 500’ radius of the blasting hole(s).
The permit applicant as well as the owner of the property being surveyed shall sign all such
surveys once completed. If an owner refuses to allow for or sign a pre-blast survey form for
whatever reason the applicant shall note this on the form. The applicant shall make at least three
attempts to notify the owner of the need for such surveys, the last attempt shall include written
notification and name and contact number of a person that they may contact.
A. The pre-blast structural inspection condition survey shall consist of a written
description of the interior and exterior of each of the structures examined.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 132
Descriptions shall locate any existing cracks, damage or other defects and shall
include such information so as to make it possible to determine the effect, if any,
of the blasting operations on the defect. Where significant cracks or damage
exist, or for defects too complicated to describe in words, photographs shall be
taken. A good quality videotape survey with appropriate audio description of
locations, conditions, and defects can be used in lieu of a written form. Prior to
the start of the work, a copy of the pre-blast condition survey shall be submitted to
the Fire Chief and the homeowner or occupant.
B. The individual person conducting the survey shall give written notice to the owner
of the property concerned and tenants of the property. This notice shall state the
dates on which the surveys are to be conducted. Copies of all notices shall also be
provided to the Fire Chief.
5.11.100 Blasting operations.
A. During the time that holes are loaded or are being loaded with explosives, blasting
agents or detonators, the blast site shall be barred to all but those authorized
personnel engaged in the drilling and loading operations or otherwise authorized
to enter the site. The blast site shall be guarded or barricaded and posted.
B. After loading for a blast is completed, and before firing, all excess explosives
materials shall be removed from the area and returned to the proper facilities.
C. As soon as practical after all blast holes are connected, prior to connecting to a
source of initiation, such as a blasting machine, and until the shot has been fired
and subjected to a post blast examination, the blast area shall be guarded or
barricaded and posted or flagged against unauthorized entry.
5.11.101 Warning required.
A. No blast shall be fired until the blaster in charge has made certain that all surplus
explosive materials are in a safe place, all persons and equipment are at a safe
distance or under sufficient cover and that an adequate warning signal has been
given.
B. The blaster shall inform the Fire Chief of the method by which a signal is sounded
and the type of signal prior to starting the blasting operations.
5.11.102 Supervision of operations.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 133
A. Loading and firing shall be performed or supervised only by a person possessing
an appropriate blaster’s permit.
B. The Fire Chief may at his discretion monitor at or near the blast site any blasting
operations conducted within the Town of Milford.
C. If making the required one hour notification (5.12.70 C) the blaster is informed
that the blast will be monitored, the blaster shall delay initiation of the shot until
such time as the Fire Department representative is in position to monitor the blast.
5.11.103 Seismographic monitoring.
A. The Fire Chief may, at his discretion, require that seismographic monitoring be
conducted by the blaster for any or all blasts initiated.
B. The location of seismographic equipment for tests may be determined by the Fire
Chief in coordination with the blaster.
C. The seismographic instrumentation shall, at a minimum, meet the specifications
as outlined by the Milford Fire Department in Appendix A. The Chief has the
option of requiring that the original seismographic strip chart, digital
seismographic data and calibration be provided.
D. All seismographic test results shall be made available in writing to the Fire Chief
upon request. The Chief has the option of requiring that the original
seismographic strip be provided.
5.11.110 Complaints.
A. The Fire Chief shall have the responsibility of coordinating all activities relative
to complaints received concerning blasting operations within the Town of
Milford.
B. Complaints received may be grouped into two categories:
1. Complaints of an informational nature or of a nuisance nature relative to
blasts.
2. Complaints wherein possible damage is claimed as a result of blasting
operations.
C. All complaints shall be submitted in writing to the Fire Chief on the form entitled
“Blasting Complaint Form” attached at the end of these Rules and Regulations.
5.11.111 Nuisances.
A. Complaints of an informational nature or reporting a nuisance factor relating to
blasting operations shall be handled by the Fire Chief. The Chief shall contact the
complainant in a timely manner and attempt to resolve the complaint. In the
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 134
event that the complainant is not satisfied after contact by the Chief, the Chief
shall require the blaster or blasting company to contact the complainant directly.
B. If, in the determination of the Fire Chief, sufficient complaints have been receive
in reference to a specific blasting operation, the Fire Chief may direct such actions
as may reduce the possible nuisance factor. Such actions may include, but not be
limited to, reductions in the amount of explosive materials used, change in the
time of the blast initiation and monitoring of blasts by noise level or earth
vibration equipment to determine the extent of existence of the nuisance factor.
5.11.112 Damage complaints.
A. Complaints received by the Fire Department which allege damage to property as a
result of blasting operations shall be reported immediately to the Fire Chief.
B. The complainant shall be contacted directly by the Fire Chief to ascertain
pertinent information relative to the alleged damage.
C. The complainant shall also receive written instructions outlining the procedures to
follow in order to seek compensation for possible damage.
D. The Fire Chief may elect to inspect the alleged damage and is authorized to
document and/or photograph such evidence as he deems necessary.
E. If in the determination of the Fire Chief, the blaster the blasting company or their
insurance representatives are not dealing with the complainant in a satisfactory
manner, the Chief may exercise any option provided under this Code, including
ordering suspension of blasting operations until such time as a satisfactory
resolution is attained.
5.11.120 Manufacture of explosives.
The manufacture of explosives within The Town of Milford shall be prohibited.
These regulations are established by the authority granted to me in accordance with New
Hampshire State Law, RSA 154:18 and shall take effect on July 1, 2007
_________________________
Francis X. Fraitzl, III
Fire Chief
Town of Milford
July 19, 2002 (Pauley)
Amended: February 16, 2007 (Pauley)
Amended: May 1, 2007
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 135
APPENDIX A
Seismographic Instrumentation Minimum Specifications
The seismographic instrumentation shall at a minimum meet the following specifications:
A. Capability to measure, display and record digitally three mutually perpendicular
components of particle velocity.
1. Frequency response of 8 to 150 Hz
2. 12-bit A/D converter
3. Trigger levels from .02 to .25 ips.
4. Particle velocity range of 0.00 to 9.00 ips.
5. Digital storage capacity of 100 events.
6. Analysis capabilities for OSM alternative criteria.
7. Printing of records on a permanent strip chart.
B. The seismograph shall have been calibrated within 12 months of any blast
monitored by it, and, such calibration shall been performed with standards
traceable to NIST.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 136
MILFORD FIRE DEPARTMENT
EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING REGULATIONS
APPENDIX B
Records Requirements for Blasting
A. The following Records Requirements for Blasting Operations shall be adhered to
by all individuals and companies that perform blasting operations or other
operations utilizing explosives in the Town of Milford. Any violation shall result
in the immediate suspension of the individual’s or company’s blasting privileges
in the Town of Milford.
B. Each holder of a blaster’s permit shall keep a record of explosive material fired or
otherwise disposed of for all operations. The records shall be kept for a minimum
of five years, and they must be made available immediately upon the request of
the Fire Chief. These records shall include:
1. A daily log which shall contain:
a. The manufacturer’s name.
b. The type, size and identification number of the explosives.
2. A record of each blast completed prior to or immediately following
detonation, that includes the following:
a. Name and certificate of competency number of the person setting
off the blast.
b. The date, time and location of the blast.
c. Total amount of explosive detonated.
d. Amount of explosive in each hole.
e. Amount, type and delay time of initiators.
f. Maximum weight of explosive used in each delay period.
g. Diameter of each hole and the distance between the last loaded
explosive and the surface of the hole.
h. Distance between the closest explosive and nearest structure.
i. Type of matting or cover used to contain fragments and to prevent
particles from being discharged in the direction of workers and the
general public.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 137
j. Whether vibration recording instruments were used or the scaled
distance of 50 was followed.
k. Written description or diagram showing the:
1. Location and spacing of loaded holes.
2. Location and amount of each delay period.
3. Location of blast site and distance to:
a. The nearest structures.
b. Overhead wires.
c. Underground pipes or wires.
d. Highways which are close enough to be affected by ground
vibration or air blast.
4. Location of and the distance from the blast site to the vibration recording
instruments if used.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 138
Milford Fire Department
Explosives and Blasting Application
Date
Company requesting permit
Company Address
Company Phone Number
Location of Blasting
Survey Required Yes No
Estimated start date of blasting operations
(at least 5 business days from the Milford Cabinet’s Thursday Edition)
Property Owner
Property Owner Address
Property Owner Phone Number
Blasting must be conducted with compliance to State Law Rules and Regulations, BOCA Basic
Fire Prevention Code 1993, Article 30 and the Town of Milford Rules, Revised 4/1/97.
(Milford Fire Office Use)
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 139
BLASTING DAMAGE COMPLAINT FORM
PROPERTY OWNER INFORMATION
Date of Incident: ______ Time of Incident: ______
Location of Incident: ___________________________
(town)
Address of Structure: _____________________ Type of Structure: ______________
(street)
Property Owner’s Name: __________________ Phone Number: ________________
Property Owner’s Address: _________________________________________________
(Address, City, State, Zip)
Complainant’s Name if Different: _______________ Phone Number: _______________
Complaint’s Address if Different: ____________________________________________
(Address, City, State, Zip)
Did the property have a Pre-Blast Survey prior to the start of blasting? YES NO
DESCRIPTION OF ITEM(S) OR AREA OF ALLEGED DAMAGE
____________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________
This form must be returned to the head of the Fire Department within 30 days of the alleged incident)
CERTIFICATION OF DAMAGE- PLEASE READ AND SIGN
I declare under the penalty of perjury that the statements and information provided herein are
true as of the date of this complaint. I am aware that there are penalties for submitting false
information including possible fines, civil penalties and imprisonment.
Signature of Property Owner: _____________________________ Date Signed: _______
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 140
APPENDIX VI: FIRE CISTERN REQUIREMENTS
Milford Fire Department
Fire Cistern Requirements
April 1, 2010
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 141
I. Applicability
A. These requirements shall apply to all new commercial developments and residential
subdivisions that are not served by municipal water and/or not having adequate water to
provide year round fire protection as determined by the Fire Chief or designee.
II. Permits
A. A permit to install shall be obtained from the installation of each cistern. The permits
shall be obtained from the Milford Fire Department.
B. A fee of 75.00 dollars for each permit shall be paid at the time of application.
III. Plans
A. Four (4) sets of plans, including manufacture literature shall be submitted for each cistern
to be installed for review and approval by the Milford Fire Department. The plans shall
include the following:
• Must be signed and stamped by a NH registered professional engineer.
• Cistern Design in accordance with Milford Fire Department Requirements, NFPA
1142, UL and ASTM standards.
• Site plan showing the location of cistern and easement for cistern maintenance
and possible future removal. Easement shall be a minimum of ten (10’) feet on all
sides. All easements shall also be on file with the Community Development
Office and Planning Board.
IV. Cistern locations
A. All cisterns shall to be in place and fully operational prior to any combustible materials
being stored on site or building permits being issued. For developments that are built in
phases, fire cisterns shall be in place and fully operational for the phase currently under
development, prior to combustible materials being stored on site.
B. The location of ALL cisterns shall be reviewed and approved by the Fire Department
prior to the installation of any cistern as part of an approved site or subdivision plan. Any
cistern that is installed prior to the approval of the Fire Department or installed in the
wrong location shall be excavated, removed and installed in the proper location unless
approved by the Fire Chief and Planning Board as necessary. The work shall be done by
a qualified technician and the complete cost of this work shall be borne by the contractor,
developer and/or owner.
C. Cisterns shall be located no more than 2000 feet truck travel distance from the nearest lot
line of the furthermost lot, spaced every 2000 feet throughout the development. The
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 142
spacing of cisterns may be increased or eliminated if the contractor, developer and/or
owner installs an NFPA 13,13R or 13D compliant sprinkler system in the facility or
individual houses within the development. Adjustments to the cistern spacing
requirement may be made by the Fire Chief or designee on a case by case basis.
D. The contractor, developer and/or owner shall be responsible for annual maintenance of all
cisterns including, but not limited to snow removal, until the roadway is officially
accepted by the Town of Milford. If not maintained, the Town of Milford reserves the
right to bill the contractor, developer and/or owner for maintenance or snow removal.
V. Vehicle Pad
A. The vehicle pad and approach shall be constructed of a hard, all weather surface such
as bituminous pavement or concrete, meeting NHDOT standards and Town of
Milford requirements.
B. The vehicle pad shall be of sufficient length to permit easy access to Suction and Fill
piping when the fire apparatus is set forty five (45°) degrees to the road.
C. The pitch of the shoulder and vehicle pad from the edge of the pavement to the
pumper suction connection shall be one percent (1 %) to six percent (6%) downgrade.
D. A no parking sign shall be placed at the vehicle pad.
VI. Cistern Specifications
A. All cisterns shall be single wall fiberglass or precast concrete.
B. The minimum size capacity for a fire cistern shall be 30,000 gallons.
C. All cisterns shall be trouble free and carry a lifetime warranty of 50 years.
D. All cisterns shall be capable of flowing 1000 gpm for 75% of the cistern capacity.
E. Protection from vehicular traffic shall be provided for all cisterns. Bollards shall be
placed along the entire length of the vehicle pad. Bollards shall be a minimum of steel,
concrete reinforced 8” diameter. Bollard shall be painted with a rust inhibitor and then
painted red.
F. Both Suction and Fill piping shall be supported by either the top of the tank or below
the frost line.
G. All horizontal piping shall be pitched towards the tank to allow for drainage.
H. All exterior piping shall be painted with a rust inhibitor and then be painted red.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 143
I. A metal hydrant marker outfitted with white reflective tape shall be installed on the
suction pipe.
J. The draft pipe shall be supplied with an anti-vortex plate a minimum of sixteen square
inches (16” x 16”). The anti-vortex plate shall be attached to the bottom of the tank, a
minimum of six (6”) inches off of the tank floor.
K. All cisterns are to be designed so they will not float when empty. This shall be shown
on the plans submitted.
L. The bottom of the suction piping to the pumper connection shall not exceed fourteen
(14’) vertical feet in distance.
M. Vent Pipe will be three (3”) inch Schedule 40 Steel Pipe. The pipe will have a bug
resistant screened opening and will be positioned to minimize condensation buildup.
The height of the vent pipe is to be determined by approved submittal drawings.
N. Fill Pipe will be four (4”) inch Schedule 40 Steel Pipe. The fill pipe will terminate
above the tank with a four (4”) inch Storz connection with cap. The pipe shall be thirty
six (36”) inches above grade.
O. The suction pipe will be six (6”) inch Schedule 40 Steel Pipe. Above the tank the pipe
will remain vertical until a ninety (90°) degree long sweep establishes a horizontal
direction. The height of the suction pipe above the cistern is to be thirty six (36”)
inches above finished grade. The pipe will then be reduced to a final four and a half (4
½”) inch National Hose male thread and must be capped. Inside the cistern the suction
pipe will extend to six (6”) inches of the floor of the cistern. The taper of the pipe
shall not allow air bubbles to form.
P. The elevations of all cistern piping are based on the finished grade of the approach and
vehicle pad which must be shown on the submitted plans.
1. Precast Reinforced Concrete Cisterns
• All precast reinforced cisterns shall be waterproofed in accordance with
manufacturer’s specifications and these requirements.
• The entire cistern shall be rated for highway loading.
• Surface Loads: Tank shall withstand surface H-20 axle loads when properly
installed according to manufacturer's installation instructions.
2. Single Wall Fiberglass Cisterns
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 144
• All single wall fiberglass cisterns shall be installed in accordance with
manufacturer’s specifications and these regulations.
• The entire cistern shall be rated for highway loading.
VII. Backfill of Tanks
A. All construction, backfill and grading material shall be in accordance with proper
construction practices and acceptable to the Fire Chief or designee.
B. Bedding for the cistern shall consist of a minimum of twelve (12”) inches of 3/4 inch
to 11/2 inch crushed, washed stone, compacted. No fill can be used under the stone.
C. All backfill material must be screened gravel with stones not larger than 11/2 inches
and must be compacted to ninety five(95%) percent in accordance with ASTM D
1557, Standard Test Methods for Laboratory Compaction Characteristics of Soil
Using Modified Effort.
D. All tanks will be backfilled with a one (1’) foot blanket of clean sand around all sides
the top of the cistern.
E. Backfill over the tank must have one of the following characteristics:
• Minimum four feet (4’) of fill.
• The top and highest two feet (2’) of sides of the cistern shall be insulated with
vermin-resistant foam insulation and two (2’) feet of fill.
• All backfill shall extend ten feet (10’) beyond the edge of the cistern, and have
a maximum of 3:1 slope, loamed and seeded.
VIII. Inspections
A. All inspections shall be performed by the Town of Milford Inspecting Engineer or
designee and coordinated through Milford Fire Department
B. Inspections shall include the following:
• Rough excavation
• Tie down or strapping inspection
• Backfill Inspection
• Random compaction test
• Finish inspection
• Leakage test
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 145
• Fire Department Conditional Acceptance Test
IX. Testing
A. After backfilling of the tank and manway, and miscellaneous piping is installed, the
fire cistern tank shall be leakage tested. The tank must be filled with potable water to
within 1 inch of the top cover of the manway. The installer may allow the filled tank
to sit for one (1) day prior to commencement of the test. The test duration will be
seven (7) calendar days. The tank level measurements will be made and recorded by
the Town of Milford’s Inspecting Engineer or designee. The installer must provide
the specified lock and key for use by the Town of Milford’s Inspecting Engineer or
designee, and the Milford Fire Department to secure the manway cover. The test is a
zero leakage test. If after the seven day test leakage is verified, the tank and or
components must be repaired to stop the leak. Any repairs made must be in
accordance with manufacturer’s specifications and acceptable to the Fire Department.
Any repairs made to the tank must be done with prior written recommendation by the
tank’s manufacturer.
B. The Fire Department shall conduct a final Conditional Acceptance Test of the cistern
which will consist of a fire apparatus pump pulling and maintaining a draft from the
cistern for two (2) cycles of five (5) minutes each.
C. Refilling of the tank with potable water is the responsibility of the contractor,
developer and/or owner. Tank shall remain filled once tested and accepted.
D. Once the final Conditional Acceptance Test has been successfully completed the Fire
Department will conditionally accept the cistern. This conditional acceptance shall
remain in place until the roadway is accepted by the Town of Milford.
E. The contractor, developer and/or owner shall be responsible for annual maintenance
of all cisterns including, but not limited to snow removal, until the roadway is
officially accepted by the Town of Milford. If not maintained, the Town of Milford
reserves the right to bill the developer, contractor and/or owner for maintenance or
snow removal.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 146
Milford Fire Department Fire Cistern
Inspection Sign Off
ALL FIRE DEPARTMENT INSPECTIONS SHALL BE SCHEDULED A
MINIMUM OF 24 HOURS IN ADVANCE. ALL 3RD PARTY
INSPECTIONS SHALL BE SCHEDULED A MINIMUM OF 48HOURS IN
ADVANCE.
Cistern location: __________________________________________________________
Manufacture: ________________________________________________________________
Date Performed by Approved/Not
Approve d
Excavation
Inspection:
Tie down Inspection:
Finish Inspection:
Backfill Inspection:
Random
Compaction Test:
Leakage Test:
Flow Test:
Conditional
Acceptance:
Final Acceptance:
Final acceptance of the cistern is granted upon acceptance of the
road by the Town of Milford. Conditional acceptance will be granted
upon successful completion of the Flow Test.
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 147
Town of Milford, NH
FIRE CISTERN INSTALLATION
PERMIT
?? Single wall fiberglass ?? Precast reinforced concrete
REQUIRED INFORMATION
Installer Name: Daytime Phone #:
Company: Phone #:
Address: City: State: Zip:
Please submit 4 sets of plans.
Approved By: __________________________Date: ________________
Milford Fire / Building Official
Location
Of Work:
Property Owner: Owner’s
Phone #:
Description of Work:
Make of Appliance:
Size: Location:
Parcel ID:
Map_______ Lot________
?? Paid with Permit
?? Amount __________
?? Cash ?? Check # _________
Office Use Only
24 HOUR NOTICE
Required for Fire
Department
inspections
(603) 249-0680
Infrastructure Design, Construction & Administration Standards
Milford, New Hampshire
Page 148
APPENDIX VII: RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAY REGULATIONS
Page 149
Page 150
Page 151
Page 152
Page 153
Page 154
Town of Milford
Driveway Permit
Regulations
Residential & Non-Residential
Adopted August 19, 2008
Department of Public Works
Revised 3/30/2010; 4/17/2012
T A B L E O F C O N T E N T S
SECTION I. AUTHORITY…………………………………………………………………………………………………...…3
SECTION II. PURPOSE…………………………………………………………………………………………………….…...3
SECTION III. PERMIT.....................................................................................................................................3
SECTION IV. PERMIT PROCESS…………………………………………………………………………………………...3
SECTION V. RESIDENTIAL ACCESS POINTS…………………………………………………………………….……4
SECTION VI. NON-RESIDENTIAL ACCESS POINTS……………………………………………………………..….4
SECTION VII. DESIGN REQUIREMENTS………………………………………………………………………………..5
SECTION VIII. MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILTY…………………………………………………………………...6
SECTION IX. EASEMENT AND SECURITY……………………………………………………………………….……..7
SECTION X. SEPARABILITY………………………………………………………………………………………………….7
SECTION XI. ENFORCEMENT………………………………………………………………………………………………..8
SECTION XII. AMENDMENT………………………………………………………………………………………………....8
SECTION XIII. APPENDIX……………………………………………………………………………………………..………9
FIGURE 1: DRIVEWAY DETAIL…………………………………………………………………………………………….………………………….…..9
FIGURE 2: FLARED END DETAIL…………………………………………………………………………………………………….………………..….10
FIGURE 3: HEADWALL DETAIL……………………………………………………………………………………………………………..….…..….…11
FIGURE 4a: RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION ENTRANCE……………………………………………………………….…………….………..12
FIGURE 4b: NON-RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION ENTRANCE……………………………………………………………………….….….13
Town of Milford Driveway Permit Regulations 2012
3
SECTION I AUTHORITY
The Town of Milford Planning Board hereby adopts the following regulation pursuant to its authority as
set forth at RSA 236:13.V, and establishes that hereafter no driveway providing access from private
property to a public way owned and maintained by the Town of Milford shall be constructed without
compliance with this regulation.
SECTION II PURPOSE
Inasmuch as driveways and entrances are, in effect, intersections, and therefore require certain
controls as to size, location and construction in order to provide safe and efficient access to property
fronting on the public way, as well as surface drainage in and around said driveways, this regulation is
enacted for the purpose of such control.
SECTION III PERMIT
Anyone desiring to construct, alter, or relocate a driveway in order to obtain access to an existing public
way or a proposed street or public way, shall first apply for and obtain a permit from the Director of
Public Works (DPW Director) or designated agent. This permit shall provide for the approved location,
construction, alteration or relocation of such driveway in accordance with the specifications provided in
the driveway permit form, which is available at the Department of Public Works, the Community
Development Office and related websites. The driveway location as indicated on the approved permit
(in accordance with the approved site plan or septic plan, as applicable) is the ONLY driveway to be
utilized unless the DPW Director or the Planning Board authorizes a change in writing. If a permanent
house or structure number is assigned by the Building Department at the time of driveway permit
issuance the number shall be located so as to be clearly visible from the roadway at start of
construction.
If the roadway to be accessed by a proposed driveway is maintained by the State of NH, the applicant
shall apply for and receive a driveway permit from the State of NH Department of Transportation
(NHDOT) and will not be required to obtain a Driveway Permit from the Town of Milford. Applicants can
obtain a permit and information for driveway permits on State maintained roadways at www.
nh.gov/DOT or by calling the Department of Transportation directly at 603.271.3734. A copy of the final,
signed NHDOT Permit shall be submitted to the Town of Milford.
SECTION IV PERMIT PROCESS
A. Prior to submitting an application for a driveway permit,
B. The applicant shall clearly mark and flag the location of the proposed driveway with a centerline
stake at the edge of the right-of-way (ROW). The applicant shall then submit completed applications
to either the Department of Public Works or Community Development Office.
C. Applications will be reviewed with a site inspection (as necessary) and approved by the Department
of Public Works within five (5) business days. The approved permit and any additional
documentation will be sent to the Community Development Office.
D. Once the driveway permit has been approved by the DPW Director or designated agent, the
driveway can be installed.
Town of Milford Driveway Permit Regulations 2012
4
E. A construction exit/entrance shall be in place prior to the start of on-site activity (see Appendix,
Figures 4a and 4b).
F. Upon completion of the driveway or a minimum of fourteen (14) days prior to the issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy (CO) by the Building Department, the Department of Public Works will
perform a post-construction inspection and issue a Certificate of Compliance (CC) for the driveway.
A copy of the CC will be sent to the Community Development Office. A CO will not be issued unless
a driveway CC has been issued by the Department of Public Works or a security is in place.
SECTION V RESIDENTIAL ACCESS POINTS
A. If a property is adjacent to a side road the access to the main road should be via the side road.
B. Curb cuts shall be limited to one (1) per residential lot, except where the DPW Director has
determined that a second cut is warranted and can be safely accommodated. A scale drawing
indicating the features necessitating the second access must be submitted for the DPW Director to
make a determination. A second cut may be granted under the following conditions:
1. A second curb cut is necessary for access to a secondary use or structure, or if the physical
constraints of the lot, including natural features, unusual lot shape, size or elevation change
necessitates the second access.
2. A second curb cut is necessary to allow handicapped access for an individual who is a
permanent resident of the property.
C. A permit is required from the Department of Public Works for any temporary access entrance. A
security in an amount to be determined by the DPW Director may be required at the discretion of
the Director. If a security is required, the applicant shall submit an itemized detailed estimate of the
cost to complete the driveway to the DPW Director who shall determine the required amount of the
security.
D. A construction exit/entrance is required for all driveways (See Appendix, Figure 4a). The public
right-of-way shall be cleared daily of debris such as mud, stone, earth and all construction supplies,
vehicles and equipment. Said maintenance of the exit/entrance shall be the responsibility of the
permit applicant.
SECTION VI NON-RESIDENTIAL ACCESS POINTS
A. Curb cuts shall be limited to one (1) per lot, except through Planning Board Site Plan approval or if
the DPW Director has determined additional curb cuts are warranted and can be safely
accommodated. If the driveway(s) are not shown on an approved Site Plan a scale drawing
indicating the features necessitating additional access points must be submitted to the DPW
Director to make a determination. Additional cuts may be granted to provide access to a secondary
use, structure or corner lots, to increase access safety or if the physical constraints of the lot,
including natural features, unusual lot shape, size, or elevation change necessitates the additional
access.
B. A permit is required from the Department of Public Works for any temporary access entrance. A
security in an amount to be determined by the DPW Director may be required at the discretion of
the Director. If a security is required, the applicant shall submit an itemized detailed estimate of the
cost to complete the driveway to the DPW Director who shall determine the required amount of the
security.
Town of Milford Driveway Permit Regulations 2012
5
C. A construction exit/entrance is required for all driveways (See Appendix, Figure 4b). The public
right-of-way shall be cleared daily of debris such as mud, stone, earth and all construction supplies,
vehicles and equipment. Said maintenance of the exit/entrance shall be the responsibility of the
permit applicant.
SECTION VII DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
A. Driveway design and construction shall conform to the applicable Residential or Non-Residential
detail and the Department of Public Works Infrastructure Design, Construction and Administration
Standards. It is understood that the applicant shall confer with the DPW Director who shall
determine specifications as to sloping, culverts, headwalls and other aspects of construction of said
driveway only when it deviates from the typical profile and standards. The deviations shall be noted
in writing on the Driveway Permit. Upon written application, the DPW Director may waive any of the
design requirements when it is shown that strict compliance would cause undue or unnecessary
hardship, so long as such waiver does not result in any injury to the public health or welfare.
B. All driveways shall be a minimum of ten feet (10’) in width. A residential entrance shall flare as it
approaches the pavement to a maximum width of twenty-four feet (24’) measured at the existing
edge of roadway. A non-residential entrance shall flare as it approaches the pavement to a
maximum width of fifty feet (50’).
C. Flat driveway side-slopes (4:1 to 6:1) are required to minimize hazards to vehicles that leave the
pavement for any reason.
D. All paved driveways shall require an asphalt apron. The asphalt apron shall be paved twenty feet
(20’) from the edge of pavement and shall be constructed with a minimum of three inches (3”) of
asphalt with emulsion applied at the joint with the Town roadway surface.
E. All new driveways established to serve structures intended for human occupancy shall have a
maximum grade of ten percent (10%). The purpose of the maximum grade requirement is to ensure
public safety and accessibility for emergency vehicles. This standard shall not apply to driveways
intended to serve non-occupancy structures, such as utility service buildings, and other private
ways intended for purposes such as logging, silviculture, agriculture and recreational access.
F. All driveways shall have not more than four percent (4%) negative grade from the edge of the
traveled way to the center of the ditch line and no more than four percent (4%) positive grade from
the center of the ditch line back to the end of the apron, to insure the driveway does not drain into
the street.
G. All driveways shall intersect the Town’s roadway at a perpendicular angle to the center line.
H. Where required, culverts shall be at least fifteen inches (15”) in diameter and shall be constructed of
reinforced concrete, high density polyethylene pipe or approved equal. The driveway will have
minimum three foot (3’) shoulders on each side where it meets the culvert. Culverts shall have a
minimum twelve inches (12”) of cover above the crown.
I. Headwalls shall be constructed of either pre-cast or cast-in-place concrete. The culvert cover shall
be equal to or greater than two feet (2’). Stone and mortar headwalls shall not be permitted. Where
headwalls are not applicable, pre-manufactured flares will be placed on each pipe end.
J. Safe sight distance shall be maintained and is defined as a line which encounters no visual
obstruction between two points, each at a height of three feet, nine inches (3’9”) above the
pavement, and ten feet (10’) back from the road pavement, to represent the critical line of sight
between the operator of a vehicle using the access and the operator of a vehicle approaching from
either direction for a distance of two hundred (200) feet.
Town of Milford Driveway Permit Regulations 2012
6
K. Driveway Design Features:
1. The following table (VII.K.1) summarizes driveway design features:
Zoning Districts
R
A, B, C, I, LCB, ICI, ICI-2, Open Space &
Conservation Subdivisions
Minimum tangent between
drives
100 feet 50 feet
Minimum distance from
intersections
100 feet 50 feet
Note: The dimensions of the minimum tangent between drives and distance from intersection shall be
detailed on the driveway plan.
2. Driveway design features for the Commerce and Community District shall be based upon the
approved Master Regulating Plan and/or Site Regulating Plan.
3. Safe sight distance shall be compatible with the maximum speed limit posted on the road, as
described in the following table (VII.K.3):
Speed Limit (MPH) Sight Distance
15-25 MPH 200 feet
26-35 MPH 300 feet
36-55 MPH 400 feet
L. In cases of rear lots with private ways to local streets, the above requirements for minimum tangent
between drives and maximum frontage drives shall not apply.
M. Any driveway impacting a wetland or wetlands buffer shall have all permits required by the State
and Town posted on-site until a CC is issued or all on-site work is completed, whichever comes
last.
N. Two-way driveways, divided driveways and alternate major entrances shall be constructed to State
DOT standards and shall be approved by the Planning Board or the DPW Director.
SECTION VIII MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY
A. Temporary and permanent erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be provided before,
during and after construction, in accordance with the best management practices as described in
the “New Hampshire Stormwater Manual” (NH Department of Environmental Services 2008) as
amended, a copy of which is available in the Community Development Office.
B. The applicant, or their grantees, successors and/or assigns served by the driveway shall be
responsible for the following:
1. Maintenance of the driveway from the edge of the roadway pavement or paved shoulder, if
existing;
2. Maintenance of all approved and/or required upstream and downstream drainage alterations
including but not limited to: pipe extensions, open ditches, swales, drainage systems and
detention ponds, with the exception of connecting catch basins, manholes or other specified
structures at roadway cross culverts;
3. All driveway pavement markings and all traffic control signs on the drive with the exception of a
stop sign or yield sign; and,
Town of Milford Driveway Permit Regulations 2012
7
4. Operational costs of electric service for traffic signals and street lights that are required by the
permit.
C. The Department of Public Works may also specifically maintain the following drainage structures:
1. The driveway culverts carrying surface water in roadside ditches under driveways within the
Town right-of-way, provided said driveway culverts were initially installed according to permit
conditions;
2. Drainage systems within the roadway limits, serving existing State highways, and constructed
for the purpose of controlling highway and surface water run-off; and,
3. Catch basins, manholes or other specified connecting drainage structures constructed at the
end of cross roadway culverts or parallel culverts serving the State highway system.
SECTION IX EASEMENT AND SECURITY
A. The applicant shall, at the discretion of the DPW Director and as a condition of the granting of the
Driveway Permit, be required to provide to the Town of Milford, its successors and/or assigns, an
easement for the purpose of entering upon the premises of the applicant to control or maintain
surface drainage on the property and perform all necessary maintenance for, and incidental to, said
drainage easement.
B. A security in an amount to be determined by the DPW Director may be required at the discretion of
the Director to guarantee the proper construction of any culverts, piping, ditching or other efforts
incidental to and necessary for the proper discharge and control of surface drainage in and around
the vicinity of the proposed driveway as well as the proper construction of the driveway entrance
both on the property of the applicant or on the property of the Town of Milford.
C. If a security is deemed necessary, the applicant shall submit an itemized detailed estimate of the
cost to complete the DPW Director who shall determine the required amount of the security. The
security shall be provided to the Department of Public Works accompanied by the necessary
securities form and W-4, to be held in an escrow account and released within one (1) year of
obtaining a CC. Failure to begin construction within one (1) year of application approval will render
the driveway permit null and void. Failure to complete construction within one (1) calendar year
from the date of posting of a security shall result in the automatic calling of the security, unless
specifically extended by the DPW Director for a period of one (1) additional year.
D. Funds may be withdrawn from the security by the Town of Milford and applied to the cost of said
construction which the Town of Milford is obliged to complete. No funds shall be expended at any
site in excess of the amount of the security pertaining to said site.
E. Driveways that have not received a CC at the time of the issuance of a CO will be required to
provide a security to insure completion of the approved driveway to Town of Milford specifications. If
a security is provided in lieu of obtaining a CC for the driveway, The Department of Public Works
shall submit documentation to the Community Development Office notifying them of the security.
SECTION X SEPARABILITY
The invalidity of any provision of these regulations shall not affect the validity of any other provisions.
Town of Milford Driveway Permit Regulations 2012
8
SECTION XI ENFORCEMENT
The Milford Board of Selectmen and the DPW Director are charged with the power and authority to
enforce the provisions of these regulations.
SECTION XII AMENDMENT
These regulations may be amended by the Planning Board following a noticed public hearing on the
proposed amendment. All amendments will take effect upon approval by a majority of the Planning
Board and filed with the Milford Town Clerk.
Town of Milford Driveway Permit Regulations 2012
9
SECTION XIII APPENDIX
Figure 1. Driveway Detail
Town of Milford Driveway Permit Regulations 2012
10
Figure 2. Flared End Detail
Town of Milford Driveway Permit Regulations 2012
11
Figure 3. Headwall Detail
Town of Milford Driveway Permit Regulations 2012
12
Figure 4a. Residential Construction Entrance
Town of Milford Driveway Permit Regulations 2012
13
Figure 4b. Non-Residential Construction Entrance
Town Of Milford
Gravel and Earth Removal
Regulations
Adopted 1990
Title 10-A
Office of Community Development
Re-numbered 10/22/10
Amended 08/19/2014
Milford Gravel and Earth Removal Regulations 2014
Page 2 of 8
T A B L E O F C O N T E N T S
ARTICLE I: Definitions ........................................................................................................................ 3
ARTICLE II: Excavation Operations Before August 24, 1979 ............................................................... 3
ARTICLE III: Permit required ................................................................................................................. 3
ARTICLE IV: Exceptions and Waivers ................................................................................................... 4
ARTICLE V: Permit Application Process ............................................................................................... 4
ARTICLE VI: Prohibited Projects ........................................................................................................... 5
ARTICLE VII: Hazard to Public Welfare .................................................................................................. 5
ARTICLE VIII: Operational Standards .................................................................................................... 5
ARTICLE IX: Reclamation Standards .................................................................................................... 5
ARTICLE X: Administration and Enforcement ....................................................................................... 6
A. Permits and Fees ........................................................................................................................ 6
B. Bonding ....................................................................................................................................... 6
C. Renewal ...................................................................................................................................... 6
D. Appeals ....................................................................................................................................... 6
ARTICLE XI: Required Information ........................................................................................................ 6
Milford Gravel and Earth Removal Regulations 2014
Page 3 of 8
AUTHORITY
The Town of Milford Planning Board hereby adopts the following regulation pursuant to its authority as
set forth at RSA 155:E, and establishes that these regulations supplement the provisions of RSA 155-E
and provide further clarification of the statutory requirements and their application within the Town of
Milford. They are adopted as provided in RSA 155-E, and as adopted, whenever local regulations differ
from the most recent provisions of RSA 155-E, those which impose a greater restriction or higher
standard shall be controlling.
PURPOSE:
The purpose of this regulation is to implement the authority given to this municipality under NH RSA
155-E, as amended. This statute dictates that reasonable opportunities must exist within the community
to extract gravel and earth. In addition, a town may implement specific requirements to protect the
public’s health and welfare, prevent pollution, soil erosion and oversee restoration.
ARTICLE I: DEFINITIONS
Earth: Sand, gravel, rock, soil or construction aggregate produced by excavating, crushing or any other
mining activity or such other naturally occurring unconsolidated materials that normally mask the
bedrock. Per RSA 155-E:1. IV, dimension stone does not include earth as defined in RSA 155-E:1, I.
Excavation: Land area which is used, or has been used, for the commercial taking of earth, including
all slopes.
Excavation Site: Any area of contiguous land in common ownership upon which excavation takes
place.
Existing Excavation: Any excavation which lawfully existed as of August 24, 1979, from which earth
material of sufficient weight or volume to be commercially useful has been removed during the 2-year
period before August 24, 1979.
Reclamation: The restoring of an excavation site to a standard at least equal to those outlined in
Section IX of these regulations.
ARTICLE II: EXCAVATION OPERATIONS BEFORE AUGUST 24, 1979
Owners who operated excavation sites in continuous operation prior to August 24, 1979 as provided by
NH RSA 155-E:2 (I), as amended, are not required to apply for a gravel removal permit and,
accordingly these existing grandfathered excavations may be expanded as provided by NH RSA 155-
E:2 (I) (b), as amended.
ARTICLE III: PERMIT REQUIRED
All commercial excavations proposing to begin operation after the adoption date of these regulations
require a permit except those specifically exempted in RSA 155-E-2 and 155-E:2-a.
Milford Gravel and Earth Removal Regulations 2014
Page 4 of 8
ARTICLE IV: EXCEPTIONS AND WAIVERS
In addition to those exceptions outlined in NH RSA 155-E:2-a, as amended, the Planning Board may,
upon application and following a duly-noticed hearing, grant an exception in writing to the standards
contained herein for good cause shown. The written decision shall state specifically what requirements
are being waived and include any reasonable alternatives.
ARTICLE V: PERMIT APPLICATION PROCESS
In addition to those requirements outlined in NH RSA 155-E:3, Application for Permit, (as amended) the
following provisions shall apply:
1. Three (3) large copies (22”x34”) and one (1) reduced (11”x17”) copy of the excavation plan
shall be submitted at a scale no less than one inch = 100 feet. The Assessors map and lot
number shall also be noted.
2. A description of the proposed haul roads used by the operator shall be provided. The Planning
Board reserves the right to conduct a traffic study at the applicant’s expense. The purpose of
this study is to determine the impact that the project may have on the surrounding road system.
A road bond and/or off-site road improvements may be required based upon the condition of the
local road system and anticipated site generated traffic volume.
3. Drainage calculations based upon a twenty-five (25) year storm may be required.
4. Name and seal of a New Hampshire registered engineer and/or surveyor shall be affixed to the
site plan.
5. The site plan shall indicate compliance with the Erosion and Sediment Control requirements as
outlined within the Development Regulations of the Town of Milford.
6. Detail how the operation will control dust generated by the project.
7. A Stormwater Management Permit may be required if more than 5,000 SF of site disturbance
and detailed plans shall be required if more than 20,000 SF of site disturbance;
8. A reclamation plan shall also be provided detailing how the site will be regraded and stabilized
upon completion of the project.
9. The addition of vegetated visual barriers may be required depending upon existing
neighborhood conditions.
10. No portion of any excavation site shall exceed ten (10) acres at one time. The site plan shall
detail the sequence of operation in sections no greater than ten (10) acres each.
11. Upon approval of the excavation plan by the Planning Board, five (5) large copies (22”x34”) and
one (1) reduced (11”x17”) copy of the excavation plan and reclamation plan shall be submitted
at a scale no less than one inch = 100” feet.
After receipt of an application which provides the information identified below, the Planning Board shall
within sixty (60) days schedule a public (abutter notified) hearing on the application.
The Planning Board reserves the right, per RSA 155-E: 3, VII to request additional reasonable
information deemed necessary to make an informed decision, or to have plans reviewed by an outside
agency. All expenses of preparation of all plans, maps, and reports accompanying the application shall
be at the applicant’s expense.
Milford Gravel and Earth Removal Regulations 2014
Page 5 of 8
ARTICLE VI: PROHIBITED PROJECTS
In addition to those prohibitions outlined in NH RSA 155-E:4, as amended, no permit for gravel removal
shall be allowed unless explicitly provided for within the Zoning Ordinance.
ARTICLE VII: HAZARD TO PUBLIC WELFARE
When a proposed gravel and earth removal operation will pose an undue hazard to the public the
Planning Board, after a duly advertised public hearing, may reject the application for a permit. The
Planning Board shall indicate to the applicant in writing the reasons for its denial and the information
upon which the Planning Board is basing its findings.
The following criteria shall be used by the Planning Board to determine if a public hazard exists:
1. The amount of traffic generated by the site, in conjunction with the close proximity of residential
uses, would create a dangerous situation for those who reside in the area.
2. Noise, fumes and dust associated with the proposed operation would create a hazardous or
harmful living environment for the abutting land owners.
3. The operation itself cannot be carried out in a safe manner, posing a hazard to the environment,
abutting landowners and the public at large.
ARTICLE VIII: OPERATIONAL STANDARDS
In addition to those criteria outlined in NH RSA 155:E:4-a, the following provisions shall apply:
1. No operation of the gravel and earth removal business shall operate outside the hours of
7:00AM to 5:00PM, Monday through Friday. In addition, no excavation shall be allowed on a
legal holiday. Other hours may be required or permitted which are compatible with
neighborhood conditions.
2. Trucks entering signs shall be erected by the operator as required by the Director of Public
Works and the Planning Board.
3. A copy of the approved gravel and earth removal plan shall be on site at all times.
4. Topsoil shall be stripped and stockpiled for subsequent use in reclamation of the site.
5. Natural vegetation adjacent to neighboring properties on which excavation is not intended shall
be maintained for the purpose of erosion control, screening, noise reduction, dust control, and
property evaluation.
ARTICLE IX: RECLAMATION STANDARDS
In addition to those standards set forth in RSA 155-E:5, E:5-a and E:5-b, the following shall apply:
1. Stockpiled topsoil shall be spread over the disturbed area to allow revegetation. These
disturbed areas will be adequately fertilized and reseeded to maintain a healthy vegetated
cover.
2. If deemed necessary by the Planning Board, suitable trees and/or shrubs may be required in
order to provide screening, natural beauty and to aid in erosion control. Such planted areas
shall be protected from erosion during an appropriate established period by mulch and structural
erosion control devices.
Milford Gravel and Earth Removal Regulations 2014
Page 6 of 8
ARTICLE X: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
A. PERMITS AND FEES
Permits shall be issued only to the owner or his agent and shall not be transferable without the written
consent of the Planning Board. A copy of the permit shall be prominently displayed at the site or the
principal access point to the site. A permit shall be valid for one (1) year and the expiration date shall be
specified at the time of issuance. In addition to those criteria outlined in NH RSA 155-E:8 and the
required abutter and site plan fees, (a schedule is available in the Planning Office), the following fees
shall apply:
1. A $50 annual gravel and earth removal permit fee shall be required to cover the cost of
inspections necessary to determine compliance.
2. A fee payable to the Hillsborough County Register of Deeds (HCRD) shall be paid upon
approval, for the filing of any new plan, if so required by the Planning Board.
Additional reasonable fees shall be charged should the Planning Board require the advice of an
engineer or other expert to review plans or inspect the site to determine permit compliance.
B. BONDING
The bond amount, established by the Planning Board to cover reclamation of the site, shall be based
on an amount of seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500) per acre. Given the actual acreage of
the site, this figure shall be prorated accordingly. The bond amount shall be adequate to reclaim the
excavation site in accordance with RSA 155-E:5. The bond will be returned to the applicant when
reclamation work has been completed.
C. RENEWAL
Excavation permits shall be valid for the term of one (1) year. A renewal permit must be in place prior to
continuing excavation activities beyond the expiration date. The owner may apply for renewal of an
excavation permit through the Office of Community Development for a fee not to exceed fifty dollars
($50.00) per year.
D. APPEALS
Any person affected by the Board’s decision to approve or disapprove an application or any
amendment thereto or any suspension or revocation of a permit pursuant to RSA 155-E:10, may appeal
to the Board for a rehearing on such decision or any matter determined thereby. The motion for
rehearing shall be filed within ten (10) days of such decision and shall fully specify every ground upon
which it is alleged that the decision or order complained of is unlawful or unreasonable. The Board shall
either grant or deny the request for rehearing within ten (10) days, and if the request is granted, a
rehearing shall be scheduled within thirty (30) days. Any person affected by the Board’s decision on a
motion for rehearing may appeal in accordance with RSA 677:4-15.
ARTICLE XI: REQUIRED INFORMATION
It shall be implicit in any approved permit and stated on said permit that the owner(s) are granting the
Planning Board or its agents the right to enter on the property without notice to determine compliance
with the conditions of the permit or any reclamation.
Milford Gravel and Earth Removal Regulations 2014
Page 7 of 8
APPENDIX
EXCAVATION SITE PLAN REVIEW
COMPLETED APPLICATION CHECKLIST
1. A signed and dated application.
2. Name and address of owner, the person doing the excavation and all abutters.
3. An excavation plan which includes:
a. Is at a scale no less than 1” = 100’;
b. Shows area to be excavated and within 150’;
c. Three (3) large copies (22”x34”)and one (1) reduced (11”x17”) copy;
d. Has the seal or signature of a registered engineer;
e. Has existing topography at five or fewer feet contours;
f. Shows the breadth, depth and slope of proposed elevation and existing excavation and
estimated duration;
g. Shows wooded and heavily vegetated areas;
h. Shows all surface drainage patterns including wetlands and standing water;
i. Shows location of all easements on/below the ground;
j. Includes location and width of all public roads and rights-of-ways;
k. Includes a log of borings or test pits to include ground water levels;
l. Shows stonewalls, ledge outcroppings, wells, existing buildings, septic systems, utilities and the
like;
m. Includes a LOCUS map at a scale of 1”= 1,000 showing the proposed operation in relation to
existing roads;
n. Shows any and all accessory facilities/activities;
o. Includes existing and proposed access roads including width and surface materials;
p. Shows existing and proposed parking areas;
q. Shows the location of driveways and road intersections within two hundred feet of property
boundary;
r. Includes fencing, buffers and other visual barriers including height and materials;
s. Identifies storage areas for topsoil to be used in reclamation;
t. Identifies all measures to control erosion, sedimentation, water pollution, air pollution and safety
hazards;
u. Plans for stormwater management if more than 5,000 SF of site disturbance;
v. Identifies zoning districts;
w. Copies of all state or federal permits required for the excavation;
4. Location and boundaries of the proposed excavation and the number of acres involved in the
project;
- Haul routes
- Hours of operation
- Dust control
- Excavation 50’ from disapproving abutter; 10’ from approving abutter
Milford Gravel and Earth Removal Regulations 2014
Page 8 of 8
5. A site reclamation plan which:
a. Is at the same scale as the excavation plan;
b. Three (3) large copies and one (1) reduced (11”x17”) copy and a pdf.;
c. Includes the seal and signature of a registered engineer;
d. Shows all boundaries of the area proposed for reclamation
e. Includes the final topography of the reclaimed area;
f. Shows final surface drainage patterns;
g. Includes the schedule of final reclamation activities including seeding mixtures, cover
vegetation, fertilizer types, rates and trees;
h. Final slopes shown as being regraded to at least 2:1
6. Other Information:
The Planning Board reserves the right, per RSA 155-E: 3, VII, to request additional reasonable
information deemed necessary to make an informed decision, or to have plans reviewed by an
outside agency. All expenses of preparation of all plans, maps, and reports accompanying the
application shall be at the applicant’s expense.
TOWN OF MILFORD
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND
EROSION CONTROL REGULATIONS
Prepared for:
Town of Milford, New Hampshire
1 Union Square
Milford, NH 03055
Prepared by:
540 Commercial Street • Manchester, NH 03101
(603) 668-8223 • Fax: (603) 668-8802
cld@cldengineers.com • www.cldengineers.com
Maine • New Hampshire • Vermont
April 2007
5/22/07
Chapter 5.32
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION CONTROL
Sections
5.32.010 Purpose and Objectives.
5.32.020 Authority.
5.32.030 Jurisdiction.
5.32.040 Severability.
5.32.050 Amendments.
5.32.060 Applicability.
5.32.070 Abbreviations/Definitions.
5.32.080 Design Standards.
5.32.090 Application, Approval and Review.
5.32.100 Responsibility for Installation/Construction/Inspection.
5.32.110 Maintenance and Inspection.
5.32.120 Other Required Permits.
5.32.130 Post-Construction Operation.
5.32.140 Enforcement and Penalties.
5.32.150 Mandatory Regulated MS4s in Urbanized Areas – Map.
Map 1: Town of Milford “Urbanized Areas”
5/22/07 1
Chapter 5.32
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION CONTROL
5.32.010 Purpose and Objectives.
The purpose of this Regulation is to provide for the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of the Town of Milford through the regulation of discharges into
the Town’s Stormwater Drainage System, waterbodies, streams, and wetlands in a
manner compliant with the requirements of State and federal law, including the
provisions of the Federal Stormwater Management legislation for Municipal Separate
Storm Sewer Systems (MS4’s), as amended.
The objective of this Regulation shall be to:
• Prohibit unpermitted discharges into the Stormwater Drainage System;
• To set forth the legal authority and procedures to carry out all inspection,
monitoring, and enforcement activities necessary to ensure compliance with this
Regulation and applicable State and federal law; and
• To establish, for new construction, design and construction standards for
stormwater drainage systems that will result in the construction of systems that will
be compliant with this Regulation and State and federal laws and to have such
standards incorporated into the existing standards and review processes governing
new construction in site plan and subdivision review, as well as building permits that
implicate the requisite disturbance of the site.
5.32.020 Authority.
This Regulation is adopted pursuant to the authority vested in:
• The authority vested in the Selectmen pursuant to RSA 41:11, RSA 47:17,
VII, VIII, and XVIII; and
• The Planning Board pursuant to RSA 674:35 and 36, and RSA 674:44; and,
RSA 155-E:11; and
• The authority vested in the Health Officer and Board of Health pursuant to
RSA 147:1 and 147:14; and
• The authority vested in the Water and Sewer Commissioners pursuant to
RSA 38:26 and RSA 149:I:6, respectively.
The Regulation shall become effective upon adoption by the Town of Milford
Planning Board, Health Officer/Board of Health, the Board of Selectmen, Water and
Sewer Commissions, in accordance with the statutory sections identified above.
5.32.030 Jurisdiction.
A. This Regulation shall pertain to all land within the boundaries of the Town of
Milford, New Hampshire.
B. In any case where a provision of the Regulation is found to be in conflict with
a provision of any other Ordinance, regulation, code, or covenant in effect in the
Town of Milford or with any State Statute with particular reference to NHRSA
Chapter 676:14 and 674:16 and 674:17 and the relevant sections therein, the
provision which is the more restrictive shall prevail.
5/22/07 2
5.32.040 Severability.
The invalidity of any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or
word of this Regulation shall not be held to invalidate any other section, subsection,
paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this Regulation.
5.32.050 Amendments.
This Regulation may be amended by the approval of the several boards identified
in Section 5.32.020 above, provided that each such agency complies with any
applicable statutory or local procedures governing their authority to adopt such
regulations. Amendments to zoning aspects must be approved at Milford Town
Meeting.
5.32.060 Applicability.
This Regulation shall apply to any action that will hinder, interfere with, alter, or
modify the existing stormwater flow, drainage, or infrastructure constructed for such
purpose unless and until this Regulation has been complied with. It shall apply to
any discharges into the Town’s Stormwater Drainage System, waterbodies, streams,
and wetlands.
A. Permit and SWMP.
1. Permit Required. Except as permitted by this Regulation, no person shall
alter land or engage in any activity which causes or contributes to stormwater runoff
discharge without first having obtained a Stormwater Management Permit (SMP) for
land proposed to be altered or which will be affected by such activity. The owner
shall be required to apply to the Director of Community Development and obtain
such permit from the Planning Board, Health Officer, DPW Director, Water and/or
Sewer Commissioners, or their designees, as their jurisdiction warrants, prior to
undertaking any such action. This requirement shall apply to any activity that will
disturb or impact a land area greater than 5,000 cumulative square feet unless noted
as an exclusion in a through e below.
a. Normal maintenance and improvement of land in agricultural use provided
Best Management Practices as established by NHDES Regulations are being
observed.
b. Maintenance of existing landscaping, gardens, or lawn areas associated with
a single-family dwelling.
c. The construction of any fence that will not alter existing terrain or drainage
patterns.
d. Construction of utilities (gas, water, electric, telephone, etc.) other than
drainage, disturbing less than 20,000 contiguous square feet, within the limits of an
existing paved roadway, which will not permanently alter terrain, groundcover, or
drainage patterns, where trenches are paved at the end of each working day.
e. Emergency repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice that
poses a threat to public health or safety, or as deemed necessary by the Health
Officer.
2. Requirement of Construction Stormwater Management and Erosion Control
Plan. The applicant for a permit required under Section 5.32.060.A.1 above, shall be
required, additionally, as part of the application review process, to design and submit
a Construction Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Plan (unique to the
site) to the Director of Community Development for distribution to the Planning Board
and Town Engineer for any tract of land being developed, redeveloped, or
subdivided within the boundaries of Milford, where one or more of the following
conditions are proposed:
5/22/07 3
a. A cumulative disturbed area exceeding 20,000 square feet, unless the
disturbance is solely related to construction or reconstruction of a street or road,
which will allow up to one (1) acre of disturbance prior to requiring a complete
Construction Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Plan.
b. A subdivision of more than three building lots.
c. Proposed work adjacent to a wetlands or wetlands buffer.
d. Phasing of greater than three lots per year of an existing or proposed
subdivision.
e. Construction of utilities (gas, water, electric, telephone, etc.) requiring
contiguous ground disturbance of greater than 20,000 square feet unless the
disturbance is proposed within the limits of an existing paved roadway utilizing a
contractor with no history of erosion concerns.
f. Disturbed critical areas (see Definitions).
B. Standards and Requirements of Plan Submission. Such plans shall be
submitted to the Director of Community Development for distribution to the Planning
Board, Health Officer, DPW Director, Water and/or Sewer Commissioners, or their
designees, for review and approval to the extent that the proposed use involves
areas of their jurisdiction. The Planning Board, Health Officer, DPW Director, Water
and/or Sewer Commissioners, or their designees may, if in their judgment they deem
it necessary or helpful to assist them in their review of such plan, require that the
plan be reviewed by a Registered Professional Engineer or other professional
consultant acceptable to them, the cost of which shall be borne by the applicant.
The Plan, which shall be unique to the site, shall contain all information required by
Sections 5.32.080 and 5.32.090, below.
5.32.070 Abbreviations/Definitions.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP): A proven or accepted structural, nonstructural,
or vegetative measure; the application of which reduces erosion,
sediment, or peak storm discharge, or improves the quality of stormwater runoff.
BMP: Best Management Practice.
CEASE AND DESIST: Document issued related to a parcel or activity in
violation of the Town of Milford Stormwater Management and Erosion Control
Regulations and/or the Town of Milford Site Plan, Subdivision, other Land Use
Regulations or Ordinances, or plans approved thereunder.
CERTIFIED SOIL SCIENTIST: A person qualified in soil classification and
mapping who is certified by the State of New Hampshire Board of Natural Scientists.
CRITICAL AREAS: Disturbed areas of any size
1. Within 25 feet of a permanent or intermittent vernal pool, stream, bog, water
body; or
2. Within 25 feet of poorly or very poorly drained soils; floodplain; or
3. Disturbed areas exceeding 2,000 square feet in highly erodible soils; or
4. Disturbed areas containing slope lengths exceeding 25 feet on slopes greater
than 15 percent.
DEVELOPMENT: Any construction or land disturbance or grading activities
other than for agricultural and silvicultural practices.
DISTURBED AREA: An area where the natural vegetation has been removed
exposing the underlying soil or where vegetation has been covered.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA): The Federal agency of the
United States responsible for implementing the Clean Water Act, including the
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) program.
EPA: (United States) Environmental Protection Agency.
5/22/07 4
EROSION: The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water,
wind, ice, or gravity.
HIGHLY ERODIBLE SOILS: Any soil with an erodibility class (K factor) greater
than or equal to 0.43 in any layer as found in Table 3-1 of the Stormwater
Management and Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Urban and
Developing Areas in New Hampshire.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM: An EPA Clean
Water Act Permit program.
NOI: Notice of Intent.
NOPV: Notice of Probable Violation.
NOT: Notice of Termination.
NOTICE OF INTENT (NOI): Document to apply for coverage under the EPA’s
Construction General Permit for stormwater discharges from construction activities.
NOTICE OF PROBABLE VIOLATION (NOPV): Document describing
nonconformance with the Town of Milford Stormwater Management and Erosion
Control Regulations.
NOTICE OF TERMINATION (NOT): Document to end coverage of a construction
activity under EPA’s Construction General Permit.
NPDES: National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
PROJECT AREA: The area within the subdivision or site plan boundaries plus
any areas with associated off-site improvements.
SEDIMENT: Solid material, either mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is
transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by erosion.
STABILIZED: When the soil erosion rate approaches that of undisturbed soils.
Soils which are disturbed will be considered protected when covered with a healthy,
mature growth of grass, or a good covering of straw mulch or other equivalent
(seedless) mulch (2 tons/acre). Mulch is only a temporary measure; ultimately, the
site needs vegetation.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION CONTROL PLAN (SWMP): A
plan which may be required by the Town which outlines project features, proposed
temporary and permanent erosion control features, maintenance schedules and
practices, and design basis used to establish temporary and permanent stormwater
design features. If a SWPPP is required under Federal law, the applicant may
completely incorporate SWMP requirements into the SWPPP and request that the
SWPPP cover both the SWPPP and SWMP requirements.
STORMWATER PERMIT (SWP): A permit issued by the Town of Milford per the
requirements outlined in this Regulation.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP): A plan required
by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) that clearly describes appropriate
pollution control measures that include a description of all pollution control measures
(i.e., BMP’s) that will be implemented as part of the construction activity to control
pollutants in stormwater discharges and describes the interim and permanent
stabilization practices for the site.
STORMWATER RUNOFF: The water from precipitation that is not absorbed,
evaporated, or otherwise stored within the contributing drainage area.
STREAM: Areas of flowing water occurring for sufficient time to develop and
maintain defined channels but which may not flow during dry portions of the year.
Includes but is not limited to all perennial and intermittent streams located on U.S.
Geological Survey Maps.
SWMP: Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Plan.
SWP: Stormwater Permit.
5/22/07 5
SWPPP: Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan.
TOWN: The Town of Milford, New Hampshire.
TOWN ENGINEER: It is understood that there is no official position in the Town
of Milford identified as the “Town Engineer”. Thus, the term “Town Engineer’” when
contained in this Regulation, is intended to refer to and identify any qualified
engineering consultant which the Selectmen, Town Administrator, Planning Board,
Health Officer, DPW Director, Water and/or Sewer Commissioners, or their
designees engage(s) for the purpose of reviewing any application or plan submitted
in accordance with this Regulation or determining compliance herewith, when, in
their judgment, such review is appropriate or necessary in order to insure compliance
with this Regulation or determine if the provisions hereof have been violated.
UA: Urbanized Area.
URBANIZED AREA (UA): An area as defined by the EPA (based upon data
collected from the US Census Bureau) serving a population of 10,000 or greater and
a population density of 1,000 people per square mile.
5.32.080 Design Standards.
A. Temporary/Construction Stormwater Management Design. The following
standards shall be applied in planning for stormwater management and erosion
control as related to construction: (These standards are in addition to requirements
that may be found in this and other sections of the Site Plan, Subdivision, other Land
Use Regulations or Ordinances.)
1. All measures in the Plan shall meet as a minimum the Best Management
Practices set forth in the Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment
Control Handbook for Urban and Developing Areas in New Hampshire, Rockingham
County Conservation District, NH Department of Environmental Services, Soil
Conservation Service (now the Natural Resources Conservation Service), August
1992, as amended.
Additional BMP’s are available at the following locations:
a. http://www.des.state.nh.us/factsheets/wqe/wqe-6.htm - NHDES
Environmental Fact Sheet WD-WQE-6, (Soil Erosion and Sediment Control on
Construction Sites, 1996)
b. http://cfpub.epa.gov/npdes/stormwater/menuofbmps/index.cfm EPA National
Pollution Discharge Elimination System, (NPDES) (Stormwater Menu of Best
Management Practices (BMP's) and Construction Site Stormwater Runoff Control)).
Note: The web site links in this section are provided for information and are
subject to change. The most current link reference should be utilized.
2. Whenever practical, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected, or
supplemented. The stripping of vegetation shall be done in a manner that minimizes
soil erosion.
3. Appropriate erosion and sediment control measures shall be installed. The
Town Engineer or his designee shall review and approve installation of the measures
prior to land disturbance.
4. The area of disturbance shall be kept to a minimum. Disturbed areas
remaining idle for more than 30 days shall be stabilized.
a. Measures shall be taken to control erosion within the project area. Sediment
in runoff water shall be trapped and retained within the project area using approved
measures. Wetland areas and surface waters shall be protected from sediment.
b. Off-site surface water and runoff from undisturbed areas shall be diverted
away from disturbed areas where feasible or carried non-erosively through the
project area. Integrity of downstream drainage systems shall be maintained.
5/22/07 6
c. Measures shall be taken to control the post-development peak rate of runoff
so that it does not exceed pre-development runoff for the two-year, 24-hour storm
event and for additional storm event frequencies as specified in the design criteria of
the Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for
Urban and Developing Areas in New Hampshire.
d. Priority should be given to preserving natural drainage systems including
perennial and intermittent streams, wetlands, swales, and drainage ditches for
conveyance of runoff leaving the project area.
e. All temporary erosion and sediment control measures shall be maintained in
functioning condition until final site stabilization is accomplished.
f. All temporary erosion and sediment control measures shall be removed after
final site stabilization. Trapped sediment and other disturbed soil areas resulting
from the removal of temporary measures shall be permanently stabilized within 30
days unless conditions dictate otherwise.
g. Naturally occurring streams, channels, and wetlands shall be used for
conveyance of runoff leaving the project area only after appropriate sedimentation
control measures have been employed.
B. Permanent Stormwater Management General Design Criteria. The following
standards shall be applied in planning for stormwater management and erosion
control as related to long-term management of municipal water quality (Note: See
Section 5.32.150 for the EPA map of the Urbanized Area):
1. Under One Acre of Total Disturbance (includes non-contiguous areas):
a. Within the urbanized area (UA) will require a basic stormwater quality
management system. At a minimum, all stormwater must pass through basic
pretreatment (beyond catch basin sumps) prior to leaving the site.
b. Outside of the UA, water quality measures will be required on a case-by-case
basis.
2. Over One Acre of Total Disturbance (includes non-contiguous areas):
a. Within the UA requires a well thought out, systematic permanent stormwater
quality management system. Latest technology and most up-to-date performance
data must be considered when selecting permanent control measures. As noted
above, catch basin sumps alone are not considered a valid water quality control
measure. Mechanical devices may be required to supplement any proposal.
Maintenance programs and schedules will be required as part of the proposal. In
addition to the one-time maintenance bond at the time of road acceptance, off-site
water quality control measures may require long-term escrow funds to cover future
maintenance expenses (including removal of erosion control measures not removed
as part of the project). Sites with appropriate separation to the seasonal high
groundwater table must also consider groundwater recharge. All groundwater
recharge systems will require on-site test pit and percolation test data to be
submitted as part of the review.
b. Outside the UA requires a basic systematic permanent stormwater quality
management system. Catch basin sumps alone are not considered a valid water
quality control measure.
3. Adjacent to the Wetlands Buffer (Any Size Disturbance):
a. Any new project adjacent to the wetlands buffer will require permanent water
quality control measures.
b. Projects involving redevelopment or expansion will be considered on a caseby-
case basis.
5/22/07 7
4. Municipal Projects:
All municipal projects will comply with water quality control measures defined
in this Regulation. Nothing regarding municipal projects is intended to impose any
greater requirement than is already required by RSA 674:54.
C. Permanent Stormwater Management Technical Design Criteria
1. All measures in the plan shall, as a minimum, meet the Best Management
Practices set forth in the Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment
Control Handbook for Urban and Developing Areas in New Hampshire, Rockingham
County Conservation District, NH Department of Environmental Services, Soil
Conservation Service (now the Natural Resources Conservation Service), August
1992, as amended.
2. The design of proposed features must consider the following:
a. Existing and proposed methods of handling stormwater runoff so that there
will be no increase in the amount of runoff that leaves the boundaries of the site.
(The Planning Board may permit an increase in off-site stormwater runoff on
submission of a detailed downstream study and on the recommendation of the Town
Engineer.)
b. Engineering calculations used to determine drainage requirements based
upon 25-year storm frequency, 24-hour duration shall be provided if the project will
significantly alter the existing drainage patterns due to such factors as the amount of
new impervious surfaces (such as pavement and building areas) being proposed. All
closed drainage systems, culverts, major ditches, swales, and detention facilities
must be sized for the 25-year storm frequency. All structural measures such as
detention/retention facilities must be reviewed for 50-year storm impacts.
c. If the project will affect drainage flow to an existing roadway culvert, or if a
detention or retention area is proposed, a minimum of a 25-year storm shall be used
to evaluate potential off-site effects. If a State-owned or maintained culvert is
affected by the development, State of New Hampshire Department of Transportation
(NHDOT) Guidelines shall be used for evaluation of the culvert. Written approval
from the NHDOT must be submitted before final approval is granted.
d. Access for maintenance of stormwater facilities must be included as part of
the design, where necessary. Access easements may be required.
e. All temporary erosion and sediment control measures shall be removed after
final site stabilization. Trapped sediment and other disturbed soil area resulting from
the removal of temporary measures shall be permanently stabilized within thirty (30)
days unless conditions dictate otherwise. If local, State, or Federal authorities
determine that the trapped sediment contains pollutants, trapped sediment must be
removed and disposed of in a manner which satisfies Federal, State, and local
regulations.
f. Velocities of less than ten feet per second (10 fps) are required prior to
entering a sedimentation swale. The maximum design velocity within the swale shall
be 1.0 feet per second during passage of the 25-year storm.
g. Flows less than ten cubic feet per second (10 cfs) are required prior to
entering a sedimentation swale.
h. All slopes equal to or steeper than 2:1 adjacent to a public right-of-way must
have special stabilization details provided with the submission.
i. Forebays for stilling and sediment trapment must be included in all basin and
swale designs.
j. Velocities of ten feet per second (10 fps) or less are desirable within a closed
drainage system. Higher velocities may be allowed provided special design criteria
have been used.
5/22/07 8
k. A minimum velocity of two feet per second (2 fps) is required within a closed
drainage system.
l. Proposed riprap within a public right-of-way shall be placed a minimum of
twelve inches deep.
m. Seasonal highwater table elevations must be accounted for in all BMP design
criteria.
n. Drainage design should follow the guidelines presented in the Stormwater
Management and Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Urban and
Developing Areas in New Hampshire, as published by the New Hampshire
Department of Environmental Services, Rockingham County Conservation District
and the USDA Soil Conservation Service, and additional guidelines published in the
Manual on Drainage Design for Highways, as published by the State of New
Hampshire Department of Transportation.
5.32.090 Application, Approval and Review.
A. Initial Application Requirements. The following minimum requirements apply
to all demolition or construction projects subject to 5.32.060.A.1 or 5.32.060.A.2.
Additional requirements may be found in this and other sections of the Site Plan,
Subdivision, or Other Land Use Regulations. If the project is part of a formal
Planning Board Approval process, documents must be submitted for consideration
as part of Final Approval.
1. Site drawing of existing and proposed conditions including:
a. Locus map showing property boundaries.
b. North arrow, scale, and date.
c. Property lines.
d. Easements.
e. Structures, utilities, roads, and other paved areas.
f. Topographic contours.
g. Critical areas, as defined herein.
h. Surface water and wetlands, drainage patterns, and watershed boundaries.
i. Vegetation.
j. Limits of work.
2. Soils information for design purposes or for determining highly erodible soils
shall be determined from a National Cooperative Soil Survey (NCSS) soil series
map. A High Intensity Soil Map of the site, prepared in accordance with the Society
of Soil Scientists of Northern New England (SSSNNE) Special Publication No. 1, can
only be used for design purposes and not for determining highly erodible soils.
3. Construction details and/or application procedures for temporary and
permanent stormwater management and erosion and sediment control BMP's.
4. Areas and timing of soil disturbance.
5. A schedule for self-inspection and maintenance of all BMP's. (The schedule
must be included within the plan set.)
6. Narrative section including discussion of each measure, its purpose,
construction sequence, and installation timing as they apply to the site.
7. If infiltration or exfiltration is proposed as part of the drainage solution, test pit
information including estimated seasonal high water table elevations shall be
provided at the location and approximate elevation of the proposed infiltrating or
exfiltrating device.
8. Calculations for the infiltration or exfiltration system. These calculations
should also account for frozen ground conditions, when the devices may not function
at their optimal design.
5/22/07 9
9. Any other specific study, calculation, or investigation as requested by the
Town.
10. The drainage plans and calculations portion of the SWMP or SWPPP shall be
certified by a Licensed Professional Engineer, registered in the State of New
Hampshire.
B. Final Application Requirements. The following additional requirements shall
be required (in paper and electronic form) as part of the final plan unless the project
is deemed of sufficiently minimal impact to qualify for the minimum requirements
specified in Section 5.32.080 (Design Standards) of this Regulation as determined by
the Public Works Director or Town Engineer. Applicants with projects approved prior
to the effective date of this Regulation, whose submission(s) included an Erosion
Control Plan and a Stormwater Management Plan as a component of such
submission(s) may present such submission(s) in lieu of the requirements of Section
5.32.090.A and Section 5.32.090.B.
1. Construction Drawings/Supporting Documents:
a. A project narrative including a description of the development.
b. Locus map showing property boundaries.
c. North arrow, scale, date.
d. Property lines.
e. Structures, roads, and utilities.
f. Topographic contours at two-foot (2’) intervals.
g. Critical areas.
h. Within the project area and within 200 feet of project boundary surface
waters, wetlands, and drainage patterns and watershed boundaries.
i. Vegetation.
j. Extent of 100-year floodplain boundaries if published or determined.
k. Soils information for design purposes from a National Cooperative Soil
Survey (NCSS) soil series map or a High Intensity Soil Map of the site, prepared in
accordance with Society of Soil Scientists of Northern New England (SSSNNE)
Special Publication No. 1. Highly erodible soils shall be determined by soil series.
l. Easements.
m. Areas of soil disturbance.
n. Areas of cut and fill.
o. Locations of earth stockpiles.
p. Locations of equipment storage and staging.
q. Locations of proposed construction and/or permanent vehicle or equipment
fueling.
r. Stump disposal plan.
s. Highlighted areas of poorly and very poorly drained soils.
t. Highlighted areas of poorly and/or very poorly drained soils proposed to be
filled.
u. Construction and earth movement schedule including project start and
completion dates, sequence of grading and construction activities, sequence for
installation and/or application of soil erosion and sediment control measures, and the
sequence for final stabilization of the project site.
v. Locations, descriptions, details, and design criteria and calculations for all
structural, non-structural, permanent, and temporary erosion and sedimentation
control measures and BMP’s.
w. Identification of all permanent control measures.
x. Identification of permanent snow storage areas.
y. Identification of snow management measures during construction.
5/22/07 10
z. Description of the combination of sediment and erosion control measures
which are required to achieve maximum pollutant removal such as:
i. Sediment Basins: For common drainage that serves an area with 10 or more
acres disturbed at one time, a temporary (or permanent) sediment basin must
provide storage for a calculated volume of runoff from a drainage area from a 2-year,
24-hour storm, or equivalent control measures, must be provided, where attainable,
until final stabilization of the site. Where no such calculation has been performed, a
temporary (or permanent) sediment basin providing 3,600 cubic feet of storage per
acre drained, or equivalent control measures, must be provided where attainable
until final stabilization of the site. When computing the number of acres draining to a
common location, it is not necessary to include flows from off-site areas and flows
from on-site areas that are either undisturbed or have undergone final stabilization
where such flows are diverted around both the disturbed areas and the sediment
basin. In determining whether a sediment basin is attainable, the operators may
consider such factors as site soils, slope, available area on-site, etc. In any event,
the operator must consider public safety, especially as it relates to children, as a
design factor for the sediment basin and alternative sediment controls must be used
where site limitations would preclude a safe design.
ii. Drainage locations which serve 10 or more disturbed acres at one time and
where temporary sediment basins or equivalent controls are not attainable, smaller
sediment basins and/or sediment traps should be used. At a minimum, silt fence,
vegetative buffer strips, or equivalent sediment controls are required for all
downslope boundaries (and for those side slope boundaries deemed appropriate as
dictated by individual site conditions).
iii. Drainage locations serving less than 10 acres may utilize smaller sediment
basins and/or sediment traps. At a minimum, silt fence, vegetative buffer strips, or
equivalent sediment controls are required for all downslope boundaries (and for
those side slope boundaries deemed appropriate as dictated by individual site
conditions) of the construction area unless a sediment basin providing storage for a
calculated volume of runoff from a 2-year, 24-hour storm or 3,600 cubic feet of
storage per acre drained is provided.
2. Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Plan (SWMP) shall include the
following:
a. Design calculations for all temporary and permanent structural control BMP
measures.
b. A proposed schedule for the inspection and maintenance of all measures for
the site prior to achieving final site stabilization. Inspections must be conducted at
least once every 7 calendar days, or once every 14 calendar days and within 24
hours of the end of a storm event of 0.5 inches or greater.
c. Identification of all permanent control measures and responsibility for
continued maintenance.
d. Drainage report with calculations showing volume, peak discharge, and
velocity of present and future runoff for the 25-year, 24-hour storm event.
e. Plans showing the entire drainage area affecting or being affected by the
development of the site. Proposed lot boundaries and drainage areas shall be
clearly shown on the plan.
f. The direction of flow of runoff through the use of arrows shall clearly be
shown on the plan.
g. The location, elevation, and size of all existing and proposed catch basins,
drywells, drainage ditches, swales, retention basins, and storm sewers shall be
shown on the plan.
5/22/07 11
h. When detention structures are planned to reduce future condition peak
discharge, the soil cover complex method shall be used to compute the runoff
volume and peak discharge for designing the structure. The design will conform to
the criteria outlined for those types of structures given in the Stormwater
Management and Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Urban and
Developing Areas in New Hampshire.
i. Copies of pertinent State and Federal Permits.
j. An example SWMP table of contents is as follows:
i. Project overview.
ii. Owner.
iii. Address of development.
iv. Location of the site.
v. Description of receiving waters.
vi. Nature and purpose of the land disturbing activity.
vii. Limits of disturbance.
viii. Construction schedule.
ix. Existing conditions summary.
x. Definition of topography, drainage patterns, soils, groundcover, critical areas,
adjacent areas, upstream areas draining through site, existing development, existing
stormwater facilities, on- and off-site utilities, construction limitations, buffers,
wetlands, streams, sensitive areas, and other pertinent features.
xi. Include an existing conditions plan (drawing) showing the above existing
conditions and labeled per the narrative above.
xii. Off-site analysis.
xiii. Description of the tributary area (include at least ¼-mile downstream),
drainage channels, conveyance systems, and downstream receiving waters.
xiv. Summary of a review of existing or potential problems resulting from the
development including, but not limited to, sedimentation, erosion, water quality
issues, and chemical spills.
xv. Demonstration that development of the site will not negatively affect the
downstream systems.
xvi. Demonstrate adequate capacity of the downstream system to handle flow
conditions after development.
xvii.As applicable, include an off-site drainage plan (the plan may be part of the
existing conditions plan).
xviii.Special reports, studies, and maintenance information.
xix. As applicable, include test pit log forms, soil conditions data, and wetland
delineation information.
xx. As applicable, include information regarding long-range maintenance of any
closed drainage systems, detention/retention facilities, etc.
xxi. Appendix (include copies of all tables, graphs, charts, and test pit and
percolation test data used in any of the above calculations).
C. Plan Approval and Review.
1. The Planning Board or other agency having jurisdiction (per 5.32.060.B.)
shall indicate approval of the SWMP, as filed, if it complies with the requirements and
objectives of this Regulation. As applicable, such approval shall be a component of
subdivision or site plan approval.
2. Final SWMP approval shall be contingent upon collection of any required fees
or escrow amounts related to technical review of any SWMP prepared under this
Regulation.
5/22/07 12
5.32.100 Responsibility for Installation/Construction/Inspection.
A. The applicant and the applicant’s engineer (or technical representative) shall
schedule and attend a mandatory preconstruction meeting with the Town Engineer
or his designee at least two weeks prior to commencement of construction. All
required escrow deposits and bonding must be in place prior to the scheduled
meeting. Three copies of the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) and
Notice of Intent (NOI) (if required), the SWMP, up-to-date construction schedule, and
associated construction documents must be provided at that time. The SWMP must
bear the seal and signature of the New Hampshire Registered Professional Engineer
preparing the documents. The SWMP may be combined with the SWPPP if labeled
as both, meeting the requirements of both. Prior to commencement of construction,
the Department of Community Development will confirm that the documents
submitted meet the conditions of plan approval. An appropriate notation will be
made on the “official” construction set used by the Code Enforcement and Public
Works Departments. (Note: Preconstruction conferences will typically not be
required for construction of one single-family home or one residential duplex, not part
of a larger plan of construction.)
B. The Department of Community Development and/or Department of Public
Works reserve the right to prepare and request the applicant’s acknowledgement of
a preconstruction checklist.
C. The applicant shall bear final responsibility for the installation, construction,
inspection, and disposition of all stormwater management and erosion control
measures required by the provisions of this Regulation.
D. The Department of Community Development may require a bond or other
security with surety conditions in an amount satisfactory to the Town, providing for
the actual construction, installation, and removal of such measures within a period
specified by the Town and expressed in the bond or the security.
E. The Department of Community Development and/or Code Enforcement may
require the owner or his authorized agent to deposit in escrow with the Town an
amount of money sufficient to cover the Town’s costs for inspection and any
professional assistance required for site compliance monitoring.
F. Site development shall not begin before the SWMP and SWPPP (if required)
have been reviewed and approved by the Town, a NOI has been acknowledged by
the EPA, and NHDES has been contacted regarding impaired waters in accordance
with a NOI (if applicable). Best Management Practices shall be installed as designed
and scheduled as a condition of final approval of the SWMP.
G. Commercial and Industrial Development and/or Redevelopment. The
applicant, owner, and owner’s legally designated representative (if any) shall all hold
responsibility for implementing the SWMP and SWPPP (if required).
H. Residential Development and Redevelopment. The applicant is responsible
for implementing the SWMP and SWPPP (if required). Excluding any postdevelopment
requirements of plan implementation, there are two ways for the Town
to consider an applicant to be removed as the responsible party (the applicant may
also be required to comply with other regulating entities’ additional requirements):
1. The applicant completes the project in a manner satisfactory to the Town and
files a Notice of Termination (NOT) with the EPA in accordance with the terms of the
Federal requirements.
2. The applicant passes legal responsibility for the plan to another competent
party. In the case of a new subdivision where lots may be transferred to a different
5/22/07 13
entity for construction of the buildings, it is the applicant’s responsibility to ensure
that the applicant has a legal basis to require compliance by the new entity.
I. Individual Homeowner Development. The homeowner or a homeowner who
has taken control of a subdivided property bears responsibility for compliance with
the approved SWMP and SWPPP (if required). If the homeowner is contracting
building services to another person or entity, the homeowner may choose to pass
legal responsibility of compliance to the contracted entity. If the responsibility is not
passed, the homeowner remains the responsible party and must comply with the
terms of the original plan.
5.32.110 Maintenance and Inspection.
A. Maintenance and Inspection – Planning Board Approved Projects. The
following provisions shall pertain and be applicable only to those plans which come
under the jurisdictional purview of the Planning Board, (site plan/subdivision review).
1. A narrative description of ongoing construction and operational maintenance
requirements for water quality measures required by the SWMP after final Planning
Board approval shall be incorporated into the final plan and supporting
documentation or development agreement of the property on which such measures
are located and recorded at the Hillsborough County Registry of Deeds. The
narrative shall be in the form of a typical site plan management or development
agreement, or as otherwise set forth by the Planning Board.
2. If the applicant is unable to adequately provide the required maintenance
activities during construction, work may be stopped and the Town may require
additional escrow funding to be used by either the applicant or the Town solely to
repair, replace, and/or maintain the required measures.
3. The Town may require periodic compliance inspections to verify ongoing
maintenance of water quality protection measures. Such inspections shall be
performed by the Town or their designee at reasonable times to the landowner.
4. As a condition of Planning Board approval, the owner, his successor, and
assigns shall consent to periodic compliance inspections by the Planning Board or
their designee for compliance with this Regulation.
5. Self-inspections are to be performed in accordance with the SWMP and
SWPPP (if required).
6. Self-inspection reports are to be filed on-site in a location readily accessible
to the Town Inspector.
B. Maintenance and Inspection – Other Projects. The following provisions shall
pertain and be applicable only to those plans which come under the jurisdictional
purview of the Planning Board, (site plan/subdivision review).
1. Right to inspect. The Code Enforcement Officer, Health Officer, and/or DPW
Director or their designee, are authorized to conduct inspections of any site that is
the subject of a permit issued hereunder, irrespective of whether such permit also
required the approval of a Plan in accordance with Section 5.32.060.A.2, above, in
order to insure that any conditions of the issuance of such permit are being
maintained and that no violation of any of the provisions of this Regulation are taking
place.
2. Confirmation by Registered Professional Engineer. Upon such inspection,
when the circumstances of any suspected breach of condition or violation of this
Regulation involve standards that implicate technical engineering criteria either
included in this Regulation or as a condition of such permits, the Code Enforcement
Officer, Health Officer, and/or DPW Director or their designee shall seek confirmation
5/22/07 14
that such circumstances constitute a violation of such criteria prior to taking any
enforcement action under Section 5.32.140 of this Regulation.
3. Enforcement. Upon such confirmation by a Registered Professional
Engineer, or when such confirmation is not required due to the fact that the
circumstances of such violation do not implicate technical engineering criteria either
included in this Regulation or as a condition of such permit, the Code Enforcement
Officer, Health Officer, and/or DPW Director or their designee may proceed to
enforce the provisions of this Regulation or conditions of the permit in accordance
with applicable statutes, rules or regulations.
5.32.120 Other Required Permits.
In addition to local approval, copies of the following permits shall be required if
applicable:
A. Terrain Alteration (Site Specific Permit). RSA 485-A:17 requires a permit
from the Department of Environmental Services for “…any person proposing to
significantly alter the characteristic of the terrain, in such a manner as to impede
natural runoff or create an unnatural runoff …”. Regulations require this permit for
any project involving more than 100,000 contiguous square feet of disturbance or
50,000 contiguous square feet in the protected shoreland.
B. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater
Discharge Permit. A permit issued by the EPA or by the State under authority
delegated pursuant to 33 USC, section 1342 (b) that authorizes the discharge of
pollutants to waters of the United States. For a cumulative disturbance of one acre
of land that EPA considers “construction activity”, which includes, but is not limited to
clearing, grading, excavation, and other activities that expose soil typically related to
landscaping, demolition, and construction of structures and roads, a Federal Permit
will be required. Consult EPA for specific rules. This EPA Permit is in addition to
any State or local permit required. To apply, the entity or individual responsible for
construction site operations shall file a NOI with the EPA at least 7 days prior to work
beginning. Discharge is authorized when the application status is listed as
“authorized” in the EPA public NOI database or when the applicant receives an EPA
authorization letter by mail.
C. Wetlands Permit. RSA 482-A requires a permit from the Department of
Environmental Services for any person desiring to “…excavate, remove, fill, dredge
or construct any structures in or on any bank, flat, marsh, or swamp in and adjacent
to any waters of the State . . .”.
5.32.130 Post-Construction Operation.
A. Stormwater Discharges Associated with Commercial/Industrial Activities.
Each commercial and industrial facility approved under this Regulation is required to
perform annual site inspections (at a minimum). The site inspection must be
documented and at a minimum should include: review of stormwater flow paths,
condition of any sediment or contaminant control devices, water quality notations,
corrective actions and time frames if unacceptable water quality runoff is noted, and
the name and position of the inspector. All records of the inspections must be made
available to the Town or authorized agent upon request.
B. Notification for Spills or Other Non-Stormwater Discharges. As soon as any
person responsible for a facility, site, activity, or operation has information of any
known or suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges which are
resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater,
the Town of Milford’s municipal storm system, State waters, or waters of the United
5/22/07 15
States, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery,
containment, and cleanup of such release as to minimize the effects of the
discharge. (If said individual is not competent to assess, contain, or clean up, that
person shall immediately notify another competent individual or firm.) If the
substance poses an immediate health or safety concern, the Town of Milford
Emergency Services must immediately be notified. If the substance does not pose
an immediate concern, the Town of Milford Code Enforcement, Health Officer, and
Department of Public Works should be notified. This notification should be made as
soon as possible; however, no later than 24 hours post event. This notification does
not preclude and must be made in addition to any Federal or State required
notifications. The site operator/owner must be aware that discharges such as
treated swimming pool water are not allowed discharges unless appropriate
measures have been taken to reduce the treatment chemical concentrations in the
water.
5.32.140 Enforcement and Penalties
The Code Enforcement Officer, DPW Director, Health Officer, or their designee,
as the case may be and subject to the provisions below, shall be responsible for
enforcement of all aspects of this Regulation. In that regard, said official(s) shall be
empowered hereby to invoke any and all statutory enforcement prerogatives that
may be applicable to the purported violation as it relates to the plan submitted
hereunder or activity regulated hereby. By way of illustration and not by way of
limitation, it is contemplated that the following statutory enforcement prerogatives
would apply:
Type of Proposal Applicable Board Applicable
Enforcement
Statute
Site Plan/Subdivision Proposals Planning Board RSA 676:15, 16,
17, 17-a, & 17-b
Proposals affecting single existing tracts Health Officer/
Board of Health/
Planning Board
RSA 147:9
Proposals affecting existing public roads
or public stormwater systems in place
Selectmen/DPW RSA 41:11,
47:17,
RSA 625:V-a.
Proposals affecting any water/sewer
infrastructure in place
Water/Sewer
Commission
RSA 38:26, II,
and
RSA 149-I:6, III
Proposals implementing or involving
Earth Material Removal Permits or other
activities regulated by RSA 155-E
Planning Board RSA 155-E:10
The Code Enforcement Officer, DPW Director, Health Officer, or their designee is
authorized by means of this Regulation to take any action to enforce the conditions
hereof and to act on behalf of the various boards or agencies identified above,
5/22/07 16
depending on the nature or form of the conduct constituting the alleged violation. It
is intended that said Code Enforcement Officer, DPW Director, Health Officer, or
their designee shall have the authority to seek individual specific remedies, including,
where appropriate, injunctive relief, the issuance of Notices of Violation, the pursuit
of civil and/or criminal sanctions, or, without limitation, any other sanction as
authorized by applicable law, regulation or statute, and said Officer(s) are hereby
designated as the appropriate designee of any board or agency having jurisdiction,
whenever there is reason to believe that a violation of any of the provisions of this
Regulation or any permit issued hereunder has taken place. Nothing herein shall be
interpreted to limit or otherwise curtail any statutory authority which such board or
agency is entitled to exercise independent of this Regulation.
Further, nothing in this section is intended to limit, in any way, the Code
Enforcement Officer, DPW Director, Health Officer, or their designee from exercising
any authority that State law allows them to exercise on behalf of any State agency
which has preemptive or concurrent jurisdiction over any conduct that would be
considered a violation of this Regulation.
5.32.150 Mandatory Regulated MS4s in Urbanized Areas – Map.
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems (MS4s) within “urbanized areas” (UA),
as defined by the Bureau of Census, fall under mandatory regulation under EPA
Phase II Stormwater Management Regulations. Within the UA, all roads and streets
and associated drainage systems, both open and closed fall under regulation. Map 1
depicts the two urbanized areas in Milford. The northern area is within the Nashua,
New Hampshire UA and the southern area is within the Boston, Massachusetts, New
Hampshire, and Rhode Island UA. All land in Milford shall comply with this
Regulation.
5/22/07 17
Map 1: Town of Milford “Urbanized Areas”
Insert Town Copy of EPA Map
Town of Milford, NH
Schedule of Fees
5/18/2016
Rev - 1 Updated May 18, 2016
Town Services: Fees:
Administration Office
Photocopies $.50 per copy
Computer print out $.75 per copy
11x17 computer print out $1.00 per copy
Junk Yard Permit $25. per year
Rental of Auditorium $250 per occurance
Rental of Banquet Hall $100 per occurance
Rental of Both Auditorium and Banquet Hall $300 per occurance
Custodial Fees for Auditorium and Banquet Hall:
1 - 30 people $60 per occurance
31 - 100 people $90 per occurance
101 and up $120 per occurance
All Depts. Charge the same for photo copies otherwise it will be listed.
Ambulance Department:
BLS Rate $586.18 per client
ALS 1 Rate- Emergency $766.26
ALS 2 Rate - Emergency $1,216.21
ALS 1 Rate - Specialty Care Transport (SCT) $1,698.78 (new fee)
Mileage $12.95 per mile
Patient Record request $15.00 for the first 30 pages followed by $.50 per page thereafter
Outside Detail
Labor $36.00 per hour
Vehicle $10.00 per hour
Assessing Department:
Tax Maps/Property Record Cards $1.00 per copy
Larger than 8 x 11 $1.00 per copy
Reports:
Canned or partial date base report $25 per copy
Custom or full date base report $60 per copy
Community Development Department:
Building & Safety
New residential Buildings ( electrical/ Plumbing fees included)
200 SF $35 per permit
201- 499 SF $75 per permit
500 SF and over $90 plus $.20 SF over 500SF
Renewals $15 per permit
Existing Residential Buildings ( Additions/ Altercations)
200 SF $35 per permit
201- 499 SF $75 per permit
500 SF and over $90 plus $.20 SF over 500SF
Renewals $15 per permit
Rev - 1 Updated May 18, 2016
Town Services: Fees:
Decks/ Porches ( up to 200 SF)
Renewals $15 per permit
Manufactured Homes (New and Replacements)
200 SF $35 per permit
201- 499 SF $75 per permit
500 SF and over $90 plus $.20 SF over 500SF
Accessory Residential ( detach garages, sheds over 120 SF, etc.)
0- 200 SF $35 per permit
201- 499 SF $50 per permit
500 SF and over $75 plus $.20 SF over 500 SF
Renewals $15 per permit
New Commercial/ Industrial Business
0-200 SF $100 per permit
201-499 SF $115 per permit
500 SF and over $200 plus $.25 SF over 500 SF
Renewals $75 per permit
Existing Commercial/ Industrial Business
0-200 SF $75 per permit
201-499 SF $100 per permit
500 SF and over $150 plus $.25 SF over 500 SF
Renewals $50 per permit
Electrical Permits
Residential has no fees if permit is issued
Electrical services change or miscellaneous electric $50 per permit
Temporary Electric service $25 per permit
Commercial/ Industrial/ Business
New and Exciting services ( include Main Disconnect) $10 for each additional disconnect
0- 200 AMP $75 per permit
201-400 AMP $100 per permit
401- 600 AMP $150 per permit
601-1000 AMP $200 per permit
1000 AMP and over $300 per permit
Plumbing Permits
Residential has no fees if permit is issued
Replacement/ Additions $50 for residential permit
Commercial/ Industrial/ Business
Base fee (1-6 Fixtures)= one fixture group $50 per permit
Base fee (7 or more fixtures) $50 plus $10 for each additional fixture or group
Miscellaneous
Swimming Pools (includes electrical permit cost)
Above Ground Pool $50 per permit
In Ground Pool $75 per permit
Demolition $30 per permit
Chimney ( masonry/ metal) $25 per permit
Re-Inspection fee $50 fee
Work commencing prior to obtaining required permits
Rev - 1 Updated May 18, 2016
Town Services: Fees:
Permit cost of $50.00 or less $100
Permit cost greater than $50.00 2x original permit cost
Sign Permits
Temporary $10 non refundable
0-12 SF $25 per permit
13-32 SF $40 per permit
33- 100 SF $50 per permit
Agricultural Buildings (barns, green houses, etc.)
0-1000 SF $25 per permit
2001 SF and over $75 per permit
Community Development Office costs
Abutter Fees $6.75 per abutter
Photocopies $.50 per copy
DVD of Board meetings $3.00
GIS & Data Disc Requests $50.00
Impact Fees
Library $.13/SF of finished residential construction
Police (Residential) $.22/SF of finished residential construction
Police (Commercial) $.14/SF of finished residential construction
Nashua Street Improvements $45 per residential unit
Maps
Zoning Map 17 x 22 $15.00
Zoning Map 24 x 36 $20.00
Zoning Map 34 x 44 $30.00
Street Map 11 x 17 (on copier) $1.00
Street Map 17 x 22 $10.00
Street Map 24 x 36 $25.00
Complete Tax Map Set $100.00
Regulations (hard copies)
Development Regulations $5.00
Master Plan $15.00
Sign Ordinance $5.00
Zoning Ordinance (full document) $75.00
Stormwater Management
Permit $25
Plan Review $50
Stormwater Management & Erosion Control Regulations $10
Planning Board
Subdivision Applications
Discussion/Conceptual Review $75.00
Design Review $75.00 plus $25/affected lot
Lot Line Adjustment $75.00 plus $50/affected lot
Minor Subdivision $75.00 plus $25/new lot or condominium
Major Subdivision (3-5 new lots) $75.00 plus $50/affected lot
Major Subdivision (6 or more new lots) $75.00 plus $100/affected lot
Rev - 1 Updated May 18, 2016
Town Services: Fees:
Site Plan Applications
Minor Site Plan - Change of Use $75.00
Minor Site Plan - Less than 600SF of site disturbance) $75.00 plus $.05 per SF of site disturbance
Major Site Plan $75.00 plus $.05 per SF of site disturbance
Gravel/Earth Removal $1,250.00 for 200,000 SF disturbance plus $500/additional 100,000SF
Design Review $75.00 plus $.05 per SF of site disturbance
Amendments to site plans $75.00 plus $.05 per SF of site disturbance
Miscellaneous Applications
Waiver requests (not part of current applications) $75.00
Extensions / Modifications of Approvals $75.00
Scenic Road Hearings $25 plus advertising costs
Regional Impact Hearings $25 plus advertising costs
Gravel Permits $50.00 annually
Abutter Notification $6.75 per abutter
Zoning Board of Adjustment
All applications (Variance, Special Exception, Administr Decision, Equitable Waiver) $75.00
Abutter Notifications $6.75 per abutter
Community Media
Media Duplication/All other $10.00 per disc or person provides their own USB Drive
Conservation Department:
No fees
Finance Department:
Returned Check Fee $25 per check
RFP - hardcopy $25+
Fire Department:
Alarm System
New $15 initial Permit
Renewal $15 per year
Alarm System monitoring $200 per year
False Alarms (after 3) 4th incident $100 per incident
Fire Prevention
Blasting $35 per permit
Cistern Acceptance $75 per permit
Day Care Inspection NO CHARGE
NFIRS Report Copies $1.00 per page
Fireworks Display $75 per permit
Mechanical New & Replacement Unit (Hot Water Heater, Furnace LPG & Oil) $35.00 per permit
Tank Installation - 120 gallon and up LPG above ground and unerground $35.00 per tank
Tank Removal (Underground Oil only) $35.00 per tank
Generators $35.00 per permit
Rev - 1 Updated May 18, 2016
Town Services: Fees:
Gas Piping $35.00 per permit
Plan Review
Fire Alarm Plan Submittal $50+
each divice $.50 each
Sprinkler Plan Submittal $50+
each divice $.50 each
Clean Agent Plan Submittal $50+
each divice $.50 each
Outside Details $50+
Fire Watch Detail $42.00 per hour, per person
Equipment - Engine $95.00 per hour
Equipment - Ladder $145.00 per hour
Equipment Rescue $75.00 per hour
$50+
IT Department:
Create a CD of information $25.00 per copy
Copy fees for voter list and property list $1.00 per copy
Library:
Photocopies/ computer print outs - Black & white $.10 per copy
Computer print out- color $.25 per copy
Fax service $1.00 per page
3D printing $.20 - $.40 per gram depending
11x17 computer print out $.15 per copy
Museum Passes ( over due) $5.00 per day
Museum Pass lost - replacement $10 per pass
DVD's (overdue) $1.00 per day up to $5 per item
Books ( over due) and other library materials $1.00 per day up to $2.50 per item
Library Card for Non-resident $ 50.00 per year
Lost or damage of any Library property the full cost of the item and $1.00 processing fee
Lost Library card replacement fee $1 per card
Police Department:
Pistol Permit $10 per permit
Letters of Good Conduct (adoption, Etc.) $25 fee
False Burglar Alarm Response ( After 3 Free) $25 fee
Police Officer Testing ( Written & Physical) $25 fee
Outside Detail w/o Cruiser $55 per hour
Outside Detail with Cruiser $70 per hour
Permit To Solicit $25 per permit
Taxi License (Company) $25 per permit
Taxi Operator Permit $25 per permit
Fingerprints ( non-resident) No Fee
License to Sell Pistols & Revolvers $50 per 3 year term
Copy work - insurance, attorneys, citizens .50 per page
Discovery (2:10) attorney request .50 per page
Rev - 1 Updated May 18, 2016
Town Services: Fees:
Electronic Media $25 per copy
Domestic Related Reports exempt
Public Works Department:
Road Opening Permit $55 per permit
Driveway Permit $30 per permit
Commercial Hauler Fee
Trash Disposal ( Recycled- Milford Only)
Commercial MSW Tipping Fee $100 a ton
Demolition Disposal ( Commercial- Milford Only)
Demolition and Building Materials $110 a ton
Mattress and Bulky Furniture $10 per item
Miscellaneous Disposal
Propane Cylinders ( 1lb-20lbs) $2.00 each
Propane Cylinders ( 30lbs-100lbs) $25 each
Freon Removal From appliances $16 each
Battery Disposal $2.00 each
Use of Scale for Weighing Vehicles and Trailers $5.00 each
Tires
Off Rims/ Passenger $2.00 each
On Rims/ Passenger $3.50 each
Off Rims/ Small Trucks $11 each
On Rims/ Small Trucks $12 each
Off Rims/ Large Trucks $18 each
On Rims/ Large Trucks $24 each
Residential Fee
Trash Disposal ( Recycled- Milford Only)
Residential MSW Tipping Fee $100 a ton
Demolition Disposal ( Residential- Milford Only
Demolition and Building Materials $110 a ton
Mattress and Bulky Furniture $10 per item
Miscellaneous
Propane Cylinders ( 1 LB - 20 LBS) $2.00 each
Propane Cylinders ( 30 LBS - 100 LBS) $25 each
Freon Removal from Appliances $16 each
Battery Disposal $2.00 each
Use of Scale for Weighing Vehicles and Trailers $5 each
Tires
Off Rims/ Passenger $2.00 each
On Rims/ Passenger $3.50 each
Off Rims/ Small Trucks $11 each
On Rims/ Small Trucks $12 each
Off Rims/ Large Trucks $18 each
On Rims/ Large Trucks $24 each
Rev - 1 Updated May 18, 2016
Town Services: Fees:
Highways and Streets Fees
Miscellaneous
Town of Milford Specification Book $20 each
Trench/ Street opening permits $55 each
Cemeteries Fees
Lot Sales
Cremation lot (2) $250 per lot
Single Grave lot $600 for single
2 grave lot $1,200 for 2
4 Grave lot $2,460 for 4
8 Grave lot $4,800 for 8
Services
Grave Openings ( full burials) $500 for full burial
Additional Charges
Late Day Burials ( after 2pm M-F and After 12Noon Saturday) $175 additional
Weekend Burials (prior to 12 noon on Saturday) $300 additional
Winter Burials ( December 1st - March 15th) $300 additional
Tent $100 per tent
Greens and Devise which are required $60 which is required
Concrete Monument Foundations ( March 1st- October 31st) $50 per surface Ft. Dimensions up to 1'2" wide
Cremation Vaults ( Required for all containers other than Marble, Concrete or Granite)
One size $125 per vault
Military Markers ( Bronze) $50 per marker
Military Markers ( Granite) No fee
Disinterment (Full Burials) $750 ea
Recreation Department:
Field and Pool Fees
Keyes Park
Baseball Field
Resident $15 an hour during the week and $20 an hour for weekends
Non-resident $25 an hour during the week and $35 an hour for weekends
Softball Field #1
Resident $15 an hour during the week and $20 an hour for weekends
Non-resident $25 an hour during the week and $35 an hour for weekends
Softball Field #2
Resident $15 an hour during the week and $20 an hour for weekends
Non-resident $25 an hour during the week and $35 an hour for weekends
Soccer Field
Resident $15 an hour during the week and $20 an hour for weekends
Non-resident $25 an hour during the week and $35 an hour for weekends
Basketball Court $15 an hour during the week and $20 an hour for weekends
Resident $25 an hour during the week and $35 an hour for weekends
Non-resident
Rev - 1 Updated May 18, 2016
Town Services: Fees:
Tennis Courts $15 an hour during the week and $20 an hour for weekends
Resident $25 an hour during the week and $35 an hour for weekends
Non-resident
Volleyball Sand Court
Resident $15 an hour during the week and $20 an hour for weekends
Non-resident $25 an hour during the week and $35 an hour for weekends
Skate Park No Fee
Pavilion
Resident $20 an hour or $100 a day during the week, Weekends $25 an hour or $125 a day
Non-resident $20 an hour or $100 a day during the week, Weekends $25 an hour or $125 a day
Shepard Park
Baseball fields
Resident $15 an hour during the week and $20 an hour for weekends
Non-resident $25 an hour during the week and $35 an hour for weekends
Adams Field
Resident $15 an hour during the week and $20 an hour for weekends
Non-resident $25 an hour during the week and $35 an hour for weekends
Keyes Pool
Pool pass Resident $20 per person
Pool Pass family pass ( 4 or more) $80 per family
Pool Pass Non-resident $40 per person
Pool Pass family pass ( 4 or more) $160 per family
Pool Day Pass $5 per person
Replacement Pool Passes $5 each
Swim Lessons
Resident $30 per person per session
Non-resident $40 per person per session
Swim Team resident - $10 sibling discount $80 per person
Swim Team non-resident - $10 sibling discount $90 per person
Town Clerk:
Returned Check Fee $25 per Check
Dog Licenses:
Altered $6.50 per dog
Unaltered $9.00 per dog
Late Fee per Month after 1 June $1.00 per dog
Puppies - 4 to 7 months $6.50 per dog
Group License ( 5 or more dogs) $20.00 for group
Senior Citizens $2.00 per person
Taxi
Driver $15.00 per driver
Owner/ Operator $100.00 per owner
Vehicle $30.00 per vehicle
Video
Video/ Non-Video $30.00 per video
Arcade ( 5 + machines) $100 5 or more
Rev - 1 Updated May 18, 2016
Town Services: Fees:
Peddler/ Vendor
Weekly ( Maximum 8 weeks) $10.00 per vendor
Yearly $100.00 per vendor
Pole License $10.00 per Utility Installation
Aqua Therm Permit $0.50 per permit
Dog Fines
Unlicensed $25.00 per dog
At Large $25.00 per dog
Vitals' Fees/Charges
Marriage License $45.00 per license
Birth Certificate $12.00 per certificate
Extra Copy ( purchased at same time) $8.00 per copy
Death Certificate $12.00 per certificate
Extra Copy ( purchased at same time) $8.00 per copy
Marriage Certificate $12.00 per certificate
Extra Copy ( purchased at same time) $8.00 per copy
Voter Registration Card N/A
City Seal N/A
VSCR: (Vital Statistic Change Record) $10.00 per change
Delayed Birth $25.00 per delay
Legitimization/ Affidavit of Paternity $22.00 test
UCC: (Uniform Commercial Code)
Termination $15.00 per termination
Search $10.00 per search
Copies $1.00 per copy
IRS Tax Liens:
Filing $15.00 for filing
Release $15.00 per release
Articles of Agreement $5.00 establishing a non-profit organization
Candidacy Filing $2.00 filing fee
Motor Vehicle Fees
Permit Various
Clerk $1.00 per fee
Agent $2.50 per agent
Title $2.00 per title
Transfer $5.00 per transfer
Tax Collector:
Returned Checks $25.00 per check
Reports $15.00 per report
Reports $25.00 per report
Reports $40.00 per report
Reports $50.00 per report
Reports $25.00 per report
Standard Electronic Media $25.00 per copy
Electronic Media- Special Request Varies
Rev - 1 Updated May 18, 2016
Town Services: Fees:
Real Estate Fees
Impending Tax Lien Notice $19.00 per notice
Impending Tax Lien Notice each additional parcel $2.00 per parcel
Tax Lien Execution $18.50 per execution
Tax Lien Execution each additional parcel $8.00 per addition
Post Lien Treasurer's Fee (Mortgagee identification and notice) $35.00 per parcel
Notice to Former owner to Repurchase $25.00 flat fee
Notice to Mortgage of repurchase Option $25.00 flat fee
Water and Waste Water Department:
Water Rates:
Quarterly Flat Meter Rate:
5/8" meter $23.10 flat rate
1" meter $41.80 flat rate
1 1/2" meter $73.15 flat rate
2" meter $110.55 flat rate
3" meter $210.65 flat rate
4" meter $324.23 flat rate
Meter Horns:
5/8" for 3/4 pipe $275.74 pipe
1" for a 2" pipi $476.14 pipe
Utility and Impact Fees:
Water entrance fee $1176.15 fee
Sewer entrance fee $1716.50 fee
Commercial/Industrial:
Water entrance fee $7.26 GPD
Sewer entrance fee $12.02 GPD
Hydrant Water $7.00 per 1,000 gal.
Flat Labor Fee $75.00 setup/breakdown
Water turn on/off:
Regular hours $50.00 regular
After hours/Holidays $120.00 after hours
Late fee $10 each time
Backflow testing $25.00 each time
Hydant Rental $344.00 each time
Returned check $25.00 each time
Sewer Rates:
Residential $4.40 100cf (748 gallons)
Commercial/Industrial $5.50 100cf (748 gallons
Sewer Disposal:
In Town - Milford and Wilton $70.00 (1,000 gallons)
Out of Town - Amherst, Brookline, Hollis, Lyndeborough, Mason and Mont Vernon $80 (1,000 gallons)
Grey Water $27.00 (1,000 gallons)
Septage Disposal Permit (2 year renewal cycle) $50.00 (2 year)
Rev - 1 Updated May 18, 2016
Town Services: Fees:
Sewer service Inspection Fee:
Residential $135.00 ea
Commercial/Industrial $270.00 ea
Industrial Pretreatment:
Permit $125.00 ea
Inspections $250.00 ea
Sampling:
Grab $25.00 ea
Composit $75.00 ea
Analysis
Sewer Maintenance Activities
Blockage $25.00 ea
Service repair/replacement $25.00 ea
Service connection $50.00 ea
Fees adopted by the Milford Board of Selectmen on 5/8/2017
One Union Square, Milford, NH 03055 ~ (603) 249-0620 ~ www.milford.nh.gov
Town of Milford,
New Hampshire
Office of Community Development Building Safety
PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE Effective 7/1/2017
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING PERMITS: All work regulated by the 2009 International Residential Code (IRC)
Applicability: The provisions of the International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement,
enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, removal and demolition of detached one and two-family dwellings and townhouses not
more than three stories above grade plane in height with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures (garages, sheds, pools, decks, etc.)
Application fee due at time of submittal…………………………. $50.00
All construction……………………………………………………… $.14/SF
Demolition (removal of entire structure)……………………..……. $50.00
NON-RESIDENTIAL BUILDING PERMITS: All work regulated by the 2009 International Building Code (IBC)
Applicability: The provisions of the International Building Code shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment,
use and occupancy, location, removal and demolition of any building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. This
does not include structures regulated by the IRC.
Application fee due at time of submittal…………………………. $50.00
All new construction………………………………………………… $.25/SF
Construction existing structures…………………………………… $.20/SF
Demolition (removal of entire structure)………………………….. $50.00
ELECTRICAL PERMITS: All work regulated by the 2014 National Electrical Code
Application fee due at time of submittal…………………………. $50.00
RESIDENTIAL
New & existing structures ………………….…………………….. $25 for each New/Temp/Sub panel
Panels (Upgrades/Subpanel) …………….………………………. $25 per panel
COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL
New construction (new & additions)………………………………. $.05/SF plus $25 per service/panel
Existing structures ………………….…………………………...….. $25 per service/panel
Panels (Perm/Temp/Subpanels) …………….…………………. $25 per additional service and/or panel
ADDITIONAL POWER SOURCE (Generator/Solar)………… $50 (Building/Mechanical / Gas Piping permits required)
PLUMBING PERMITS: All work regulated by the 2009 International Plumbing Code
Application fee due at time of submittal…………………………. $50.00
RESIDENTIAL (All plumbing work)…………..………………….. $50.00
COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL
New & existing structures……………………..………………….. $10 per new fixture (including hot water heaters)
MISCELLANEOUS PERMITS: All work regulated by Milford Zoning Ordinance or Milford Municipal Code
Accessory Dwelling Units (ADU)………………………………….. See Residential Building
Home Occupations…………………………………………………. See Residential/Non-Residential Building
Permit Renewals…………………………………………………… $25.00
Sign Permits (Due at time of application)…………………..……. $50.00 (Building/Electrical permits may also be req’d)
Stormwater Permit ………………..…………….………………….. $25.00
Stormwater Plan Review fee (if required)………………………… $50.00
Mechanical/Gas Piping permits…………….. ……………….…….. Contact Fire Department (603) 249-0680
Driveway permits……………………………………………………... Contact DPW (603) 249-0685
Water/Sewer permits….…………………………………………….. Contact Water Utilities (603) 249-0660
MISCELLANEOUS FEES:
Work commencing prior to permit issuance……………………… Permit Fee x 200%
Re-inspection fees ………………..…………….…………………. $50.00 per inspection
Copies ……………………………………………………………….. $.50 per page/$5.00 per large scale plan
Fees adopted by the Milford Board of Selectmen on 5/8/2017
One Union Square, Milford, NH 03055 ~ (603) 249-0620 ~ www.milford.nh.gov
Town of Milford,
New Hampshire
Office of Community Development Building Safety
PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE Effective 7/1/2017
REFUNDS:
Refunds may be requested (in writing) up to 180 days from permit issuance. Application fees are non-refundable.
INSPECTIONS:
? A minimum of 24 hours’ notice to schedule inspections. It is strongly encouraged that inspections are scheduled well in advance of
construction to avoid unnecessary delays.
? Inspections are scheduled by contacting the Building Department during regular business hours and performed based on availability of
Building Officials.
? Missed inspections, incomplete projects, or scheduled inspection where the inspector cannot gain reasonable access will be rescheduled
upon payment of a re-inspection fee.
? Some permits require inspection by other departments.
Work Commencing Before Permit Issuance: (See IBC Section 108.4 & IRC Section R108.7) Any person who is found to have demolished,
constructed, altered, removed, or changed the use of a building or structure without the benefit of a building, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, or
change in use permit shall, upon issuance of said permit(s), be assessed a fee of 200% of the regular permit fee.
Work requiring multiple re-inspections: (See IBC Section 109.7 & IRC Section R109.5)
Outside Plan Review Services: (See IBC Section 106.3.6) When a third party plan review consultant/agency is hired to perform the code plan
review, the resulting construction permit(s) shall be credited twenty (20) percent from the calculated regular (non-adjusted) permit rate or the
amount of services, whichever is less.
Milford Municipal Code
Appendix B – Fines
Title Chapter Code No. Fine Description Fine* Amended
Administration
and Personnel
Office of Emergency
Management 2.04.090 Violation of any provision of this code NTE $500.00 05-01-03
Business
Licenses and
Regulations
Hawkers, Peddlers,
and Vendors 3.08.070 $100.00 for each separate violation $100.00 09-09-28
Business
Licenses and
Regulations Taxicabs 3.020.110 Violation of code NTE $100.00 10-08-09
Animals Dogs
4.04.110:
A-I(a) Nuisance (I – IV) – first offense $25.00 10-10-12
Animals Dogs
4.04.110:
A-I(a) Nuisance (I – IV) – second offense $100.00 10-10-12
Animals Dogs
4.04.110:
A-I(b) Menace (V & VI) – first offense $50.00 10-10-12
Animals Dogs
4.04.110:
A-I(b) Menace (V & VI) – second offense $200.00 10-10-12
Animals Dogs
4.04.110:
A-II Vicious (VII) – first offense $100.00 10-10-12
Animals Dogs
4.04.110:
A-II Vicious (VII) – second offense $400.00
10-10-12
Health and
Safety
Regulation of Alarm
Systems 5.04.100
Failure to apply for or renew Alarm System
Permit $50.00 11-03-14
Health and
Safety
Regulation of Alarm
Systems 5.04.120
False Alarms: Prevention and Payment of
Costs – failure to pay false alarm service
fee $50.00 11-03-14
Health and
Safety
Regulation of Alarm
Systems 5.04.140
Operating an Alarm System After
Revocation; Penalty $250.00 11-03-14
Streets,
Sidewalks &
Public Places Sidewalk Obstructions 7.04 (D) Sidewalk Obstructions
$25.00, NTE
$500.00 11-09-26
Streets,
Sidewalks &
Public Places
Streets, Sidewalks &
Bridges Generally 7.04.010
Jumping and/or diving from bridges
prohibited
$50.00 each
separate violation 11-06-02
Streets,
Sidewalks &
Public Places
Streets, Sidewalks &
Bridges Generally 7.04.030 Snow removal placement NTE
$500.00 – each day
of violation shall be
deemed a separate
occurrence 11-06-02
Streets,
Sidewalks &
Public Places
Streets, Sidewalks &
Bridges Generally 7.04.050 Sidewalk Obstructions in Winter $25.00 11-06-02
Streets,
Sidewalks &
Public Places
Streets, Sidewalks &
Bridges Generally 7.04.060 Sidewalk Obstructions NTE $500.00 11-06-02
Streets,
Sidewalks &
Public Places
Commons,
Playgrounds, Town
Buildings, Pools &
Other Public Areas 7.16.115 Angling prior to fishing derby $50 11-06-02
Streets,
Sidewalks &
Public Places
Commons,
Playgrounds, Town
Buildings, Pools &
Other Public Areas 7.16.115 Angling prior to fishing derby NTE $500 11-06-02
Streets,
Sidewalks &
Public Places
Commons,
Playgrounds, Town
Buildings, Pools &
Other Public Areas 7.16.150 Discharging a firearm TBD 11-06-02
Streets,
Sidewalks &
Public Places
Depositing Trash or
Refuse 7.30 Depositing Trash or Refuse per violation $50.00
10-11-08
Buildings &
Construction 9.01.000
Civil penalty/fine for violation of any
provision of NH RSA Title LXIV(676:17.I) –
first offense $275.00 per day 09-11-09
Buildings &
Construction 9.01.000
Civil penalty/fine for violation of any
provision of NH RSA Title LXIV(676:17.I) –
second offense $550.00 per day 09-11-09
Buildings &
construction 9.01.000
Restitution of expended public funds,
posting bond and fines See RSA 676:17 09-11-09
* NTE = ‘Not To Exceed’.
If a fine is listed as an amount (X), followed by the text NTE, and then a greater amount (Y) indicates that the amount of the fine is X, or
to be determined by the court not to exceed Y (i.e., a fine is listed as ‘$25.00, NTE $500.00’ indicates that the fine is in the amount of
$25.00, or if the court sees fit to increase the fine the amount will not exceed $500.00).

Milford Municipal Code - Title 5 Health & Safety
Chapter 5.33 Fletcher Paint Superfund Site Groundwater Management Zone
FLETCHER PAINT SUPERFUND SITE
GROUNDWATER MANAGEMENT ZONE
Adopted L/-9- J _& _ by the Town of Milford Board of Selectmen (hereafter "Board")
I. AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE
Pursuant to RSA 147:1, Local Regulations, the Board adopts a Groundwater Management Zone in
consultation with the United States Environmental Protection Agency (US-EPA) and New
Hampshire Depatiment of Environmental Services (NH-DES) to be entitled, "Fletcher Paint
Superfund Site Groundwater Management Zone" (FS-GMZ).
Objectives of the Fletcher Paint Superfund Site Groundwater Management Zone are:
A. To prevent use of groundwater drawn from within a designated Federal Superfund site, as
defined under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability
Act (CERCLA), 42 U.S.C. § 960 I et seq., until the cleanup goals required under CERCLA
decision documents for the Fletcher Paint Superfund Site are achieved.
B. To protect the public health and safety of the residents of Milford in the vicinity of the Fletcher
Paint Superfund Site by preventing the possible spread of contaminated water from
groundwater to drinking water.
II. ZONEBOUNDARIES
The FS-GMZ is superimposed over the existing underlying zoning districts and is comprised of thirtysix
(36) parcels, those being shown on plan entitled "Fletcher Groundwater Management Zone I Town
Ordinance Area", dated February 2018 and shall extend to any newly-created lot and map numbers
created as a result of a legal subdivision within the defined area. The extent of the boundary of the FSGMZ
shall be reviewed no less frequently than every five years and possibly with greater frequency
depending on the results of testing. Subsequent to such review, lots may be removed from or added to
the FS-GMZ after consultation with US-EPA and NH-DES.
When the actual boundary of the FS-GMZ is in dispute by any owner or abutter affected by said
boundary, the Town will engage, at the owner or abutter's expense, a professional geologist or hydro
geologist to determine more accurately the precise boundary of the Zone. The Town shall consult with
the US-EPA and NH-DES, before any modification of the Groundwater Management Zone is made.
III. PROHIBITED USES
A. Additional to the prohibited uses of the underlying zoning district in which the FS-GMZ is located,
all use of groundwater for any purpose whatsoever in this district is prohibited without prior
approval from the Town, US-EPA and the NH-DES. No wells of any nature whatsoever shall be
dug, installed, or otherwise created within the district without prior approval from the Town, USEPA
and the NH-DES. No groundwater shall be drawn by any means whatsoever or for any use
whatsoever from within the Zone without prior approval from the Town, US-EPA and the NH-DES.
B. No disturbance of wetlands within the FS-GMZ shall be permitted without prior approval from the
Town, US-EPA and the NH-DES.
1
Milford Municipal Code - Title 5 Health & Safety
Chapter 5.33 Fletcher Paint Superfund Site Groundwater Management Zone
C. These restrictions do not apply to US-EPA and NH-DES activities authorized under CERCLA or
associated with remedial activities at other contaminated sites within the GMZ.
D. Nothing in this regulation shall prohibit a property owner from developing property within the FSGMZ
provided that any development proposal requiring on-site water shall demonstrate the ability
to connect to town water or other acceptable off-site water supply at the applicant' s expense.
E. Temporary dewatering activities for construction or maintenance activities within the FS-GMZ
are permissible with prior approval by the Town and US-EPA/NH-DES.
IV. ADMINISTRATION
A. The provisions of the FS-GMZ shall be administered by the Board acting through the Health Officer.
B. Any element of this ordinance may be waived by the Board and US-EPA and NH-DES, provided
that the granting of such waiver does not adversely affect any adjoining prope1iy.
C. The Town shall conduct ammal review ofFS-GMZ property transfers and provide notice of the
ordinance to new property owners.
V. ENFORCEMENT
The Board shall be responsible for enforcement of the provisions of the FS-GMZ and may pursue all
legal and equitable remedies to ensure compliance with this ordinance.
VI. EFFECTIVEDATE
This A1iicle shall become effective upon passage.
The FS-GMZ shall remain in effect until the cleanup goals required under CERCLA decision documents
for the Fletcher Superfund Site are achieved. The Town shall consult with the US-EPA and NH-DES
before modifying or terminating the FS-GMZ.
Adopted Qer\ \ Q) , 2018
Kevin Fe~~ of Selectmen
Mike Putnam, Selectman Laura Dudziak, Selectwoman
Paul Dargie, Selectmen
2
Milford Municipal Code - Title 5 Health & Safety
__ C_h_a_pter 5.34 Fletcher_S_ite La~_d Use ~est~!E!!..?ES Ord!!-1-~~~-----,---------------,-----,--M
FLETCHER'S PAINT WiORKS SUPERFUND SITE
LAND USE RESTRICTIONS TOWN ORDINANCE
Adopted on J~ 8 I .:l.Dl'j by the Town of Milford Board of Selectmen (hereafter "Board")
I. AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE
Pursuant to RSA 147:1, Local Regulations, the Board adopts Land Use Restrictions on two Town owned
parcels (Lots 25-12 and 25-13) in consultation with the United States Environmental Protection Agency
(US-EPA) and New Hampshire Department of Enviromnental Services (NH-DES) to be entitled, "Fletcher
Land Use Restrictions."
Objectives of the Fletcher Land Use Restrictions are:
A. To prevent the disturbance of portions of Lot 25-12, and 25-13 without first notifying the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the New Hampshire Department of Environmental
Services (NHDES).
B. To protect the public health and safety by preventing exposure to, and the possible spread of, contaminated
soils that remain in place under the capped portions of Lots 25-12 and 25-13.
II. PERMITTED LAND USE AND PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES
A. The use of Lot 25-12 shall be limited to recreational use only.
B. There shall be no disturbance of the surface or subsurface by, including but not limited to, filling, drilling,
excavation, removal of top soil, riprap, gabion basket retaining wall, storm water retention basin, planting
or cultivating, or change in the topography in any manner on Lot 25-12 without first contacting the EPA
and the NHDES, except for the area designated as a "vegetative restoration/planting area", which is
located outside of the engineered soil cover. Refer to the attached Site Restoration Plan - Elm Street
Area, and the As-Built Plans, Elm Street Area (sheets 1-3).
C. There shall be no disturbance of th~ surface or subsurface by, including but not limited to, filling, drilling,
excavation, removal of top soil, riprap, planting or cultivating, or change in the topography in any manner
of that portion of Lot 25-13, that is currently located outside of the fenced-in area without first contacting
the EPA and the NHDES, except for the area designated as a "vegetative restoration/planting area" ",
which is located outside of the engineered soil cover. Refer to the attached Site Restoration Plan - Elm
Street Area, and the As-Built Plans, Elm Street Area (sheets 1-3).
III. EMERGENCY PROCEDURES
In the event of any emergency or condition (e.g., storm/erosion, and or flood event) that may result in significant
risk of harm to human health from exposure to contamination from the Elm Street Area of the Fletcher's Site (Lot
25-12), the Town of Milford, as the property owner, shall immediately notify the EPA and the NHDES. The
contact information is provided below.
US Enviromnental Protection Agency
Office Of Site Remediation and Restoration
5 Post Office Square
Boston, MA 02109-3912
(617) 918-1205
1
Milford Municipal Code - Title 5 Health & Safety
............. ,. . ._~ 5.34 Fletcher Site Land Use Restrictions Ordinance
IV. ADMINISTRATION
NH Department Of Environmental Services
Hazardous Waste Remediation Bureau
29 Hazen Drive
Concord, NH 03302-0095
.(603) 271-2905
The provisions of this Fletcher Land Use Restrictions Ordinance shall be administered by the Board acting
through the Health Officer.
V. ENFORCEMENT
The Board shall be responsible for enforcement of the provisions of this Fletcher Land Use Restrictions
Ordinance.
VI. EFFECTIVEDATE
This Ar!icle shall become effective upon passage. This Fletcher Land Use Restrictions Ordinance shall remain in
effect until the cleanup goals required under CERCLA decision documents for the Fletcher's Paint Works
Superfund Site are achieved. The Town shall consult with the EPA and NHDES before modifying or terminating
this Fletcher Land Use Restrictions Ordinance.
Adopted ~'6 8) , 2019
. .JJ~ ~~ Pau~:; ~~SelecTinen
fyfike Putnam, Selectman
--t,~~~
Laura Dudziak, Selectwoman
2