ZONING
ORDINANCE
TOWN OF
MILTON
NEW HAMPSHIRE
Adopted 12/20/1989
Revised 3/14/2018
Revised 3/13/2019
Table of Contents
ARTICLE I- 1
A. Preamble
B. Title
C. Purpose
D. Conflicts with other Regulations
E. Administration and Enforcement
F. Permits Required
G. Amendments
H. Zoning Map
I. Lots split by Zoning District Boundaries
ARTICLE II - DEFINITIONS 2-10
ARTICLE III – ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 11-15
ARTICLE IV – PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES 16-18
ARTICLE V – MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARKS 19
ARTICLE VI – OPEN SPACE DEVELOPMENT (OSD) 20-26
ARTICLE VII – NON-CONFORMING USES AND LOTS 27
ARTICLE VIII – ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 28-30
ARTICLE IX – PENALTIES 31
ARTICLE X – SEVERABILITY 31
ARTICLE XI – THE GROUNDWATER USE RESTRICTION DISTRICT 31
Groundwater Use Restriction District Map 32
ARTICLE XII – INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL OUTDOOR LIGHTING 33-35
Lighting Diagram 36
ARTICLE XIII – WETLAND CONSERVATION ORDINANCE 37-40
ARTICLE XIV – SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS ORDINANCE 41-44
ARTICLE XV – THE EXCAVATION OVERLAY DISTRICT 45
Sand and Gravel Excavation Overlay Map 46
ARTICLE XVI – GROUNDWATER PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT 47-52
Groundwater Protection Overlay District Map 53
ARTICLE XVII – SHORELAND PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT 53-58
Shoreland Protection Overlay District Map 59
ARTICLE XVIII – TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS 60-62
ARTICLE XIX – IMPACT FEE ORDINANCE 63-67
ARTICLE XX – SIGN ORDINANCE 68-71
ARTICLE XXI – ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS 72-74
MILTON ZONING MAP 75
1
ARTICLE I
A. PREAMBLE - The Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Milton is adopted pursuant to and under the
authority conferred by New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated Title LXIV, as amended.
B. TITLE - This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the “Zoning Ordinance of the Town of
Milton, New Hampshire,” effective December 20th 1989, and as amended March 10th 1992, March
12th 1996, March 11th 1997, March 10th 1998, March 9th 1999, March 13th 2001, March 12th
2003, March 9th 2004, May 18th 2004, March 9th 2005, March 15th 2006, March 14th 2007,
March 11th 2009, March 9 2010 and as amended March 11, 2014.
C. PURPOSE - To establish regulations to more effectively meet the demands of the community, to
enhance the public health, safety and general welfare of the Town of Milton, New Hampshire and
to encourage the appropriate and wise use of land. To permit greater flexibility in design and to
preserve more useable open space through a Cluster Development provision. To implement the
Master Plan adopted in 1994 and to encourage a pattern of development consistent with a New
England Village.
D. CONFLICTS WITH OTHER REGULATIONS - In the event that the requirements of this
ordinance differ from another federal, state or local statute, ordinance or regulation, the more
stringent requirement shall apply. In the event that the requirements within this ordinance are in
conflict with one another, the more stringent requirement shall apply.
E. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT - The Milton Selectmen or their duly authorized
representative are hereby designated to administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this
Ordinance, in accordance with the New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated, as amended.
F. PERMITS REQUIRED - A permit shall be obtained from the administering authority prior to
undertaking any activity regulated by this ordinance or for the construction, erection, alteration,
movement or placement of any structure. The administering authority shall ensure that the
proposed use or structure meets all the requirements of this ordinance.
G. AMENDMENTS - This ordinance may be amended by a majority vote of any legal Town
Meeting, in accordance with the provisions of the New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated, as
amended.
H. ZONING MAP - There shall be an Official Zoning Map for the Town of Milton, which depicts the
base zoning district boundaries. The zoning map shall be available for public inspection at the
Milton Planning Board Office and the Milton Town Office. This map shall be used for all
interpretations of the base zoning district boundaries.
I. LOTS SPLIT BY ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES - Where an existing lot of record falls
into more than one zoning district, the following shall apply:
a. For lots which are large enough to be subdivided, the provisions of each district shall be applied
separately to each portion of the lot;
b. For lots which are not large enough to be subdivided, the provisions of the district which
comprises the largest share of the lot shall apply to the entire lot.
2
ARTICLE II
DEFINITIONS
(Revised 3/09/10)
In this Ordinance, unless the context requires otherwise, the following terms have the meanings
indicated:
1. ABANDONMENT - To stop the use of a property intentionally. When the use of a property has
ceased and the property has been vacant for 24 months, abandonment of the use will be presumed
unless the owner can demonstrate that a diligent effort has been made to sell, rent or use the property
for a legally permissible use
2. ABUTTER - Any person whose property is located in New Hampshire and adjoins or is directly
across the street or stream from the land under consideration by the Planning Board. For the
purposes of receiving testimony only, and not for the purposes of notification, the term “abutter”
shall include any person who is able to demonstrate that his or her land will be directly affected by
the proposal under consideration. For the purpose of receipt of notification by the Town of a
scheduled Planning Board hearing, in the case of an abutting property being under a condominium
or other collective form of ownership, the term of “abutter” means the officers of the collective or
association as defined in RSA 356-B:3, XXIII. For the purpose of receipt of notification by the
Town of a Planning Board hearing, in a case of an abutting property being under a manufactured
park from of ownership as defined in RSA 205-A:1, II, the term “abutter” includes the manufactured
housing park owner and the tenants who own manufactured housing which adjoins or is directly
across the street or stream from the land under consideration by the Planning Board.
3. ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE - A use or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature
incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or structure.
4. ACRE - A measure of land equating to 43,560 square feet.
5. ACTIVE OPEN SPACE - Any park and recreational facility that is not dependent upon a specific
environmental or natural resource, which is developed with recreation and support facilities that can
be provided anywhere for the convenience of the user.
6. AGRIBUSINESS - Any business producing, processing or distributing agricultural products
including forestry as defined in RSA 21:34-a, as amended.
7. APARTMENT - One or more rooms with private bath and kitchen facilities comprising of an
independent, self-contained dwelling unite in a building containing two or more dwelling unites.
8. APARTMENT BUILDING - A residential building of three or more individual, attached dwelling
units.
9. ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY – A residential facility for the elderly, developed and maintained
in compliance with RSA –A: 15, Housing for Older Persons, that contains individual rooming units,
and which may have common sanitary facilities, and within which common dining facilities and
certain personal services such as housekeeping and laundry services, assistance in person care, as
well as limited medical and nursing services, are provided to residents.
10. AUTO SALES AND SERVICE - Use of any building or land area for the display, sale and service
3
of new or used automobiles, including sport utility vehicles, light trucks, vans, trailers or
recreational vehicles.
11. BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT - An owner-occupied type of lodging facility
wherein a single-family dwelling is used to provide eight or fewer rooming units for transient
lodging and which may proved limited food service for guests or lodgers. A transient guest means
persons renting for less than two consecutive weeks and no more than a total of six weeks per year.
12. BUFFER – A naturally vegetated upland area adjacent to a wetland or surface water. Naturally
vegetated includes the following: uncut or undisturbed forest minimally disturbed or managed
forest, and abandoned pasture or fields. This definition comes from Buffers for Wetlands and
Surface Waters, A guidebook for New Hampshire Municipalities, Chase, Deming and Latawiec,
Revised May 1997.
13. BUILD - The work "build" shall include the works "erect", "construct", "alter", "enlarge",
"modify", "excavate", "fill", and any others of like significance.
13. BUILDING - The word "building" shall include the word "structure" unless the context
unequivocally indicates otherwise. "Building" shall also mean any three-dimensional enclosure by
any building materials of any space for use or occupancy, temporary or permanent, and shall
include foundations in the ground, also all parts of any kind of structure above ground except
fences and field or garden walls or embankment retaining walls.
14. BUSINESS OFFICE - Establishments primarily engaged in rendering services to business
establishments on a fee or contract basis, including all phases of the enumerated businesses.
15. CAMPING GROUND - A plot of ground upon which two or more campsites are located,
established or maintained for occupancy by camping units of the general public as temporary
living quarters for recreation, education or vacation purposes.
16. CHILD DAY CARE FACILITY - A facility and related services for children who are (12)
years of age or younger, provided by a child day care agency as defined in RSA 170-E: 2,
Definitions.
17. CHURCH - Buildings used or intended for use as places for worship, or for other religious
uses such as meetings, training or instruction.
18. COMMON OWNERSHIP – Ownership by the same person, Corporation, firm, entity,
partnership, or unincorporated association; or ownership by different corporations, firms,
partnerships, entities, or unincorporated associations, in which a stockbroker, partner, or associate,
or a member of his family owns an interest in each corporation, firm, partnership, entity, or
unincorporated association.
19. COMMUNITY CENTER – A building or structure, together with accessory buildings,
structures, and appurtenances, owned and operated by a unit of government or non-profit
organization for the provision of recreational, cultural, and social programs which may be oriented
to a group of citizens of a specific range or to all citizens.
4
20. CONDOMINIUM - A building, or group of buildings, in which dwelling unites, offices, or floor
area are owned individually, and the structure, common areas and facilities are owned by all owners
on a proportional undivided basis.
22. CONSERVATION LAND - Land given to a public body dedicated to conservation of forests, park
lands, deed restricted areas, etc. or to a private conservation trust, with the intent of preserving it in
its original undeveloped condition, safeguarding water supplies, or diminishing flood danger.
23. CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION - A subdivision wherein single-family dwellings are laid out
on lots of reduced dimensions, or in clustered groupings, in order to preserve open space on the
parcel, as provided for under the terms of this Ordinance. The proposed subdivision would be
designed consistent with Article IX Conservation Subdivision.
24. CONTIGUOUS - The term contiguous shall be construed to mean areas that form or represent a
single unit of similar features or features that are touching at a common property line or other type
of boundary.
25. DENSITY - The number of dwelling units, households or housing units that are allowed per unit of
land according to the zoning ordinance.
26. DEVELOPABLE LAND - The area of the entire tract to be developed less that classified as “Very
Poorly Drained,” “Poorly Drained,” or having slopes exceeding 25% in the Strafford County Soils
Survey (March 1973, as amended and as further delineated by qualified personnel after on-site
inspection).
27. DWELLING - (Revision 3/11/09)
(a) Attached Dwelling - A building containing two (2) or more dwelling units, each unit having
direct access to the ground outside, and arranged such that units are separated on one (1) or more
sides by vertical party walls, and such that no unit is located over another.
(b) Congregate Dwelling - A multifamily dwelling for the elderly, developed and maintained in
compliance with RSA 354-A:15, Housing for Older Persons, in which common dining facilities
and certain personal services such as housekeeping, laundry, medical, or nursing services, are
provided to residents.
(c) Multifamily Dwelling - A building containing three (3) or more dwelling units, and wherein
units may be located on more than one (1) floor. Adopted March 11, 2009
(d) Multifamily Dwelling for the Elderly - A multifamily dwelling that is developed and
maintained in compliance with RSA 354-A:15, Housing for Older Persons.
(e) Single-family Detached Dwelling - A building, other than a manufactured home designed or
intended as a residence exclusively for one (1) family, and separated from any other building,
except accessory buildings, by side and rear yards.
(f) Two-family Dwelling - A detached building, or a pair of attached dwelling units, designed or
intended for residential use for exclusive occupancy by two (2) families.
(g) Seasonal Dwelling - A residence which is occupied five months or less during the year.
28. DWELLING UNIT - Any room or suite of rooms forming a habitable unit for one (1) family, with
its own cooking and food storage equipment, its own bathing and toilet facilities, and it own living,
sleeping and eating areas wholly within such room or suite of rooms.
5
29. EASEMENT, CONSERVATION - The grant of a property right stipulating that the described land
will remain in its natural state and generally precluding future or additional development. This
definition includes appropriate references from NHRSA 79-B: 2 and NH RSA as amended.
(Revised 3/11/09)
30. EATING AND DRINKING PLACES - Retail establishments selling food and drink for
consumption on premises, including restaurants, lounges, private clubs, lunch counters, and
refreshment stands selling prepared foods and drinks for immediate on-site consumption.
31. EQUIPMENT SERVICE CENTER - An establishment where equipment and machinery is
received, serviced, repaired, overhauled, or rebuilt, and then shipped back to the owner or is resold.
Where this may usually apply to production and manufacturing equipment, it could apply to most
any kind of equipment except that which is defined under the term of “Retail Sales & Service”.
32. EXCAVATION - The extraction of minerals including solids, such as coal and ores, liquids, such as
crude petroleum and gases, such as natural gases. The term also includes quarrying, well operation,
milling, such as rock crushing, loam screening, washing and flotation, and other preparations
customarily done at the mine site or as part of a mining activity and generally activities included in
NH RSA 155-E: 1.
33. FLOOD IN/FLOOPLAD HAZARD AREA - Any land susceptible to being inundated with water
from any source. (Refer to the Flood Insurance Rate Map of the Town of Milton and the Milton
Flood plain Development Ordinance.) See also the definition of Wetlands.
34. FOUNDATION – A permanent structure, normally consisting of poured concrete, cinder
blocks, stone or the like, that is placed in the ground for the purpose of providing full support for a
building and is constructed in accordance with the required building code and best building practices
as reviewed by the Town’s Code Enforcement Officer under R 106.2 (International Residential
Code, 2006 as revised).
35. FRONTAGE - That side of a lot abutting a street which provides a legal and useable access and
which is not a limited access state highway. Lot frontage shall be a continuous line between abutting
side lot lines measured along the edge of the street right-of-way.
36. HEALTH CARE HOME - Rest home, nursing home, sheltered or shared care home.
37. HOME OCCUPATION - Any activity carried out for gain by a resident and conducted as an
incidental and accessory use in the resident's dwelling unit, including but limited to a professional,
tradesman, artist or service provider. The activity shall not change the character of the
neighborhood.
38. HOMEOWNER ASSOCIATION - A community association, other than a condominium
association that is organized in a development in which individual owners share common interests
and responsibilities for the costs and maintenance of interior roads, open facilities, water and sewer
facilities and other like facilities.
39. HOTEL, MOTEL or INN – A type of lodging facility that is a commercial establishment
containing rooming units for transient lodging which routinely provides additional services such as
restaurants, meeting rooms and recreational facilities serving both guests and lodgers as well as the
general public.
6
40. IMPERVIOUS SURFACE - Any material that prevents the absorption of stormwater into the
ground.
41. INDUSTRIAL - Areas for scientific research, development and training, offices, manufacture and
assembly of products and related supply activities.
42. JUNKYARD - Junkyard or "automotive recycling yard" means an establishment or place of
business which is maintained, operated, or used for storing, keeping, buying or selling junk, or for
the maintenance or operation of an automotive recycling yard, and includes garbage dumps and
sanitary fills. The work does not include any motor vehicle dealers registered with the director of
motor vehicles under RSA 261:104 and controlled under RSA 236:126.
43. KENNEL - Any structure or premises, in which animals are kept, boarded, bred or trained for
commercial gain.
44. LODGING HOUSE - A building where non-transient guests shall not exceed ten.
45. LOT - The whole area of a single parcel of land with ascertainable boundaries in single or joint
ownership, undivided by a street, established by deed(s) of record, or a segment of land ownership
defined by lot boundary lines on a land subdivision plan duly approved and recorded at the Strafford
County Register of Deeds.
46. LOT COVERAGE - The area of a lot covered by the aggregate of the maximum horizontal cross
section area of all buildings on a lot exclusive of cornices, eaves, gutters, chimneys, bay windows,
balconies and terraces.
47. LOT DEPTH - The mean horizontal distance between a front lot line and a rear lot line.
48. LOT LINE, FRONT - A line dividing a lot from a street from which access is legal and useable and
which is not a limited access highway. Lot frontage shall be a continuous line between the abutting
side lots lines measured along the edge of the street right-of-way.
49. LOT LINE, REAR - Except for triangular lots, corner lots, and such other lots which have no rear
lot lines, the lot line opposite the front lot line.
50. LOT LINE, SIDE - Any lot line not a front or rear lot line.
51. LOT WIDTH - The horizontal distance between the side lot lines as measured at the minimum
front yard depth required by this Ordinance, and parallel to the street line.
52. MANMADE VEGTATED BUFFER – Includes but is not limited to those shrubs, trees and/or
ground covers planted to create, replace, or augment, any or all of those qualities of any "naturally
vegetated buffer" as used and defined by this ordinance.
53. MANUFACTURED HOUSING - Any structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in
the traveling mode, is 8 body feet or more in width and 40 body feet or more in length, or when
erected on site, is 320 square feet or more, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed
to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to required
7
utilities, which include plumbing, heating and electrical heating systems contained therein.
Manufactured housing as defined in this section shall not include presite built housing as defined in
RSA 674:31-a (Source: NH RSA 674:31) Adopted March 2009
54. MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARK - Any tract of land on which two or more manufactured
housing units are parked or placed and are occupied for living purposes, whether or not a charge is
made for such accommodation. The term “Manufactured Housing Park” shall not include sales lots
on which unoccupied manufactured housing, whether new or used, are parked for the purpose of
inspection or sale.
55. MANUFACTURING - Establishments engaged in the mechanical or chemical transformation of
materials or substances into new products, including the assembling of component parts, the
creation of products and the blending of materials, such as lubricating oils, plastics and resins
among others.
56. MEDICAL FACILITY – A facility or establishment that provides health services such as support
to medical profession and patients including medical and dental laboratories, blood banks, oxygen
and miscellaneous types of medical supplies and services.
57. NURSING HOME – A health care facility licensed by the State of New Hampshire wherein skilled
nursing care and related medical services are provided on a twenty four (24) hour per day basis to
individuals admitted because of illness, disease, or physical or mental infirmity.
58. OFFICE BUILDING - A building used primarily for conducting the affairs of a business,
profession, service, industry, or government, or like activity, and may include ancillary services for
office workers, such as a restaurant, coffee shop, newspaper or candy stand, and child-care facilities.
59. OPEN SPACE, COMMON –Land within or related to a development, not individually owned or
dedicated for public use, that is designed and intended for the common use of enjoyment of the
residents and their guest of the development and may include such complementary structures and
improvement as are necessary and appropriate.
60. OPEN SPACE DEVELOPMENT (OSD) – An alternative form of residential development where,
instead of subdividing an entire tract into lots of conventional size, a similar number of housing
units is arranged on lots of reduced dimensions, with the remaining area of the parcel permanently
protected as designated open space.
61. ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK - The line on the shore, running parallel to the main stem of
the river, established by the fluctuations of water and indicated by physical characteristics such as a
clear, natural line impressed on the immediate bank, shelving, changes in the character of soil,
destruction of terrestrial vegetation, the presence of litter and debris, or other appropriate means that
consider the characteristics of the surrounding areas. Where the ordinary high water mark is not
easily discernible, the ordinary high water mark may be determined by the Department of
Environmental Services. Reference line shall mean for natural fresh water bodies without artificial
impoundments, the natural mean high water level as determined by the Division of Water Resources
of the Department.
62. OUTDOOR RECREATION - Leisure time activities usually performed with others, often
requiring equipment and taking place at prescribed places, sites or fields.
8
63. PASSIVE OPEN SPACE -Areas which, due to the presence of a particular natural or
environmental setting, which may include conservation lands, can provide for both active and
passive types of resource-based outdoor recreation activities that are less formalized or programoriented
than activity-based recreation. Resource-based outdoor recreation means and refers to
activities requiring a natural condition that cannot easily be duplicated by man.
64. PLANNING BOARD - The Milton Planning Board established by the Town of Milton under the
provisions of NH RRSA 673:2.
65. PROFESSIONAL ESTABLISHMENT - An office for an accountant, architect, attorney,
chiropractor, engineer, dentist, medical doctor or any other similar profession.
66. PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS - A building or group of buildings which contain four or more
living units and which primarily constitute the temporary abode on a commercial basis. Public
accommodations shall be deemed to include any establishment, which provides residential living
accommodations and meals for transients on a short-term basis, such as a hotel/motel.
67. RETAIL - Establishment engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general public for personal
or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sales of such goods.
68. RETAIL SALES & SERVICE - An establishment engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the
general public for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale
of such goods.
69. ROOMING HOUSE - A detached dwelling unit that contains sleeping accommodations for
individuals other than members of the resident family and having common and dining facilities.
70. SALE, RENTAL OF CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT – A retail facility that sells or rents
backhoes, forklifts, excavating equipment and similar construction type equipment
71. SALE RENTAL OF RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT – A retail facility that sells or rents
boats, boy a trailers, recreational trailers, and motor vehicles not designed to be registered or
inspected for road use including snowmobiles, all terrain vehicles, racing cars, and other similar
vehicles.
72. SETBACK - The distance between any property line and the nearest point to which any building or
structure can be erected. Measurement shall be to the outer most vertical plane nearest the property
line.
73. SHOPPING MALL/CENTER - A group of commercial establishments planned, constructed and
managed as a total entity, with customer and employee parking provided on-site, provision for the
delivery of goods separated from customer access, aesthetic considerations and protection from the
elements, and landscaping and signage in accordance with an approved plan.
74. SIGN - Any name, identification, description, display, illustration or devise which is affixed to or
represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure or land in view of the general public and
which directs attention to product, place, activity, person, institution or business.
9
75. SLOPE - The ratio of elevation change to horizontal distance, expressed as a percentage. Slope is
computed by dividing the vertical distance by the horizontal distance and multiplying the ratio by
one hundred.
76. SPECIAL EXCEPTION - A use of land or buildings that is permitted, upon a favorable finding by
the Zoning Board of Adjustment, subject to specific conditions that are set forth in the Milton
Zoning Ordinance.
77. STREET - A public right-of-way, primarily used or intended to be used for passage or travel by
motor vehicles, also used for pedestrian movement and the distribution of utility services, and from
which access can be legally obtained to serve lots which are adjacent to said public right-of-way.
Streets include those existing rights-of-way laid out or accepted by the Town of Milton, or by the
State of New Hampshire within the corporate limits of the Town, but not those rights-of-way laid
out as limited access highways.
78. STRUCTURE – A combination of materials constructed or erected which requires location on or in
the ground, or attached to something having location on or in the ground, including, but not limited
to underground tanks, signs, billboards, towers, framework, platforms, swimming pools and the like.
79. SUBDIVISION - The division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, plats, sites
or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, rent, lease,
condominium conveyance or building development. It includes resubdivision and, when appropriate
to the context, relates to process of subdividing or to the land or territory subdivided. The division of
a parcel of land held in common and subsequently divided into parts among the several owners shall
be deemed a subdivision under these Regulations. The grant of an easement in gross to a public
utility for the purpose of placing and maintaining overhead and underground facilities necessary for
its transmission or distribution network such as poles, wires, cable, conduit, manholes, repeaters and
supporting apparatus, including any unstaffed structure which is less than 500 square feet, shall not
be considered a subdivision, and shall not be deemed to create any new division of land for any other
purpose. The rent, lease, development, or grant of an easement to a person for the purpose of
planning and maintaining a wireless communication facility shall not be construed as a subdivision,
and shall not be deemed to create any new division of land for any other purpose.
80. THEATER - A structure or part of a structure devoted to dramatic, musical or live performance or
showing motion pictures.
81. TRACT - An area, parcel, site, piece of land or property, which is the subject of a development
proposal and application.
82. TRANSPORTATION CENTER – A facility or establishment that includes a building or structure
and offers services for those individuals or business using busses, trucks, rail and related
transportation activities.
83. UPLAND SOILS -Soils not present in any wetland area
84. VARIANCE - A variation from the requirements of this ordinance, not otherwise permitted within a
particular district and allowable only after a public hearing and determination by the Zoning Board
of Adjustment, pursuant to the State Statutes which govern its discretionary power.
10
85. WAREHOUSING & STORAGE - A building used primarily for the holding or storage of goods
and merchandise. For the purpose of this ordinance, where a warehousing establishment is
permitted, a mini-warehouse establishment shall also be permitted.
86. WETLANDS - A wetland is hereby determined to be an area which would be delineated as a
wetland using the methodology required by the state of New Hampshire Wetlands Bureau. The
Department of Environmental Service Wetlands Bureau requires wetlands to be delineated using a
combination of the Corps of Engineers Wetlands Delineation Manual, Technical Report Y-87-1,
Environmental Laboratory, Department of the Army, 1987 and the Field Indicators for Identifying
Hydric Soils in New England, Version 2, New England Interstate Water Pollution Control
Commission, 1998. The approved wetlands delineation methodology uses three parameters, hydric
soils, hydrophytic vegetation, and wetland hydrology. The precise location of a wetland boundary in
any particular case shall be determined by on-site inspection of soil types and vegetation by a
certified wetland scientist using the methodology required by the New Hampshire Department of
Environmental Service Wetlands Bureau. In conformance with State RSA 482-A:2,X - Wetlands'
means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and
duration sufficient to support, and that under normal conditions does support, a prevalence of
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated solid conditions.
87. WHOLESALE SALES- The sale of goods, merchandise and commodities in gross, primarily for
the purpose of resale.
88. YARD -An open space on the same lot with a main building unoccupied and unobstructed by any
structure or portion of a structure provided that fences, walls, poles, post and other customary yard
accessories, ornaments, and furniture may be permitted in any yard subject to height limitations and
requirements liming obstruction of visibility.
89. YARD, FRONT - A space between a street line and a line parallel thereto extending between side
lot lines drawn through the nearest point of a structure.
90. YARD, REAR- A yard extending between side lot lines across the rear of the lot.
91. YARD, SIDE- A yard extending from the front yard, or front lot line where there is not front yard,
to the rear yard
11
ARTICLE III
ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS
(Revised & Adopted 3/10/15)
Section 3.1 General
Every parcel of land and any buildings or structures in the Town of Milton are subject to the
restrictions of a base district, as established hereinafter, and may be subject to the provisions of one or
more overlay districts, as established hereinafter. Land, buildings, or structures shall be used only if
and to the extent that a proposed use is permitted both in the base district and any applicable overlay
district. Wherever the regulations differ between the base and overlay Districts, the regulations that
impose the more restrictive provisions or the higher standards shall control.
Section 3.2 Zoning Districts Established
a. All of the land in the Town of Milton is hereby divided into the following base zoning districts, as
identified, herein with district zoning boundaries delineated on the Official Zoning Map and noted in
the written text which is a part of the Official Zoning Map. The overlay districts are superimposed
upon the base districts and the provision of each overlay district shall be in addition to the requirements
of the base district.
Abbreviation Base District
HDR High Density Residential Zone
IC Industrial / Commercial Zone
CR Commercial Residential Zone
LDR Low Density Residential
Overlay Districts
CS Conservation Subdivision (to be replaced by OSD)
GUR Groundwater Use Restriction
WC Wetland Conservation Ordinance
GP Groundwater Protection Overlay District
SP Shoreland Protection Overlay District
b. The base districts are established for the purposes stated below:
1) The High Density Residential (HDR) Zone is established to accommodate single family
housing, apartments and dwelling with two units with a minimum lot size of 0.5 acre and
served by municipal water and sewer. Developed lots shall be connected to the Milton Water
District system and Milton Sewer District system if available. (Note: In order to receive the
benefits of the High Density Residential (HDR) zoning district, the parcel shall be served by
municipal water and sewer).
2) The Industrial / Commercial (IC) Zone is established to accommodate commercial, retail and
manufacturing uses with a minimum lot size of two acres and served by municipal sewer and
water if within 100 feet of the lot. When lots are within 100 feet of the Milton Water District
system and Milton Sewer District system, the owner is required to connect to the system(s).
12
3) The Commercial / Residential (CR) Zone is established to accommodate a mixed use of
residential uses, professional establishments and retail uses with a minimum lot size of one acre
and served by municipal sewer and water where available. All lots and developments shall be
connected to the Milton Water District system and Milton Sewer District system, when service
is available.
4) The Low Density Residential (LDR) Zone comprises the largest land area in Milton,
approximately 90% of the land area, and is established to accommodate residential, agricultural,
recreational and rural type land uses in a low density environment with a minimum lot size of
two acres.
Section 3.3 The Zoning Map
The Zoning Map shall consist of a set of maps including the Official Zoning Map, Town of Milton, NH
dated March 2004 prepared by the Stafford Regional Planning Commission and certain overlay zoning
maps, the original of which shall be kept in the office of the Town Clerk and in the office of the Milton
Planning Board.
a) The Official Zoning Map shall display the boundaries of the base districts as identified in Section 3.2
a.
b) The zoning overlay zoning district maps are a series of topical maps displaying those overlay
districts.
c) Amendments to the Zoning Map shall be made in accordance with Article I section G of the Milton
Zoning Ordinance.
d) The location of district boundaries shall be as shown on the Official Zoning Maps or as otherwise
described in this ordinance. Where any uncertainty exists with respect to the boundary of any District
as shown on the Zoning Base District or Overlay District Maps, the following rules shall apply:
(1) Where a boundary is indicated as a highway, street, alley, railroad, utility right-of way,
watercourse or Town boundary, it shall be construed to be the centerline thereof or such Town
boundary;
(2) Where a boundary is indicated as approximately parallel to a highway, street, alley,
railroad, utility right-of-way, watercourse or Town boundary, it shall be construed as parallel
thereto at such distance from the edge of the right-of-way thereof as shown on the Zoning
Maps;
(3) Where a boundary coincides within ten (10) feet or less with a lot line, the boundary shall
be construed to be the lot line; and
(4) If no dimension is given on the Zoning Maps, the location of any boundary shall be
determined by the Code Enforcement Officer by use of the graphic scale shown on the Zoning
Maps.
e) When a lot is transected by a zoning district boundary, the regulations of this Zoning Ordinance
applicable to the larger part by area of such lot may, at the option of the owner, be deemed to govern
13
the smaller part of the lot beyond such district boundary but only to an extent not more than forty (40)
linear feet in depth beyond such district boundary.
f) Where a lot is situated in part in the Town of Milton and in part in an adjacent municipality, the
entire lot shall be considered as if it were situated within the applicable zoning district in the Town of
Milton.
Section 3.4 Allowable Principal and Accessory Uses in Zoning Districts.
a) A use denoted by the letter "P" within a zoning district, as set forth in Section 3.5 Table of
Principal Uses is a use permitted by right in that district, subject to all other applicable sections of this
ordinance and other local, state, and federal laws, rules and regulations.
b) A use denoted by the letters "SE" within a zoning district, as set forth in Section 3.5 Table of
Principal Uses is a use which may be authorized by special exception in that district, subject to all other
conditions of approval as specified in this ordinance. The Board of Adjustment may grant special
exceptions in accordance with the procedures and conditions set forth in Article VIII, subject to all
other applicable sections of this ordinance and other local, state, and federal laws, rules and
regulations.
c) A use denoted by the letters "CU" within a zoning district, as set forth in Section 3.5 Table of
Principal Uses is a use which may be authorized by a conditional use permit in that district, subject to
all other conditions of approval for such as specified in this ordinance. The Planning Board may grant a
conditional use permit in accordance with the procedures and conditions, subject to all other applicable
sections of this ordinance and other local, state, and federal laws, rules and regulations.
d) A use denoted by a dashed line (--) within a zoning district, as set forth in Section 3.5 Table of
Principal Uses is a use which is not permitted in that district.
Section 3.5 Table of Principal and Accessory Uses in Zoning Districts.
In the base districts established under Section 3.2, Zoning Districts Established, of this ordinance, no
building, structure, or land shall be used or occupied except as set forth hereinafter in the Table of
Principal Uses, subject to all other provisions and standards of this ordinance, and other local, state and
federal laws, rules and regulations. The Table of Principal Uses is organized according to a functional
and economic classification of land uses, as follows:
A. Residential
B. Educational and Institutional
C. Services
D. Retail Trade
E. Motor Vehicle Sales and Service
F. Transportation, Communications, and Utilities
G. Manufacturing and Construction
H. Agricultural
14
Table of Principal Uses
Principal Uses Base Zoning Districts
Use # Use Category HDR IC CR LDR
A Residential
1 Dwelling, One Unit P --- P P
Dwelling, Two Unit P --- P P
Dwelling, Multifamily P --- P ---
Accessory Structure P --- P P
Home Occupation P --- P P
Manufactured housing park --- --- --- SE
Manufactured housing subdivision --- --- --- SE
Open Space Development (OSD) --- --- P P
Rooming house SE --- SE ---
B Educational and Institutional
1 Elem and Secondary Schools SE SE SE SE
Post secondary, colleges SE SE SE SE
Child (day) care facility SE P P SE
Adult day care SE P P SE
Social service center P --- P ---
Community center P --- P ---
Church P P P SE
Private social clubs SE SE SE ---
Accessory Structure P P P P
C Services
Recreational facility P SE --- SE
Outdoor Recreation --- --- --- SE
Concert halls, studios --- P P ---
Campgrounds, youth camps --- --- --- SE
Medical facility P P SE ---
Nursing homes P --- P
Assisted living facility P --- P ---
Business, professional offices --- P P ---
Professional Establishment --- P P ---
Hotels, motels, Inns --- P P ---
Bed and Breakfast SE --- P SE
Kennel --- --- SE SE
Accessory Structure P P P P
D Retail Trade
Food & Drink Service --- P P ---
Restaurant, drive thorough --- P P ---
Restaurant, sit down P P P ---
HDR IC CR LDR
Equipment Service Center --- P SE ---
Retail Sales & Service --- P SE ---
15
Shopping Mall / Center --- SE SE ---
Theater --- P P ---
Accessory Structure P P P P
E Motor Vehicle Sales, Service
Auto Sales & Service --- SE SE ---
Sale, rental of recreation equipment --- SE SE ---
Sale, rental of construction equipment --- SE SE ---
Accessory Structure --- P P P
F Transportation, Com & Utilities
Aircraft, TOL as accessory --- --- --- SE
Transportation Center (formerly Truck
or rail terminal)
--- SE --- ---
Wireless Service Facility SE SE SE SE
Public utilities and related SE SE SE SE
Radio / TV Station or Transmitter --- SE --- ---
Accessory Structure P P P P
G Manufacturing & Construction
Manufacturing fabrication, of Goods --- P --- ---
Materials recycling, processing --- P --- ---
Printing and publishing --- P SE ---
Warehousing & Storage --- P SE ---
Wholesale Sales --- P SE ---
Accessory Structure --- P P ---
H Agricultural
Agribusiness --- SE P P
Accessory Structure --- P P P
Notes:
1. Septic systems shall be at least 75 feet from a steam, brook, lake, river or pond, except that in the
Shoreland Overlay District, where Article XVII H 3 is effective.
2. Only one (1) residential structure, with an accessory structure, is allowed on a lot.
3. In HDR, no more than four (4) apartments or dwelling units permitted on a lot of 21,780 SF with
an additional 5,445 SF required for each unit over four.
4. Adequate off-street parking shall be provided for all apartment dwellings and non-residential uses.
5. Conversion of a seasonal dwelling to year-round use requires a building permit and connection to
municipal sewer service or proof of the adequacy of the septic system.
Table of Dimensional Requirements
Zoning
District
Front
Setback
Rear
Setback
Side
Setback
Maximum
Height
Minimum
Frontage
Minimum
Lot Size
HDR 10 feet 10 feet 15 feet 35 feet1 75 feet 0.5 acre
IC 25 feet 30 feet 30 feet 35 feet 200 feet2 2.0 acres
CR 25 feet 25 feet 25 feet 35 feet3 150 feet 1.0 acre
LDR 40 feet 30 feet 25 feet 35 feet4 200 feet 2.0 acres
1 Excludes silos, steeples and similar structures.
2 Or 150 feet on a cul du sac on an interior road.
3 See 1 above.
16
ARTICLE IV
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES
(Revised 3/11/09)
Personal Wireless Service Facilities will be permitted, by Special Exception, in Industrial Zones, Water
District/High Density Residential Zones, Low Density Residential Zones, and Commercial Residential
Zones and require a site plan review. No Personal Wireless Service Facility is permitted on land under
Conservation Easement. Any plan to install wireless facilities for the commercial transmission or
reception of tele-communications shall be subject to the specific requirements detailed herein and
elsewhere in the Zoning Ordinance and Site Plan Review Regulations. Personal Wireless Service
Facilities shall not be considered accessory uses. All Personal Wireless Service Facilities shall
conform to the following minimum requirements.
A. DEFINITIONS
1. ABANDONED - An antenna and structure no longer being used to receive or send
transmissions for thirty (30) days.
2. ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE (or “stealth facility") - A wireless communications
facility designed to blend into the environment so as to be visually unobtrusive. Examples
include screened roof-mounted antennas; building-mounted antennas painted to match the
existing structure; antennas integrated into architectural elements such as clock towers and
church steeples; antenna structures resembling utility poles; and antennas placed on trees.
3. ANTENNA - The surface from which radio signals are sent and /or received by a personal
wireless service facility.
4. ANTENNA ARRAY-A collection of antennas attached to a mount to send and receive radio
signals.
5. ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE - A building, pole, telescoping mast, tower, or other
such structure which supports an antenna.
6. AVERAGE TREE CANOPY-An average elevation of the upper canopy above ground level
for a defined area equal to 2 times the height of the facility. The trees within the proposed
security barrier shall be excluded. All trees over 25 feet in height shall be inventoried.
7. CAMOUFLAGED-A personal wireless service facility that is disguised, hidden, part
of an existing or proposed structure, or placed within an existing or proposed structure.
8. CARRIER-A Company that provides personal wireless services also sometimes referred to as a
provider.
9. CO-LOCATION -The use of a single mount on the ground by more than one carrier (vertical
and horizontal co-location) or the same carrier with multiple licenses, and/or the use of several
mounts on an existing building or structure by more than one carrier or the same carrier with
multiple licenses.
10. EQUIPMENT SHELTER - An enclosed structure, cabinet, shed, vault, or box near the base of
the mount within which are housed equipment for personal wireless service facilities such as
batteries and electrical equipment. Equipment shelters are sometimes referred to as base
transceiver stations.
11. FACILITY - See Personal Wireless Service Facility.
12. FALL ZONE - The area on the ground from the base of a ground mounted personal wireless
service facility that forms a circle with a diameter equal to twice the height of the facility,
including any antennas or other appurtenances. The fall zone is the area within which there is a
potential hazard from falling debris (such as ice) or collapsing material.
17
13. HEIGHT - The height above ground level (AGL) from the natural grade of a site to the highest
point of a structure.
14. PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY - Facility for the provisions of personal
wireless services, as defined by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, as amended. Personal
Wireless Service facilities include a mount, antenna, equipment shelter, and other related
equipment.
15. PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES - The three types of services regulated by this
Ordinance: commercial mobile radio services, unlicensed wireless services, and common
carrier wireless exchanges access services as described in the Telecommunications Act of 1996
as amended.
16. SECURITY BARRIER - A wall, fence, or berm that restricts an area from unauthorized entry
or trespass.
17. SEPARATION - The distance between one carrier’s array of antennas and another carrier’s
array.
B. REGULATION AND PERFORMANCE CRITERIA - In considering any request for special
exception for the placement of a communication tower, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall
determine that all of the criteria in this section are met.
1. Tower Locations: All Personal Wireless Service Facilities must be located 100-Feet from all
lot lines.
2. Location Requirements: The Zoning Board of Adjustments must be satisfied that a complete
assessment of locations, in order of priority, has been under-taken and completed, and that
higher priority uses are exhausted or unfeasible.
3. Maximum Height: Ground-mounted personal wireless service facilities shall not project higher
than (10) ten feet above the average tree canopy height within a one hundred and fifty (150) foot
perimeter of the mount, security barrier, or designated clear area for access to equipment,
whichever is greatest.
C. INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC SAFETY TELECOMMUNICATIONS - No new or
existing telecommunications service shall interfere with public safety telecommunications. All
applications for new service shall be accompanied by an inter-modulation study, which provides a
technical evaluation of existing and proposed transmissions and indicates all potential interference
problems. Telecommunication providers shall notify the Police and Fire Departments at least ten
(10) calendar days prior to placing new services on line, to give those Departments an opportunity
to monitor interference levels during the testing process. A copy of the notification should be sent
to the Planning Board for their records.
D. DECLARATION OF CONTINUING OPERATION - The owner(s) of a wireless facility, with
written authorization from the property owner, shall file annually a declaration with the Planning
Board as to the continuing operation of every facility installed, subject to these regulations. Failure
to do so may be construed to mean that the facility is no longer in use and considered abandoned,
thus subject to the provisions below.
18
E. ABANDONED OR UNUSED WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES - Abandoned
or unused antennas and structures shall be removed as follows:
1. An agreement between the facility owner (and successors in interest), property owner (and
successors in interest), and the Town of Milton shall be submitted with the Wireless
Communications Facilities original application.
2. A copy of the relevant portions of a signed lease (except in cases where the land is owned by the
provider) which requires the applicant to remove the antenna, support structure, and associated
facilities upon cessation of operations at the site, shall be submitted at the time of the
application.
3. All abandoned wireless communication facilities shall be removed within ninety (90) days of the
cessation of operations at the site, unless a time extension is approved by the Planning Board.
4. The amount of the security shall be based upon the estimated removal cost plus, fifteen percent
(15%), provided by the applicant and certified by a professional civil engineer licensed in New
Hampshire. The owner of the facility shall provide the Planning board with a revised removal
cost estimate and structural evaluation prepared by a professional civil engineer licensed in New
Hampshire every five (5) years from the date of the Planning Board’s approval of the site plan.
If the cost has increased more than fifteen percent (15%) then the owner of the facility shall
provide additional security in the amount of the increase.
If the owner of the facility does not remove the facility upon the Zoning Administrator’s order, then
the Selectman shall, after holding a public hearing with notice to the owner and abutters, issue a
declaration of abandonment. The owner of the facility shall dismantle and remove the facility
within ninety (90) days of receipt of the declaration of abandonment by the Selectmen. If the
abandoned facility is not removed within ninety (90) days, the Town may execute the security to
pay for this action.
19
ARTICLE V
MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARKS
Manufactured Housing Parks will be permitted in the Low Density Residential Zone and will require
subdivision and if applicable, site plan review. All Manufactured Housing parks shall conform to the
following minimum requirements:
A. LOCATION - All Manufactured Housing Parks shall have on-site sewage disposal and a group
well(s), unless municipal water and sewer are available. All such parks shall also be located on a
site graded to insure adequate drainage of surface and sub-surface water.
B. BUFFER YARD - There shall be not less than 50 feet plus a visual screen between an exterior lot
line of the park and any mobile home space or other structure or parking area within the park.
Where the buffer area is not naturally wooded, an appropriate wall, fence or hedge shall be
provided as necessary to screen the park from view at all exterior lot lines.
C. AREA - The area of the park shall be large enough to accommodate:
1. Manufactured Home lot spaces shall be a minimum of 21,870 square feet (1/2 acre). “Poorly”
or “Very Poorly Drained” soils shall be excluded from the density calculation.
2. Necessary streets, walkways, public utilities, parking areas for motor vehicles and service
buildings to house necessary facilities as are prescribed by the Town of Milton Road Standards.
D. PARKING SPACE - Vehicle parking spaces shall be provided in sufficient number to meet the
needs of the occupants of the park and their guests without interference with the normal movement
of traffic. Such facilities shall be provided at the rate of at least two vehicle spaces for each
Manufactured Home space.
E. ADMINISTRATIVE AND/OR SERVICE BUILDINGS - The administrative and/or service
building shall be located on a space, which remains as an integral part of the Manufactured
Housing Park. For dimensional control purposes, however, it/they shall be treated as a building lot
subject to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located.
F. SANITATION - Manufactured Housing Parks shall meet all requirements relevant to sanitation as
required by the Water Supply and Pollution Control Commission and Bureau of Environmental
Health, Department of Health and Welfare, State of New Hampshire.
G. SETBACK- The setbacks shall be 30-feet from the Ordinary High Water Mark for any property
having shore land frontage.
20
ARTICLE VI
OPEN SPACE DEVELOPMENTS
(Adopted 3/9/10)
1. Authority
This Section is enacted in accordance with the provisions of NH RSA 674:21 (Innovative Land Use
Controls) and NH RSA 674: 16-20. This authority allows the Planning Board to grant conditional use
permits, special use permits and waivers from specific requirements of this Article.
2. Purpose
The purpose of this Open Space Development Section is to:
• Further the recommendations of the Milton Master Plan by encouraging flexibility in the
design and development of land to preserve open space and traditional rural character;
• Retain and protect important natural, scenic and historic resources;
• Provide for more efficient use of land and town services and
• Promote the development of balanced residential communities in harmony with the natural
landscape.
3. Objectives
Open Space Development (OSD) will promote the following objectives:
a. Maintain rural character through preservation farmland, forests and rural viewscapes and
encouraging residential development that is sited in harmony with the environment and
promotes a sense of neighborhood.
b. Preserve those areas of the site that have high environmental or ecological value such as
wildlife habitat (as identified in the Milton Master Plan and areas of high quality habitat as
based on NH Fish and Game’s Wildlife Action Plan) and significant water resource value such
as critical watersheds, wetlands, streams and rivers.
c. Provide for alternative housing opportunities.
d. Minimize impact of development sprawl by reducing potential for consecutive lot development
on major roadways.
e. Locate buildings and structures on those portions of the site that are the most appropriate for
development and avoid areas that have hydric soil conditions are subject to flooding and have
steep slopes.
f. Preserve historic, archeological, and cultural features located on the site.
g. Create a permanently protected contiguous network of open spaces or “greenways” by linking
the common open spaces within the open space subdivision and to open space on adjoining
lands wherever possible.
21
h. Reduce the amount of roads, sidewalks, and stormwater management structures that must be
built and maintained.
i. Preserve undeveloped frontage along existing roads, protecting transportation corridors from
encroachment of structures.
4. Definitions
For purposes of this Article, the following terms are defined as follows:
a. Applicant: The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or his representative.
b. Buffer: Land area within which adequate vegetation is maintained or provided to visibly
separate or screen one use from another and/or to minimize potentially negative impacts on
surrounding areas.
c. Common Area: Land within or related to a development, exclusive of land dedicated as
designated open space, not individually owned, which is designed and intended for the common
use or enjoyment of the residents of the development and/or the town and may include such
complementary structures and improvements as are necessary, appropriate and approved by the
Planning Board.
d. Conservation Easement: A permanent legal restriction against future development and other
activities as specified in the conservation easement deed. An easement may be worded to
permit or restrict public access, allow or disallow recreational uses, allow or disallow other
uses, such as limited development, agriculture, or forestry. Easements are tied to the title of the
land, regardless of subsequent ownership and runs with the land in perpetuity.
e. Designated Open Space: Reserved land that is permanently protected from further
development and remains in a natural condition or is managed according to an approved
management plan for natural resource functions, e.g., forestry, agriculture, habitat protection,
passive recreation, or limited uses as approved by the Planning Board under this ordinance as
part of an open space subdivision.
f. Homeowners Association: A private corporation, association, or other legal entity organized in
accordance with state law and established by the applicant or the member individuals for the
benefit and enjoyment of its members, including oversight and management of common open
space, designated open space, and/or shared facilities.
g. Open Space Development subdivision: An alternative form of residential development where,
instead of subdividing an entire tract into lots of conventional size, a similar number of housing
units are arranged on lots of reduced dimensions, with the remaining area of the parcel
permanently protected as designated open space.
h. Parent Parcel: Any lot existing as of March 9, 2010, the date of the adoption of this ordinance.
5. Applicability
a. In furtherance of the goals of the Milton Master Plan, any subdivision for residential use that is
proposed on a parent parcel within the Agricultural and Residential Zoning Districts of 20 or
more acres may be considered for the OSD Option.
22
Authorization to Issue a Conditional Use Permit:
Notwithstanding other provisions of Milton’s zoning ordinance, authority is hereby granted to
the Planning Board, as allowed under RSA 674:21, II, to issue a Conditional Use Permit to
modify the requirements of this section as follows:
1) Such modifications shall be consistent with the purposes and objectives of this section;
2) All lots comply with the NH Department of Environmental Services for subsurface
wastewater management;
3) Fall within the standards contained herein, and
4) Shall not be detrimental to public health, safety or welfare.
b. Sequential Subdivisions: The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to the sequenced
development of a parent parcel over time through separate successive applications. When a
subdivision is proposed that involves part of a larger parcel or includes lots that are capable of
further subdivision, the Planning Board may require that a site inventory and a conceptual (nonbinding)
long-range plan be submitted for the entire parcel and used to evaluate the proposed
subdivision.
c. Review Process: A subdivision application under this section shall comply with the application
and review process specified in the Town on Milton’s Subdivision Regulations. If there are any
conflicts, the provisions of this article shall apply.
d. Legal Review: Prior to final approval by the planning board, the applicant shall submit for
review by the town counsel any deeds, restrictive covenants, condominium or cooperative
agreements, conservation easement, deed restrictions, legal documents related to the
Homeowners Association or other legal agreements proposed for use in the open space
subdivision. The town counsel shall advise the Planning Board of the adequacy of such legal
provisions. The applicant shall pay all associated costs of the legal review in accordance with
NH RSA 676:4 I (g).
6. Permitted Uses
Land within an OSD subdivision may be used for the following purposes:
a. Single family and duplex residential dwellings, accessory uses and buildings, and minor home
occupations as permitted in the zoning district in which the parcel lies.
b. Uses permitted within the Designated Open Space as described in Section 10 of this Article.
c. Manufactured housing, accessory recreation facilities (community building, clubhouse,
swimming pool, etc), accessory utility and facility maintenance.
7. Development Density
The total number of dwelling units allowed in an OSD Subdivision shall not exceed the number
of dwellings that would be allowed under a conventional subdivision for the zoning district in
which the site is located. In no case shall the density exceed the soils carrying capacity to
23
accommodate a septic system for each dwelling unit as required by the NH DES consistent with
RSA 485A:38.
The allowable number of units will be determined upon submission by the applicant of a yield
plan. A yield plan is a sketch plan for a conventional subdivision for the subject property; the
Planning Board could approve such plan as a conventional subdivision as it complies with all
requirements of the Town’s Subdivision Regulations.
8. Procedural Requirements
An OSD subdivision application under this section shall comply with the application and
review process specified in the Subdivision Regulations, except that sections of the Subdivision
Regulations that are clearly not applicable to an open space subdivision design shall not be
imposed on the applicant by the Planning Board.
9. Lot and Dimensional Requirements
a. Open Space Developments are subject to the following lot, dimensional and building separation
requirements.
Dimension Residential & Agricultural
District
Minimum Lot Area 30,000
Maximum Lot Area 150%1
Frontage 100 ft
Front Yard 35 ft
Side Yard 25 ft
Rear Yard 25 ft
Height 35 ft
Minimum Separation
Between Buildings—
Existing
50 ft
Minimum Separation
Between Buildings—New
Lots
40 ft
Note:
1. Unless otherwise required by NH DES for the OSD minimum lot size.
b. Alternative Lot Sizing: The Planning Board may authorize variations from the minimum lot
sizes specified above by a Conditional Use Permit, provided the Planning Board determines
that the following conditions are met:
• All lots comply with the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services
requirements for subsurface wastewater management (developments may utilize
individual or community wells and/or septic systems); and
• The objectives and design standards of this article and the Subdivision Regulations are
otherwise achieved.
24
d. Applicants are encouraged to vary lot sizes, lot dimensions, and the location of building
envelopes and structures from the access road and from lot to lot within the subdivision to
retain significant, natural vegetation along the access road or existing adjacent public road;
provide increased privacy for residents on adjacent lots; and increase the visual variety provided
by the arrangement of homes within the subdivision.
e. Lots may be irregular in size and shape provided they conform to the natural topography and
features of the parcel (e.g., the lot lines follow an existing stone wall, stream, or other natural
dividing feature).
f. The Planning Board may authorize variations from the above standards, except for any
requirement provided by state regulation or mandated elsewhere in this ordinance, by up to 25
percent by a Conditional Use Permit issued pursuant to Section 5 for the purpose of providing
flexibility in the design of the subdivision to meet the objectives of this section.
g. Common driveways providing access to two residential lots shall be allowed.
h. Landscape Buffer: Depending on the abutting land uses, the Open Space Development may
have a buffer of less than 100 feet between abutting land uses and the development and a buffer
up to 150 feet but no less than 100 feet between any new structure and an existing public road
to retain the community’s rural character. The buffer area shall remain free of buildings and
whenever possible, the natural vegetation shall remain. The Board may require vegetative
plantings to supplement or replace inadequate natural buffers. Only the primary access road
may be permitted in the landscape buffer
i. Design Standards for Developed Areas--Subdivision plans shall comply with any additional
applicable standards governing the location and layout of lots and structures found elsewhere in
this ordinance and as set forth in the Subdivision Regulations.
10. Permissible Uses of Open Space
a. The total area of Designated Open Space shall equal at least 50 percent of the Open Space
Development’s gross tract area. Not more than 50 percent of the Designated Open Space may
consist of non-buildable areas, such as wetlands and land with slopes in excess of 25%. Such
Designated Open Space shall consist of as much contiguous area as possible and should, when
practical, connect with existing trails, conservation easements, parks and playgrounds and other
types of open space.
b. Portions of the parcel that comprise part of an individual house lot, roadway, driveway, access
road, roadway right-of-way, other new or existing right-of-way, utility easement, private or
community leachfields or other components of a wastewater management system, stormwater
management structures, or are part of a required buffer between any new structure and an
existing right-of-way shall not count toward the calculation of the Designated Open Space.
c. The following uses generally are permitted in the Designated Open Space, unless specifically
prohibited or restricted as a condition of subdivision approval for the purposes of protecting
important natural features or characteristics of the parcel:
1) Forest management activities and agricultural cultivation and pastures provided that all
applicable best management practices are employed.
25
2) Passive (non-motorized) trails and recreational uses such as walking, hiking, bird
watching, skiing and snow shoeing.
3) Snowmobile trails.
4) Horseback Riding and Cycling.
d. Up to 50 percent of the Designated Open Space may be considered the Common Area and may
be permitted by Conditional Use Permit to be used for the following. The Planning Board may
impose specific criteria or restrictions on such uses as deemed necessary to support the goals of
this section:
1) Agriculture involving animal husbandry and/or boarding.
2) Active outdoor recreation uses, including formal playgrounds and fields.
3) Parking areas for access to the designated open space.
4) Individual or community wells provided that this use was approved as part of the
subdivision plan and that appropriate legal arrangements are established and approved
by the Planning Board for the maintenance and operation of these facilities.
e. The removal of soil, trees and other natural features from the designated
open space is prohibited, except as consistent with conservation objectives or
permitted uses as provided above.
f. The Designated Open Space shall be retained in a natural, undisturbed state, except for those
activities permitted and approved as provided above, or as required for active management
according to a conservation agreement and management plan written by a qualified natural
resource professional.
11. Protection and Management of Open Space
At the applicant’s option and subject to approval by the Planning Board, all areas to be protected as
open space shall be:
a. Conveyed to the town to be placed under the care, custody and control of the Conservation
Commission, and be accepted by it for use as a park or open space use. Land conveyed to the
town shall be open for public use; and/or
b. Conveyed to a non-profit organization, the principal purpose of which is the conservation or
preservation of open space, with a conservation restriction as specified in §3 below. Such
organization shall be acceptable to the town as a bona fide conservation organization; and/or
c. Conveyed to a corporation or trust owned or to be owned by the owners of lots or residential
units within the development (i.e. "homeowners association") and placed under conservation
restriction. If such a corporation or trust is used, as indicated herein, ownership thereof shall
pass with conveyance of the lots or residential units. The developer is responsible for the
maintenance of the open space and other facilities to be held in common until such time as the
homeowners association is capable of assuming such responsibility. Thereafter, the members of
the association shall share the cost of maintaining the open space. The Planning Board shall
require the applicant to provide documentation that membership in the homeowners' association
is mandatory and such association that has been established prior to the conveyance of any lots
within the subdivision.
26
d. Design Guidelines for Designated Open Space. The location and layout of the open space shall
conform to the standards and process set forth in the Subdivision Regulations.
e. Monitoring of the Open Space: The applicant should provide sufficient funds to the Town,
which shall be placed in a designated escrow account for the purpose of the Town’s monitoring
of the open space. The Town’s Conservation Commission or a non-profit conservation
organization would provide this service.
27
ARTICLE VII
NON-CONFORMING USES AND LOTS
Any lawful non-conforming use in existence at the time of passage of this ordinance, or at the time of
adoption of an amendment to this ordinance may continue unchanged. Minor expansion shall be
allowed if the nature and intent of the use is not changed and the expansion does not adversely affect
the surrounding area.
A. Non-conforming structures or uses destroyed by fire, natural disaster or other means may be
repaired or replaced within one (1) year if the degree of nonconformity is not increased.
B. Abandonment of a non-conforming use shall constitute the termination of the right to continue or
reestablish the non-conforming use. A non-conforming use shall be considered abandoned if:
1. There is the intention to abandon or relinquish the use, and
2. There is some overt act or failure to act, which carries the implication that the owner neither
claims nor retains any interest in the use.
C. Nonconforming Lots in Any Zone. The erection of a building or structure shall be permitted on
any lot which has been duly recorded at the Strafford County Registry of Deeds on or before the
effective date of adoption of this Ordinance, provided that:
1. The lot shall support a land area of at least five thousand (5,000) square feet and a minimum
width of fifty (50) feet. In such cases, the following side yard restrictions shall apply:
(a) A lot with a width of one hundred ten (110) feet or less and greater than seventy-five (75)
feet, shall have a minimum side yard of ten (10) feet.
(b) A lot with a width of seventy-five (75) feet or less and fifty (50) feet or more shall have a
minimum side yard of six (6) feet.
2. Individual lots which become non-conforming because of amendments to lot area requirements
(from the effective date of adoption) in any district may be built upon, provided that they are of a
minimum size to meet State requirements for the New Hampshire Water Supply and Pollution
Control Commission for water and septic systems and can comply with A. above.
3. Sufficient off-street parking is provided within the lot boundaries. In this case, sufficient is
defined as two spaces per dwelling.
4. Adjacent non-conforming lots under the same ownership may be merged to create a new, larger
non-conforming lot, provided that the merger does not create any new nonconformity, other than
lot size.
(Amended 3/13/19)
28
Article VIII
ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
(Revised 3/11/09)
I. In accordance with the powers granted by RSA 674:33, Powers of the Zoning Board of Adjustment,
the Town of Milton Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA) shall hold hearings and make decisions on
the following:
1. Appeals of decisions of the Code Enforcement Officer;
2. Applications for special exceptions under the terms of this ordinance;
3. Appeals for variances from the terms of this ordinance;
4. Appeals of determinations of the Planning Board which are based on the terms of this ordinance,
in accordance with RSA 676:5, Appeals to the Board of Adjustment;
5. Applications for equitable waivers of dimensional requirements pursuant to the provisions of
RSA 674:33-a, Equitable Waiver of Dimensional Requirement;
A. Special Exceptions
Special exceptions shall be made in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the Zoning
Ordinance. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall affirmatively find that the following criteria
exist in order to approve applications for a Special Exception:
1. That the specific site is an appropriate location for the proposed use or structure.
2. That the use will not be injurious, noxious, offensive or detrimental to the neighborhood.
3. That there will be no undue nuisance or serious hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic,
including the location and design of access ways and off-street parking.
4. That adequate and appropriate facilities and utilities will be provided to insure the proper
operation of the proposed use and structure so that the use will not be contrary to the public
health, safety or welfare.
5. That the proposed use or structure is consistent with the spirit of this ordinance and the
intent of the Master Plan.
If the use or construction so authorized by the granting of a special exception has not
commenced within a two-year period from the date of the decision of the ZBA, or in the event
of an appeal to the courts of the special exception or the project to which it relates, within a
two-year period from the date of the judgment of the court, then the special exception shall be
deemed to have expired and the ZBA's decision rendered null and void. Upon request,
submitted prior to the date of expiration, the ZBA may extend the period of validity of a special
exception for one (1) additional year provided that the applicant presents evidence of a good
faith effort made to commence the use or construction so authorized by special exception, that
the delay in commencement was beyond the applicant's control, and that the circumstances
relating to the property and the surrounding neighborhood have not changed substantially since
the date of the original decision. Once an extension has been granted, should the use or
construction so authorized by special exception not be commenced within the one-year
extension period, then the special exception shall be deemed to have expired and the ZBA's
decision rendered null and void.
If after commencement, a special exception is abandoned or discontinued for a period of two
(2) years, or it is supplanted by another use, then the special exception shall be deemed to have
29
expired and cannot be re-established without a new application process and the affirmative
decision of the ZBA.
B. The ZBA may grant variances and equitable waivers if a majority of the Board makes a positive
finding of fact on each of the following relevant items.
(1) The variance will not be contrary to the public interest;
(2) The spirit of the ordinance is observed;
(3) Substantial justice is done;
(4) The values of surrounding properties are not diminished; and
(5) Literal enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance would result in an unnecessary
hardship.
(A) For purposes of this subparagraph, “unnecessary hardship” means that, owing to special
conditions of the property that distinguish it from other properties in the area:
(i) No fair and substantial relationship exists between the general public purposes of the
ordinance provision and the specific application of that provision to the property; and
(ii) The proposed use is a reasonable one.
(B) If the criteria in subparagraph (A) are not established, an unnecessary hardship will be
deemed to exist if, and only if, owing to special conditions of the property that distinguish it
from other properties in the area, the property cannot be reasonably used in strict conformance
with the ordinance, and a variance is therefore necessary to enable a reasonable use of it.
If the use or construction so authorized by a variance has not commenced within a two-year
period from the date of the decision of the ZBA, or in the event of an appeal to the courts of the
variance or the project to which it relates, within a two-year period from the date of the
judgment of the court, then the variance shall be deemed to have expired and the ZBA's
authorization shall be considered null and void. Upon request, submitted prior to the date of
expiration, the ZBA may extend the period of validity of a variance for one (1) additional year
provided that the applicant presents evidence of a good faith effort made to commence the use
or construction so authorized by the variance, that the delay in commencement was beyond the
applicant's control, and that the circumstances relating to the property and the surrounding
neighborhood have not changed substantially since the date of the original decision. Once an
extension has been granted, should the use or construction so authorized by a variance not be
commenced within the one (1) year extension period, then the variance shall be deemed to have
expired and the ZBA's decision rendered null and void.
If after commencement, a variance is abandoned for a period of two (2) years, or otherwise
replaced by a conforming use, and then the variance shall be deemed to have expired and
cannot be re-established without a new application process and affirmative decision of the
ZBA.
Equitable Waiver of a Dimensional Requirement.
1. The violation was not noticed or discovered until after a structure in violation had been
substantially completed, or a lot or other division of land in violation had been conveyed to
a bona fide purchaser for value.
2. The violation was caused by either a good faith error in measurement or calculation made
by an owner or owner's agent, or by an error in the interpretation or administration of this
ordinance by the Code Enforcement Officer.
30
3. The violation does not constitute a nuisance, diminish the value of properties in the area, or
adversely affect any present or permissible future uses of the premises.
4. Weighing the cost of past construction or investment made in ignorance of the facts
constituting the violation, the cost of correction so far outweighs any public benefit to be
gained in requiring the violation to be corrected.
5. In lieu of the findings required by the Board under items # 1 and # 2 above, the owner may
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Board that the violation has existed for ten (10) years
or more and no enforcement action has been commenced against the violation during that
time by the Town or any person directly affected.
6. In considering the request, the ZBA may request additional information such as a
professionally prepared site plan. In granting a permit, the ZBA may attach appropriate
conditions to the approval.
II Application Fees. At the time of application, a nonrefundable fee shall be submitted together with
the application to cover the costs of the advertising, notification, and processing of the application.
The applicant shall be required to pay for any special investigative studies deemed necessary by the
ZBA. Any application that is withdrawn prior to consideration by the ZBA, deemed incomplete by
the ZBA, or tabled for further consideration by the ZBA shall require the submission of another
nonrefundable fee prior to further consideration of the application by the ZBA. A schedule of
application fees is available at the Milton Town office.
(Amended 3/9/10)
ARTICLE IX
PENALTIES
A violation of this ordinance shall be subject to fines or penalties as specified by NH RSA 676:17, as
amended.
ARTICLE X
SEVERABILITY
If any section, provision, portion, clause or phrase of this ordinance shall be held to be invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect, impair or
invalidate any other section, provision, portion, clause or phrase of this ordinance.
ARTICLE XI
THE GROUNDWATER USE RESTRICTION DISTRICT
A. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE - The purpose of this section is, in the interest of public health,
safety and general welfare, to prohibit the use of groundwater potentially degraded by the Milton
Municipal Landfill, through the establishment of a Groundwater Use Restriction District. All
properties in the Groundwater Use District are in the service area of the Milton Water District. An
additional purpose of this section is to require that all development within the Groundwater Use
District be connected to that municipal water supply system.
31
B. LOCATION - The Groundwater Use Restriction District is an overlay Zoning District. The
boundary of the District has been set to include lots that are down gradient of the Milton Municipal
Landfill. The District shall be comprised of the following areas and lots.
1. Those areas defined and mapped as the Groundwater Use Restriction District, as may be
amended in the future, included on Plate 1 (attached).
2. The following lot numbers of Tax Map 32 are included in the Groundwater Use Restriction
District. Lot #'s 30, 31, 73, 74, 75, 76, 133 through 153, 155, 156, and 157.
C. DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS AND PROHIBITIONS:
1. Pumping of groundwater from any well, trench, sump, or other structure for residential,
irrigation, agricultural, or industrial purpose is prohibited, unless it is for the specific purpose of
pumping groundwater out of a sump to keep a cellar from flooding during periods of high
groundwater conditions.
2. All proposed residential, commercial, and industrial developments in the District shall be
connected to and served by the municipal water supply system (Milton Water District).
3. The requirements, restrictions, and prohibitions of the underlying zoning districts shall continue
to apply to the extent that they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this section.
SEE ATTACHED: GROUNDWATER USE RESTRICTION DISTRICT MAP
32
RESERVED FOR GROUNDWATER USE RESTRICTION DISTRICT MAP
33
ARTICLE XII
INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL OUTDOOR LIGHTING ORDINANCE
(Adopted 3/13/01)
PURPOSE - Appropriate outdoor lighting increases safety, enhances the Town’s nighttime character
and helps provide security. Excessive light creates glare and sky glow, and increases energy cost. Light
trespass reduces privacy.
This ordinance is intended to minimize or eliminate the problems associated with light trespass, glare
and sky glow.
A. DEFINITIONS - For the purposes of this Ordinance, terms shall be defined as follows:
1. Direct Light - Light emitted directly from the lamp, off of the reflector or reflector diffuser, or
through the refractor or diffuser lens, of a luminaire.
2. Dark Sky Specification - Specification of the International Dark-Sky Association, 3225 N.
First Ave., Tucson AZ 85719, http://www.darksky.org., intended to control sky-glow.
3. Fixture - The assembly that houses the lamp or lamps and can include all or some of the
following parts: a housing, a mounting bracket or pole socket, a lamp holder, a ballast, a
reflector or mirror and/or a refractor or lens.
4. Flood or Spot Light - Any light fixture or lamp that incorporates a reflector or a refractor to
concentrate the light output into a directed beam in a particular direction.
5. Glare - Light emitting from a luminaire with an intensity great enough to reduce a viewer’s
ability to see, and in extreme cases causing momentary blindness.
6. Height of Luminaire - The vertical distance from the ground directly below the centerline of
the luminaire to the lowest direct-light-emitting part of the luminaire.
7. Indirect Light - Direct light that has been reflected or has been scattered off other surfaces.
8. Lamp - The component of a luminaire that produces the actual light.
9. Light Source - Light source includes any reflector, refractor or globe as well as the lamp.
10. Light Trespass - The shining of light produced by a luminaire or luminaires beyond the
boundaries of the property on which it is located.
11. Lumen - A unit of luminous flux. One-foot candle is one lumen per square foot. For the
purposes of this Ordinance, the lumen-output values shall be the INITIAL lumen output ratings
of a lamp.
12. Luminaire - This is the complete lighting system, and includes a lamp or lamps, lenses and a
fixture.
13. Outdoor Lighting - The night time illumination of an outside area or object by any man-made
device located outdoors that produces light by any means.
14. Shielding - Opaque attachment to a lighting fixture to prevent direct light from shining in a
particular direction.
15. Temporary Outdoor Lighting - The specific illumination of an outside area or object by any
man-made device located outdoors that produce light by any means for a period of less than 7
days, with a least 180 days passing before being used again.
B. REGULATIONS - All industrial and commercial outdoor lighting installed for industrial and
commercial uses, in the Town of Milton shall be in conformance with the requirements established
by this Ordinance.
34
1. EXTERIOR LIGHTING:
a. Lighting Plan: A lighting plan shall be prepared indicating fixture specifications, placement,
and area lighting intensities on the ground. This plan shall be submitted as part of the plat for
site plan review.
(1) Fixture specification and placement will follow the concepts shown on
Diagram A (Note that all light must shine in a generally downward direction).
(2) No direct light shall shine beyond the applicant’s property boundaries.
(3) Although correct placement and specification should give desired distribution, shielding
may be added to further control light distribution.
(4) Height of luminaire shall be limited to 25 feet unless waived by the Planning Board for
specific applications.
b. Boundary Light Intensity: All Lighting fixtures shall be specified, placed and directed so
that total illumination intensities at all property boundaries does not exceed 1.0 foot candle
per Diagram A.
c. Glare: No operation or activity shall be conducted so as to cause or create unnecessary glare.
Any operation or activity producing unremediable glare shall be conducted so that total
illumination intensity does not exceed 1.0 foot candle at the property boundaries.
d. Appropriate Intensity for the Need: Outdoor lighting illumination intensities shall be the
minimum required to meet operational and safety standards. It is recommended that parking
area and other non-secure area lighting be reduced or extinguished outside of business hours.
e. Entrance and Exit Lighting: When building entrances and exits need to be lighted,
minimum power fixtures that carry the dark sky specification shall be used. If these fixtures
raise the property boundary illumination intensity above 1.0 foot candle, shielding shall be
added.
2. RECOMMENDATIONS:
a. Fixture Type: It is recommended that high-pressure sodium lighting not be used.
b. Reflective Surfaces: Consideration should be given to utilizing material that reflects the
minimum amount of light while meeting the surfacing needs of the particular area.
3. EXCEPTIONS:
a. Lighting of the United States Flag.
b. Customary holiday lighting.
c. Emergency lighting required by a public agency in the performance of its duties.
4. EFFECTIVE DATE AND GRANDFATHERING OF NONCONFORMING
LIGHTING:
a. This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon approval by the voters of the Town of
Milton at an annual or special Town Meeting and shall supersede and replace all previous
ordinances pertaining to outdoor lighting.
b. All lighting lawfully in place prior to the date of the Ordinance shall be grandfathered. A
grand fathered fixture may be replaced with a similar fixture, but if the fixture is moved or
relocated the requirements of this Ordinance must be applied.
35
5. AUTHORIZATION FOR INSTALLATION OF PUBLIC AREA AND ROADWAY
LIGHTING - Installation of any new public-area and roadway lighting fixtures, other than for
traffic control, shall be specifically approved by the Board of Selectmen.
6. NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS - The Town of Milton site plan application shall
include a statement asking whether the planned project will include any outdoor lighting. A
copy of this ordinance shall be attached to all electrical permits for this purpose.
7. VIOLATIONS, LEGAL ACTIONS AND PENALTIES:
a. Violations and legal actions: If, after investigation the Code Enforcement Officer finds that
any provision of the Ordinance is being violated, he shall give notice by hand delivery or by
certified mail, return-receipt requested, of such violation to the owner and/or to the occupant
of such premises, demanding that the be abated within thirty (30) days of the date of hand
delivery or of the date of mailing of the notice. If the violation is not abated within the
thirty-day period, the Code Enforcement Officer may institute actions and proceedings, legal
and/or equitable, to enjoin, restrain, or abate any violations of the Ordinance and to collect
the penalties for such violations.
b. Penalties: A violation of this Ordinance, or any provision thereof, shall be punishable by a
civil penalty of up to one hundred dollars ($100) and each day of violation after the
expiration of the thirty-day period provided in Paragraph 1 shall constitute a separate offense
for the purpose of calculating the civil penalty.
SEE ATTACHED DIAGRAM: MILTON LIGHTING ORDINANCE ACCEPTABLE
LIGHTING CONFIGURATIONS
36
RESERVED FOR LIGHTING DIAGRAM
37
ARTICLE XIII
WETLAND CONSERVATION ORDINANCE
(Adopted 3/09/2005)
These Regulations are intended to:
1. Control and regulate the development of structures and of land use on jurisdictionally occurring
wetlands which could contribute, if uncontrolled, to pollution of surface and ground water by
wastewater or septic systems or toxic substances.
2. Prevent unnecessary or excessive expense to the Town in providing and maintaining essential
services and utilities as a result of inharmonious use of wetlands.
3. Prevent the destruction of natural wetlands which provide flood protection and water storage,
provide recharge of groundwater supply and provide augmentation of stream flow during dry
periods.
4. Encourage those uses that can be appropriately and safely located in wetland areas.
5. Protect presently existing natural wetland wildlife habitats.
6. Prevent damage to abutters' structures and properties.
A. Description.
1. A Wetland (also see "wetlands" and “wetlands buffers” definitions in Article II of the Milton
Zoning Ordinance) is hereby determined to be an area which would be delineated as a wetland
using the methodology required by the State of New Hampshire Department of Environmental
Service Wetlands Bureau, surface waters, and including the buffer requirements of section H of
this Ordinance. The Department of Environmental Service Wetlands Bureau requires wetlands
to be delineated using a combination of the Corps of Engineers Wetlands Delineation Manual,
Technical Report Y-87-1, Environmental Laboratory, Department of the Army, 1987 and the
Field Indicators for Identifying Hydric Soils in New England, Version 2, New England Interstate
Water Pollution Control Commission, 1998. As of the writing of this Ordinance the approved
wetlands delineation methodology uses three parameters, hydric soils, hydrophytic vegetation,
and wetland hydrology. The precise location of a wetland boundary in any particular case shall
be determined by on-site inspection of soil types and vegetation by a certified wetland scientist
using the methodology required by the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Service
Wetlands Bureau.
2. In all cases where the rules of this Ordinance differ from those of the underlying zoning district
in the Town of Milton, any conflict between such Regulations shall be resolved by applying the
more-restrictive Regulation.
3. Areas to be excluded from this Ordinance are:
a. Where the wetland or surface water is an isolated wetland smaller than three thousand (3,000)
sq. ft.
b. The wetland or surface water is a vegetated swale or roadside ditch, a sedimentation/detention
basin, an agricultural/irrigation pond, a septage lagoon, or a wetland on converted cropland.
B. Purpose - The purpose of this Ordinance is to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare
by controlling and guiding the use of land areas, which have been found to be subjected to high
water tables for extended periods of time.
Wetlands are a critical natural resource, which effect water quality, flooding, wildlife, recreation,
and aesthetics, and their protection is a goal of the Master Plan. Wetlands protect surface water
quality by reducing the velocity of surface water runoff, allowing for the deposit of sediment and
38
nutrients. Wetlands protect shorelines from erosion. Wetlands absorb water during times of
flooding, thus helping to reduce floodwater elevations. Wetlands help to maintain the quality of
groundwater recharge. Wetlands provide habitat for a wide variety of wildlife, including fish,
birds, deer and other animals. Wetlands contribute to a broad range of recreational opportunities,
including canoeing, hunting, fishing and bird watching. Wetlands contribute to the aesthetic values
of the Town, providing open space, natural vistas, landform contrasts, and early autumn foliage.
These purposes, in combination with the fact that wetlands are often ill suited to development
activities; demonstrate why the long term protection of wetlands contributes greatly to the welfare
of the community.
The publication Buffers for Wetlands and Surface Waters, Chase, Deming and Latawiec, Revised.
May 1997 recommends that buffers around wetlands also be protected since unbuffered wetlands
may not be able to adequately fulfill their functions. The guidebook defines buffers as “a naturally
vegetated upland area adjacent to a wetland or surface water.” In this definition, “naturally
vegetated” includes the following: uncut or undisturbed forest, minimally disturbed or managed
forest, and abandoned pasture or fields.
C. Permitted Uses Within the Naturally Vegetated Buffer - Permitted uses shall be as follows:
1. Any use that does not involve the erection of a structure or does not alter the surface
configuration of the land by the addition of fill or dredging, except common agricultural land
drainage, provided that such use is otherwise permitted in the use district of a given wetland.
2. Forestry or tree farming, in compliance with the provision of chapter 227-J (Logging and the
Law) of the Best Management Practices for Erosion Control on Timber Harvesting Operations
in New Hampshire, Rev. Feb. 2000.
3. Agriculture, including grazing, farming, truck gardening and harvesting of crops.
4. Water impoundment and the construction of well water supplies, pending State approval.
5. Drainage ways such as streams, creeks or other paths of normal runoff.
6. Wildlife habitat development and management.
7. Recreation uses, excepting such as may be inconsistent with the purpose and intent of this
Ordinance.
8. Conservation areas, nature trails and snowmobile trails.
9. Open space in accordance with the Subdivision Regulations and other sections of this chapter.
10. Any wetland impact, which has the approval of the New Hampshire Wetlands Bureau, shall be a
permitted project.
D. Conditional Uses - Under the provisions of RSA 674:21, Subdivision II, the Planning Board may
grant approval of a conditional use permit for the construction of streets, roads and other access
ways and utilities, including pipelines, power lines and other transmission lines, provided that all of
the following conditions are found to exist:
1. No alternative location outside the wetland, or which has less detrimental impact on a wetland,
is feasible.
2. The proposed construction is essential to the productive use of other land, which is not within
the wetland.
3. Design, construction and maintenance methods will be such as to minimize detrimental impact
upon the wetland and will include restoration of the site as nearly as possible to its original
grade and condition.
4. Economic advantage is not the sole reason for the proposed location of the construction.
39
E. Special Exceptions for Existing Lots:
1. On an existing lot, the erection of a structure or septic system within the wetland may be
permitted by special exception if the Zoning Board of Adjustment, after due public notice and
public hearing, finds that such exception complies with all other applicable requirements set
forth in this Article and with each of the following:
a. The lot upon which the exception is sought was an official lot of record, as recorded in the
Strafford County Registry of Deeds, or has been accepted and subsequently approved by the
Planning Board prior to the date on which this Article was posted and published in the
Town, August 20, 2003.
b. The use for which the exception is sought cannot reasonably be carried out on a portion or
portions of the lot, which are outside the wetland.
c. The design and construction of the proposed septic system will, to the extent practical, be
consistent with the purpose and intent of this Article.
d. The proposed septic system will not create a threat to individual or public health, safety and
welfare, such as the degradation of ground or surface water, or damage to surrounding
properties.
2. Prior approval shall be obtained from the Planning Board where site plan review is required. At
the time of submission to the Zoning Board of Adjustment, the Conservation Commission, and
the Health Officer shall be informed of the application for special exception.
3. This Ordinance shall not prohibit the construction of principal and accessory structures within
the buffer zone or for unimproved lots that were approved for subdivision by the Planning
Board or which otherwise legally existed on or before August 20, 2003.
F. Provisions for Existing Uses:
1. Structures and uses existing prior to the date on which this Article was enacted may be
continued, provided that such uses shall not be expanded further to encroach upon the wetland
or designated buffer zone.
2. Notwithstanding other provisions of this Article, the construction of attached additions to one
to three-family dwellings shall be permitted within the wetland buffer, provided that:
a. The dwelling lawfully existed prior to the date on which this Article was enacted.
b. The number of dwelling units is not increased.
c. The proposed construction conforms to all other applicable Ordinances and Regulations of
the Town of Milton.
3. Where an existing building within the wetland or buffer zone is destroyed or in need of
extensive repair, it may be rebuilt, provided that such rebuilding is completed within one (1)
year of the event causing destruction, the new or rebuilt structure shall not extend further into
the wetland or buffer zone than the original foundation and the result will not be a new or
increased threat to the wetland.
G. Lot Size Determination in Wetlands:
1. Wetlands may be used to fill up to twenty-five percent (25%) of the minimum lot size or density
requirements of Town Ordinances and Subdivision and Planned Unit Development
Regulations, provided that the non-wetland area is sufficient in size and configuration to
adequately accommodate all buildings and required utilities, such as sewage disposal and water
supply, including primary and auxiliary leach field locations, within required zoning setbacks
from the wetland area.
40
2. Lots served by municipal water and sewer may use wetlands to fulfill up to fifty percent (50%)
of the minimum required lot size.
3. No areas of surface water may be used to satisfy minimum lot sizes.
H. Buffer Zone and Setback Requirements:
1. No septic system, leach field or other waste-disposal facility shall be installed closer than fifty
(50) feet of any point in a wetland. Any more stringent State rule shall supercede this Article.
2. Building structures, roads and parking areas, shall not be allowed closer than fifty (50) feet
from any point in a wetland. The area between the building structures and naturally vegetated
buffer shall be stabilized with lawn or plantings.
3. A naturally vegetated buffer of undisturbed land, not less than twenty-five (25) feet from any
point in the wetland, shall be maintained around all wetlands.
I. Reclassification of Wetlands - Challenge of classification. If the wetland classification is
challenged by the applicant, an abutter, a landowner, the Code Enforcement Officer, the
Conservation Commission or the Planning Board, petition shall be made, in writing, by the
challenger to the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall determine
whether a certified wetlands scientist shall conduct an on-site investigation and at the expense of the
applicant. The certified wetland scientist’s investigation shall be in accordance with Section A.1.of
this Ordinance.
J. Restoration of Altered Soils - Any wetland altered in violation of this chapter shall be restored at
the expense of the violator(s).
K. Additional Information - No approval or waiver of permits by State or Federal Agencies shall
preempt the ability of the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment to seek additional
information or to make an independent judgment as to the acceptability of a lot or alteration of land.
41
ARTICLE XIV
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS ORDINANCE
(Adopted 3/09/05)
A. AUTHORITY - Pursuant to the authority conferred by chapter 674:16 of the New
Hampshire Revised Statutes, the Town of Milton adopts the following ordinance regulating
Sexually Oriented Business. This Ordinance shall be considered part of the Zoning
Ordinance of the Town of Milton for the purpose of administration and appeals under State law. If
any provisions of this Ordinance differs or appears to conflict with any provision of the Milton
Zoning Ordinance or other ordinance or regulation, the provision imposing the greater restriction or
more stringent standard shall be applied.
B. PURPOSE - It is the purpose of this Ordinance to regulate Sexually Oriented Businesses and
related activities to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the Town of
Milton and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and
concentration of Sexually Oriented Businesses within the Town of Milton. The provisions of this
Ordinance have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content
of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the
intent nor the effect of this Ordinance to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented
materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of
sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this
Ordinance to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene materials.
C. DEFINITIONS - Pursuant to this Ordinance, the following definitions shall apply to Sexually
Oriented Business:
1. ADULT BUSINESS BOOKSTORE OR ADULT VIDEO STORE - A business that utilizes
more than 15% of the total display, shelf, rack, table, stand and floor area, for the display and
sale or rent of the following:
a. Books, magazine, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion picture,
video cassettes, slides, tapes, records, cd-roms or other forms of visual or other audio
representation which meet the definition of "harmful to minors" and/or "sexual conduct" as
set forth in RSA 571-B:1; or
b. Instrument, devices or paraphernalia, which are designed for use in connection with "sexual
conduct" as, defined in RSA 571-B:1, other than birth control devices.
AN ADULT BOOKSTORE OR ADULT VIDEO STORE DOES NOT INCLUDE AN
ESTABLISHMENT THAT SELLS BOOKS AND PERIODICALS AS AN INCIDENTAL OR
ACCESSORY PART OF ITS PRINCIPAL STOCK AND TRADE AND DOES NOT
DEVOTE MORE THAN 15% OF THE TOTAL AREA OF THE ESTABLISHMENT TO THE
SALE OF BOOKS AND PERIODICALS.
2. ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER - An establishment with a capacity of five (5) or
more person, where for any form of consideration, films, motion picture, video cassettes, slides
or similar photographic reproduction are shown, and in which a substantial portion of the total
presentation time is devoted to the showing material which meets the definition of "harmful to
minors" and/or "sexual conduct" as set forth in RSA 572-B:1 for the observation by patrons.
For subsection 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9, a "substantial portion of the total presentation time" shall
mean the presentation of films or shows described above for viewing on more than seven (7)
days within any thirty (30) consecutive day period.
42
3. ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE - Any place to which the public is permitted or
invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled
still or motion picture machine, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to
show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one time, in which a substantial
portion of the total presentation time of the images so displayed is devoted to the showing of
material which meets the definition of "harmful to minors" and/or "sexual conduct" as set forth
in RSA 571-B:1.
4. ADULT DRIVE-IN THEATER - An open lot or part thereof, with appurtenant facilities,
devoted primarily to the presentation motion pictures, films, theatrical production and other
forms of visual productions, for any form of consideration to persons in motor vehicle or on
outdoor seats, in which a substantial portion of the total presentation being presented for
observation by patrons is devoted to the showing of material which meets the definition of
"harmful to minors" and/or "sexual conduct" as set forth in RSA 571-B:1.
5. ADULT CABARET - A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar establishment which during a
substantial portion of the total presentation time features live performances which meet the
definition of "harmful to minors" and/or "sexual conduct" as set forth in RSA 571-B:1 and/or
feature films, motion picture, video cassettes slides or other photographic reproductions, a
substantial portion of the total presentation of which meets the definition of "harmful to
minors" and/or "sexual conduct" as set forth in RSA 571-B:1.
6. ADULT MOTEL - A motel or similar establishment offering public accommodation for any
form of consideration which provides patrons with closed circuit televisions, transmissions,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproduction in which a
substantial portion of the total presentation time of which are distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis upon the depiction or description of materials which meet the definition of
"harmful to minors" and/or "sexual conduct" as set forth in RSA 571-B:1.
7. ADULT THEATER - A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar establishment either indoor
or outdoor in nature, which, for any form of consideration, regularly features live performances,
a substantial portion of the total presentation time of which are distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on activities which meet the definition of "harmful to minor" an/or "sexual
conduct" as set forth in RSA 571-B:1.
8. NUDE MODEL STUDIO - A place where a person who appears in a state of nudity, whether
male or female, and displayed in a state of sexual arousal and is observed, sketched, drawn,
painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or
any form of consideration or such display is characterized by an emphasis on activities which
meets the definition of "harmful to minors" and/or "sexual nature" as set in RSA 571-B:1.
9. NUDITY OR A STATE OF NUDITY - Means the appearance of a human bare buttock, anus,
anal cleft or cleavage, pubic area, male genitals, female genitals, or vulva, with less than a fully
opaque covering; or a female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the
areola; or human male genitals in discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely
covered.
10. SEMI-NUDE OR SEMI-NUDITY - Means the appearance of the female breast below a
horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point. This definition shall include the
entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the
cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or
other wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
11. SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER - A business or commercial enterprise that as one of its
primary business purpose, offers for any form of consideration:
a. physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or
b. activities between male and female and/or persons of the same sex when one or more person
is in the state of nudity, or where the activities in (a) or (b) is characterized by and emphasis
43
on activities which meets the definition of "harmful to minors" and/or "sexual conduct" as
set forth in RSA 571-B:1.
12. SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS - Means an adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video
store, adult cabaret, adult drive in theatre, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult
theater, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center as those terms are defined herein.
13. SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITES - Means and includes any of the following:
a. The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or
female breasts, whether covered or uncovered;
b. Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or
sodomy;
c. Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
d. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in (a)
through (c) above.
D. LOCATION RESTRICTIONS - A Sexually Oriented Business may only be allowed in the
Commercial/Residential Zone and Industrial/Commercial Zone. For a use to be established under
this Ordinance the applicant must demonstrate that the proposed site satisfies all the site
requirement of the Site Plan Review from the Planning Board and must obtain a Special Exception
from the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
For existing businesses in any zone which sells sexually explicit goods, paraphernalia or adult
materials, but does not meet the 15% threshold outline in Section C, such goods and paraphernalia
shall be located either behind a counter or in a separate room or enclosure where citizens under the
age of eighteen (18) are not allowed to enter. Such sexually explicit goods and paraphernalia must
be located so the materials in question are not within view of minors.
A Sexually Oriented Business use may only be allowed by the Zoning Board of Adjustment as a
Special Exception, subject to the following conditions:
1. No Sexually Oriented Business shall be permitted within 1,000 feet of the property line of a
church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building, which is used primarily for religious worship
and related religious activities;
2. No Sexually Oriented Business shall be permitted within 1,000 feet of the property line of
a public or private educational facility including, but not limited to, child day care facilities,
nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, private schools, intermediate
schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary
schools, continuation schools, special education school, junior colleges, and universities; school
includes the school ground, but does not include the facilities used primarily for another purpose
and only incidentally as a school;
3. No Sexually Oriented Business shall be permitted within 1,500 feet of the property line of
a public park or recreational area which has been designated for park or recreational activities
including, but not limited to, a park, playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic
field, basketball or tennis courts, skating rink, pedestrian/bicycle paths, or other similar public
recreation land which is under the control, operation, or management of the Town or any of its
Departments, Boards or Commission;
4. No Sexually Oriented Business shall be permitted within 500 feet of any posted school bus stop;
5. No Sexually Oriented Business shall be permitted within 500 feet of a town border.
44
6. No Sexually Oriented Business shall be permitted within 500 feet of the property line of a lot
used for residential purposes.
7. Sexually Oriented Businesses shall only be permitted in single use, freestanding structures. In
no instances shall Sexually Oriented Business share premises, facilities or buildings with
businesses, which are not sexually oriented.
8. There shall be a minimum of 1,000 feet between any two Sexually Oriented Businesses. This
shall be measured in a straight line.
9. The exterior of the site shall be maintained daily in a condition that is free and clear of any
sexual paraphernalia or packaging.
10. No sexually explicit material or advertising shall be visible from outside the building.
11. No one under the age of eighteen (18) shall be permitted inside such a use, structure, or
business, and a procedure shall be developed to keep those under eighteen (18) from entering the
building.
12. All operators and employees shall be of good moral character. No operator or employee shall
have been convicted of a misdemeanor or felony of sexually related nature.
13. No Sexually Oriented Business shall be permitted within 1,000 feet of the junction of Route
125 and Route 75 and Route 125 and Route 153.
E. SIGNAGE - Signage shall comply in all respects with all Town of Milton Ordinances, codes or
regulations governing signs and in addition shall comply with the provisions of this section.
No signs, whether primary or secondary, shall contain photographs, silhouettes, drawings, images
or pictorial representation an any manner depicting or making linguistic reference to nudity, seminudity,
specified anatomical areas, specified sexual activity, or any device or paraphernalia
designed for use in connection with specified sexual activity and may contain only the name of the
enterprise.
F. ADMINISTRATION - In addition to meeting the specific conditions set out in this Ordinance, no
Sexually Oriented Business shall be established without first obtaining a Special Exception from
the Zoning Board of Adjustment. Any such application shall be subject to all of the Special
Exception criteria and discretionary authority of the Zoning Board of Adjustment set out in Article
XI of the general Zoning Ordinance.
G. PUBLIC NUISANCE - Violation of the use provisions of this Ordinance is declared to be a public
nuisance per se, which shall be abated by the Town of Milton by way of civil abatement
procedures.
Limiting Clause: Nothing in this Ordinance is intended to authorize, legalize or permit the
establishment operation or maintenance of any business, building or use which violates any Town
of Milton Ordinance or statute of the State of New Hampshire regarding public nuisances, sexual
conduct, lewdness, or obscene or harmful matter or the exhibition or public display thereof.
H. SEVERABILITY - The invalidity of any provision of this Ordinance shall not affect the validity
of any other provisions of this Ordinance or of the Zoning Ordinance as a whole.
I. EFFECTIVE DATE - This Ordinance shall be effective immediately upon adoption by the Milton
Town meeting.
45
ARTICLE XV
THE EXCAVATION OVERLAY DISTRICT
(Adopted 3/15/06)
A. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE - The purpose of this section is, in the interest of public health,
safety and general welfare, to restrict excavation of earth as defined and regulated by
RSA 155-E and this Ordinance to those areas defined and mapped by or from USGS/NH
GRANIT data sources as likely to contain land(s) suitable for the commercial taking of earth.
B. LOCATION - The Excavation Overlay District is an overlay zoning district in which each
excavation is a permitted use. The district shall comprise of the following areas and lots:
1. Those areas defined and mapped on the Sand and Gravel Excavation Overlay Map, as may be
amended in the future, and
2. The following Tax Map and Lot #s of the present record:
Tax Map #1- Lot #3;
Tax Map #2- Lot #1, 2, 3, 4, 14.5;
Tax Map #4- Lot #2, 19, 21;
Tax Map #8- Lot #6, 7, 9;
Tax Map #9- Lot #1, 10, 100, 102, 106, 110, 111, 112, 113, 116, 117, 119, 120, 121, 122, 123,
124, 125, 125.1;
Tax Map #10- Lot #1, 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 9.1;
Tax Map #11- Lot #7, 11, 12, 13, 14;
Tax Map #12- Lot #1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 13, 15, 16, 19, 20;
Tax Map #13- Lot #1, 3;
Tax Map #14- Lot #1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 10, 14, 15, 17, 18, 19, 21, 22, 23, 25, 29, 30, 34, 36;
Tax Map #15- Lot #4;
Tax Map #17- Lot #22, 23, 24, 25;
Tax Map #18- Lot #4, 13, 14, 15;
Tax Map #19- Lot #2, 13;
Tax Map #20- Lot #1;
Tax Map #21- Lot #11, 12;
Tax Map #22- Lot #21, 31.1;
Tax Map #23- Lot #44;
Tax Map #26- Lot #23;
Tax Map #27- Lot #1, 2, 3, 4, 11, 12;
Tax Map #28- Lot #4, 21, 28.1, 49, 50, 50.2, 50.3, 51, 52;
Tax Map #30- Lot #25;
Tax Map #32- Lot #28, 30, 37A, 63, 67, 69, 75, 79, 117, 132;
Tax Map #33- Lot #86, 203, 211, 214, 251.1, 251.2, 251.3; 252;
Tax Map #34- Lot #11, 12;
Tax Map #37- Lot #100;
Tax Map #45- Lot #53, 54, 54A, 58, 59;
Tax Map #47- Lot #15, 15.1, 18, 21, 22, 24, 26, 27, 33, 35, 36, 38;
Tax Map #49- Lot #39, 40, 43, 45, 46, 49.
C. DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS AND PROHIBITIONS- The requirements, restrictions and
prohibitions of the underlying zoning districts shall continue to apply to the extent that they are not
inconsistent with the provisions of this section.
SEE ATTACHED: SAND AND GRAVEL EXCAVATION OVERLAY MAP
46
RESERVED FOR SAND AND GRAVEL EXCAVATION OVERLAY MAP
47
ARTICLE XVI
GROUNDWATER PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT
(Adopted 3/15/06, Revised 3/14/18)
I. AUTHORITY
The Town of Milton hereby adopts this ordinance pursuant to the authority granted under NH
RSA 674:16, specifically RSA 674:16, II relative to innovative land use controls.
II. PURPOSE
The purpose of this ordinance is to preserve, maintain, and protect existing and potential
groundwater supplies and related groundwater recharge areas within the Town and to prevent
development and land use practices that would contaminate or reduce the recharge of the
identified aquifers. The ordinance serves to provide for future growth and development of the
Town, in accordance with the Master Plan, by ensuring the future availability of public and
private water supplies and to encourage uses that can appropriately and safely be in the
groundwater recharge areas.
III. DEFINITIONS
A. Aquifer: for the purpose of this ordinance, a geologic formation composed of rock, sand,
or gravel that contains significant amounts of potentially recoverable water. [NHDES
Model Groundwater Protection Ordinance, Chapter 2.5 Protection of Groundwater and
Surface Water Resources, Innovative Land Use Planning Techniques]
B. Groundwater: subsurface water that occurs beneath the water table in soils and geologic
formations. [RSA 485-C (VIII), the Groundwater Protection Act]
C. Impervious surface: a surface through which regulated substances cannot pass when
spilled. The term includes concrete and asphalt unless unsealed cracks or holes are
present, but does not include earthen, wooden, or gravel surfaces that could react with or
dissolve when in contact with the substances stored on them. [Env-Wq 401.03(c), NH
Code of Administrative Rules]
D. Junkyard: as defined under RSA 236:112.
E. Public water system: a system for the provision to the public of piped water for human
consumption, if such system has at least 15-service connections or regularly serves an
average of at least 25-individuals daily at least 60-days out of the year. [RSA 485:1-a, XV,
New Hampshire Safe Drinking Water Act]
F. Regulated container: any device in which a regulated substance is stored, transported,
treated, disposed of, or otherwise handled, with a capacity of greater than or equal to five
gallons. [Env-Wq 401.03(g), NH Code of Administrative Rules]
G. Regulated substance: any of the following, with the exclusion of all substances used for
the treatment of drinking water or wastewater at department-approved facilities5 [Env-Wq
401.03(h), NH Code of Administrative Rules]:
5 These chemicals are excluded from the definition of regulated substances within state administrative rule Env-Wq 401,
because they are used in the treatment of wastewater and drinking water supplies and are not considered to pose a
significant risk to groundwater.
48
1. Petroleum products and their byproducts of any kind, and in any form
including, but not limited to, petroleum, fuel, sludge, crude, oil refuse or oil mixed
with wastes and all other liquid hydrocarbons regardless of specific gravity and
which are used as motor fuel, lubricating oil, or any oil used heating or processing.
Shall not include natural gas, liquefied petroleum gas or synthetic natural gas
regardless of derivation or source. [RSA 146-A:2(III), Oil Discharge or Spillage in
Surface Water or Groundwater]; or
2. Any substance that contains a regulated containment for which an ambient
groundwater quality standard has been established pursuant to RSA 485-C:6; or
3. Any hazardous substance as listed in the 40 CFR Part 302, Table 302.4
H. Sanitary protective radius: the area around a public water supply well, which must be
maintained in its natural state as required by Env-Dw 301.06 for small community wells);
and Env-Dw 302.06 (large community wells).
I. Seasonal high water table: the depth from the mineral soil surface to the upper most soil
horizon that contains 2% or more distinct or prominent redoximorphic features that
increase in percentage with increasing depth as determined by a licensed Hydrologist,
Soils Scientist, Wetlands Scientist, Engineer or other qualified professional approved by
the Planning Board, or the shallowest depth measured from ground surface to free water
that stands in an unlined or screened borehole for a period of one week or more.6
[NHDES-Wq 1502.49, NHDES Alteration of Terrain]
J. Snow dump: for the purposes of this ordinance, a location where snow is placed for
disposal from any off-site location (i.e. cleared from roadways, and/or motor vehicle
parking areas). [NHDES Model Groundwater Protection Ordinance, Chapter 2.5
Protection of Groundwater and Surface Water Resources, Innovative Land Use Planning
Techniques]
K. Stratified-drift aquifer: a geologic formation of predominantly well-sorted sediment
deposited by or in bodies of glacial meltwater, including gravel, sand, silt, or clay, which
contains sufficient saturated permeable material to yield significant quantities of water to
wells. [RSA 485-C (XIV), the Groundwater Protection Act]
L. Wellhead protection areas: the surface and subsurface area surrounding a water well or
well field supplying a community public water system, through which contaminants are
reasonably likely to move toward and reach such water well or well field. [RSA 485-C
(XVIII), the Groundwater Protection Act]
IV. GROUNDWATER PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT
The Groundwater Protection Overlay District is an overlay district which is superimposed
over the existing zoning. The District shall impose additional requirements and restrictions
beyond the base zoning. Boundaries of the District shall be referenced by the latest edition of
the map entitled “Town of Milton Groundwater Protection Overlay District.” The District
shall include:
6 This definition includes a focus on both soil morphology and groundwater hydrology
49
1. All stratified-drift aquifer areas based on data developed by the United States
Geological Survey, in cooperation with the New Hampshire Department of
Environmental Services Water Division
2. All delineated wellhead protection areas around existing and potential municipal
production water wells as defined under Article III (M), including a protective radial
distance of 1,000ft7 around those wells.
V. APPLICABILITY
This ordinance applies to all uses in the Groundwater Protection Overlay District, except
for those uses exempted under Article XI of this ordinance.
VI. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
The following Performance Standards apply to all uses in the Groundwater Protection Overlay District
unless exempt under Article XI of this ordinance.
A. For any use that will render impervious more than 15%, or more than 2,500-square feet
of any lot, whichever is greater, a storm water management plan shall be prepared which
the Planning Board determines is consistent with New Hampshire Storm water Manual
Volumes 1-3, December 2008, NH Department of Environmental Services;
B. Storm water management plans prepared pursuant to paragraph A shall demonstrate that
storm water recharged to groundwater will not result in violation of Ambient
Groundwater Quality Standards Env-Or 603.03 at the property boundary;
C. Animal manures, fertilizers, and compost must be stored in accordance with Manual of
Best Management Practices for Agriculture in New Hampshire, NH Department of
Agriculture, Markets, and Food, July 2008, and any subsequent revisions;
D. Regulated substances within regulated containers must be used and stored in accordance
with Env-Wq 401, Best Management Practices for Groundwater Protections.
E. Projects that will excavate more than a total of 5,000 cubic yards of bedrock through
rock blasting activities or are within a radial distance of 1,000 feet from a municipal
production well must adhere to NHDES WD-10-12, Best Management Practices for
Blasting – “Rock Blasting and Water Quality Measures That Can be Taken to Protect
Water Quality and Mitigate Impacts,” prepared 2010, and any subsequent revisions.
VII. PERMITTED USES
All uses permitted by right or allowed by special exception in the underlying district are
permitted unless they are Prohibited Uses (Article VIII) or Conditional Uses (Article IX) in the
Groundwater Protection Overlay District. All uses must comply with the Performance
Standards unless specifically exempt under Exemptions (Article XI).
VIII. PROHIBITED USES
7 The protective radius around the municipal production wells pertains to rock blasting activities.
50
The following uses are prohibited in the Groundwater Protection Overlay District:
A. Development or operation of a solid waste facility;
B. Outdoor storage of road salt or other deicing chemicals in bulk;
C. Development or operation of a junkyard;
D. Development or operation of a snow dump;
E. Development or operation of a wastewater or septage lagoon;
F. Development or operation of a petroleum bulk plant or terminal;
G. Development or operation of gasoline stations;
H. Use of powdered ammonium nitrate fuel oil and explosives that contain perchlorate during
blasting activities
IX. CONDITIONAL USES
The Planning Board may vary the provisions herein by granting a Conditional Use Permit in
accordance with RSA 674:21 (II) to allow for a use which is otherwise permitted within the
underlying district. The following conditions shall apply to all uses in the Groundwater
Protection Overlay District:
A. Storage, handling, and use of regulated substances in quantities exceeding 55 gallons per
container or 660 pounds per container8 dry weight at any one time, provided that an
adequate regulated materials response plan has been submitted. This plan must address:
a. Description of the physical layout and a facility diagram, including all
surrounding surface waters and wellhead protection areas.
b. Contact list and phone numbers for the facility response coordinator, cleanup
contractors, and all appropriate federal, state, and local agencies who must be
contacted in case of a release to the environment.
c. List of all regulated substances in use and locations of use and storage
d. Description of containment and/or diversionary structures or equipment to
prevent regulated substances from infiltrating into the ground
e. List of positions within the facility that require training to respond to spills of
regulated substances
f. Prevention protocols that are required after an event that causes large releases
of any regulated substance
B. Any use that will render impervious more than 15% or 5,000-square feet of any lot,
whichever is greater, provided that a storm water management plan has been submitted.
This plan shall be prepared in accordance with the New Hampshire Storm water Manual
Volumes 1-3, most recent edition, NH Department of Environmental Services.
C. Project that will excavate more than a total of 5,000 cubic yards of bedrock through rock
blasting activities or are within a radial distance of 1,000 feet from a municipal production
well provided that an adequate groundwater monitoring plan has been submitted. This
plan must address:
a. Identification of potential sensitive receptors and evaluation hydrogeological
background information
8 According to the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration’s Emergency Response Guidebook, large spills
are defined as containers that are greater than 55 US gallons (208 liters) for liquids and greater than 660 pounds (300
kilograms) for solids with regard to initial isolation and protection action distances. This is a standard that is used by the
bulk of the voluntary first responder organizations
51
b. Identification of monitoring well locations and install monitoring wells,
where appropriate.
c. Collection of background water quality samples to identify, or rule out, preexisting
groundwater contamination issues and to establish background
chemistry levels and performance criteria for groundwater quality.
d. Collection of periodic groundwater samples, including but not limited to
nitrite/nitrates, as well as standard analysis for inorganic chemical, volatile
organic chemical, and synthetic organic chemical contaminates as designated
in Env-Dw 703 through Env-Dw 705, and ambient groundwater quality
standards as designated in Env-Or 603, from the groundwater monitoring
points during blasting, as well as collect water level data, when pertinent.
e. Collection of post-blast groundwater samples (conducting multiple rounds of
sampling may be prudent, and/or sampling could be ongoing for extended
periods if contamination is detected as a result of the blasting).
The Planning Board may, at its discretion, require a performance guarantee or bond, in an
amount and with surety conditions satisfactory to the Board, to be posted to ensure completion
of construction of any facilities required for compliance with the Performance Standards.
X. EXISTING NONCONFORMING USES
Existing nonconforming structure and uses are exempt from this zoning ordinance under RSA
674:19. Any existing nonconforming uses may continue without expanding or changing to
another nonconforming use but must be in compliance with all applicable State and federal
requirements, including Env-Wq 401, Best Management Practices Rules.
XI. EXEMPTIONS
The following uses are exempt from the specified provisions of this ordinance as long as they
are in compliance with all applicable local, State, and federal requirements:
A. All permitted residential uses are exempt from all Performance Standards;
B. Any business or facility where regulated substances are stored in containers with a
capacity of 5 gallons or less is exempt from Performance Standard D;
C. Storage of heating fuels for on-site use or fuels for emergency electric generation,
provided that storage tanks are indoors on a concrete floor or have corrosion control, leak
detection, and secondary containment in place, is exempt from Performance Standard D;
D. Storage of motor fuel in tanks attached to vehicles and fitted with permanent fuel lines to
enable the fuel to be used by that vehicle is exempt from Performance Standard D;
E. Storage and use of office supplies are exempt from Performance Standard D;
F. Temporary storage of construction materials on a site where they are to be used is exempt
from Performance Standard D if incorporated within the site development project within
six months of their deposit on the site;
G. The sale, transportation, and use of pesticides as defined in RSA430:29 XXVI are exempt
from all provisions of this ordinance;
H. Any non-reoccurring household hazardous waste collection projects regulated under NH
Code of Administrative Rules Env-Wm 401.03(b)(1) and 501.01(b) are exempt from
Performance Standard D;
52
I. Underground storage tank systems and aboveground storage tank systems that are in
compliance with applicable State rules are exempt from inspections under Maintenance
and Inspection (Article XIII).
XII. RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN STATE AND LOCAL REQUIREMENTS
Where both the State and the municipality have existing requirements the more stringent shall
govern.
XIII. MAINTENANCE AND INSPECTION
A. For uses requiring Planning Board approval for any reason, a narrative description of
maintenance requirements for structures required to comply with Performance Standards, shall
be recorded so as to run with the land on which such structures are located, at the Registry of
Deeds for Strafford County. The description so prepared shall comply with the requirement of
RSA 478:4-a.
B. Inspections may be required to verify compliance with Performance Standards. Such inspections
shall be performed by the Code Enforcement Officer at reasonable times with prior notice to the
landowner.
C. All properties within the Groundwater Protection Overlay District known to the Code
Enforcement Officer as using or storing regulated substances in containers with a capacity of 5-
gallons or more, except for facilities where all regulated substances storage is exempt from this
ordinance under Article XI, shall be subject to inspections under this Article.
D. A fee schedule shall be established by the Board of Selectmen as provided for in RSA 41-9: A.
The Board of Selectmen shall require a fee for compliance inspections. The fee shall be paid by
the property owner.
XIV. ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES AND PENALTIES
Any violation of the requirements of this ordinance shall be subject to the enforcement
procedures and penalties detailed in RSA 676 or RSA 485-C.
XV. SAVING CLAUSE
If any provision of this ordinance is found to be unenforceable, such provision shall be
considered separable and shall not be construed to invalidate the remainder of the ordinance.
XVI. EFFECTIVE DATE
This ordinance shall be effective upon adoption.
53
RESERVED FOR GROUNDWATER PROTECTION MAP
54
ARTICLE XVII
SHORELAND PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT
(Revised & Adopted 3/11/14)
A. AUTHORITY - Pursuant to the authority granted by RSA 483-B:8, RSA 674:16 - RSA
674:21, this Ordinance is adopted by the Town of Milton, New Hampshire in order to protect the
public health, safety and general welfare.
B. PURPOSE - This Ordinance establishes standards for the subdivision, use and development of
shoreland adjacent to public waters as defined herein for the purpose of minimizing degradation of
shoreland and assuring retention of the benefits provided by such shoreland. These benefits
include:
1. Maintenance of safe and healthy conditions;
2. Prevention and/or control of water pollution;
3. Reduction or elimination of flooding and accelerated erosion;
4. Protection of wetlands and their important natural functions;
5. Maintenance of water quality and related stream flows during low flow periods;
6. Protection of shoreland cover as a means of protection of natural beauty and the scenic qualities,
which are critical attributes of the Town of Milton.
7. Protection of water resources and their related watersheds to insure an adequate quantity/supply
of the highest quality water,
8. Protection of water resources by managing the use of land resources and balancing their use and
development consistent with conservation and development needs
9. Preservation of shore-side (riparian) buffers that filter out pollutants before water discharges
into lakes, streams and wetlands,
C. DEFINITIONS - Shall be in accordance with RSA 483-B: 4, except as listed below:
1. Boat Slip - An area of water 20-feet long and at least 2-feet deep and 6 feet in width measured
at and located adjacent to a structure to which a watercraft may be secured.
2. Protected Shoreland - For natural freshwater bodies without artificial impoundments, for
artificially impounded fresh water bodies and for streams, brooks and rivers, all land located
within 250-feet of the reference line of waters shown on the Milton Wetlands Map.
3. Public Waters - All fresh water bodies listed in the official list of public waters published by
the department pursuant to RSA 271: 20, II, whether they are great ponds or artificial
impoundments. Rivers, streams, and brooks, meaning all-year-round flowing waters of first
order or higher, as shown on the current version of the U.S. Geological Survey 7 ½’ topographic
maps and the Milton Wetlands Maps. Public waters include but are not limited to:
(a). Lakes/Ponds: Allan Hasting Way Pond, Willey Pond, Gould Pond, Milton Pond, Depot
Pond, Northeast Pond, Spaulding Pond, Sunrise Lake and Town House Pond.
(b). Rivers/Streams: Branch River, Dames Brook, Great Brook, Hart Brook, Jones Brook,
Lyman Brook, Miller Brook, Salmon Falls River and Teneriffe Mountain Stream.
4. Reference Line- For natural fresh water bodies without artificial impoundments, the natural
mean high water level as determined by the Division of Water Resources. For artificially
impounded freshwater bodies, the waterline at full pond as determined by the elevation of the
top of the impoundment structure. For rivers, streams and brooks, the ordinary high water mark.
55
5. Shoreland Frontage - The average of the distances measured along the public boundary and
along a straight line drawn between the points at which the public boundary intersects the
sidelines of the property.
6. Shrub - Multi-stemmed woody plant, which normally grows to a mature height of less than 20-
feet.
7. Water Dependent Structure - Dock, wharf, pier, breakwater, or other similar structure or any
part thereof built over, on, or in the waters of the Town.
D. SHORELAND PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT - The Shoreland Protection Overlay
District is an overlay, which is superimposed over the conventional existing zoning and includes
within its boundary the protected shoreland adjacent to all waters within the municipality which
encompasses all land within 250-feet of the public boundary line of the waters.
E. PERMITTED USES -
1. Water Dependent Uses and Structures - The following uses and structures are permitted
within the Shoreland Protection Overlay District in compliance with all applicable local, State,
and Federal regulations.
(a) Water dependent structures including, but not limited to, docks, wharfs, swimming floats
and boat ramps. Other water dependent uses and structures upon issuance of a conditional
use permit approved by the Planning Board per Innovative Land Use Controls, RSA
674:21 and after recommendations from the Conservation Commission, provided the
proposal complies with the general conditional use permit criteria and also complies with
the following criteria:
(1) The use would be in keeping with the purpose and intent of these regulations;
(2) The least impacting route and methodology for the use have been selected and
represent the best practicable alternative; canopies and seasonal covers shall extend
only over the boat slips and shall be removed during the non-boating season.
F. PROHIBITED USES - The following uses are prohibited in the Shoreland Protection
Overlay District:
1. Establishment or expansion of an automobile junkyard, solid or hazardous waste facilities;
2. Use of fertilizer, except lime and/or wood ash;
3. Bulk storage of chemicals;
4. Bulk storage of petroleum products or hazardous materials;
5. Processing of excavated materials;
6. Dumping or disposal of snow and ice collected from roadways or parking areas within
400-feet of a community well or planned community water.
G. RESTRICTED USES - The following uses may be conducted within the Shoreland
Protection Overlay District only in accordance with the conditions listed herein:
1. Construction of water dependent structures shall be constructed only as approved by the State
Wetlands Board pursuant to RSA 482-A.
2. Public water supply facilities as permitted by the Department of Environmental Services (DES).
3. Public water and sewage treatment facilities as permitted by DES.
56
4. Hydro-electric facilities, including, but not limited to dams, dikes, penstocks, and powerhouses,
shall be recognized as water dependent, as permitted by DES.
5. Public utility lines and associated structure and facilities as permitted by DES.
6. An existing solid waste facility, which is located within 250-feet of the public boundary line of
protected waters under this chapter may continue to operate under an existing permit, provided it
does not cause degradation to an area in excess of that area under DES permit.
7. No solid waste facility shall place solid waste within 250-feet of the reference line of protected
waters under this chapter except as expressly permitted under RSA 483-B: 9,
IV-c.
8. All new and existing excavations within the Protected Shoreland Protection District shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with rules adopted by the department under RSA 541-A
for terrain alternations under RSA 485:17, to manage stormwater control and sediment, during
and after construction.
However, any solid waste facility may be allowed, subject to permitting conditions under RSA 149-
M: 9, to erect accessory structures and conduct other activities consistent with the operation of the
facility within 250-feet of the reference line of protected waters under this Ordinance, such as
filling, grading, and installing monitoring wells and other drainage structures as is consistent with
its solid waste permit as issued by the Department of Environmental Services. Under no
circumstances shall the toe of any slope encroach within 150-feet of the reference line.
H. MINIMUM LOT REQUIREMENTS:
1. The minimum lot size for new lots in areas dependent on on-site septic systems shall be
determined by all soil type using the model developed by the Ad Hoc Committee for Soil Based
Lot Size for the DES.
2. New lots requiring on-site water and sewage systems within this Overlay District shall have a
minimum of shoreland frontage of 150-feet.
3. Lots with shoreland frontage, which are serviced by municipal sewers, shall meet the area and
width requirements of the underlying Overlay District or minimum size requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance
4. Setback - No primary structure shall be located within 50-feet of the public boundary. Accessory
structures such as storage sheds and gazebos but excluding automobile garages may be located
within the 50-foot setback upon issuance of a conditional use permit by the Planning Board,
after recommendations from the Conservation Commission, provided the proposal complies
with the general conditional use criteria and also complies with the following criteria:
(a) The location and construction of the structure is consistent with the intent of the Ordinance
to maintain a vegetated buffer;
(b) The structure is required as a shelter either for humans, equipment, or firewood;
(c) The structure is usually customary and incidental to a legally authorized use located within
the Shoreland District.
5. Building Height - No structure within the Shoreland Overlay District shall exceed 2 ½ stories or
35-feet in height as measured from the average ground level around the structure to the highest
point on the roof excluding chimneys.
6. Building Placement - Buildings should be placed in such a manner as to minimize impact on
habitat and at such a location as to have the least impact on the watershed.
7. Parcel coverage by impervious cover shall not exceed 20-percent.
57
I. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
1. Natural Woodlands Buffer:
(a) Where existing, a natural woodland buffer shall be maintained within 150-feet of the
reference line, the purpose of this buffer shall be to protect the quality of public waters by
minimizing erosion, preventing siltation and turbidity, stabilizing soils, preventing excess
nutrients and chemical pollution, maintaining natural water temperatures, maintaining a
healthy tree canopy and under story, preserving fish, bird and wildlife habitat, and
respecting the overall natural condition of the protected shoreland.
(b) Within the natural shoreland buffer of the protected shoreland under conditions defined in
RSA 483-B: 9, V the following shall apply:
(1) Not more than a maximum of 50-percent of the basal area of trees, and a maximum of
50-percent of the total number of saplings shall be removed for any purpose in a 20-
year period. A healthy, well-distributed stand of trees, saplings, shrubs and ground
covers and their living, undamaged root systems shall be left in place. Replacement
planting with native or naturalized species may be permitted to maintain the 50-
percent level.
(2) Trees, saplings, shrubs and ground covers that are removed to clear an opening for
building construction, accessory structures, septic systems, roadways, pathways, and
parking areas shall be excluded when computing the percentage limitations under
section I-1-(b)(1).
(3) Dead, diseased, unsafe, noxious or fallen trees, saplings, shrubs, or ground cover may
be removed. Their removal shall not be used in computing the percentage limitations
under section I-1-(b)(1). Stumps and their root systems which are located within 50-
feet of the reference line shall be left intact in the ground. Dead and living trees that
provide dens and nesting places for wildlife are encouraged to be preserved. Plantings
of natural native vegetation that are beneficial to wildlife are encouraged to be
undertaken.
2. Subsurface Waste Disposal Systems:
(a). Pursuant to RSA 483-B:9, V(b), all new lots, including those in excess of 5-acres, created
within the protected shoreland are subject to subdivision approval by the department of
environmental services under RSA 485-A:29.
(b). All subsurface waste disposal systems must be designed and installed in accordance with
the DES, Division of Water Supply and Pollution Control publications; Subdivision and
Individual Sewage Disposal System Design Rules.
(c). Septic tanks and leach fields adjacent to ponds, lakes, streams, brooks, rivers, and open
areas shall be set back from the public boundary at least the following distances based on
information contained in the Order 1-soil map or High Intensity Soil (HIS) map prepared by
a certified Soil Scientist.
(1) 125-feet where the soils map indicates the presence of porous sand and gravel
materials with a permeability faster than 2-minutes per inch;
(2) 100-feet where the soils map indicates the presence of soils with restrictive layers
within 18-inches of the natural soil surface;
(3) 75-feet where the soils map indicates the presence of all other types of soils.
58
A minimum of one extra percolation test midway between the septic system and the reference
line shall be performed by a Soil Scientist to determine the presence of excessively drained sand
and gravel materials, and a minimum of 2-test pits, (one down slope from the septic system 35-
feet, and one down slope from the septic system 75-feet) shall be dug and witnessed by a
permitted subsurface disposal system designer to determine if restrictive layers exist within 18-
inches of the natural soil surface.
3. Erosion And Sediment Control:
(a) All construction and/or development activities shall incorporate design standards for
erosion and sedimentation control which at a minimum reflect the recommendations of the
publication Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for
Urban and Developing Areas in New Hampshire, prepared by the Rockingham County
Conservation District for the DES in cooperation with the USDA Soil Conservation
Service, August 1992.
(b) Disturbance of a contiguous area in excess of 50,000-square feet requires a permit from the
DES pursuant to RSA 485-A: 17 (I).
(c) The Towns' Model Stormwater Erosion Control Regulation listed in the Site Plan
Regulation and Federal EPA rules also apply.
4. Cluster Or Open Space Developments - The grouping of residential units on a parcel within the
Shoreland Overlay District is permitted and encouraged to the extent that valuable shoreland
resources and open spaces are retained. Such developments should meet the following
provisions:
(a) Densities should not exceed those permitted under the soil based lot size density plus a
bonus of 2-percent, which recognizes the open space advantages of clustering.
(b) A minimum of 60-percent of the total parcel shall remain as permanent open space, which
shall be in a conservation easement in perpetuity.
(c) Parcel coverage by impervious cover including building footprint, impervious roadway, or
other impervious cover shall not exceed 20-percent of the parcel.
5. Leach Field Setbacks - All leach fields shall meet the setback requirements of this Overlay
District. In the event that the leach field cannot physically be located on the lot in conformity
with this Ordinance the owner shall be required to acquire additional land or a permanent
easement to such land for this purpose in so far as practicable. Should additional undeveloped
land not be available, allowable sewage loading shall be reduced by decreasing the number of
bedrooms, toilet facilities, and other wastewater generating facilities to bring the proposed
development as close to compliance with this Ordinance as feasible.
6. Common Owners or Users of Water Front Parcels or Lots - Shorefront lots/parcels which are
intended for use for common access by the non-shoreland property owners within the
development or subdivision which owns or has control over the common land, shall:
(a) Contain a minimum of one acre;
(b) Have a minimum shoreland frontage of 150-feet for the first ten residential units and an
additional ten feet for each additional unit;
(c) Have no structures other than toilet facilities, picnic shelters and/or recreational facilities.
Necessary leach fields shall be located at least:
(1) 125-feet where the soils map indicates the presence of porous sand and gravel materials
with a permeability faster than 2-minutes per inch;
(2) 100-feet where the soils map indicates the presence of soils with restrictive layers
within 18-inches of the natural soil surface;
(3) 75-feet where the soils map indicates the presence of all other types of soils.
59
(d). Half the shoreland frontage shall be designated for swimming and shall be separated from
boating areas by ropes and appropriate marks, subject to the approval of the Safety Services
Division of the NH Department of Safety.
(e). Off street parking shall be provided on the basis of 300-square feet for each residential unit
located ¼ mile or more from the common area, which has use of the area.
(f). Toilet facilities shall be provided on the basis of one facility each for men and women for
each 25-residential units.
(g). Impervious cover for roof area, parking lots, access roads, sidewalks and any other similar
cover over or on the parcel or lot shall not exceed 10-percent of the area of the parcel or lot.
7. Land Clearing for Agriculture - All agricultural activities and operations in the State as defined
in RSA 21:34-a and as governed by RSA 430, including the use of animal manure, lime, wood
ash, irrigation and clearing of land for agricultural utilization, and other agricultural technologies,
shall be exempt from the provisions of this Ordinance, provided such activities and operations are
in conformance with the most recent best management practices determined by the United States
Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service, the United States Department of
Agriculture Cooperative Extension Service and the Department of Agriculture. Persons carrying
out such agricultural activities and operations in the protected shoreland shall work directly with
local representatives of the above agencies for their particular property.
J. Conditional Use Permit: The Planning Board, after a public hearing, may issue a conditional use
permit for Section E-1 and Section H-4.
K. CONFLICTS OF ORDINANCE - In the event that the requirements of this Ordinance differ
from another federal, state or local statute, ordinance or regulation, the more stringent requirement
shall apply. In the event that the requirements within this Ordinance are in conflict with one
another, the more stringent requirement shall apply.
60
RESERVED FOR THE SHORELAND PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT MAP
61
ARTICLE XVIII
TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS
(Adopted 3/14/07)
A. Authority. By the authority granted under NH RSA 674:21, this section creates overlay district(s)
for the purpose of transferring development rights (TDR) within said districts.
B. Purpose and Intent. Within the Town of Milton there are certain lands that possess highly valued,
significant conservation features, including but not limited to wetlands, groundwater recharge
zones, forested areas, wildlife habitat, farmland, scenic view sheds, historic landmarks, and
linkages to other such areas. Because of their singular and distinctive assemblages of flora and
fauna and their significant contribution to the ecological system and/or the cultural identity of our
community, these lands are worthy of permanent protection. The Town of Milton furthermore, has
a limited supply of land suitable for development. The purpose of this overlay district is to
promote intensive development on the developable land possessing the least conservation value and
to permanently protect lands possessing significant and noteworthy conservation features that
provide unique values in their undisturbed condition.
C. Applicability. Upon request by an applicant for subdivision or site plan approval and at the
discretion of the Planning Board, the provisions of this subsection may apply to the district(s)
defined in this subsection E below.
D. Definitions. The terms contained within this section shall have their meaning as defined herein in
the context of the Town of Milton Zoning Ordinance or as defined in NH RSA’s. In any dispute of
interpretation, the more restrictive definition consistent with Section B. above shall apply.
Development Rights - The legal claim to construct or develop specified land uses within specified
densities and/or dimensional limits as granted by the Town of Milton Zoning Ordinance.
Landscaped Area - An area unoccupied by pavement or structures and open to the sky in either a
landscaped or grassed condition. May include recreational fields, lawns, and public parks that do
not possess significant conservation features.
Open Space – Land that is not built upon or substantially altered by human activity including open
fields, such as meadows and farmland, and forest as well as undeveloped shorelands and
waterbodies. Lands so transferred shall not be further altered or degraded.
Sending Area - A defined area within a TDR district from which development rights are
transferred, resulting in the permanent preservation of lands possessing significant conservation
features (shall include natural and built features).
Receiving Area - A defined area within a TDR district to which development rights are transferred
resulting in more efficient and intense use of suitable development sites.
Transfer of Development Rights - The conveyance of the development rights of a parcel of land
by deed or other legal instrument approved by the Planning Board to the developer of another
parcel. Said legal instrument shall be recorded at the Strafford County Registry of Deeds.
62
TDR District - An area defined as a zoning overlay district, which includes a sending area and a
receiving area for the purpose of transferring development rights from a parcel within the sending
area to a parcel within the receiving area.
E. Districts Defined.
1. The Industrial TDR District is hereby determined to be any Industrial-Commercial and Low
Density Residential Zoning district as shown on the Zoning Map for the Town of Milton, New
Hampshire, adopted date, March 2006. The sending area is defined to be open space and related
setbacks as defined by the Town of Milton Wetland Protection District, which are located in any
Low Density Residential Zoning district. The receiving area is defined to be all remaining land
in any Industrial-Commercial Zoning district.
2. The Residential TDR District is hereby determined to be any Commercial-Residential and Low
Density Residential district as shown on the Zoning Map for the Town of Milton, New
Hampshire, adopted date, March 2006. The sending area is defined to be all Low Density
Residential zoning districts. The receiving area is defined to be all Commercial-Residential
zoning districts east of the Spaulding Turnpike which allow residential development.
F. Procedural Requirements.
1. At the discretion of the Planning Board, an applicant for subdivision or site plan approval within
the receiving area of the defined TDR district may apply the performance standards specified in
subsection G and H below in return for the acquisition of land or development rights from the
sending area within the same TDR district. The performance standards for the Industrial TDR
district are outlined in subsection H below. The performance standards for the Residential TDR
district are outlined in subsection G below.
2. A certified boundary survey of the associated land in the sending area shall be submitted as a
supplement to the site plan or subdivision plan for development within the receiving area.
3. The owner of the subject open space within the sending area of the TDR district shall sign all
application materials as a co-applicant of the subdivision or site plan application.
4. A sketch plan estimating layout of the development site and identifying the open space
associated with the plan shall be submitted to the Planning Board for review at a regularly
scheduled meeting. The Planning Board, within thirty (30) days of its review of the sketch plan,
shall determine if waivers will be granted as allowed in Subsections G and H below. Following
this decision, a final application will be prepared. The final application for development
approval shall be reviewed in accordance with the standard plan review process and subjected to
all applicable development regulations, except as provided in this section.
5. A perpetual easement or restrictive covenant shall be recorded at the Strafford County Registry
of Deeds that preserves the designated open space within the sending area. Said easement or
covenant may allow for the continuance of existing residential, agricultural and silvacultural
activities, and may allow for utility and access crossings in accordance with subsection I below.
The designation of the land protection agency to hold the easement shall be approved by the
Planning Board.
G. Industrial Performance Standards.
1. Land within a sending area, when surveyed, approved by the Planning Board and preserved by
easement or covenant as specified in subsection F above, may be counted for the open space
requirement for a development site in a receiving area. The amount of land preserved in a
sending area shall equal or exceed the open space requirement for the development site, but in
63
no case be less than two (2) acres. Additionally, development sites within the Industrial-
Commercial zoning districts shall maintain open space or landscaped area on at least ten (10)
percent of the site. The design of the development site shall locate the open space or landscaped
area to maximize the aesthetic value of the site.
2. The minimum lot size requirement in the underlying zoning district may be waived by the
Planning Board for land subjected to the transfer of development rights.
3. The minimum frontage requirement may be waived by the Planning Board for land subjected to
the transfer of development rights provided that paved access to all developed areas suitable for
emergency vehicles is approved by the Planning Board.
4. Setbacks for parking, paved areas, and buildings may be waived by the Planning Board, and be
consistent with the intent to promote intensive development of suitable development sites. In
addition, buildings shall be at least 150 feet from residential structures that exist on the date of
enactment of this Chapter, and 75 feet from the lot line of a disagreeing residential abutter.
5. The developer shall record Planning Board approved covenants that address architectural
considerations for structures, signage and lighting, that are designed to promote the highest
possible aesthetic quality of the development site.
6. A landscaping plan shall be submitted with a subdivision or site plan application that depicts
landscaping or open space around the perimeter of the site, near the proposed buildings, and
within the parking lot that promotes the highest possible aesthetic quality of the development.
H. Residential Performance Standards.
1. For land in the sending district to be eligible to transfer development rights, it must be a parcel
of at least 5 acres, and developable under the existing land use regulations.
2. Land within a sending area, when surveyed, approved by the Planning Board and preserved by
easement or covenant as specified in subsection F above, may be counted for the minimum lot
size requirement for a development site in a receiving area. The amount of land preserved in a
sending area shall equal or exceed the minimum lot size requirement for the sending site.
3. The square footage being transferred shall be divided by the minimum lot size needed in the
receiving area, or by 5000 square feet, whichever is larger to determine the transferred right.
4. The minimum lot size requirement in the underlying zoning district may be waived by the
Planning Board for land subjected to the transfer of development rights.
5. The minimum frontage requirement may be waived by the Planning Board for land subjected to
the transfer of development rights provided that paved access to all developed areas suitable for
emergency vehicles is approved by the Planning Board.
6. Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter to the contrary, the density or intensity of
development of a receiving parcel may be increased by the transfer of development rights so
long as the increase in density or intensity:
(a) Is consistent with the Master Plan
(b) Is not incompatible with the land uses on neighboring lots
I. Conditional Uses. The Planning Board may grant conditional use permits to allow streets, roads,
utilities, or other infrastructure improvements to cross wetlands within the receiving area of the
TDR District provided said infrastructure is essential to the productive use of land within the
receiving area of a TDR District, and further provided that no possible location exists for said
infrastructure in non-wetland areas.
64
ARTICLE XIX
IMPACT FEE ORDINANCE
(Adopted 3/14/07)
A. PURPOSE
The following ordinance shall govern the assessment of impact fees for public capital facilities in
order to accommodate increased demand on the capacity of these facilities due to new
development. This ordinance is authorized by RSA 674:16 and 674:21, V, as an innovative land
use control to: promote public health, safety, convenience, welfare, and prosperity; insure that
adequate and appropriate public facilities are available; and provide for the harmonious
development of the Town and its environs.
B. FINDINGS
In review of the impact of growth relative to the existing and planned capital facility capacity
available to the Town of Milton for its capital facilities needs, the Town of Milton hereby finds
that:
1. As documented by the Master Plan and the Capital Improvements Program of the Town of
Milton, recent and anticipated growth rates in public enrollment and associated improvements
and costs would necessitate an excessive expenditure of public funds in order to maintain
adequate capital facility standards and to promote and protect the public health, safety, and
welfare.
2. The imposition of impact fees is one of the methods available to ensure that public expenditures
are not excessive, and that new development will bear a proportionate share of the capital costs
necessary to accommodate such development.
3. An impact fee ordinance for public capital facilities is consistent with the goals and objectives
of the Master Plan and the Capital Improvements Program of the Town of Milton.
C. AUTHORITY
1. Impact fees may be assessed to new development to compensate the Town of Milton for the
proportional share of capital facilities generated by new development in the Town of Milton.
Any person who seeks a building permit for new development may be required to pay an impact
fee in the manner set forth herein.
2. Public capital facilities have been and will be provided by the Town utilizing funds allocated
through the Capital Improvements Program, which has been reviewed by the Planning Board
and adopted and regularly updated by the Board of Selectmen.
3. The Planning Board may, as a condition of approval of any subdivision, site plan, or change of
use, and when consistent with applicable Board regulations, require an applicant to pay an
impact fee for the applicant’s proportional share of off-site improvements to public facilities
affected by the development.
4. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the existing authority of the Planning Board,
in accordance with RSA 674:36.11(a) and the regulations of the Board, to disapprove proposed
development which is scattered or premature or which would require an excessive expenditure
of public funds, or which would otherwise violate applicable ordinances and regulations.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the Planning Board’s authority to require offsite
work to be performed by the applicant, in lieu of paying an impact fee, or the Board’s
65
authority to impose other types of conditions of approval. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to affect types of fees governed by other statutes, ordinances or regulations.
D. DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
1. Capital Facilities – Facilities and associated structures, including and limited to water
treatment and distribution facilities; wastewater treatment and disposal facilities; sanitary
sewers; storm water, drainage and flood controls facilities; public road systems and rights-ofway;
municipal office facilities; public school facilities; public safety facilities solid waste
collection, transfer, recycling, processing and disposal facilities; public library facilities; and
public recreational facilities not including public open space.
2. Gross Floor Area – The sum of the areas of all floors of main and accessory buildings on the
property as measured to the outside surfaces of the exterior walls. The gross floor area shall
include basements, lobbies, and stair openings, porches, balconies and open-sided roofed-over
areas, elevator shafts and storage. The gross floor area shall exclude open wells (atriums),
mechanical rooms, crawl spaces and attics without floors, attics used only for mechanical
services.
3. Impact Fee – A fee or assessment imposed upon development, including subdivision and site
plan review, building construction or other land use change, in order to help meet the needs
occasioned by that development for the construction or improvement of capital facilities owned
or operated by the Town of Milton, including and limited to water treatment and distribution
facilities; wastewater treatment and disposal facilities; sanitary sewers; storm water, drainage
and flood control facilities; public road systems and rights-of-way; municipal office facilities;
public school facilities; public safety facilities; solid waste collection, transfer, recycling,
processing and disposal facilities; public library facilities; and public recreational facilities not
including public open space.
4. New Development - An activity that results in:
(a) creation of a new dwelling unit or units; or
(b) conversion of a legally existing use, or additions thereto, which would result in a net
increase in the number of dwelling units or number of bedrooms; or
(c) construction resulting in a new non-residential building or a net increase in the gross floor
area of any non-residential building; or
(d) conversion of an existing use to another use if such change creates a net increase in the
demand on public capital facilities that are the subject of impact fee assessments. New
development shall not include the replacement of an existing mobile home, or the
reconstruction of a structure that has been destroyed by fire or natural disaster where there is
no change in its gross floor area, density or type of use, and where there is no net increase in
demand on public capital facilities.
(e) A new or modified service connection to the public water system or the public wastewater
disposal system of the Town that would result in a net increase in demand on the capacity of
these facilities.
66
E. ASSESSMENT METHODOLOGY
1. Computation: Prior to assessing an impact fee required by the Planning Board for one or more
of the public capital facilities listed above, the Planning Board shall adopt such studies or
methodologies and related fee schedules that provide for a process or method of calculating the
proportionate share of capital improvement costs that are attributable to new development.
Such calculations shall reasonably reflect the capital cost associated with the increased demand
placed on capital facility capacity by new development.
2. Proportionality: The amount of the impact fee shall be calculated by the Planning Board to be
a proportional share of municipal capital improvement costs that are reasonably related to the
capital needs created by the development, and to the benefits accruing to the development from
the capital improvements financed by the fee.
3. Conversion or Modification of Use: In the case of new development created by conversion or
modification of an existing use, the impact fee shall be based upon the net increase in the
impact fee assessed for the new use as compared to the highest impact fee that was or would
have been assessed for the previous use in existence on or after the effective date of this
ordinance.
4. Existing Deficiencies: Upgrading of existing facilities and infrastructures, the need for which is
not created by new development, shall not be paid for by impact fees.
F. ADMINISTRATION
1. Accounting
(a) In accordance with RSA 673:16, II and RSA 674:21, V(c), impact fees shall be accounted
for separately, shall be segregated from the Town’s general fund, may be spent upon order of
the Board of Selectmen, and shall be used solely for the capital improvements for which it was
collected, or to recoup the cost of capital improvements made in anticipation of the needs which
the fee was collected to meet.
(b) In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments have been or will be issued by the Town
of Milton or the Milton School District for the funding of capital improvements that are the
subject of impact fee assessment, impact fees from the appropriate related capital facility
impact fee accounts may be applied to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt
instruments.
(c) The Town Treasurer shall record all fees paid, by date of payment and the name of the
person making payment, and shall maintain an updated record of the current ownership, tax
map and lot reference number of properties for which fees have been paid under this Ordinance,
for each building permit so affected for a period of at least nine (9) years from the date of
receipt of the impact fee payment associated with the issuance of each permit.
(d) Impact fees collected may be spent from time to time by order of the Board of Selectmen
and shall be used solely for the reimbursement of the Town and the School District for the cost
of public capital improvements for which they were collected, or to recoup the cost of capital
improvements made by the Town or District in anticipation of the needs for which the impact
fee was collected.
(e) The event that bonds or similar debt instruments have been, or will be, issued by the Town
or the District for the funding of capacity-related facility improvements, impact fees may be
transferred to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt instruments.
(f) At the end of each fiscal year, the Town Treasurer shall make a report to the Board of
Selectmen, giving a particular account of all impact fee transactions during the year.
67
2. Assessment: All impact fees imposed pursuant to this section shall be assessed at the time of
planning board approval of a subdivision, site plan or change of use as per the Planning Board
approved Schedule of Fees. When no planning board approval is required, or has been made
prior to adoption or amendment of this ordinance, impact fees shall be assessed prior to, or as a
condition for, the issuance of a building permit or other appropriate permission to proceed with
development as determined by the Board of Selectmen.
3. Security: In the interim between assessment and collection, the Board of Selectmen may
require developers to post bonds, issue letters of credit, accept liens, or otherwise provide
suitable measures of security so as to guarantee future payment of assessed impact fees.
4. Collection: Impact fees shall be collected as a condition for the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy. If no certificate of occupancy is required, impact fees shall be collected when the
development is ready for its intended use. The collection of impact fees shall be the
responsibility of the Board of Selectmen. In projects where off-site improvements are to be
constructed simultaneously with a project's development, and where the Town has appropriated
the necessary funds to cover such portions of the work for which it will be responsible, the
Town may advance the time of collection of the impact fee to the issuance of a building permit.
Nothing in this section shall prevent the Board of Selectmen, with the review by the Planning
Board, and the assessed party from establishing an alternate, mutually acceptable schedule of
payment.
5. Refund of Fees Paid: The current owner of record of property for which an impact fee has
been paid shall be entitled to a refund of that fee, plus accrued interest under the following
circumstances:
(a) When either the full or partial portion of the impact fee, whichever is applicable, has not
been encumbered or legally bound to be spent for the purpose for which it was collected
within a period of six (6) years from the date of the full and final payment of the fee; or
(b) When the Town of Milton, or in the case of school impact fees, the Milton School District,
has failed, within the period of six (6) years from the date of the full and final payment of
such fee, to appropriate their proportionate non-impact fee share of related capital
improvement costs.
G. APPEALS
A party aggrieved by a decision made by the Building Inspector regarding the assessment or
collection of impact fees authorized by this Section may appeal such decision to the Planning
Board. In accord with RSA 676:5, III, appeals of the decision of the Planning Board in
administering this ordinance may be made to Superior Court, as provided in RSA 676:5, III and
RSA 677:15, as amended.
H. WAIVERS
The Planning Board may grant full or partial waivers of impact fees where the Board finds that one
or more of the following criteria are met with respect to the particular public capital facilities for
which impact fees are normally assessed.
(a) An applicant may request a full or partial waiver of school impact fees for those residential
units that are lawfully restricted to occupancy by senior citizens age 62 or over in a
development that is also maintained in compliance with the provisions of RSA 354-A: 15,
Housing For Older Persons. The Planning Board may waive school impact fee assessments on
such age-restricted units where it finds that the property will be bound by lawful deeded
68
restrictions on occupancy by senior citizens age 62 or over for a period of at least 20 years.
Upon expiration of the specified waiver period, any proposed change in use or conversion of
residential units from age-restricted occupancy, may be subject to assessment of impact fees.
(b) A person may request a full or partial waiver of impact fees for construction within a
subdivision or site plan approved by the Planning Board prior to the effective date of this
ordinance. Prior to granting such a waiver, the Planning Board must find that the proposed
construction is entitled to the four year exemption provided by RSA 674:39, pursuant to that
statute. This waiver shall not be applicable to phases of a phased development project where
active and substantial development, building and construction has not yet occurred in the phase
in which construction is proposed.
(c) The Planning Board may agree to waive all or part of an impact fee assessment and accept in
lieu of a cash payment, a proposed contribution of real property or facility improvements of
equivalent value and utility to the public. Prior to acting on a request for a waiver of impact fees
under this provision that would involve a contribution of real property or the construction of
capital facilities, the Planning Board shall submit a copy of the waiver request to the Town
Council for its review and consent and hold a public hearing prior to its acceptance of the
proposed contribution. The value of contributions or improvements shall be credited only
toward facilities of like kind, and may not be credited to other categories of impact fee
assessment. The applicant shall pay all costs incurred by the Town for the review of such
proposal, including consultant and counsel fees.
I. ADDITIONAL ASSESSMENTS
Payment of the impact fee under this article does not restrict the Town or the Planning Board from
requiring other payments from an applicant, including such payments relating to the cost of the
extensions of water and sewer mains or the construction of roads or streets or other infrastructure
and public capital facilities specifically benefiting the development as required by the subdivision
or site plan review regulations, or as otherwise authorized by law.
69
ARTICLE XX
SIGN ORDINANCE
(Adopted 3/13/12)
1. Purpose: Signs perform important functions that are essential for public safety and general welfare,
including communicating messages, providing information about goods and services, and orienting and
directing people. The purpose of the Milton Sign Ordinance is to:
a) Promote the public, health, welfare and safety by regulating existing and proposed outdoor
advertising and outdoor signs of all types;
b) Protect property values;
c) Enhance and protect the physical appearance of the Town of Milton;
d) Preserve the Town’s scenic and natural beauty;
e) Prevent hazards to vehicular and pedestrian traffic safety by controlling the number, location,
and placement of signs;
f) Provide easy recognition and legibility of permitted signs and uses and promote visual order
and clarity on streets;
g) Support business and community vitality through informing the public of available goods,
services, and activities; and
h) Provide the Planning Board with discretion and flexibility when reviewing sign permit
applications for businesses that serve the traveling public, national retail chains, high value
businesses and the like.
2. Sign permit required.
No sign shall be placed, erected, moved, replaced, or reconstructed without a permit unless specifically
exempted in this section. Such permit shall be issued by the Code Enforcement Officer provided the
sign meets all the requirements of this section. Applications for a sign permit shall be made to the Code
Enforcement Officer on the form provided by him and shall include a set of plans (to scale), showing
site location, sign size, colors, the design, type, and size of lettering, method of illumination, (if any),
and the type of materials to be used in construction and the required fee. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall record the plans in the CEO office prior to the issuance of the permit.
3. Allowed without a sign permit. The following signs are allowed in all zoning districts without a sign
permit:
a) One (1) temporary nonilluminated sign no greater than nine (9) square feet in area advertising
the sale, rent or lease of the premises.
b) Political signs as regulated by NH RSA 664.
c) Temporary nonilluminated signs pertaining to yard, garage, and similar special sales or events.
These signs shall only be displayed while such sale or special event is actively in progress.
70
d) Directional signs indicating entrance and exit driveways, parking regulations and signs deemed
essential to protect the public health, safety and welfare. Such signs shall be no larger than four
(4) square feet.
e) Temporary signs and decorations displayed as part of the celebration of holidays, or national,
state or local citywide events or festivals.
f) Temporary special promotional signs for public, institutional, cultural, or civic events occurring
within or relative to the Town of Milton.
g) Bulletin or announcement boards not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in total area on the
premises of schools, churches or other public facilities.
h) One (1) temporary sign not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet on a building or project under
construction identifying the architect, owner, and/or contractor.
i) One (1) directory sign of the principal occupants of a building may be affixed to the exterior
wall at each entrance to the building. Such directory shall not exceed one (1) square foot for
each occupant.
j) One (1) sign not exceeding two (2) square feet identifying the name and/or address of the
occupant.
k) One (1) temporary non-illuminated sign not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet advertising
the sale, rent, lease of an existing commercial or industrial use or land located in the Industrial
Commercial (IC) zone.
l) One (1) off premise directional signs indicating the general location of a business. Such signs
shall be no larger than four (4) square feet. One such sign per business is allowed.
4. Signs allowed only by permit. A permit shall be required for signs in the following zoning districts:
a) In the HDR zoning district, one (1) exterior affixed, hanging or freestanding sign not exceeding
four (4) square feet in area identifying a permitted use.
b) In the LDR zoning district one (1) exterior affixed, hanging, or freestanding sign not exceeding
thirty-two (32) square feet in area identifying a permitted use except that signs for home
occupations shall be limited to four (4) square feet in area.
c) In the CR and IC zoning districts, exterior affixed signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square
feet. For every 25 feet of additional setback, the square footage of the sign can be increased by
three (3) square feet. One (1) hanging sign on each frontage provided that such sign has no
more than two (2) faces and projects no more than eight (8) feet from the building face.
Hanging signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area.
d) Freestanding or ground signs subject to the following conditions:
1. Signs shall not exceed sixteen (16) feet in height nor obscure vision for traffic
movement.
2. The area of a sign area shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet.
71
3. One (1) freestanding sign allowed per lot.
e) A business in the CR and IC zoning districts shall be allowed either a one (1) affixed sign or one
(1) hanging sign.
5. Planning Board Review.
For businesses such as those serving the traveling public, national retail chains, high value businesses
and the like, the Planning Board shall have the authority to allow an increase in the square footage of
signs in the CR and IC zoning districts up to a maximum of 250 square feet and to make other
appropriate modifications regarding signage requirements. In making its determination, the Planning
Board shall consider the abutting land uses, the visual impact, the site location and the signage
requirements of the business given its location and size.
6. General Provisions
a) Two-faced signs shall be considered as a single unit, and only one surface shall be considered
in determining the area.
b) The material and construction of any sign shall be in accordance with the building code and
other Town requirements. All signs shall be maintained in a safe condition and, in good repair.
c) Except for directional signs, off-premise signs advertising a business are not allowed.
d) Internally illuminated, flashing signs and scrolling signs are not permitted.
e) Signs shall conform to all dimensional requirements of the Milton Zoning Ordinance.
7. Definitions
a. Internally illuminated sign: A sign that is lighted by a source concealed behind a translucent sign
panel.
b. Sign: Any device, fixture, placard, or structure that uses color, form, graphic, illumination, symbol,
or writing to advertise, announce the purpose of, or identify the purpose of a person or entity, or to
communicate information of any kind to the public.
c. Sign Area: The area of the smallest rectangle or circle within which the entire sign can fit and which
excludes structural supports which do not contribute through shape, color, or otherwise to the sign's
message. Any separate surface, board, frame or shape on or within which the sign is displayed shall be
included. The height of a sign shall be measured to the highest point of the sign, including any
structural or ornamental projections above the sign proper, from the average ground level above which
the sign is located.
d. Temporary signs: Signs of a temporary nature such as political posters, signs giving notice of a nonprofit
or charitable event or function, notice of a public or non-profit type of meeting, yard sales, a real
estate sign, construction sign identifying a project, a sign announcing a new business or a relocated
business provided the sign is less than eight (8) square feet. Temporary signs shall not be placed on
fences, trees, utility poles or the like or a place that will obstruct or impair the vision of traffic or create
a hazard or nuisance. Temporary signs shall be removed within ten (10) days of the event or function.
72
8. Violations
Any violation of this sign ordinance shall be subject to fines or penalties as indicated in Article IX
Penalties of the Milton Zoning Ordinance.
ARTICLE XXI
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS
(Adopted 3/14/18)
I. Authority. NH RSA 674:71-73, Accessory Dwelling Units
II. Purpose. In accordance with NH RSA 674:71-73 and 674:21, expand the mix of affordable
housing opportunities throughout the Town by permitting the creation of secondary dwelling
residences as an accessory use to existing single-family detached dwellings while maintaining
the visual and functional character of single-family residential neighborhoods for the following
reasons:
A. There is a growing need for more diverse affordable housing opportunities for the
citizens of New Hampshire.
B. Demographic trends are producing more households where adult children wish to give
care and support to parents in a semi-independent living arrangement.
C. Elderly and disabled citizens need independent living space for caregivers.
D. There are many important societal benefits associated with the creation of accessory
dwelling residences, including:
1. Increasing the supply of affordable housing without the need for more
infrastructure or further land development.
2. Benefits for aging homeowners, single parents, recent college graduates who are
saddled with significant student loan debt, caregivers, and disabled persons.
3. Integrating affordable housing into the community with minimal negative
impact.
4. Providing elderly citizens with the opportunity to live in a supportive family
environment with both independence and dignity.
III. Definitions.
A. “Accessory dwelling unit (ADU)” means a subordinate dwelling residence with
complete and independent living facilities on the same lot attached to or contained
within an existing single-family dwelling. The Town shall not restrict the area of the
ADU to less than 750 sq. ft. as per NH RSA 674:72 VII. Every accessory dwelling
residence shall be deemed a residence of workforce housing for purposes of satisfying
the municipality’s obligation under RSA 674:59.
73
B. “Rental occupancy” means non-ownership including long term lease ownership.
IV. Designation.
A. One accessory dwelling unit shall be permitted only on parcels which meet the
following conditions:
1. Is a legally created lot of record;
2. Contains one existing single-family detached dwelling which is a conforming
use;
3. Contains no other accessory dwelling residence(s).
V. Procedure.
A. Each accessory dwelling unit shall require compliance with zoning, an issued building
permit and an occupancy permit and meet the standards contained in the section below.
VI. Standards.
A. New construction for an accessory dwelling unit shall comply with all the development
standards for a single-family detached dwelling including, but not limited to, setbacks,
height limits and lot coverage (for lots in the Comprehensive Shoreland Protection
Zone) and shall not increase any nonconforming aspect of any existing structure unless
otherwise addressed by this chapter.
B. The following standards shall also apply:
1. The maximum size of an ADU shall not exceed 1,000 sq. ft. area.
2. Both the ADU and the primary residence shall comply with the state Building
Code and Fire Code regulations for construction, minimum living space, fire
exits and smoke alarms.
3. An interior door shall be provided between the principal dwelling unit and
accessory dwelling unit. There is no requirement for said interior door to remain
unlocked.
4. The architecture of the ADU shall match that of the primary residence.
5. One off-street parking space shall be provided in addition to those required for
the primary residence for a minimum total of three.
6. There shall be no exterior stairway leading to the ADU on the front of the house.
7. There shall be no more than two bedrooms in an ADU.
8. The applicant shall make adequate provisions for water supply and sewage
disposal in accordance with NH RSA 485-A: 38, however, separate utility
connections are not required by the Town.
9. Any additions to the ADU shall meet the requirements of this chapter.
74
C. An accessory dwelling unit which conforms to the standards in this chapter shall not be
considered to exceed the allowable density for the lot upon which it is located and shall
be considered a residential use which is consistent with the master plan and zoning
designation for the lot.
VII. Additional requirements.
A. Accessory dwelling units shall be subject to the following requirements:
1. Sale or ownership of such unit separate from the primary residence is prohibited.
2. The occupant of either the ADU or the primary residence shall be the owner of
the entire property. Only one unit shall be used for rental occupancy.
3. No more than four persons shall occupy an ADU.
4. NH DES requirements for septic loading shall be met.
75
RESERVED FOR ZONING MAP
SUBDIVISION
REGULATIONS
TOWN OF MILTON, NEW HAMPSHIRE
NEWLY ADOPTED:
LAST REVISED:
November 19, 2019
DECEMBER 14, 2010
TOWN OF MILTON
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE i
SECTION TITLE PAGE
SECTION 1 AUTHORITY 1
SECTION 2 PURPOSE 1
SECTION 3 COMPLIANCE 2
SECTION 4 TITLE 2
SECTION 5 DEFINITIONS 2
SECTION 6 JURISDICTION 5
6.1 Subdivision 5
6.2 Exceptions 5
6.3 Condominium Conversion 5
SECTION 7 PLANNING BOARD PROCEDURES 6
7.1.0 Purpose 6
7.1.1 Applicability & Enforcement 6
7.2,0 Fees 6
7.3.0 Discussion/Application Requirements 6
7.3.1 Conceptual Review 6
7.4.0 Procedure When Approvals from ZBA Are Required and
Board of Selectmen Approval for Extension of Utilities 8
7.5.0 Determination of Potential for Regional Impact 8
7.6.0 Notice for Hearings and Meetings and Continuances 9
7.7.0 Review for Complete Application 10
7.8.0 Action by the Board 13
7.9.0 Notice of Action on the Plat 13
7.10.0 Performance Security Agreement 14
7.11.0 Recording of Final Plat 15
7.12.0 Time to Record Plat and Extensions 15
7.13.0 Phased Development 16
7.14.0 Permission to Visit Property 18
7.15.0 Waiver of Regulations 19
SECTION 8 MINOR LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS OR BOUNDARY LINE
AGREEMENTS 19
8.1 Procedure for Review 19
8.2 Submission Requirements 20
TOWN OF MILTON
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE ii
SECTION
SECTION 9
TITLE
MINOR SUBDIVISION
PAGE
21
9.1 Procedure for Review 21
9.2 Expansion of Procedures 21
9.3 Standards 21
9.4 Restriction of Further Subdivision 21
9.5 Submission Requirements 22
SECTION 10 MAJOR SUBDIVISION 24
10.1 General Standards 24
10.2 Design Review of a Preliminary Layout 24
10.3 Final Plat Review 26
10.4 Submission Requirements 26
SECTION 11 Reserved for Future Use 32
SECTION 12 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 32
12.1 Character of Land 32
12.2 Open Space and Recreation Area 33
12.3 Statement as to Impact of Subdivision and
Determination of Premature or Scattered 35
12.4 Impact Fees 36
12.5 Off-Site Improvements 36
12.6 Community Water Supply & Sewage Disposal 37
12.7 Operation & Maintenance of Common Facilities 37
12.8 Owners Association 37
SECTION 13 DESIGN STANDARDS 37
13.1 Minimum Standards 37
13.2 Specifications for Required Improvements 38
13.3 Lot Layout, Drainage and Driveways 38
13.4 Lots/Lot Area/On-Site Septic System Requirements 38
13.5 Streets 38
13.6 Street Lighting 40
13.7 Street Signs 41
13.8 Utilities 41
13.9 Storm Drainage 42
13.10 Excavation & Grading 43
13.11 Site Preservation 43
TOWN OF MILTON
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE iii
SECTION TITLE PAGE
SECTION 13 DESIGN STANDARDS (continued)
13.12 Fire Protection 45
13.13 Pedestrian Walks & Bicycle Paths 46
13.14 Development of Open Space 46
13.15 Parks and Playgrounds 46
13.16 Special Flood Hazard Areas 46
13.17 Reserve Strips 47
13.18 Modifications or Waivers of Design Standards 47
SECTION 14 COMPLETION OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND
BONDING 46
14.1 Completion of Improvements 46
14.2 Inspection of Improvements, Procedure & Fees 49
14.3 Maintenance of Street and Utility Improvements 49
14.4 Issuance of Building Permits and Certificates of Occupancy 49
14.5 Performance Security Agreement 50
SECTION 15 AMENDMENTS 51
SECTION 16 AUTHORITY, ADOPTION & AMENDMENT 51
SECTION 17 SEVERABILITY 51
SECTION 18 REPEAL 51
SECTION 19 ADOPTION AND APPLICATION 51
19.1 Appeal to Superior Court 52
19.2 Appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment 52
APPENDIX A ROAD DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION A-1
APPENDIX B SPECIAL CONDITIONS B-1
APPENDIX C EXHIBITS i, ii, iii C-1
1
SECTION 1 – AUTHORITY
The Milton Planning Board adopted these Subdivision Regulations pursuant to the authority
contained in the New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated, Title LXIV, including but not limited
to, 674:35 (Power to Regulate Subdivisions), 674:36 (Subdivision Regulations), and 676:4
(Boards' Procedures on Plats), to govern the subdivision of land in the Town of Milton. Pursuant
to the authority vested in the Milton Planning Board by the voters of the Town of Milton on
______ ; the Milton Planning Board adopted and has periodically amended these Subdivision
Regulations, pursuant to RSA 675:6 for the purpose stated herein. The Planning Board may
periodically amend these Subdivision Regulations pursuant to RSA 675:6. In each instance
where the Planning Board, after conducting a public hearing in accordance the provisions of RSA
675:7, votes to amend these Subdivision Regulations, the Planning Board shall cause copies of
the amended Regulations to be filed with the Milton Town Clerk and the New Hampshire Office
of Energy and Planning pursuant to RSA’s 675:8 and 675:9 respectively.
SECTION 2 – PURPOSE
These Regulations are adopted for the following purposes:
1. To protect and provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of the
Town.
2. To guide the future growth and development of the Town in accordance with the
Master Plan.
3. To provide for adequate light, air and privacy, to secure safety from fire, flood and
other danger, and to prevent overcrowding of the land and undue congestion of
population.
4. To protect the character and social and economic stability of all parts of the Town
and to encourage the orderly and beneficial development of all parts of the Town.
5. To protect and conserve the value of land throughout the Town and the value of
buildings and improvements upon the land and to minimize the conflicts among
the uses of land and buildings.
6. To guide public and private policy and action in order to provide adequate and
efficient transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks, playgrounds, recreation
and other public requirements and facilities.
7. To provide the most beneficial relationship between the uses of land and buildings
and the circulation of traffic throughout the Town, having particular regard to the
avoidance of congestion in the streets and highways, and the pedestrian traffic
movements appropriate to the various uses of land and buildings and to provide
for the proper location and width of streets and building lots.
8. To establish reasonable standards of design and procedure for subdivisions, and
to further orderly layout and use of land; and to ensure proper legal descriptions
and the documenting of subdivided land.
9. To ensure that public facilities are available and will have sufficient capacity to
serve the proposed subdivision.
2
10. To prevent the pollution of air, streams and ponds; to assure the adequacy of
drainage facilities; to safeguard the water tables; and to encourage the wise use
and management of resources throughout the Town in order to preserve the
integrity, stability, and beauty of the community and the value of land.
11. To preserve the natural beauty and topography of the Town and to ensure
appropriate development regarding these natural features.
12. To provide for open spaces through the most efficient design and layout of the land,
including the use of average density in providing for minimum width and area of
lots, while preserving the density of land as established in the Zoning Ordinance of
the Town.
SECTION 3 – COMPLIANCE
No subdivision plans shall be approved unless such plan complies with all applicable local
ordinances, regulations, and state and federal requirements, including but not limited to the
Zoning Ordinance, the Building Code, Site Plan Review Regulations, and Ordinance xx, "Public
Utilities Ordinance of the Town of Milton, New Hampshire."
SECTION 4 – TITLE
These Regulations shall be known and cited as MILTON SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS.
SECTION 5 – DEFINITIONS
In general, for purposes of these Subdivision Regulations, the meaning of terms used herein shall
be as defined in the Milton Zoning Ordinance and the Milton Site Plan Review Regulations, unless
a different definition appears in this Section.
Abutter. Any person whose property is in New Hampshire and adjoins or is directly across the
street or stream from the land under consideration by the local land use board or as otherwise
defined in RSA 672:3.
Applicant. The owner of record of land to be subdivided or the agent of any such owner.
Board. The Planning Board of the Town of Milton.
Boundary Line Agreement. An agreement made in court between two landowners as to the
location of a common boundary which is shown on a plan to be recorded in the Registry of
Deeds.
Building Envelope. The area of a lot in which a building or structure is proposed to be placed. A
Building Envelope may be larger than the actual footprint of a building to allow for choice in
placement on a lot.
Certified Soil Scientist. A person qualified in soil classification and mapping who is certified
by the State of New Hampshire Board of Natural Scientists.
Certified Wetland Scientist. A person qualified in wetlands classification and mapping who is
certified by the State of New Hampshire Board of Natural Scientists.
Engineer. The On-call Engineer for the Planning Board.
Cul-de-sac. A street with only one vehicular access which terminates in a turnaround area,
3
typically of a circular or “T” shape (hammerhead).
Driveway. An area used, or modified for use, as a site for vehicular access onto a Class IV, V, or
VI public highway from any land which is not a public highway, or for access onto a private
right-of-way which has been dedicated as a street by being shown on a subdivision plat
approved by the Planning Board and recorded with the Strafford County Registry of Deeds. A
driveway includes any entrance, exit, or approach, all areas or structures within the limits of
the highway right-of-way or dedicated right-of-way which are used or modified for driveway
purposes, and any portions of the abutting non-highway land whose use for driveway purposes
may affect the function or safety of the public highway or right-of-way, or of the driveway areas
within the said highway or right-of-way. The term includes all driveways, whether or not
established under a permit issued by the Town, whether established before or after the
adoption of the Town’s Driveway regulations, and whether established before or after the
highway became a public highway. The Planning Board may approve common driveways
serving no more than three adjacent lots, and in such cases any private easement area
created for purposes of the common driveway shall be deemed a private 'right-of-way' for street
purposes under these regulations.
Easement. A right of use which one party or the public may have in the land of another, normally,
but not limited to, a strip of land used or intended to be used for a water or wastewater line,
other utility, driveway or sidewalk, or for conservation purposes.
Lot. A single unit or parcel of land in single entity ownership throughout, with ascertainable
boundaries, identified by Tax Map and Lot number, and undivided by a street.
Maintenance Security Agreement. A secured agreement from the Applicant to the Town for
the purpose of securing the Applicant's obligation to remedy any defect in any improvement
to be transferred to the Town. In addition, a Maintenance Security Agreement shall secure the
Applicant's obligation to maintain all streets, sidewalks, and/or utilities in the subdivision until
such streets, sidewalks, and/or utilities are accepted by the Town. A Maintenance Security
Agreement, when required, shall be secured by the same types of security as are acceptable
for a Performance Security Agreement under Section 14.6 of these Regulations.
Major Subdivision. Any division of land which results in four (4) or more lots, plats, building sites,
or other divisions of land, or which requires new streets, utilities, or public improvements. (See
also the definition of “Subdivision” below)
Minor Lot Line Adjustments. An exchange or annexation of land or moving of the common
boundary(ies) between two or more abutting lots where no new lots are created.
Minor Subdivision. Any division of land which results in no more than three (3) lots, plats,
building sites, or other divisions of land, each fronting on an existing Class IV or V highway,
and not involving any new public or private street or extension of municipal facilities nor the
creation of any public improvements. (See also the definition of “Subdivision” below)
4
Performance Security Agreement. A secured agreement from the Applicant to the Town for
the purpose of securing to the Town the Applicant’s obligation for actual construction and
installation of all improvements required by the Board as a condition of approval of the Final
Plat.
Town Planner. The Consultant Planner for the Town of Milton, or his or her designee.
Land Use Office. The Land Use Office is the Administrative Office for the Planning Board and is
the contact point for the Land Use Secretary, Town Planner and Code Enforcement Officer.
Plat. The map or plan on which the subdivision, minor lot line adjustment, or boundary line
agreement is shown.
Right-of-Way. A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street. The usage of the
term "right-of-way" for land platting purposes in these Regulations shall mean that every rightof-
way hereafter established and shown on a recorded plat is to be separate and distinct from
the lots and parcels adjoining such right-of-way and not be included within the dimensions or
areas of such other lots or parcels. Right-of-way as herein described does not include
Driveway.
Roadway. The traveled surface of a road including the shoulders on each side or from curb face
to curb face.
Slope. The change in elevation expressed as a percentage. Slope is calculated by dividing the
vertical change in elevation (rise) over a given horizontal distance (run) multiplied by 100
percent.
Soil Type. As defined in the most current USDA Natural Resource Conservation Service County
Soil Maps.
Street. A public right-of-way which the Town or State has the duty to maintain regularly, including
a Class IV or V highway, or a public or private right-of-way shown on a subdivision plat approved
by the Planning Board and recorded with the Strafford County Registry of Deeds, which provides
the required frontage and the principal means of access to abutting property(ies).
Subdivision. The definition of this term shall be as provided in RSA 672:14, as set forth below:
A. "Subdivision" means the division of the lot, tract, or parcel of land into two (2) or more
lots, plats, sites, or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, of sale, rent, lease, condominium conveyance or building development. It
includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of
subdividing or to the land or territory subdivided.
B. The division of a parcel of land held in common and subsequently divided into parts
among the several owners shall be deemed a subdivision under this title.
C. The grant of an easement in gross to a public utility for the purpose of placing and
maintaining overhead and underground facilities necessary for its transmission or
distribution network such as poles, wires, cable, conduit, manholes, repeaters and
5
supporting apparatus, including any unstaffed structure which is less than 500 square
feet area, shall not be construed as a subdivision under this title, and shall not be
deemed to create any new division of land for any other purpose.
D. The rent, lease, development, or grant of an easement to a person for the purpose of
placing and maintaining a wireless communications facility shall not be construed as
a subdivision under this title and shall not be deemed to create any new division of
land for any other purpose. For purposes of this paragraph, "wireless communications
facilities'' means any towers, poles, antennas, or other unstaffed structure of less than
500 square feet area intended for use in connection with licensed transmission or
receipt of radio or television signals, or any other licensed spectrum- based
transmissions or receptions. This paragraph shall not be deemed to affect any other
local zoning, site plan, or regulatory authority over wireless communications facilities.
Subdivision Agreement-Notice of Decision. The agreement signed by the Planning Board
Chair or designee and the Applicant containing the decision of the Board and setting forth the
obligations of the Applicant.
SECTION 6 – JURISDICTION
6.1 Subdivision.
These Regulations shall apply to the subdivision of land within the boundaries of the Town
of Milton. The definition of a subdivision shall be as provided in RSA 672:14 and is
intended to give the Planning Board the most comprehensive jurisdiction as permitted
under state law.
The Board also has jurisdiction over Minor Lot Line Adjustments and Voluntary Lot
Mergers.
6.2 Exceptions
A. Subdivision review shall not be required for building development consisting of
more than one (1) building erected on a lot in single ownership in a non-residential
use, as Site Plan Review Regulations shall apply.
6.3 Condominium Conversion.
When land and existing buildings under single ownership are proposed to be converted
into a condominium form of ownership, and where no physical changes to the property are
proposed, subdivision approval shall be required, but the Planning Board's involvement
shall be limited to such review as it deems necessary to ensure that the underlying existing
use of the property will not be materially altered by the conversion. If the Board determines
that, due to the specific facts of the case, the effect of the conversion will be to materially
alter the nature or intensity of the use of the property, then full review under these
Regulations shall be required.
6
SECTION 7 – PLANNING BOARD PROCEDURES
7.1.0 Purpose
The purpose of this section is to set forth the procedure for Planning Board review and
action on applications for subdivision approval. The procedure is intended to facilitate the
orderly and expeditious processing of such applications. The more specific procedures for
the types of applications described in Sections 8, 9, and 10 of these Regulations shall be
in addition to the procedures set forth in this section.
7.1.1 Applicability and Enforcement
A. No subdivision of land shall occur, and no land in any subdivision shall be sold or
leased; and no street or utility construction within any subdivision shall
commence unless and until a subdivision plat, prepared in accordance with the
requirements of these Regulations, has been approved and a final plat has been
signed by the Chair of the Milton Planning Board and subsequently recorded at
the Registry of Deeds.
B. Pursuant to RSA 676:16 the Town of Milton may enjoin any transfer or sale of
any land located in a subdivision before a subdivision plat depicting that land has
been approved by the Milton Planning Board, signed by its Chair, and properly
recorded at the Strafford County Registry of Deeds pursuant to RSA 674:37.
C. In its enforcement of these Regulations, The Town of Milton has all the legal
rights and remedies afforded to a municipality under New Hampshire Law
including, but not limited to the provisions of RSA 676:15 through RSA 676:17-b.
7.2 Fees
The Planning Board has established, and from time to time may amend, a schedule of
fees, which is hereby attached to these Regulations and made a part hereof. Also see
Section 7.7.F of these Regulations, regarding additional review fees.
7.3.0 Discussion/Applications Requirements
Prior to submission of an application for subdivision review by the Planning Board, the
Applicant shall meet with the Town Planner to review initial compliance with all land use
regulations, zoning and state and federal requirements and to determine permit needs and
plan requirements. After this preliminary consultation and prior to formal submission, the
Applicant shall meet with the Technical Review Committee (TRC). The Planner shall
schedule a TRC meeting at the request of the applicant after plans have been developed to
at least 60 percent design stage. Said meeting(s) shall serve to assist the Applicant in
preparing a subdivision proposal that is technically conforming to the regulations contained
herein. The Technical Review Committee shall make no decisions regarding land use, as
their role is simply an advisory one to the Planning Board and applicant.
7.3.1 Conceptual Review
A. For any subdivision, the Applicant may request an informal review by the Board, to
be conducted in general terms, of the basic concept of the proposed subdivision.
7
The Applicant may end this conceptual review at any time. Public notice of the
conceptual review is not required, but such reviews shall only take place at a formal
meeting of the Board. Such conceptual review shall not bind either the Applicant
or the Board in any manner, and statements made by Board members shall not be
the basis for disqualifying said members or invalidating any action taken.
While a conceptual review is optional, it is strongly recommended, particularly for
Major Subdivisions, as it can help identify and resolve issues at an early stage and
save the Applicant the time and cost of changes later.
B. Not less than two weeks before the date of the scheduled conceptual review, the
Applicant shall provide the Board with a written project description, a written
statement addressing how the concept conforms with the Master Plan, and a
sketch map based on a United States Geological Survey Map, or similar map of
sufficient accuracy and quality, showing the following:
1. Existing boundary lines of the lot(s) under review;
2. General topography, to include a highlight of slopes in excess of 25%;
3. Prominent features of the site, including, but not limited to tree and
vegetation lines, watercourses, floodplains, and wetlands;
4. The conceptual location and size of proposed lots, building envelopes,
roadways, and open space areas, and;
5. Any other major issues or conceptual improvements which the Applicant
wishes to discuss with the Board.
C. The conceptual review shall be directed at review of the basic concept of the
proposal and suggestions which might be of assistance in resolving problems with
meeting requirements during Final Plat Review. The Board and the Applicant may
discuss proposals in conceptual form only and in general terms such as desirability
of types of development and proposals under the Master Plan.
1. Master Plan Review:
The conceptual plan shall be reviewed by the Planning Board by consulting
the Master Plan, its accompanying maps, diagrams, charts and
descriptions, and other appropriate documents, to determine if the area is
generally suitable for development and to analyze how well the proposed
subdivision meets the goals and objectives of the Town.
The Board shall consult the future land use map and any plans for existing
or future Town roads, utilities, and facilities, and open space to determine
how well the proposed subdivision conforms with the Plan’s pattern of
growth.
The Board shall focus on the characteristics of the site of the proposed
subdivision and its relationship to the surrounding area to determine how
well the proposed subdivision fits into both the natural and man-made
environments. The Board, in its review of the conceptual plan, shall look for
any indication of areas of historical, cultural, or environmental importance
8
which should be considered. The Board may also advise whether a
proposed subdivision should be delayed until public services have been
extended or infrastructure upgraded as set forth in the Master Plan.
7.4 Procedure When Approvals from ZBA Are Required and Board of Selectmen
Approval for Extension of Utilities
A. When approvals from the Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA), including variances,
special exceptions, or any other approval are required by the Zoning Ordinance, the
Applicant shall obtain such ZBA approvals before any Minor Lot Line
Adjustment/Boundary Line Agreement application, Minor Subdivision application,
or Final Major Subdivision application shall be deemed complete by the Planning
Board. (An Applicant may submit requests for Conceptual Review and Design
Review of a Preliminary Major Subdivision before receiving ZBA approval.) Any
conditions imposed by the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall not be diminished by
any requirements by the Planning Board under these Regulations. The condition
which imposes the greater restriction or higher standards shall be controlling.
Any Minor Lot Line Adjustment/Boundary Line Agreement application, Minor
Subdivision application, or Final Major Subdivision application submitted prior to
submission for necessary ZBA approvals shall not be accepted by the Planning
Office. The determination of whether a ZBA approval is required shall be made by
the Zoning Official, whose decision may be appealed to the ZBA pursuant to the
Milton Zoning Ordinance.
B. When approvals are required under applicable Town or Village District Ordinances
from the Board of Selectmen or Water Commissioners for the extension of or
connection to the existing Village water system and/or Town wastewater system,
such approvals shall be obtained before an application for Final Major Subdivision
Review shall be deemed complete by the Planning Board. Any Final Major
Subdivision application submitted prior to requesting such approval shall not be
accepted by the Land Use Office.
7.5 Determination of Potential for Regional Impact
Upon receipt of an application for development, the Board shall review the application
promptly and determine whether the development, if approved, reasonably could be
construed as having the potential for regional impact, pursuant to RSA 36:54, et seq.
Doubt concerning regional impact shall be resolved in a determination that the
development has the potential for regional impact.
A development of regional impact means any proposal, which, in the determination of the
Board, could reasonably be expected to affect a neighboring municipality because of
factors such as, but not limited to, the following:
A. The relative number of dwelling units as compared to existing stock. Any proposal
that involves 50 or more residential lots or units shall be deemed to have the
potential for regional impact;
B. The relative size of the development. Any proposal that involves 50,000 square
feet or more of new non-residential gross floor area shall be deemed to have the
9
potential for regional impact;
C. The proximity of the development to the borders of a neighboring community.
D. High intensity traffic impact on regional transportation networks;
E. The anticipated emission of excessive light, noise, smoke, odors, or particulates;
F. The proximity of the development to aquifers or surface water, which transcend
municipal boundaries.
G. The impact on shared facilities, such as schools and solid waste disposal
facilities.
The Board may, in its discretion, determine that any project has the potential for regional
impact, whether the project meets or exceeds the criteria listed above or not, and shall
identify the affected municipality(ies).
7.6 Notice for Hearings and Meetings and Continuances
Whenever notice is required, the Board shall give notice as follows:
A. The notice shall include a general description of the proposed Subdivision,
Minor Lot Line Adjustment, or Boundary Line Agreement that is the subject of
the application; shall identify the Applicant and the location of the subdivision;
and the day, time, and place of the public hearing or public meeting.
B. Notice shall be sent by verified mail to the Owner; Applicant, if different from Owner;
Abutters; Holders of conservation, preservation, or agricultural preservation
restrictions (as defined under RSA 477:45) on the subject property; the holders of
easements, rights-of-way, and other restrictions; and every engineer, architect,
land surveyor, or soil or wetlands scientist whose seal appears on any plan
submitted to the Board; and any other persons required by RSA 676:4, I(d). The
names and mailing addresses shall be furnished by the Applicant as both a list
and as mailing labels.
C. Notice shall be mailed at least 10 days prior to the public hearing or public meeting.
For the purpose of these Regulations, in counting days, the day on which the Notice
is given, and the day of the public hearing or public meeting shall be excluded.
D. Notice to the general public shall be given by one publication in a local newspaper
of general circulation at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing or public
meeting.
E. The applicant shall erect a sign along each principal frontage of the lot or project
site, as determined by the Land Use Office, providing notice of the impending
action. Such sign shall be of a design, size, and color approved by the Land Use
Office in order to maximize visibility of the sign and to call attention to its purpose.
At a minimum, the sign shall include the applicant’s name, the project type, the
project location, and the time, date, and location of the public hearing on such
actions, and instructions for contacting the Land Use Office for further information
on the action. Any sign required by this section shall be erected at least 10 days
10
prior to the hearing on such matter and shall be kept in good repair by the applicant
(as determined by the Land Use Office) until the date and time of the last hearing
notified by the sign. The lack of proper signage shall not be deemed to be
insufficient notice of hearing unless the Board finds, based on a recommendation
by the Land Use Office, that the applicant has not made a good faith effort to keep
the required sign(s) posted and in good repair, in which case the Board may, at its
discretion, continue the hearing to a later meeting to permit time for additional
notice by such reasonable means as the Board may specify.
As provided by law, any public meeting or public hearing for which Notice was required and
provided may be continued without additional Notice. The Board shall announce at the
prior meeting or hearing that such meeting or hearing shall be continued to a fixed day,
time, and place. For a continuance, the records of the Board must contain a statement
that such announcement was made and include also the day, time, and place when the
continued meeting/hearing is to be held.
7.7 Review for Complete Application
All required application materials shall be submitted as a single inclusive package,
including any appropriate waiver requests as permitted by these Regulations. Submission
of a complete application package ensures that the review process by the Town is as
efficient and effective as possible.Applications shall contain sufficient information to
enable the Town Staff and the Planning Board to evaluate the application for compliance
with the Zoning Ordinance, the Planning Board’s Regulations, and other applicable Town
Ordinances for the Planning Board to make an informed decision.
A. All applications submitted pursuant to these Regulations shall include the
following required information:
1. A properly completed and signed application form.
2. The appropriate fees as established by the Board’s fee schedule.
3. A written project description.
4. A list of the name(s) and address(es) of all persons to be notified by
verified mail in accordance with RSA 676:4, I(d), including the following:
a. The Applicant(s);
b. The Owner(s) of record of the subject property(ies);
c. The Owners of abutting properties;
d. Every surveyor, engineer, architect, soil scientist, or wetlands
scientist whose professional seal appears on any plan or document
submitted to the Board.
e. All persons holding conservation, preservation, or agricultural
preservation restrictions (as defined under RSA 477:45) on the
11
subject property. (NOTE: When there are no such restrictions on the
subject property, the Applicant shall provide a definitive statement
to that effect.)
f. The holders of any easements, rights-of-way, or other restrictions on
or over the subject property. (NOTE: When there are no such
easements, rights-of-way, or other restrictions on the subject
property, the Applicant shall provide a definitive statement to that
effect.)
In addition to the items listed above, a complete application shall address or consist of
the documents and information required by these Regulations depending upon the
type of application (for example, Section 8.2 for a Minor Lot Line Adjustment or
Boundary Line Agreement, Section 9.5 for a Minor Subdivision, or Section 10.4 for a
Major Subdivision).
B. For submission requirements which the Applicant wishes the Board to waive, the
Applicant shall provide waiver requests in accordance with Section 7.15 of these
Regulations in lieu of providing the information or documents.
The Applicant shall submit a completed checklist form, provided by the Land Use
Office, indicating that all information has been submitted and any appropriate
waivers have been requested.
C. An application for Subdivision review shall be filed with the Land Use Office no later
than 12 Noon twenty-three (23) days prior to the hearing date (or the following
business day if the office is closed) on forms designated by the Land Use Office.
The Applicant shall pay in advance, all applicable fees, including the costs of notice
to abutters. Failure to pay such fees shall render the application incomplete.
The purpose of the above filing deadline is to provide adequate time for Staff review
under Paragraphs D and E below. Submission of any altered, additional, or
substitute application materials required by these Regulations, subsequent to the
filing deadline set forth in this paragraph, other than as directed by Staff, shall
cause the application to be deemed untimely filed, and such application shall not
be heard until a subsequent meeting.
D. Review by the Land Use Office:
The Land Use Clerk & Town Planner shall review the application for completeness
pursuant to the requirements of these Regulations. If the Town Planner finds that
the application is complete or lacks only those items or documents for which waiver
requests have been submitted, then the Town Planner shall make a preliminary
determination of whether the waiver requests meet the standards of Section
7.15 of these Regulations, and if so, shall recommend to the Board acceptance of
the application for review.
If the Land Use Office finds that the application is not complete or that one or more
of the waiver requests do not meet the standards of Section 7.15, the Office shall
so advise the Applicant, who can elect to complete the missing submission
12
requirements. Missing submission requirements, including any necessary waiver
requests, shall be delivered to the Land Use Office no later than 12 Noon fifteen
(15) days prior to the hearing date (or the following business day if the office is
closed). Submission of additional or revised materials by this date is necessary to
ensure that the Staff have adequate time to review application materials and to
prepare a staff/TRC report, as needed, for each application listed on the Board’s
agenda.
If the Applicant elects not to complete the missing requirements or fails to deliver
all missing submission requirements prior to the deadline as described above, the
Land Use Office shall recommend that the Board deem the application incomplete.
Prior to acting on the recommendation, the Board shall give the Applicant a
reasonable opportunity to be heard on the limited issue of completeness.
E. Review by the Planning Board
The Board shall, at its next regular meeting or within 30 days following receipt of
an application, determine if the submitted application is complete according to its
Regulations and shall vote upon its acceptance. Only applications accepted by the
Board as sufficiently complete to invoke jurisdiction shall be reviewed at a public
hearing.
When an application is submitted to the Board for acceptance as a completed
application sufficient to invoke jurisdiction, public notice shall be sent in
accordance with Section 7.6 of these Regulations. The notice may provide that, if
the application is accepted as complete, the public hearing on the application may
commence at the same meeting. If the Board deems the application incomplete,
the public hearing for the application shall be cancelled.
F. Additional Fees:
The Board shall have the right to require that the Applicant pay necessary and
reasonable fees, in addition to the fees described in Section 7.2 above, sufficient
to cover the Town’s expenses for the costs of investigative studies, review of
documents, extraordinary or unusual legal expenses, and other matters that may
be required by particular applications.
Before imposing such additional fees upon an Applicant, the Board shall determine
what special investigative studies, review of documents, extraordinary or unusual
legal expenses, or other matters are required for the application. The Board, by
motion, shall determine the necessity of the additional review and shall provide the
Applicant with an estimated cost for such additional review. The Board shall require
the Applicant to pay the amount of estimated fees to the Town in advance. Failure
to pay the additional review fee shall result in disapproval of the application for
lack of adequate information. If the estimate of the additional fees is less than the
actual cost, then the Board shall send the Applicant a description and the reasons
for the additional cost. The Applicant shall then pay the total actual costs. If the
estimate of the additional fees is greater than the actual cost, the difference shall
be refunded to the Applicant.
If it is necessary for the Town to take legal action against an Applicant to collect
unpaid fees, the Town shall be entitled to an award of reasonable attorney’s fees
incurred in the collection of the unpaid amount.
13
7.8 Action by the Board:
Upon determination by the Planning Board that a submitted final Application is complete
according to the Subdivision Regulations, the Planning Board shall begin formal
consideration and shall act to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove within 65
calendar days of the date of such determination, subject to extension by request of the
Board to the Board of Selectmen for an extension not to exceed an additional 90 calendar
days, or waiver by the Applicant, in writing, and consent to such extension as may be
mutually agreeable. RSA 676:4,I(f).
Upon failure of the Board to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the application
within the 65-day period, the Board of Selectmen shall, upon request of the Applicant,
immediately issue an order directing the Board to act on the application within 30 calendar
days of the date of the order.
If the Board does not act on the application within that 30-day time period, then within 40
calendar days of the issuance of the order, the Board of Selectmen shall certify on the
Applicant's application that the plat is approved pursuant to RSA 676:4, I(c), unless within
those 40 calendar days the Board of Selectmen has identified, in writing, some specific
subdivision regulation or zoning or other ordinance provision with which the application
does not comply. The certification by the Board of Selectmen pursuant to RSA 676:4,I(c)
shall constitute final approval for all purposes, including filing and recording under RSA
674:37 and 676:18, and court review under RSA 677:15.
7.9 Notice of Action on the Plat:
For the purposes of these Regulations, the date of action by the Board is equivalent to the
date of the Board’s vote for approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval of the
Subdivision plat.
The Board shall notify the Applicant, in writing, by means of a Notice of Decision, sent by
certified mail, of its actions on the Plat. The Notice of Decision shall be derived from the
final approved minutes of the Board and shall be sent to the Applicant within 10 days of
the minutes receiving final acceptance. In case of disapproval, the Board shall clearly set
forth in the Notice of Decision the reasons for disapproval, with specific reference to
standards contained in these Regulations, which shall become part of the records of the
Board.
A. In case of approval, the Notice of Decision shall set forth the
1. description of the approved subdivision plan, minor lot line adjustment, or
boundary line agreement, indicating title, date of the plan and the last
revision date, project number, and preparer of the plan;
2. description of all specific conditions required by the Board, which are in
addition to the general requirements of these Regulations, and the
requirement of substantial conformity with the specifications of the
approved plan;
3. description of any modifications or waivers granted by the Board
14
pursuant to Section 7.15 of these Regulations;
4. description of any requirements for off-site improvements and impact
fees, as provided in Section 12.4 and 12.5;
5. description of land, if any, to be dedicated for widening existing streets
and/or providing sidewalks;
6. All agreements, and/or conditions subsequent if any, between the
Applicant and the Board concerning matters not required by these
Regulations, but to be performed by the Applicant;
7. In the case of conditional approvals, a designation of which conditions, if
any, must be met prior to the approval becoming final (conditions
precedent) and whether a public hearing shall be required under RSA
676:4, I(i) to determine if the condition(s) have been met;
8. A reminder of the time limits set forth in Section 7.12 of these Regulations,
and where appropriate, any additional time parameters, such as deadlines
within which particular conditions must be fulfilled, the threshold levels of
work which shall constitute “Active and Substantial Development or
Building” or “Substantial Completion” as set forth in Section 14.1.B of
these Regulations for purposes of RSA 674:39, or a phased development
timetable pursuant to Section 7.13 of these Regulations.
9. Any other provisions deemed necessary by the Board.
B. For Major Subdivisions, the Notice of Decision shall, unless waived by the Board
pursuant to Section 7.15 of these Regulations, include the requirement that the
Applicant sign a Subdivision Agreement, prepared by the Land Use Office,
incorporating the terms and conditions of the Notice of Decision as well as other
provisions as follows:
1. A requirement that all streets, regardless of whether such streets are to be
dedicated and accepted by the Town shall be constructed in accordance
with applicable requirements of the Town.
2. A requirement that all water lines and wastewater lines, regardless of
whether such water and wastewater lines are to be dedicated and accepted
by the Village District or Town, shall be constructed in accordance with
applicable requirements of the Village District or the Town.
3. A requirement that the Applicant shall include a statement in any contract
documents for the construction of required improvements that such
improvements must be built and constructed according to Village District or
Town requirements whether or not any of the improvements are intended
to be transferred to the Village District or Town for ownership and
maintenance.
4. A requirement, if applicable, that the Applicant shall pay to the Town an
amount equal to the reasonable cost of inspection of the required
improvements.
15
5. A statement that, in the event any of the improvements are to be
transferred to the Village District or Town for ownership and maintenance,
that the Applicant, shall be responsible for repairing all latent defects for a
period of eight (8) years from the date of Substantial Completion as set
forth in RSA 508:4-b. If the Applicant conveys or transfers the project, the
subsequent owner(s) shall be responsible for the obligations of the
Applicant for the remainder of the eight (8) year period, regardless of
whether such obligation is expressly assumed or not.
7.10 Performance Security Agreement:
In lieu of the completion of the improvements required by the Planning Board, in order to
enable the recording of the Final Plat prior to completion of such improvements, the Board
shall accept a Performance Security Agreement providing for and securing to the Town the
completion of the actual construction and installation of all such required improvements
and utilities. The Performance Security Agreement shall be in an amount and form
approved by the Town and in conformity with the requirements of RSA 674:36, III and
Section 14.6 of these Regulations. The Applicant shall be liable for the entire actual cost of
constructing and installing all improvements required by the Board regardless of the
amount of the Performance Security Agreement. The Applicant may request a public
hearing before the Board, with notice as provided in Section 7.6 of these Regulations to be
paid for by the Applicant, regarding any issue relating to the form and adequacy of the
security.
7.11 Recording of Final Plat:
When the required improvements have been completed in accordance with the Notice of
Decision, or upon acceptance of security for the construction and installation of such
required improvements (see Section 14), the Applicant shall present the Final Plat for
signature by the Chair of the Planning Board and recording in the Strafford County Registry
of Deeds.
The Applicant shall submit to the Board two (2) mylar copies of the approved Final Plat.
Sheet sizes shall be in accordance with the requirements of the Strafford County Registry
of Deeds. Space shall be reserved on the Plat for endorsement by the Chair or other person
designated by the Board. The Final Plat shall contain the following statement:
"The Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Milton and the Notice of Decision
are a part of the Plat, and approval of this Plat requires the completion of all
the requirements of the Notice of Decision and said Subdivision Regulations
excepting only any modification or waiver set forth in the Notice of Decision."
The Land Use Office shall cause one copy of the Final Plat and the Notice of Decision to
be recorded in the Strafford County Registry of Deeds with all necessary recording fees to
be paid by the Applicant. The Land Use Office shall deliver the second copy to the Assessing
Department for its records. All graphic material and presentations shall be on that surface
of the mylar Plat which is suitable for writing. The act of recording an approved subdivision
Plat shall not in itself constitute acceptance by the Town of any street, utility, or easement
shown thereon.
7.12 Time to Record Plat and Extensions:
16
A. No sale or transfer of any lots, plats, sites, or other divisions of land within the
subdivision may be entered into until the approved subdivision Plat has been
recorded in the Strafford County Registry of Deeds.
B. The Board's approval of a Final Plat shall be considered void unless all conditions
precedent have been met, and the Plat has been recorded in the Registry of Deeds,
within two (2) years from the date of the Notice of Decision; however the Planning
Board, for good cause, may specify in the original Notice of Decision some
alternative time limit for recording. The voiding of an approval under this paragraph
shall terminate the vesting of the application against changes in regulations, as set
forth in RSA 676:12, VI and RSA 674:39.
C. Notwithstanding paragraph B above, the Board may grant an extension of up to
two (2) additional years beyond the original expiration date. A request for such an
extension must be submitted by the Applicant to the Land Use Office prior to such
expiration date, and requests for extension of the subdivision approval received
after the expiration date will not be considered by the Board. An extension may be
granted only after a public hearing with notice as provided in Section 7.6.
D. In determining whether to grant such an extension, the Board shall consider the
totality of the circumstances, including the extent and complexity of the conditions
precedent, the extent of the progress made by the Applicant toward satisfying the
conditions-precedent and/or starting construction, and whether the need for more
time is attributable to unusual circumstances beyond the control of the Applicant,
rather than to the Applicant's neglect or failure to proceed with reasonable
promptness. The Board shall indicate in its minutes the reason(s) for its decision
on an extension request under this Section. The Board shall grant no more than
one extension for any Subdivision, unless it determines, based on legal advice, that
such extension is required in order to prevent a violation of constitutional rights.
E. For applications subject to both Site Plan and Subdivision review, expiration of
Board approvals shall occur as set forth in these Subdivision Regulations. For
approved phased developments, the deadlines for each phase, as stated in the
approved phasing schedule, shall be substituted for the two-year limitation period
set forth above. Any request for an extension of time for a particular phase, as
described in Section 7.13 of these Regulations, shall only apply to the particular
phase, and such extension shall not automatically apply to any later phases of the
development.
7.13 Phased Development
The Board may require, or an Applicant may request permission for, construction of the
proposed subdivision in phases. If the Board requires or permits phased development, the
review and approval procedure shall be as follows:
A. For purposes of these Regulations, “phased development” shall mean a project
which is approved to be constructed in phases over a total period of time which
may be in excess of the time limits set forth in Section 7.12 and 14.6 of these
Regulations or those in RSA 674:39. Phased development may also include a
project for which the Planning Board has imposed a phasing requirement in order
to mitigate the impact of a development on community facilities, services, or
utilities.
17
If the Board requires or permits phased development, the development shall be
B. reviewed and approved as a whole under these Regulations and shall be treated
as a whole for purposes of applying all development review standards, criteria and
submission requirements.
The Applicant shall submit with the application a proposed phasing schedule,
C. which, if approved by the Board, shall be included as part of any approval. The
phasing schedule shall include the following information for each phase:
1. A specification of all improvements, on-site or off-site, to be installed as
part of that phase;
2. A deadline for the posting of any required security for that phase;
3. A deadline for the completion of such improvements subsequent to the
posting of such security, and;
4. A date by which the Final Plat for that phase must be recorded to prevent
the approval for that phase from being considered void pursuant to Section
7.12 of these Regulations.
The phasing schedule may also specify threshold levels of work and time lines
which must be completed for the project, as a whole, or particular phase(s) of the
project, to be considered “vested” pursuant to RSA 674:39, and the New
Hampshire common law of vested rights.
The approval for a particular phase shall not be considered “final” under RSA
676:4,I(i), nor shall any plan of that phase be recorded in the Strafford County
Registry of Deeds, until the security for the improvements which are part of that
phase has been properly posted with the Town or until such required improvements
have been completed, inspected, and approved by the Town.
D. In determining whether to grant an applicant's request for phased development, or
to approve a proposed phasing schedule, the Board may consider the totality of
the circumstances, including but not limited to the following factors:
1. The extent to which review of the development in its totality is logical and
reasonable due to the degree to which the proposed phases are wellintegrated,
both as to their use and development scheme, and as to
common infrastructure and other improvements, by contrast with a series
of superficially-related projects which could just as effectively be reviewed
individually;
2. The degree to which the integration of the phases, as described above,
would make private investment in such improvements unlikely without the
predictability of a phased approval.
3. The extent to which phasing will benefit the Town by mitigating and making
more predictable the impacts of the complete development upon
community facilities, services, utilities and other Town goals as set forth in
the Master Plan.
18
4. The extent to which the proposed phasing schedule represents a realistic
timeline for active and substantial development progressing at a steady
pace, considering the type and complexity of the project as a whole, rather
than an attempt to maintain "vesting" during significant periods of nondevelopment;
5. The total length of time proposed, and the degree of unpredictability or
Board uncertainty involved, with respect to whether a later phase or phases
will continue to meet current regulations at the time of construction and
considering potential changed conditions which might occur in the
meantime within the neighborhood or the Town as a whole.
E. Prior to recording the Final Plat for each later phase, the applicant shall submit to
the Town Planner or Code Enforcement Officer a copy of the Final Plat. The Planner
or Code Officer shall then determine whether the development is in accordance
with the approved phasing schedule, and whether required security for that phase
has been provided to the Town.
If the development is proceeding in accordance with the approved phasing
schedule, the later phase(s) shall be presumed to be “vested” against changes in
Town land use ordinances and regulations, except as otherwise specified by the
Board as part of its approval. However, the Town Planner or Code Enforcement
Officer may determine that, due to specific circumstances, including but not limited
to non-compliance with applicable regulations or conditions of approval, a later
phase or phases should not be considered “vested” under RSA 674:39 or the New
Hampshire common law of vested rights. In such a case, the Town Planner or Code
Enforcement Officer may forward to the Planning Board a recommendation to
initiate proceedings, using the procedures of RSA 676:4-a as applicable, to revoke
approval of a phase or phases.
F. If the applicant anticipates being unable to meet any time deadline(s) set forth in
the approved phasing schedule with respect to any phase, he or she may apply to
the Planning Board for an extension of up to two (2) years for the particular phase,
pursuant to Section 7.12 of these Regulations. The request for an extension shall
be submitted to the Land Use Office prior to the expiration of the deadline(s)
involved.
If the applicant fails to meet any such deadline, or extension thereof, then the
approval of that phase and any subsequent phases shall be considered void, and
such phase(s) shall no longer be presumed “vested.” However, the applicant may
resubmit the application for such phase(s) to the Board for further review and reapproval
considering changes in ordinances, regulations, or other material
circumstances which have occurred in the Town since the original approval.
7.14 Permission to Visit Property
A. For the Town to effectively and efficiently review development applications, Town
Staff and members of the Planning Board must have the ability to enter a property
that is the subject of an application.
B. Submission of an application for Minor Subdivision or Design Review or Final Plat
Review of a Major Subdivision shall be deemed as the granting of permission for
Town Staff, Milton Planning Board members, and others attending the public
19
hearings, to enter onto the property for purposes of review, during orderly visits,
subject to reasonable notice. It shall be assumed that this permission is extended
until the Board has acted to formally approve or disapprove an application. If for
any reason an Applicant wishes to place some limitation upon such access, the
Applicant shall so inform the Land Use Office at the time of submission of the
development application.
C. The property owner retains all rights to withdraw permission to enter onto the
property at any time. However, such a withdrawal of permission prior to the
completion of the Subdivision Review process may result in the Board’s
disapproval of the application for lack of sufficient information.
7.15 Waiver of Regulations
Upon written request from the Applicant, the Planning Board may, at its discretion, waive
or modify any part of these Regulations, other than those regulations required by State
law. The basis for any such waiver or modification granted by the Board shall be recorded
in the minutes of the Board. The Board may only grant a waiver or modification of these
Regulations if the Board finds, by majority vote, that:
A. Strict conformity would pose an unnecessary hardship to the Applicant and
waiver would not be contrary to the spirit and intent of the regulations; or
B. Specific circumstances relative to the subdivision, or conditions of the land in such
subdivision, indicate that the waiver will properly carry out the spirit and intent of
the regulations.
All written requests for waiver or modifications of these Regulations shall address items A
and/or B above, depending on which criteria are being relied upon to justify the request.
For waivers from a submission requirement, when the Planning Board accepts an
application as sufficiently complete to invoke jurisdiction and commence review pursuant
to Section 7.7 of these Regulations, it makes a tentative finding that the above criteria
have been met. If, during its review, the Planning Board determines that the waived
information is necessary to complete its review, then the Applicant shall provide that
information.
SECTION 8 – MINOR LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS OR BOUNDARY LINE AGREEMENTS:
8.1 Procedure for Review
The following procedure shall apply to applications for Minor Lot Line Adjustments or
Boundary Line Agreements, which do not create buildable lots. Unless otherwise ordered
by the Board, an application for Minor Lot Line Adjustments or Boundary Line Agreements,
which do not create buildable lots, shall be considered and acted upon at a public meeting
without a public hearing.
A. Notice shall be provided in accordance with Section 7.6 of these Regulations.
20
B. The Board shall review the application and determine if the proposal is a Minor
Lot Line Adjustment or Boundary Line Agreement.
C. Any abutter or holder of conservation, preservation, or agricultural preservation
restrictions may be heard on the application upon request at the public meeting
when the matter is discussed by the Board. If deemed necessary, the Board may
continue its consideration to another date and time to allow further abutter
participation.
D. Upon approval of the application, the Applicant shall provide two (2) mylar copies
of the Final Plat to the Board for recording in accordance with Section 7.11 of these
Regulations.
8.2 Submission Requirements
A complete application for Minor Lot Line Adjustment or Boundary Line Agreement
approval shall include those items listed in Section 7.7 of these Regulations as well as the
following:
A. Paper copies of the proposed plat (the number to be determined by the Land Use
Office on an as-needed basis). Plans shall be submitted on sheets no larger than
24" x 36" and shall include the following information:
1. The name of the Town and County in which the subdivision is located, a
Locus map, north point, scale, date of the plat, and the date and description
of any revisions.
NOTE: The date on the plat at the time of the initial submission to the Town
for application review shall be included on all subsequent submissions to
the Town. Any subsequent change to the plat shall include a revision date
and description of the revision.
2. The names and mailing addresses of the Applicant(s); the Owner(s) of
record of the subject properties; the Owners of abutting properties,
including tax map and lot number references; and the Holders of any
easements, rights-of-way, or other restrictions, based on the current
records of the Assessor available at Town Hall, not more than 5 days before
the filing of the application.
3. The name and business address of the surveyor, including license number
and seal, and of every engineer, architect, soil scientist, or wetlands
scientist whose professional seal appears on any plan or document
submitted to the Board.
4. The zoning district(s) in which the subject lots are located, including
district boundaries if in more than one district.
5. The location of all existing structures on the subject lots.
6. A site location map showing the original boundaries of the subject lots
and adjacent lots.
21
7. The new surveyed property line(s) as a result of the Minor Lot Line
Adjustment or Boundary Line Agreement, including bearings and distances,
as determined by an actual field survey certified by a licensed land surveyor
and bearing the date of the completion of the survey. All dimensions shall
be shown in feet and decimals thereof. The areas of the altered lots shall
be shown in square feet and acres. Surveys shall utilize the NH State Plane
Coordinate system, unless prior approval to use an alternate coordinate
system is granted by the Land Use Office.
8. The plat shall be titled to include the names of the owners of all lots
altered by the Minor Lot Line Adjustment or Boundary Line Agreement.
9. A statement shall be placed on the plat as follows:
“This plan shows Minor Lot Line Adjustments / Boundary Line Agreements
and does not require the approval of the Milton Planning Board as a
subdivision.”
B. A digital copy of the plat (.PDF format) shall be provided depicting the information
required under Paragraph A above.
C. Any request(s) for waiver(s) or modification(s) pursuant to Section 7.15 of these
Regulations.
SECTION 9 – MINOR SUBDIVISION
9.1 Procedure for Review
The Minor Subdivision process requires the submission and review of a complete
application as set forth in Sections 7.7 and 9.5 of these Regulations. Review of the Minor
Subdivision shall follow the applicable procedures set forth in Section 7 of these
Regulations.
9.2 Expansion of Procedures
If, in the judgment of the Board, the subdivision, as presented, requires more extensive
review in order to assure the consistency of the development with the spirit and intent of
these regulations, or in order to more fully review and evaluate a particular type of potential
impact within the scope of these Regulations, then the Board shall require the subdivision
to be submitted and reviewed as a Major Subdivision.
9.3 Standards
All Minor Subdivisions shall conform to the applicable standards set forth in Sections 12
and 13 of these Regulations. In addition, the Minor Subdivision shall not adversely affect
any lot or lots which may be subject to future subdivision, nor any adjoining property.
9.4 Restriction on Further Subdivision
The following statement shall be placed on the Minor Subdivision plat:
22
“A parcel of land which has been reviewed and approved as part of a minor subdivision
shall not be eligible for further subdivision under the Minor Subdivision procedures for a
period of three (3) years from the date of the minor subdivision approval.”
9 . 5 Submission Requirements
A complete application for Minor Subdivision approval shall include the items listed in
Section 7.7 of these Regulations as well as the following:
A. Paper copies of the proposed plat (the number to be determined by the Land Use
Office on an as-needed basis.) Plans shall be submitted on sheets no larger than
24" x 36". Plan sets with multiple pages shall include sheets of uniform size and
be bound on the left edge. When more than three (3) sheets are required, an
additional cover sheet of the same size shall be attached including a table of
contents. The scale of the plans shall be appropriate to the size of the overall
development. All lettering shall be of a size and type that is legible.
Minor Subdivision plans shall include the following information:
1. The name of the Town and County in which the subdivision is located, a
Locus map, north point, scale, date of the plat, and the date and description
of any revisions. If a cover sheet is provided, the date of the plat and the
date(s) of any subsequent revisions shall be shown on the cover sheet.
NOTE: The date on the plat at the time of the initial submission to the Town
for application review shall be included on all subsequent submissions to
the Town. Any subsequent change to the plat shall include a revision date
and description of the revision.
2. The names and mailing addresses of the Applicant(s); the Owner(s) of
record of the subject property(ies); the Owners of abutting properties,
including tax map and lot number references; and the Holders of any
easements, rights-of-way, or other restrictions, based on the current
records of the Assessor available at Town Hall, not more than 5 days before
the filing of the application.
3. The name and business address of the surveyor, including license number
and seal, and of every engineer, architect, soil scientist, or wetlands
scientist whose professional seal appears on any plan or document
submitted to the Board.
4. The zoning district(s) in which the subdivision is located, including district
boundaries if in more than one district.
5. The boundary lines of the overall tract, and for each of the proposed lots,
including bearings and distances, as determined by an actual field survey
certified by a licensed land surveyor and bearing the date of the completion
of the survey. Surveys shall utilize the NH State Plane Coordinate system,
unless prior approval to use an alternate coordinate
23
system is granted by the Land Use Office. All dimensions shall be shown in
feet and decimals thereof. Referenced on the plat shall be monuments as
required under Section 13.5(A) of these Regulations.
6. The areas of all proposed lots in square feet and acres.
7. The location of all existing structures, easements, permanent and
intermittent watercourses, flood plains and wetlands, rock outcrops,
wooded areas, stone walls, and other significant existing features on the
property. The plan shall indicate those natural features that are to be
removed, retained, or altered, including existing treed and vegetated
areas.
NOTE: Wetlands on the property, if any, shall be delineated by a Certified
Wetlands Scientist, whose seal and signature shall appear on the plat.
8. Map of Entire Tract: If the application covers only a part of the Applicant's
entire holding, a map of the entire tract shall be drawn at a scale of not
smaller than four hundred (400) feet to the inch showing all existing streets
and an outline of the platted area.
B. A digital copy of the Subdivision plat (.PDF format) shall be provided depicting the
information required under Paragraph A above.
C. The following supporting documents and information:
1. Proposed Covenants: Such proposed covenants or deed restrictions as may
be intended to apply to the property in whole or in part to be recorded in
the Registry of Deeds.
2. Soil Tests: Where private individual wastewater systems are proposed, the
Applicant shall perform soil tests complying with requirements of Section
13.4 of these Regulations. For all proposed lots less than five (5) acres in
size, the Applicant shall have a soil investigation made and a report
prepared to establish the existence of at least 4,000 square feet of
contiguous area meeting New Hampshire Department of Environmental
Services (NHDES) requirements. NHDES approval of all subdivision lots less
than five (5) acres in size shall be obtained and a copy of such approval
shall be provided to the Board prior to the recording of the approved plat.
The soil maps and information shall be in accordance with the most current
USDA Natural Resource Conservation Service County Soil Maps. Maps
prepared by field investigation shall be stamped by a Certified Soil Scientist.
All costs of preparing soil data shall be borne by the Applicant.
3. Access Driveway to State Highway: Any access driveway to a State highway
shall be approved by the New Hampshire Department of Transportation
(NHDOT) and provided to the Board prior to the recording of the approved
plat.
24
4. Other Approvals: Approvals, as prescribed by law, from any other Town or
state agency which may have jurisdiction, including but not limited to
wetland permits (see Section 7.4).
5. Any request(s) for waiver(s) or modification(s) pursuant to Section 7.15 of
these Regulations.
SECTION 10 – MAJOR SUBDIVISION
10.1 General Standards
A. The procedures of Section 7 of these Regulations shall be followed for the review
a Major Subdivision. The review of a Major Subdivision involves the following steps:
1. A Conceptual Review, as outlined in Section 7.3 of these Regulations
(optional).
NOTE: While a Conceptual Review is optional, it is strongly recommended,
particularly for Major Subdivisions, as it can help identify and resolve issues
at an early stage and save the Applicant the time and cost of changes later.
The Technical Review Committee (TRC) is process is mandatory.
2. Design Review of a Preliminary Layout (required).
3. Final Plat Review (required).
B. All Major Subdivisions shall conform to the applicable standards set forth in
Sections 12, 13, and 14 of these Regulations.
C. A complete application addressing or consisting of the documents and information
required under Sections 7.7 and 10.4 of these Regulations shall be required for
TRC, Design Review and Final Plat Review of Major Subdivisions.
10.2 Design Review of a Preliminary Layout
For any Major Subdivision, the Applicant shall submit to the Land Use Office a Preliminary
Layout of the proposed subdivision for TRC and subsequently Design Review by the Board.
Design Review shall involve the review of more specific design and engineering details,
beyond conceptual and general discussions; provided, however, that Design Review may
only proceed after proper notice in accordance with Section 7.6 of these Regulations, as
required by RSA 676:4, II(b).
A. Design Review shall be separate and apart from formal consideration of an
application for Final Plat Review and the time limits for Board action as set forth in
Sections 7.7 and 7.8 of these Regulations and RSA 676:4, I(c) shall not apply until
an application for Final Plat Review is submitted.
25
B. Design Review shall not bind either the Applicant or the Board in any manner, and
statements made by the Board members shall not be the basis for disqualifying
said members or invalidating any action taken.
C. Upon acceptance of a complete application for Design Review, the Board shall
conduct a review of the preliminary subdivision layout at a public hearing with
notice in accordance with Section 7.6 of these Regulations. The Board may solicit
comments from abutters and other interested persons as it deems appropriate.
The Board shall review the preliminary subdivision layout for conformance to all
applicable standards set forth in Sections 12 and 13 of these regulations.
D. After Design Review of the Preliminary Layout, the Board shall prepare, in writing,
its Findings and Determinations with respect to the proposed subdivision regarding
the following general requirements: Section 12.1 (Character of Land); Section 12.2
(Open Space and Recreation Area); Section 12.3 (Premature or Scattered); Section
12.4 (Impact Fees); and Section 12.5 (Off-site Improvements). The Board shall
send its Findings and Determinations in writing to the Applicant and shall clearly
specify the date of the end of the Design Review Phase and the expiration date of
such Findings and Determinations.
Any determination concerning Scattered or Premature development made by the
Board during the Design Review Phase shall be considered a preliminary
determination based on the preliminary subdivision layout and the application
information, materials and testimony submitted to and reviewed by the Board
during Design Review. Such determination shall be re-examined by the Board
during the Final Plat Review and a final determination shall be made based on the
final subdivision layout and all application information, materials, and testimony
submitted to and reviewed by the Board. If, during Final Plat Review, the Board
finds reason to consider changes to its Findings and Determinations, the Board
may require the Applicant to return to Design Review.
E. An application for Final Plat Review shall be submitted within one (1) year of the
date of the end of the Design Review; otherwise, the Board’s Findings and
Determinations with respect to the preliminary subdivision layout shall be deemed
to have expired.
Prior to such expiration and upon written request, the Planning Board may grant an
extension of up to one (1) year of the time for the Applicant to submit an application
for Final Plat Review if the Board determines that such extension is appropriate
based on existing conditions and on progress made by the Applicant. The Board
may deny such extension request if legal notice of proposed changes or
amendments to the Zoning Ordinance or Subdivision or Site Plan Review
Regulations has been posted since the date of public notice for the Design Review
by the Planning Board pursuant to RSA 676:4, I(d).
F. Notwithstanding the above procedures, the Board may waive the requirement for
Design Review of a Preliminary Layout when the Board determines, by motion, that
the specific circumstances of a proposed subdivision application do not require
such review (for example, when a subdivision application would qualify as a Minor
Subdivision but for the restriction set forth in Section 9.4 of these Regulations).
The granting of a waiver from the requirement for Design Review by
26
the Board shall not constitute or imply any determination with respect to scattered
or premature development as set forth in Section 12.3 of these Regulations or RSA
674:36, II(a), and the Board shall be required to make such determination during
Final Plat Review.
Where the Board grants a waiver of the requirement for Design Review of a
Preliminary Layout, the Board may nevertheless require the Applicant to submit any
information or materials listed in Section 10.4.B of these Regulations that is
deemed applicable and necessary for Final Plat Review.
10.3 Final Plat Review
A. For any Major Subdivision, following the completion of Design Review, unless such
review is waived by the Board pursuant to Section 10.2.F of these Regulations, the
Applicant shall submit to the Planning Office a Final Plat layout of the proposed
subdivision for formal consideration by the Board. Formal consideration shall
involve the specific design and engineering details and shall only proceed after
proper notice pursuant to Section 7.6 of these Regulations, as required by RSA
676:4, I(d).
B. Upon acceptance of a complete application for Final Plat Review, the Board shall
conduct a review of the final subdivision layout at a public hearing in accordance
with the procedures set forth in Section 7 of these Regulations. The Board may
solicit comments from abutters and other interested persons as it deems
appropriate. The Board shall review the final subdivision layout and supporting
application materials for conformance with all applicable standards set forth in
Sections 12, 13 and 14 of these Regulations.
C. Prior to taking any final action on the Final Plat, the Board shall make a final
determination concerning Scattered or Premature development based on the final
subdivision layout and on the totality of the application information, materials,
evidence, and testimony submitted to and reviewed by the Board.
10.4 Submission Requirements
A. A complete application for all Major Subdivisions, whether for Design Review or
Final Plat Review, shall include the items listed in Section 7.7 of these Regulations
as well as the following:
1. Paper copies of the proposed subdivision plat (the number to be
determined by the Land Use Office on an as-needed basis.) Plans shall be
submitted on sheets no larger than 24" x 36". Plan sets with multiple pages
shall include sheets of uniform size and be bound on the left edge. When
more than three (3) sheets are required, an additional cover sheet of the
same size shall be attached including a table of contents. The scale of the
plans shall be appropriate to the size of the overall development. All
lettering shall be of a size and type that is legible.
All Major Subdivision plans shall include and depict the following baseline
information as well as the more detailed design information listed in
Sections 10.4.B or 10.4.C of these Regulations, as appropriate:
27
a. The proposed subdivision name or identifying title, the name of the
Town and County in which the subdivision is located, a Locus map,
north point, scale, date of the plat, and the date and description of
any revisions. If a cover sheet is provided, the date of the plat and
the date(s) of any subsequent revisions shall be shown on the cover
sheet.
NOTE: The date on the plat at the time of the initial submission to
the Town for application review shall be included on all subsequent
submissions to the Town. Any subsequent change to the plat shall
include a revision date and description of the revision.
b. The names and addresses of the Applicant(s); the Owner(s) of
record of the subject properties; the Owners of abutting properties,
including tax map and lot number references; and the Holders of
any easements, rights-of-way, or other restrictions, based on the
current records of the Assessor available at Town Hall, not more
than 5 days before the filing of the application.
c. The name and business address of the surveyor, including license
number and seal, and of every engineer, architect, soil scientist, or
wetlands scientist whose professional seal appears on any plan or
document submitted to the Board.
d. The zoning district(s) in which the subdivision is located, including
district boundaries if in more than one district.
e. The boundary lines of the overall tract, and for each of the proposed
lots, including bearings and distances, as determined by an actual
field survey certified by a licensed land surveyor and bearing the
date of the completion of the survey. Surveys shall utilize the NH
State Plane Coordinate system, unless prior approval to use an
alternate coordinate system is granted by the Land Use Office. All
dimensions shall be shown in feet and decimals thereof.
Referenced on the plat shall be monuments as required under
Section 13.5(A) of these Regulations.
f. Topographic contours, at intervals of five (5) feet or less, including
spot elevations on existing roads and a grading plan, if natural
contours are to be changed by more than two (2) feet. All contours
and spot elevations shall be referenced to USGS or FEMA Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) datums, as appropriate. Existing
topographic information shall be prepared by a professional
engineer registered in New Hampshire or by a land surveyor
licensed in New Hampshire.
g. The location of existing structures, roads, easements, and trails
located on the property and within 200 feet of the property.
28
h. The location of all existing natural features, including, but not
limited to, permanent or intermittent watercourses, marshes, lakes,
ponds, flood plains, wetlands, rock outcrops, wooded areas, stone
walls and other significant features on the property and within 200
feet of the property. The plan shall indicate the approximate limits
of clearing necessary for the development and those natural
features that are to be removed, retained, or altered.
NOTE: Wetlands on the property shall be delineated by a Certified
Wetlands Scientist, whose seal and signature shall appear on the
plan.
i. The location of existing water and wastewater mains, culverts, and
drains on the property and within 200 feet of the property with
sufficient information to allow Town Staff and the Board to view the
proposed subdivision in the context of existing Town utilities, with
pipe sizes, and direction of flow.
j. If the application covers only a part of the Applicant's entire holding,
a map of the entire tract shall be drawn at a scale of not smaller
than four hundred (400) feet to the inch showing all existing streets
and an outline of the platted area with its proposed streets.
2. Digital copies of the overall Subdivision plat (in both .PDF and CAD .dwg
format) shall be provided depicting the information required under
Paragraph 1 above.
3. Any request(s) for waiver(s) or modification(s) pursuant to Section 7.15 of
these Regulations.
B. Design Review - Specific Submission Requirements
1. Major Subdivision plans submitted for Design Review shall include and
depict the following information in addition to the baseline information
listed in Paragraph 10.4.A(1) above:
a. The proposed lot lines and rights-of-way with bearings and
distances and areas of each lot in square feet and acres.
b. The approximate width, location, and grades of all streets or road
rights-of-way proposed by the Applicant.
c. The preliminary profile of streets and cross-sections for
construction of streets and sidewalks.
d. The approximate location and size of all proposed water lines,
valves, hydrants, wastewater lines, manholes, and connections to
existing public or private utility lines. Alternate means of water
supply or wastewater disposal and treatment, including data on
29
soil tests and preliminary designs and locations shall be provided
if existing municipal systems are not available.
e. The preliminary storm drainage plan indicating the approximate
location and size of proposed catch basins, manholes, drainage
lines, ditches, retention, detention, or infiltration systems and their
profiles, connections to existing lines or ditches, and all other
means of storm water management.
f. The location and preliminary design of any proposed bridges or
culverts.
g. The preliminary plan for existing and proposed telephone, cable
(broadband), and electric utilities, including municipal fire alarm
systems.
h. The preliminary location of proposed recreational or open space
areas, including land proposed to be dedicated to public use. The
Applicant shall also indicate the location of all existing publiclyaccessible
recreation or open space areas within 1/4 mile (1,320
feet) of the property.
i. The location of any proposed traffic control devices necessary in
conjunction with the subdivision, as well as the location of all
existing transit routes and transit stops located or passing within
1/4 mile (1,320 feet) of the property.
j. Phasing lines, where applicable.
2. The following supporting documents and information shall be provided for
Design Review:
a. A preliminary statement of the anticipated work required on existing
streets and other off-site improvements to meet the minimum
standards set forth herein.
b. The information and impact statements required by all applicable
portions of Section 12 of these Regulations. The Board may require
the Applicant to pay reasonable fees to cover the Town's
administrative expenses and costs of investigative studies and/or
peer reviews with regard to the impact statements as provided in
Section 7.7.F of these Regulations.
c. Soil Tests: Where private individual wastewater systems are
proposed, the Applicant shall perform soil tests complying with
requirements of Section 13.4 of these Regulations. For all proposed
lots less than five (5) acres in size, the Applicant shall have a soil
investigation made and a report prepared to establish the existence
of at least 4,000 square feet of contiguous area meeting New
Hampshire Department of Environmental Services (NHDES)
requirements. NHDES approval of all subdivision lots less than five
(5) acres in size shall be obtained and a copy of such
30
approval shall be provided to the Board prior to the recording of the
approved Final Plat. The soil maps and information shall be in
accordance with the most current USDA Natural Resource
Conservation Service County Soil Maps. Maps prepared by field
investigation shall be stamped by a Certified Soil Scientist. All costs
of preparing soil data shall be borne by the Applicant.
d. If a subdivision is to be served by public water supply or public
wastewater services, the Applicant shall provide a statement from
the Town Consulting Engineer attesting to the availability of such
services. The Applicant shall also provide a statement of methods
of sanitary wastewater estimations and computations therefor.
e. Any development estimated to generate in excess of 100 peak hour
trips or 1,000 average daily trips (based upon the most current
edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers’ Trip Generation
Manual) shall prepare and submit a Traffic Impact Memorandum or
Study in accordance with standard traffic analysis conventions as
set forth by the Planning Board’s Traffic Impact Assessment and
Analysis Standards. The Board may, in its discretion, require the
submission of a Traffic Impact Study for a development estimated
to generate less than 100 peak hour trips or 1,000 average daily
trips if the Board has reason to believe such development could
adversely affect other types of service or have adverse impacts to
safety.
f. For any subdivision of 20 or more lots, plats, sites, units, or other
divisions of land, the Applicant shall request a letter from COAST
Transit, or other local public transportation providers, stating
whether, in the opinion of the transit provider, public transportation
service can or should in future be adequately provided to the
development.
g. A drainage analysis map and computations for the watershed area
appropriate to the scale of the development and the scope of the
project as determined by the Board.
h. Where a phased development is proposed, a preliminary schedule
for construction and completion of streets, utilities, and other
required infrastructure improvements.
C. Final Plat Review - Specific Submission Requirements
1. Major Subdivision plans submitted for Final Plat Review shall include and
depict the following information in addition to the baseline information
listed in Paragraph 10.4.A(1) above:
a. The final proposed lot lines and rights-of-way with bearings and
distances and areas of each lot in square feet and acres.
b. The final width, location, and grades of all streets or road rights-ofway
proposed by the Applicant.
31
c. The final profile of streets and cross-sections for construction of
streets and sidewalks.
d. Names of all proposed streets.
e. The final design, location, and size of all proposed water lines,
valves, hydrants, wastewater lines, manholes, and connections to
existing public or private utility lines. Alternate means of water
supply or wastewater disposal and treatment, including data on soil
tests and final designs and location, shall be provided if existing
municipal systems are not available.
f. The typical lot layout(s) with building envelopes and location for
on-site wastewater disposal facilities, if applicable.
g. The final storm drainage plan, indicating the location and size of
proposed catch basins, manholes, drainage lines, ditches,
retention, detention, or infiltration systems and their profiles,
connections to existing drainage lines or ditches, and all other
means of storm water management.
h. The final design and location of any proposed bridges and/or
culverts.
i. The final plan for existing and proposed telephone, cable
(broadband), and electric utilities, including municipal fire alarm
systems.
j. The final location of proposed recreational or open space areas,
including land proposed to be dedicated to public use. The Applicant
shall also indicate the location of all existing publicly- accessible
recreation or open space areas within 1/4 mile (1,320 feet) of the
property.
k. The final location and design of any proposed traffic control devices
necessary in conjunction with the subdivision, as well as the
location of all existing transit routes and transit stops located or
passing within 1/4 mile (1,320 feet) of the property.
l. Phasing lines, where applicable.
m. Where applicable, there shall be shown on each lot on the plat
whether or not there will be easements for water or wastewater
mains, storm drainage of the proposed streets, or other
improvements.
2. The following supporting documents and information shall be provided for
the Final Review Phase:
a. A final statement of the work required on existing streets and other
off-site improvements to meet the minimum standards set
32
forth herein, including cost estimates and the method of meeting
such costs.
b. Cost estimates for the completion of all on- and off-site
improvements which shall be subject to a Performance Security
Agreement pursuant to Section 7.10 of these Regulations.
c. Temporary Control Plan(s) to be implemented during the proposed
construction period, including, but not limited to, traffic control,
erosion control, dust control, and hours of operation.
d. A copy of such proposed covenants or deed restrictions, including
Owners Association documents and Bylaws as described in Section
12.8 of these Regulations, as may be intended to apply to the
property in whole or in part. Where applicable, such Owners
Association documents or other legal instruments shall include
provisions for the ownership and maintenance of open space as
described in Section 12.2 of these Regulations.
e. Where a phased development is proposed, a final schedule for
construction and completion of streets, utilities, and other required
infrastructure improvements, as further set forth in Section 7.13.C
of these Regulations.
f. Any proposed street or roadway access to a State highway shall be
approved by the NH Department of Transportation and such written
approval shall be provided to the Board prior to the recording of the
approved final plat.
g. Other Approvals: Approvals, as prescribed by law, from any other
municipal, federal or state agency which may have jurisdiction,
including but not limited to, wetland permits (see Section 7.4).
h. Where applicable to a specific subdivision, the Board may require a
statement from telephone, cable (broadband), and electric utilities
stating that services will be furnished and that arrangements have
been made for installation of such utilities according to the plat as
submitted by the Applicant.
SECTION 11 – RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE
SECTION 12 – GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
12.1 Character of Land
A. Unsafe Land: The Board shall prohibit or restrict subdivision of any land which is
found by the Board to be unsafe for development by reason of being subject to
flooding, erosive stream action, instabilities of slope or fill, or otherwise located in a
situation so that safe healthful development cannot be maintained on the land.
33
B. Unsuitable Land: The Board shall restrict subdivision of land which is found by the
Board to be unsuitable for development by reason of high water table, bed rock or
other impervious strata close to the surface or excessive slope, namely any slope of
land that is 25% or greater.
C. Part of Lot: The Board may permit, as to unsafe and unsuitable land, that it be platted
as part of a lot in which there is sufficient safe and suitable land to satisfy the
requirements of these Regulations as to minimum lot size.
12.2 Open Space and Recreation Area
A. Purpose: Subdivisions shall be required to provide open space. Developed open
space shall be designed to provide active recreational facilities to serve the residents
of the subdivision.
1. Amount of Space Required: Fifteen (15) percent of the tract proposed for
subdivision shall be set aside for open space adjusted as appropriate for
conditions such as population density, existing Town facilities, topography,
socioeconomic characteristics of the prospective population, and other
appropriate site and development specific factors.
2. Size of Open Space Parcels: The area of each parcel of open space designed
for active recreational purposes shall be of such dimensions as to be
functionally usable.
3. Location of Open Space Parcels: Open space parcels shall be convenient to the
dwelling units they are intended to serve. However, because of noise
generation, they shall be sited with sensitivity to surrounding development.
B. Improvements of Open Space Parcels:
1. Developed Open Space: The Planning Board may require the installation of
recreational facilities taking into consideration:
a. The character of the open space land.
b. The estimated age and the recreation needs of persons likely to reside
in the subdivision.
c. Proximity, nature, and excess capacity of existing Town recreation
facilities.
2. Undeveloped Open Space: As a general principle, undeveloped open space
should be left in its natural state. A subdivider may make certain improvements
such as the cutting of trails for walking or jogging, or the provision of picnic
areas, etcetera. In addition, the Planning Board may require a subdivider to
make other improvements such as removing dead or diseased trees, thinning
trees or other vegetation to encourage more desirable growth, and grading and
seeding.
34
C. Exceptions to the Standards: The Planning Board may permit minor deviations
from open space standards when it can be determined that:
1. The objectives underlying these standards can be met without strict
adherence to them and/or
2. because of peculiarities in the tract of land or the facilities proposed, it would
be unreasonable to require strict adherence to these standards.
D. Deed Restrictions: Any land dedicated for open space purposes shall contain
appropriate covenants and deed restrictions approved by the Town attorney ensuring
that:
1. The open space area will not be further subdivided in the future;
2. The use of the open space will continue in perpetuity for the purpose
specified;
3. appropriate provisions will be made for the maintenance of the open space;
and
4. common undeveloped open space shall not be turned into a commercial
enterprise admitting the general public at a fee.
E. Open Space Ownership: The type of ownership of land dedicated for open space
purposes shall be selected by the subdivider subject to the approval of the Planning
Board. Type of ownership may include but is not necessarily limited to the following:
1. The Town subject to acceptance by the Legislative Body;
2. Other public agencies subject to their acceptance;
3. Quasi-public organizations subject to their acceptance;
4. Owner associations or organizations; or
5. Shared, undivided interest by all property owners in the subdivision.
F. Owners Association: If the open space is owned and maintained by an owners
association, the subdivider shall file a Declaration of Covenants and Restrictions that
will govern the association, to be submitted with the application for the Final Plat
approval. The provisions shall include, but are not necessarily limited, to the
following:
1. The owners association must be established before the lots/dwelling units
are sold;
2. Membership must be mandatory for each owner;
3. The open space restrictions must be permanent, not just for a period of years;
35
4. The association must be responsible for liability insurance, real estate taxes
and the maintenance of recreational and other facilities;
5. Owners must pay their pro rata share of the cost, and the assessment levied
by the association can become a lien on the property to be set forth in the
documents establishing the owners association, including specifically the right
to collect legal fees for collection and enforcement; and
6. The association must be able to adjust the assessment to meet changed
needs.
G. Maintenance of Open Space Areas: The person or entity identified in Section
12.2.E. as having the right of ownership or control over the open space shall be
responsible for its continuing upkeep and property maintenance.
12.3 Statement as to Impact of Subdivision and Determination of Whether or Not
Premature or Scattered
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to require the subdivider to provide
information to the Planning Board with regard to the impact of the subdivision and
such other information to allow the Planning Board to make a determination as to
whether or not the proposed subdivision will be premature or scattered.
B. Areas of Study and Information: The following areas shall be considered in such
studies and such information provided to the Board to determine the effect of the
proposed subdivision. The Land Use Office may provide administrative guidelines to
assist the subdivider in providing appropriate information.
1. Statement of impact of the proposed development on natural resources and
environmental quality including, but not limited to, water quality, air quality,
wetlands, soil erosion and agricultural soils and a statement of pollution control
and environmental impact mitigation measures.
2. Capacity of the school system; effect on school bus transportation and
distance of the proposed subdivision from the nearest elementary school.
3. Adequacy of streets and/or sidewalks in the general area of the subdivision
including major intersections providing access, and such other areas as
requested by the Board.
4. Sufficiency, availability and capacity of utility services to provide water, fire
protection, and sewer, and further, the impact of the subdivision on the
municipal solid waste disposal facilities.
5. (If applicable) The impact of on-site subsurface sewage disposal systems as to
adjacent wells, water supply systems, and any known aquifers so designated
by the United States Geological Survey.
6. Any special fire, police and public safety problems due to location and/or
special conditions relative to the type of use.
36
7. Impact of drainage from the subdivision on abutting properties and potential
drainage problems both on the site of the subdivision and downstream from
the subdivision.
8. Fiscal impact statement analyzing the impact of the subdivision on municipal,
school and county revenues and expenditures, including estimated potential
tax revenue and estimated number of school children.
C. Prohibition of Approval of Scattered or Premature Subdivisions:
The Planning Board shall not approve a subdivision if such subdivision constitutes
premature or scattered subdivision as would involve danger or injury to health, safety
or prosperity by reason of the lack of water supply, drainage, transportation, schools,
fire department, or other public services or necessitate an excessive expenditure of
public funds for the supply of such services. If a subdivision is determined by the
Planning Board to be premature and scattered, the subdivider may show through
both on and off-site improvements made at the expense of the subdivider, that the
subdivision is not premature or scattered or, if so, is overcome by remedial action of
the subdivider.
D. Board's Determination as to Premature or Scattered:
The Board shall determine based on the information presented and other
information available and made part of the record whether or not the amount of
development contained in the proposed subdivision in relation to the quantum of
services available will pose a danger to the public through insufficiency of services.
12.4 Impact Fees:
The Planning Board may, in accord with Article XVIIII of the Zoning Ordinance, require the
Applicant to contribute an impact fee for types of capital improvements in addition to those
listed in Section 12.5, in an amount reasonably and proportionally related (A) to the capital
needs created by the development, and (B) to the benefits accruing to the development
from the capital improvements financed by the fee.
12.5 Off-site Improvements:
If the Board determines that the proposed subdivision will adversely affect existing public
facilities, streets, sidewalks, drainage, sewer and water supply, causing them to be
inadequate to meet the additional needs created by the subdivision, then the subdivider
shall pay a reasonable share for such upgrading of the public facilities to an extent
necessary to protect the public interest. If other properties benefit from the upgrading of
such off-site public improvements, the Board shall determine the fair share portion of the
cost to be paid by the subdivider, taking into consideration the following elements:
A. The character of the area.
B. The extent that other public and private property will be benefited by the upgrading;
and
37
C. Any other factors that the Board deems appropriate to establish a rational
connection (nexus) between the needs created by the subdivision and the amount
to be paid by the subdivider.
12.6 Community Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Systems
Once the Board grants preliminary or conditional approval to the design of any community
water supply or sewage disposal systems to be provided by the subdivider, the Board shall
then submit two (2) copies of the design plan to the NH DES Water Supply and Pollution
Control Division (WSPCD).
If the final subdivision plans approved by the Board differ from the subdivision plans
conditionally approved by the Board and reviewed by the WSPCD, then the subdivider shall
resubmit the revised plans to the WSPCD for reapproval. Within thirty (30) days of granting
final approval to said revised subdivision plans, the Board shall submit one (1) copy of the
plat to WSPCD for informational purposes.
12.7 Operation and Maintenance of Common Facilities
The Board will not approve a subdivision with a community water supply or sewage
disposal system subject to regulation by Water Supply and Pollution Control Division until
provision satisfactory to the Board and condition are made for the continued operation
and maintenance of such systems in perpetuity. The Board may require the subdivider to
establish an association to provide continued maintenance of such community utilities,
streets, parks and playgrounds and beaches as may not be dedicated to public use and
accepted by the Town. It shall be a condition of Final Plat approval that the subdivider shall
file with the Land Use Office "As-Built" plans and drawings showing the location and
installation of a community water supply and/or sewage disposal system. Such filing shall
not impose any obligation on the Town but shall be solely for information purposes and for
the benefit of the ultimate owners and operators of such common facilities.
12.8 Owners Association
A. Documents for an Owners Association: In the case of a subdivision requiring a
management organization to operate and maintain private roads, community water
or sewer systems, common lands or reserve areas or recreational facilities, the
subdivider shall furnish a copy of the proposed legal documents establishing this
organization and shall include specific provisions for the collection of fees,
assessments and charges to pay for the operation and maintenance of such
common facilities.
SECTION 13 – DESIGN STANDARDS
13.1 Minimum Standards
In considering applications for subdivision of land, the Planning Board shall adhere to
and be guided by the standards hereinafter set forth. Such standards shall be
considered to be minimum standards and shall be reduced by the Board only when in its
opinion specific circumstances surrounding a subdivision, or condition of the land in
38
Tow such subdivision indicate that such modification will properly carry out the purpose and
intent of these Regulations.
13.2 Specifications for Required Improvements
All required improvements shall be constructed or installed in accordance with good
engineering design and practice in accordance with Town, NHDES and NHDOT standards,
which may be obtained from the Consulting Engineer, in accordance with these
standards.
13.3 Lot Layout, Drainage and Driveways
Lot layout will result in the permanent division of land. It is in the public interest that the
lot layout shall be functional, economical and aesthetically pleasing. Lots shall be laid out
in relation to the topography and graded sufficiently to provide adequate drainage for the
purpose intended without the diversion of water onto other lots or onto property adjoining
the subdivision. Excessive grading and disturbance of natural cover will not be permitted.
Steep driveways shall be avoided, and Town Driveway Regulations shall be followed. The
configuration of the lots shall provide lots that are functional for land uses intended. A lot
layout resulting in unusual shapes solely to satisfy minimum area requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance will not be approved.
A. The subdivider shall demonstrate on each lot that there is a feasible location for a
safe and convenient access for a driveway without unreasonable grades.
13.4 Lots/Lot Area/On-Site Septic System Requirements
A. Lot Sizes and Areas. The minimum lot size for each lot shall be in conformity with the
Zoning Ordinance. In addition, where there is to be an on-site subsurface sewage
disposal system, additional area may be required based on the following:
1. For each lot in the proposed subdivision requiring a subsurface sewage
disposal system, soil data shall be provided using Site Specific Soil Maps from
New Hampshire Web-based Soil Survey System or equal.
2. The tests and soil mapping for required soil information shall be performed by
a certified soil scientist.
3. The report of the certified soil scientist shall establish that there is at least
4,000 square feet of contiguous area suitable for the placement of an
individual sewage disposal system on each lot.
4. In the case of a subdivision resulting in the creation of lots in excess of five
(5) acres, the subdivider may request a waiver under Section 13.19 from the
requirements of the investigation and report as to soil data.
13.5 Streets
A. Monuments:
39
1. Permanent survey monuments consisting of concrete or stone monuments not
less than four (4) inches square and forty-two (42) inches long shall be installed
in the ground a minimum of three (3) feet. Such monuments shall be installed
in the right-of-way limits of new streets where there is a change in direction and
at all points of curvature and tangents or angular change in direction. This
requirement shall apply to the right-of-way limits on both sides of the new
street.
2. On each permanent monument as described above, there shall be a plug, a
brass plate, or a pin to serve as the point of reference.
3. Iron rods not less than one-half (½) inch in diameter and at least twenty-four
(24) inches long shall be placed at all lot corners or angle points not covered
by the permanent monument described in subparagraph (1) above.
4. The monumentation required for a subdivision fronting on an existing street will
be monuments at the point of intersection of the perimeter of the subdivision
with the right-of-way line of the existing street.
5. Where a subdivision is a portion of a larger tract of land no permanent survey
monument shall be required for that portion not included within the proposed
subdivision so long as the perimeter monumentation of the entire tract of land
is sufficiently established to the satisfaction of the Land Use Office.
B. Cul de sac: A cul-de-sac street shall not exceed one thousand (1000) feet in length
and shall not provide entrance to other streets. When there are ten (10) residential
units or less on a cul-de-sac, the Board may modify the pavement width
requirements, provided that the subdivider provides adequate off-street parking
facilities. A turnaround shall be provided with a minimum radius of sixty (60) feet at
the end of all cul-de-sacs. Upon recommendation of the Consulting Engineer, the
Board may approve a "T" (hammerhead) turnaround instead of a cul-de-sac.
C. Dead End Street: A temporary dead end street used in a phased development shall
be designed to serve not more than fifty (50) lots, including those lots abutting on
such street and those abutting on streets served by the dead end street. A dead end
street may serve as an entrance for cul-de-sac streets. Any dead end street at its
terminus shall have a turnaround with a minimum radius of 60 feet.
D. Standards: All streets shall be completely constructed by the subdivider in
accordance with the minimum requirements for street construction in the
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction (latest edition), as
published and amended by the New Hampshire Department of Transportation,
and as shown in Figures IV-A and B, and in subsection E, below.
D. Road Design and Construction Standards are contained in Appendix A of these
regulations.
F. Classification of Streets: The classification standards of design shall be as shown in
Appendix A, Table E and as required by this section.
G. Curbs and Sidewalks: Curbs and sidewalks shall be required on at lest one side of all
streets as follows:
1. In any subdivision where the density is greater than one (1) residential unit for
40
each 10,000 square feet; or
2. One (1) commercial or industrial use reaches 10,000 square feet unless
modified by the Board. Curbs and sidewalks may be required on both sides of a
street if deemed necessary by the Board.
H. Curbs and Gutters.
1. Curbing shall be required for the purposes of drainage, safety, and
delineation and protection of pavement edge.
2. Curb requirements shall vary according to street classification and intensity of
development in accordance with the requirements shown in Appendix A and in
conformance with "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction,
State of New Hampshire." Curbing may also be required:
a. For storm management;
b. To stabilize pavement edge; and/or
c. To delineate parking areas.
3. Where curbing is not required, some sort of edge definition and stabilization
shall be furnished for safety reasons and to prevent pavement unraveling.
4. Where curbing is required, this requirement may be waived, and shoulders
and/or drainage swales used when it can be shown that:
a. Shoulders are required by State regulations;
b. Soil or topography make the use of shoulders and/or drainage swales
preferable; or
c. It is in the best interests of the community to preserve its rural character
by using shoulders and/or drainage swales instead of curbs.
5. At medium development intensity, the curbing requirements may be waived
where front yard setbacks exceed forty (40) feet and it can be demonstrated
that sufficient on-site parking exists.
6. Where curbing is required, said curbing shall be either concrete or granite.
7. Curbing shall be designed to provide ramps for bicycles and/or
wheelchairs as required by state law.
8. Curbing shall be constructed according to the specifications set forth in
Appendix A.
13.6 Street Lighting.
Streetlights shall be installed in accordance with the standards and guidelines contained
in the IES Lighting Handbook and the lighting and spacing standards established by the
Milton Zoning Ordinance.
41
13.7 Street Signs.
All street signs and posts shall be installed in accordance with Appendix A.
13.8 Utilities.
A. Water:
1. In any subdivision requiring on-lot water source, the subdivider shall
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Board that each lot can be served by an
on-lot water source in sufficient quality and quantity. Refer also to Appendix A.
2. The existing Village District water system shall be extended or a community
system provided so as to provide the necessary quantity of water, at acceptable
pressure, for fire protection. In the event of connection to the Village District
water system, the subdivider shall be required to pay to the Water District a
sum of money equal to the number of units proposed times the per unit hookup
fee or assessment set by the Water District Commissioners. The subdivider may
be required by the Board to provide or have installed at his expense larger
transmission lines and storage and pumping facilities outside the subdivision
if the supply and pressure would otherwise be inadequate. There shall be a
blow off for flushing the water line. All extensions to the existing Village District
system must be approved by the Water District Commissioners prior to filing
the application for Final Plat approval.
B. Sewage: The subdivider shall provide adequate provisions for sewage with the
following restrictions:
1. The subdivider shall be required to connect to the Town sewer system or
provide a community sewer system approved by the Town and the State in any
subdivision where off-lot sewer is proposed. If the subdivision is within 3,000
feet of the Town sewer system and has twelve (12) or more lots, the Board shall
require connection to the system by the subdivider. The subdivider is required
to provide such pumping and other facilities as may be necessary. He may also
be required to pay to the Town to connect to the sewer system a sum of money
equal to the number of units proposed times the per unit hookup fee or
assessment set by the Board of Selectmen. The subdivider may be required by
the Planning Board to provide or to have installed at his expense larger sewer
lines, pumping and other facilities outside the subdivision if the sewer service
would otherwise be inadequate. All extensions to the existing Town system
must be approved by the Board of Selectmen prior to filing the application for
Final Plat approval.
2. Lots to be served by an on-lot subsurface sewage disposal system shall meet
the requirements of Appendix A.
C. Electric, Telephone, Cable TV. Electric, telephone and cable TV distribution systems
shall be underground, including services and streetlights, unless modified by the
Board. The subdivider shall coordinate subdivision design with the utility
companies to ensure adequate and suitable area for underground installations.
42
13.9 Storm Drainage
7.2.1 Removal of Spring and Surface Water: The subdivider shall be required by the Board
to carry away by pipe or sod-bottom swale any spring or surface water that may be
either pre-existing to or as a result of the subdivision. Such drainage facilities shall
be located in the street right-of-way where feasible, or in perpetual unobstructed
easement of appropriate width.
7.2.2 Drainage Structure to Accommodate Potential Development Upstream: Culverts or
other drainage facilities shall, in each case, be large enough to accommodate
potential runoff from the entire subdivision. The Board’s Consulting Engineer shall
approve the design and size of facilities based on anticipated runoff under
conditions of total potential development. The subdivider's engineer shall provide
such information as the Board’s Consulting Engineer deems necessary to the
determination of the adequacy of the facilities.
7.2.3 Responsibility for Drainage Downstream: The subdivider's engineer shall provide
such information as the Board’s Consulting Engineer deems necessary to
determine the effect of the subdivision on the existing downstream drainage
facilities outside of the area of the subdivision. Where the Board’s Consulting
Engineer anticipates that the additional runoff incident to the development of the
subdivision will overload an existing downstream drainage facility so that there will
be damage to private property or an increase in the expenditure of public funds, the
Board shall not approve the subdivision until the subdivider and the Town agree to
share the cost of the necessary improvement required. The Town's share shall be
based upon the portion of runoff which the developed area downstream from the
subdivider's subdivision contributes to the necessary improvement, except that
there shall be credited to the Town's share that portion of the need which can be
met by existing facilities.
7.2.4 Other Provisions. In design of the drainage system, natural waterways shall be
utilized to the fullest extent feasible. There shall be at least eighteen (18) inches of
cover over culverts crossing roadways and for culverts over fifteen (15) inches in
diameter the Board’s Consulting Engineer may specify additional depth of cover.
The minimum size culvert installed shall be fifteen (15) inches. Where catch basins
are installed, the street shall have curbing unless the Board shall approve an
alternate method. Open roadside swales in excess of five (5) percent grade shall be
paved with stone or asphalt or as approved by the Board’s Consulting Engineer and
as required by the Board. All culverts shall have headers which shall not extend
above the final grade. Header design shall be approved by the Board’s Consulting
Engineer. Whenever possible, natural drainage courses should be extended across
a road and not diverted to roadside drainage swales.
7.2.5 Repair or Rehabilitation of Drainage Downstream. Slip sizing of existing culvert
pipes in need of repair or rehabilitation downstream of a new subdivision shall be
required actions by the developer if the Town’s Consulting Engineer anticipates the
increased runoff incident to the development will require such repair or
rehabilitation.
43
13.10 Excavation and Grading
A. General: All excavating and filling required for construction and improvements shall
be as specified herein. The entire area of work shall be brought to the required lines
and grades by excavation or filling. Excavation material, if suitable, may be used in
making embankments and in filling low areas. A minimum of four (4) inches of
topsoil shall be provided to cover over all finished slopes. All streets shall be graded
from property line to property line to approved grade and cross section.
B. Suitable Materials Required: No stumps, wood, roots, sod or other fibrous materials
shall be placed in any embankment. In those locations where the alignment
crosses swamp or marsh land, or other similar soil that is incapable of supporting
the proposed roads, such inadequate soil shall be entirely removed and replaced
with adequate material. The materials so removed shall not be placed in
embankment but may be used in flattening embankment slopes or for filling low
spots outside the road section. The Board may require the subdivider to submit
evidence of boring and/or other soil investigations to determine the depth
composition and stability of the subgrade within the road section.
C. Embankments: Embankments shall be formed of suitable and acceptable
excavated materials and brought to the required lines and grades. The materials
for embankment shall be placed in successive horizontal layers not exceeding six
(6) inches in depth extending across the entire fill area. They shall be spread by a
bulldozer or other acceptable method and shall be thoroughly compacted.
Successive layers shall not be placed until the layer under construction has been
thoroughly compacted. Where embankments are made of rock, the rock shall be so
deposited that all voids are filled with earth and in such a way that the compaction
specified above may be secured.
D. Subgrade: Upon completion of filling and excavating, the subgrade shall be formed
to the required grade and contour, and the entire surface again rolled as specified
above. High spots shall be removed, and low spots filled with the acceptable
material and the process of leveling and rolling continued until no further
depression results. Soft spots shall be removed and replaced with crushed stone,
gravel or as specified by the Consulting Engineer. These areas shall be drained as
directed by the Consulting Engineer.
E. Side Slopes: Side slopes in embankment and on roadside drainage ditches shall
descend one (1) foot vertically for at least each two (2) feet horizontally (2 on 1).
Surplus material resulting from excavation of the road prism shall be used to flatten
slopes of embankment so that they ascend one (1) foot vertically for at least two (2)
feet horizontally (2 on 1). Side slopes in excavation rock shall ascend six (6) feet
vertically for at least each one (1) foot horizontally. Side slopes shall not be graded
to extend beyond the limits of the road right-of-way onto land not part of the
subdivision unless a suitable slope easement has been properly established and
granted by the affected property owner.
13.11 Site Preservation
A. Natural Cover: Land shall be subdivided and improved in reasonable conformity to
44
existing topography in order to minimize grading, cut and fill, and to retain, insofar as
possible, the natural contours, limit storm water runoff, and conserve the natural
cover and soil. After application for approval has been submitted to the Board, no
topsoil, sand or gravel shall be removed from the subdivision for any other purpose
than to meet construction needs for that particular subdivision or to meet any
requirements of these Regulations.
B. Erosion and Sediment Control: The smallest practical area of land should be
exposed at any one time during development. When land is exposed during
development, the exposure should be kept to the shortest practical period of time.
Land should not be left exposed during the winter months. Where necessary,
temporary vegetation and/or mulching and structural measures may be required by
the Board to protect areas exposed during the development. Sediment basins (debris
basins, desilting basins, or silt traps) shall be installed and maintained during
development to remove sediment from runoff water and from land undergoing
development.
C. Other Requirements: Where possible, natural drainage-ways may be utilized and left
open to remove excess surface water; the permanent final vegetation and structures
should be installed as soon as practical in the subdivision. If the Consulting Engineer
determines that excessive damage may result from open channel flow, closed
drainage systems will be required.
13.12 Fire Protection
In the event that a subdivision is not serviced by Water District water mains, then the
following standards shall apply in order to provide minimum requirements for water supply
for firefighting, and a reasonable degree of protection to life and property.
A. There shall be located in the subdivision a water storage facility capable of delivering
required fire flows as determined by using the ISO formula for required fire flow. Such
storage and delivery systems will meet the requirements of NFPA #22, Water Tanks
for Private Fire Protection, and NFPA #24, Private Fire Service Mains and Their
Appurtenances. In no case shall storage capacity be less than 10,000 gallons of
usable water.
B. If proper improvements to be constructed are to be sprinklered, either by Building
Code requirements or applicant's choice, water storage capacity shall be
determined by NFPA #13, Installation of Sprinkler Systems (for commercial and/or
multifamily), or NFPA #13D, Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One and Two-
Family Dwelling and Mobile Homes. If the proposed project does not fit within
either national code, then the Fire Chief shall determine what is required to meet
the intent of these two codes.
C. The supply of water for firefighting purposes shall be located and maintained to
be accessible year-round to Fire Department apparatus. Such supply shall be
within a 500 feet hose lay of all structures for residential development and within
300 feet hose lay of all structures for commercial and industrial development.
D. The Board shall obtain comments from the Fire Chief on compliance with these
standards.
45
Nothing contained herein shall relieve the subdivider of complying with applicable
provisions of the Milton Building Code.
13.13 Pedestrian Walks and Bicycle Paths
Where necessary, in the judgment of the Board, public ways for pedestrian and/or bicycle
travel and access may be required between subdivisions or its parts or between a
subdivision and public property. These pedestrian walks and/or bicycle paths shall be built
and lighted in conformity with applicable standards of the Town. Unless otherwise stated
by the Board as part of its written decision, no pedestrian or bicycle way created under this
section shall be considered to be a street for frontage or access purposes, nor shall such
a way, by virtue of its approval as part of a subdivision, be deemed to be dedicated to the
Town as a Town-maintained public highway or facility. The Board, in its decision, may
include provisions governing how and by whom such a way shall be maintained.
13.14 Development of Open Space
On land to be used as active recreation open space, undesirable growth and debris shall
be removed. Wooded and brook areas shall be left natural. Active recreation open spaces
shall be graded properly to dispose of surface water and shall be seeded with lawn grass.
There shall be no depositing, dumping, or storage of waste, or other natural or man-made
material, supplies or equipment, on any subdivision land designated as open space. No
work, or removal, or filling shall be done, nor shall the existing natural characteristics of
open space land be altered from the original condition, until a site plan shall have been
approved by the Board.
13.15 Parks and Playgrounds
Areas set aside for parks and playgrounds to be dedicated or to be reserved for the
common use of all property owners in the subdivision whether or not required by the Board
shall be of reasonable size, shape, character and location for the intended use.
13.16 Special Flood Hazard Areas
For subdivisions, site plans and other development proposals that involve land designated
as "Special Flood Hazard Areas" (SFHA) by the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP):
A. The Planning Board shall review the proposed development to assure
that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental
agencies from which approval is required by Federal or State law,
including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334.
B. The Planning Board shall require that all proposals for development
greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is the lesser, include Base
Flood Elevation (BFE) data within such proposals (i.e. floodplain boundary
and 100- year flood elevation).
C. The Planning Board shall require the applicant to submit sufficient
evidence (construction drawings, grading and land treatment plans) so as
to allow a determination that:
(i) all such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage;
(ii) all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and
water systems are located and constructed to minimize or
46
eliminate flood damage; and,
(iii) adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
13.17 Reserve Strips
Reserve strips of land which in the opinion of the Board show an intent on the part of the
subdivider to control access to land dedicated or to be dedicated to public use shall not
be permitted.
13.18 Modifications or Waivers of Design Standards
A subdivider may request the modification or waiver of a design standard contained in
Section 13 with the exception of 13.17, above. The Board may grant such request if it
determines that compliance is not required to meet the purpose and intent of these
Regulations and that the public good will not be adversely affected.
SECTION 14 – COMPLETION OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND BONDING
14.1 Completion of Improvements
A. Requirement to Complete Improvements:
The Applicant shall be required to complete, in accordance with the Notice of
Decision and these Regulations, all the streets, sidewalks, utilities, and other
improvements as so specified. Such required improvements shall be completed at
the Applicant’s expense, without cost or reimbursement by the Town. Record
drawings and any other required information shall be delivered by the Applicant to
the Town for all improvements to be transferred or conveyed to the Town.
B. Active and Substantial Development and Substantial Completion
As provided for in RSA 674:39, III, the Board may specify the threshold levels of
work that shall constitute the following terms, with due regard to the scope and
details of a particular project:
1. Active and Substantial Development or Building
a. For purposes of these Regulations, unless modified by the Board at
the time of approval of a specific application, the completion of all
the following shall imply “Active and Substantial Development or
Building” when inspected and approved by the Board’s Consulting
Engineer or designated agent:
i) Construction of and/or installation of basic infrastructure to
support the development (including all the following: one or
more subdivision roadways, access ways, etc. to a minimum
gravel base; and water and wastewater lines and other
utilities placed in underground conduit ready for
connection to proposed buildings/structures) in
accordance with the approved plans; and,
47
ii) Construction and completion of drainage improvements to
service the development (including all the following:
detention/retention basins, treatment swales, pipes,
underdrains, catch basins, etc.) in accordance with the
approved plans; and,
iii) Placement and maintenance of all erosion control
measures on the site as specified on the approved plans.
Movement of earth, excavation, or logging of a site without
completion of items i, ii, and iii, above, shall not be considered
“Active and Substantial Development or Building.” Plans approved
in phases shall be subject to this definition for the phase currently
being developed.
b. Unless otherwise specified by the Board, Active and Substantial
Development or Building shall be achieved within two (2) years from
the date of the recording of the plat.
c. The time for completion of Active and Substantial Development or
Building may be extended for good cause by the Planning Board. A
request for an extension of the time within which to complete such
Active and Substantial Development or Building shall be submitted
by the Applicant to the Land Use Office prior to such expiration date.
Requests for extension of time to complete Active and Substantial
Development or Building received after the expiration date shall not
be considered by the Board.
In no event shall the time for completion of Active and Substantial
Development or Building be extended to more than five (5) years
from the date of the recording of the plat, unless the subdivision has
been approved for completion in phases in accordance with Section
7.13 of these Regulations. In the event the Planning Board
approves an extension request, the Applicant shall be required to
update all Subdivision Agreements, Security Agreements, and other
documents, as necessary, to reflect the dates of the extended
approval.
2. Substantial Completion
a. For purposes of these Regulations, unless modified by the Board at
the time of approval of a specific application, Substantial
Completion shall be deemed to have occurred when all on-site and
48
off-site improvements specified in the subdivision approval have
been constructed or installed by the Applicant and inspected and
approved by the Consulting Engineer or designated agent, except
for those improvements which are explicitly deferred by vote of the
Board.
In the event that the Town calls a performance security for such
improvements and the funds are paid to the Town, Substantial
Completion of the improvements in the subdivision shall be deemed
to have occurred.
b. Unless the subdivision has been approved for completion in phases
in accordance with Section 7.13 of these Regulations, or as
otherwise specified by the Board, Substantial Completion shall be
achieved within five (5) years from the date of the recording of the
plat.
C. Default of the Applicant:
If the Applicant fails to complete Active and Substantial Development or Building
or fails to achieve Substantial Completion within the specified period(s) as
described above, or in the event that the Applicant is in default for failing to
construct and install the required improvements as specified, or in the event the
Applicant is in default for any other reason, the Town shall have the following
remedies:
1. The Board, upon Notice to the Applicant, abutters, holders of conservation,
preservation, or agricultural preservation restrictions, and any lot owners in
the approved subdivision, shall revoke the approval of the subdivision in
accordance with provisions of RSA 676:4-a to prevent the sale of any
further lots. A certified copy of the Board's action shall be recorded in the
Strafford County Registry of Deeds under the name of the Applicant as
Grantor. The Applicant or the Applicant's successors or assigns, may
request the withdrawal of the revocation by submitting a new application
for subdivision review and satisfying the Board that all required
improvements shall be constructed and installed without cost or expense
to the Town.
2. The Town shall have the right to use the security given by the Applicant to
pay for the expense of constructing and installing required improvements
plus an administration fee of up to ten percent (10%). If the security is
inadequate, the Applicant shall pay any cost in excess of the amount
available from the security furnished by the Applicant. The Town shall make
written demand upon the Applicant for payment. The Town shall be entitled
to reasonable attorneys' fees and costs for the collection of any unpaid
amounts due from the Applicant to the Town.
3. In the event the Town seeks injunctive relief, the Applicant agrees that the
Town shall not have to post any bond as a condition, notwithstanding the
provisions of law or any court rule.
49
D. Acceptance of Dedication Offers:
Acceptance of formal offers of dedication of streets, utilities, public areas,
easements and parks shall be by action of the Legislative Body. The approval by
the Board of the subdivision plat shall not be deemed to constitute or imply the
acceptance by the Town of any street, utility, public area, easement, or park shown
on said plat. The Board may require the Final Plat to be endorsed with appropriate
notes to this effect.
14.2 Inspection of Improvements, Procedure and Fees
The Town shall provide for inspection of required street, utility, drainage, and/or erosion
control improvements during construction to insure their satisfactory completion. The
Applicant shall pay to the Town a fee estimated to cover the cost of the inspection services
as determined by the Board’s Consulting Engineer. No building permits shall be issued until
all fees are paid. If the Board’s Consulting Engineer or designated agent finds upon
inspection that any of the required improvements have not been constructed in
accordance with the Town's standards and specifications, the Applicant shall be
responsible for completing any required alterations of the improvements to bring them
into compliance.
14.3 Maintenance of Street and Utility Improvements
A. The Applicant shall be required to maintain all streets, sidewalks, utility and/or
drainage improvements in the subdivision including, but not limited to, snow
removal, until acceptance of any such improvements by the Town.
B. The Applicant may be required to enter into a Maintenance Security Agreement
with the Town following substantial completion, as determined by the Board’s
Consulting Engineer or the Town’s designated agent, of streets, sidewalks, and
utility improvements to be offered for dedication to the Town, in an amount
considered adequate by the Consulting Engineer and in a form satisfactory to the
Town’s attorney in order to assure the maintenance of such improvements until
acceptance of those improvements by the Town. If there are any certificates of
occupancy for buildings on a street not accepted by the Town, the Town may, on
twelve (12) hours’ notice, plow the street or effect emergency repairs and require
the Applicant to pay the Town.
14.4 Issuance of Building Permits and Certificates of Occupancy
A. Where a performance security has been provided for a subdivision, no temporary
or final certificate of occupancy for any building in the subdivision shall be issued
until the required improvements, including all underground utilities, have been
installed, inspected and approved by the Board’s Consulting Engineer or
designated agent and until the first course of pavement has been applied to the
street from the entrance to the subdivision to the front of the building.
B. The extent of street improvements shall be adequate for vehicular access by a
prospective occupant and by police, fire, and ambulance personnel and
equipment, prior to the issuance of any temporary or final certificate of occupancy.
50
C. No building permit(s) shall be issued for the final fifty percent (50%) of lots or units
in the subdivision, until all improvements required by the Board including, but not
limited to, storm and wastewater, water, power, broadband, streets and sidewalks
have been fully completed by the Applicant and inspected and approved by the
Town.
14.5 Performance Security Agreement:
A. As provided for in Section 7.10 of these Regulations, the Applicant may execute a
Performance Security Agreement in an amount approved by the Board’s
Consulting Engineer and deemed sufficient to secure to the Town the satisfactory
construction and installation of all required improvements. The Applicant shall be
liable for the actual cost of the construction and installation of all such required
improvements regardless of the acceptance or amount of any such Performance
Security Agreement. Such Performance Security Agreement shall comply with all
statutory requirements of RSA 674:36, III and shall be satisfactory to the Town
Attorney as to form, sufficiency, and manner of execution as set forth in these
Regulations. The Performance Security Agreement shall be secured by an
irrevocable letter of credit, a surety bond, an escrow account, or other security
acceptable to the Town. The period within which required improvements must be
completed shall be incorporated into the Performance Security Agreement and
shall not exceed five (5) years from the date of the recording of the plat.
B. Release or Reduction of Performance Security:
The Town shall not release nor reduce the amount of a Performance Security
Agreement until the Consulting Engineer, or designated agent, has certified that all
required improvements have been satisfactorily completed in accordance with the
approved subdivision plans and the Town’s standards. Such certification by the
Consulting Engineer or agent shall be based on detailed Record Drawings and
other information provided by the Applicant’s engineer or surveyor, indicating the
location, dimensions, materials, and any other information required by the
Consulting Engineer, which demonstrate that the layout and installation of the
improvements are in accordance with the approved construction plans for the
subdivision.
As phases or portions of the secured improvements or installations are completed,
inspected, and approved as provided above, the Town shall partially release the
performance security to the extent reasonably calculated to reflect the value of
such completed improvements or installations so long as the security retained by
the Town is sufficient to cover the estimated cost of all remaining improvements.
(RSA 674:36,III(b)) In no event shall the performance security be reduced below
twenty-five percent (25%) of the original principal amount unless the Board takes
such action upon a request by the Applicant and after holding a public hearing on
the request.
Final release of the performance security shall not occur until all required
improvements covered by the Performance Security Agreement have been
completed, inspected pursuant to Section 14.2 of these Regulations, and approved
by the Town and unless any Maintenance Security Agreement, if required, is in
place pursuant to Section 14.3 of these Regulations.
51
SECTION 15 – AMENDMENTS
These Regulations may be amended by the Board as provided in RSA 675:6, which requires a
public hearing prior to amendment and Notice as required by RSA 675:7. After the completion of
the public hearing, the amendment may be adopted by an affirmative vote of a majority of the
members of the Board. A copy of the amendment shall be certified to by a majority of the Board
and shall be filed with the Milton Town Clerk who shall note thereon the date of the recording. The
amendment shall be legal and shall be in effect upon recording of the certified copy with the Milton
Town Clerk. A copy of the certified copy filed with the Milton Town Clerk shall be sent to the Office
of Strategic Initiatives, RSA 675:9.
SECTION 16 – AUTHORITY, ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT
Authority granted to the Milton Planning Board by the voters of the Town of Milton, dated
November 19,2019.
The existing Subdivision Regulations were adopted on December 14, 2010 and amended
as indicated on the cover of these regulations.
SECTION 17 – SEVERABILITY
These Regulations and the various parts, sections, subsections and clauses thereof, are hereby
declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, subsection, section or clause is
adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, it is hereby provided that the remainder of the Regulations
shall not be affected thereby.
SECTION 18 – REPEAL
The existing Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Milton, adopted December 14, 2010 as
amended from time to time, be and the same is hereby repealed. Such repeal shall not have any
effect on existing litigation and shall not operate as an abatement of any action or proceeding
pending on or by virtue of the Subdivision Regulations so repealed.
SECTION 19 – ADOPTION AND APPLICATION
These Regulations shall not apply to any Completed Application accepted prior to posting date,
nor shall any approved subdivision plan be affected or any other subdivision application
specifically described in the Motion of Adoption, except as allowed by law. The prior Regulations
described in Section 16 above shall continue to apply to those Completed Applications not subject
to these Regulations hereby adopted.
The effective date of these Regulations is the date of filing with the Milton Town Clerk. Any
modification of an approved subdivision plan not subject to these Regulations shall be subject
only to the extent of the requested modification and the Board shall restrict its consideration to
that modification, unless the Board decides otherwise for good cause.
52
19.1 Appeal to the Superior Court.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Planning Board, except for decisions
discussed in Section 19.2 may appeal to the Superior Court pursuant to RSA 677:15 within
30 days after the decision of the Planning Board has been filed and first made available
for public inspection in the Land Use Office.
19.2 Appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
If the Planning Board makes a decision or determination which is based upon the terms
of the Zoning Ordinance, or upon any construction, interpretation, or application of the
Zoning Ordinance, which would be appealable to the Zoning Board of Adjustment if it had
been made by the administrative officer, then such decision may be appealed to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment under this section; provided, however, that if the Zoning
Ordinance contains an innovative land use control adopted pursuant to RSA 674:21 which
delegates administration, including the granting of conditional or special use permits, to
the Planning Board, then the Planning Board’s decision made pursuant to that delegation
cannot be appealed to the Zoning Board of Adjustment, but may be appealed to the
Superior Court as provided by RSA 677:15(revised 8/96).
Town of Milton Subdivision Regulations-Appendix A & B
1
Appendix A
1.0 Road Design and Construction
A. Acceptance of New Subdivision Roads. The Planning Board will not recommend acceptance of
any new road constructed as a result of an approved subdivision plat unless it meets the
specifications contained in these Regulations and the Policies of the Planning Board. If a subdivider
or developer seeks to have the road accepted as a town road, then prior to the Planning Board
advising the Board of Selectmen on whether to prepare an acceptance warrant for Town Meeting or
not, the developer shall be responsible for submitting a recordable deed and any associated fees to the
Land Use Office. If at Town Meeting the road is accepted, the developer shall be notified, and the
Land Use Office shall record the deed with the Strafford County Registry of Deeds within ten (10)
days of said acceptance. Upon recording, a signed original copy of the deed shall be filed with the
Town Clerk’s office and a copy submitted to the developer.
B. All newly created roads in any subdivision approved by the Milton Planning Board shall have
signs erected by the subdivider at all intersections, in accordance with the following specifications:
1. Road intersection signs – All road intersection signs shall be high intensity retro-reflective
sheeting, green in color, on a 9” aluminum extruded panel (1/8” thick, with 3/16” at extruded edge).
The lettering shall be 6” white reflective lettering. The sign panel length to be determined by name
length. Sign mounting shall be on a U channel post with top mount 9” sign mounting bracket. The
sign posts must be a two post system break-a-way design with a 3’ in ground mounting post, coupled
to a 10’ top post, which must be a minimum of 1 1/2 feet off roadway surface. Signs should be
mounted a minimum of 5’ from the roadways edge.
2. Hardware - All signs shall be mounted with stainless steel or aluminum lag bolts within one (1)
foot of the top of the post.
3. Posts - All posts shall be 10' hot dip galvanized flanged channel steel, set in a hole to an elevation
of 1 1/2' above ground level. All signs are to be installed so as not to interfere with any plowing or
roadside maintenance and shall be placed no more than 10' and no less than 8' off the traveled way.
4. Names of roads - All newly created roads shall be named on the application delivered to the
Planning Board. All road names must be approved by the Milton Board of Selectmen upon
recommendation by the Fire Chief in accordance with the 911 Regulations.
C. Preservation of natural, archeological, cultural and historical resources. The Planning Board
shall, whenever possible, for each land use application, promote the preservation of those features
which add value to residential/commercial developments and contribute to the scenic beauty and
rural character of the community; such as stone walls, tree masses, watercourses, historic buildings
and sites, scenic vistas and similar irreplaceable assets.
D. Offsite Improvements. Subdividers shall be assessed that portion of offsite improvements which
bears a rational nexus and relationship to the needs created by, and the special benefits conferred
upon the subdivision. The cost of such improvements shall be determined by an engineer approved
by the Board.
Town of Milton Subdivision Regulations-Appendix A & B
2
E. Table of geometric and other standards for new subdivision roads. All new roads proposed as
a result of an approved subdivision plat shall be designed in accordance with the following minimum
criteria and shall further be arranged and constructed in accordance with the provisions set forth
hereinafter:
TRAFFIC
LOAD
ADT
0-50
ADT
50-250
ADT 250-400 ADT 400-150 (or
greater)
Design Speed 20MPH 20MPH 30MPH 35MPH
Centerline
Curve Radius
120’ 150’ 250’ 425’
Travelled way
Width
18' 20' 22' 24'
Shoulder Width
(each side)
2' 2' 3' 4'
Vertical Curve
Crest:
Sag:
(Minimum K
Values)
15
24
15
24
30
40
50
50
Sight Distance 150’ 200’ 300’ 350’
Sight Distance @
Road
Intersections
200’ 300’ 350’ 400’
Profile Grade
Minimum:
Maximum:
0.5%
10%
0.5%
9%
0.5%
8%
.5%
1%
Minimum
Platform @
Road
Intersections
2%-50' 2%-15' 2%-100' 2%-100'
Minimum
Pavement
Radius @
Road
Intersections
30' 30' 35' 40'
Surface
Treatment shall
use NHDOT
Standard
Specifications for
Road and Bridge
Construction
Gravel or
Bituminous
Asphalt
Gravel or
Bituminous
Asphalt
Bituminous
Asphalt
Bituminous
Asphalt
Clear Zone 2’ 2’ 3’ 4’
Town of Milton Subdivision Regulations-Appendix A & B
3
Notes on table above:
1. A clear zone is defined as the total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the traveled way,
available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a
non-recoverable slope, and/or a clear run-out area. The desired minimum width is dependent upon
traffic volumes and speeds and on the roadside geometry. Simply stated, it is an unobstructed,
relatively flat area beyond the edge of the traveled way that allows a driver to stop safely or regain
control of a vehicle that leaves the traveled way.
2. ADT is defined as Average Daily Traffic.
1) Minimum width of right-of-way 50 ft.
2) Minimum angle of intersection at center lines 60 °
(Streets shall be laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles.)
3) Minimum grade of shoulders from pavement or traveled way 1/2 in per foot
4) Minimum tangent length between reverse curves (s curves) 100 ft.
5) Minimum road crown 1/4” per ft.
6) If a hammer-head or cul-de-sac is proposed, a hammer-head shall be designed with a “T” with
turnaround points forty (40) feet long and of the same material and width as the connecting road
surface. For cul-de-sacs, a center island is required with the road surface to remain at the required
widths, with shoulders on both sides for the entirety of the circle. The center island shall be green
space but may contain stormwater infrastructure. The cul-de-sac Right-Of- Way shall have a
diameter of no less than 120 ft. Hammer-heads shall be the preferred ending to a street with no outlet.
All road surfaces, shoulders and infrastructure for hammer-heads and cul-de-sacs shall be fully
contained within the street right-of-way. Refer to Figure IV-b for design standards for cul-de-sacs
and hammerheads.
1) Adequate stormwater controls shall be provided for all road surfaces for a 24-hour, 50-year storm
event.
8) Relation to topography. The street plan of a proposed subdivision shall bear a logical relationship
to the topography of the property, and all streets shall be arranged to obtain as many of the building
sites as possible at or above the grade of the streets. Grades of streets shall conform as closely as
possible to the original topography.
9) Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall be
prohibited. A street jog is defined as two parallel straight-line, tangential sections of roadway
connected by a horizontal curve section; the two tangent sections cannot be separated by less than
125 ft. measured perpendicularly unless topography and terrain dictate.
10) Safe Sight Distance is defined as a straight line view which encounters no obstruction measured
between two points along the center line of the street entirely within the street right-of-way, each
point to be a height of four (4) feet above the road surface. Safe Sight Distances shall be as shown in
the table at the beginning of this section.
Town of Milton Subdivision Regulations-Appendix A & B
4
11) When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point by more than ten (10)
degrees, they shall be connected by a curve with a radius adequate to insure proper sight distances as
defined by the NHDOT Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction and Policies of
the Board.
12) Drainage - Construct adequate drainage facilities to provide removal of storm water, to prevent
flooding of the pavement (24-hour, 50 year storm) and erosion of adjacent facilities. Construction
shall conform to NHDOT Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction and all
applicable laws and regulations and must not interfere with any normal watershed drainage.
13) Construction Engineer and Inspection – For all new road construction required by subdivision
plat approval, a construction engineer/inspector holding a Professional Engineer’s certification shall
be designated by the Board or its designee, at the developer’s expense, to oversee all required
construction elements and shall verify that all projects are constructed per these Subdivision
Regulations and the most recent edition of NHDOT Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction as deemed applicable by said engineer.
14) Guardrails – Guardrails installed shall be as required to follow the requirements of the Road
Agent and standards detailed by the NHDOT Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction.
15) There shall be provision made by the subdivider to ensure that maintenance of new private roads
in conformity with these standards continues in perpetuity; to that end, continuing maintenance
language shall be included as part of the homeowner’s association document. Said document shall be
submitted to the Planning Board for review and approval as part of the subdivision application, as per
Section X., Final Plat Requirements.
F. Construction Standards.
1) Subgrade:
A. All trees and roots shall be stripped to below the base course of pavement and shoulders for the
full width of the pavement and shoulders. All soft spots, peat, organic material, spongy soil, and
other unsuitable materials shall be removed and replaced by material approved by the Board or its
agent. The subgrade fill or backfill shall be compacted in lifts not exceeding 12 inches in depth. The
subgrade shall be graded in the general cross slope configuration shown on the Typical Roads
Section (Figure IV-a).
B. Boulders and/or ledge shall be removed to a depth of 6 inches below the subgrade level shown on
the Typical Road Section (Figure IV-a). After removal to this depth they shall be covered by a fill
material approved by the Board or its agent and graded and compacted to the subgrade level.
2) Base Course:
A. Bank-run gravel of good quality shall be spread over the entire width of the proposed pavement
and shoulders to a depth of 12 inches, plus six (6) inches of crushed gravel.
B. The bank-run gravel and crushed gravel each shall be placed in lifts not exceeding six (6) inches
and in the cross slope configuration shown on the attached Typical Roadway Section (Figure IV-a)
3) Compaction: Roadway subgrade and base courses shall be compacted to 95% of maximum
density proctor method in accordance with AASHTO T-99.
Town of Milton Subdivision Regulations-Appendix A & B
5
4) Pavement Materials:
A. Base Course of two (2) inches conforming to Type B of the NHDOT Specifications.
B. "Wearing Course" conforming to Type F of the NHDOT Specifications.
5) Bridge Construction: All bridges shall be constructed in accordance with the NHDOT Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction and as approved by the Planning Board.
G. Construction Plans and Specifications.
1) Before final approval is granted for any subdivision, the developer shall submit a complete set of
plat construction detail sheets and specifications to the Board or its designee for evaluation. Once
approved by the Board or its designee, the developer shall not alter or vary the construction
documents without prior consultation with the Board or its designee.
2) As a minimum, the plat construction detail sheets and specifications shall incorporate the
requirements of these regulations.
2.0 Protection of Public Thoroughfares from An Excessive Number Of Access
Points
A. The purpose of the Regulations in this section is to maintain efficient and safe roads in Milton.
These provisions are designed to cause fewer distractions to motorists, fewer requirements to brake,
while promoting smooth traffic flow and optimum sight distances. They are designed to ensure wise
use of taxes for road construction and maintenance, and long term use of the public roadways for
intra and inter Town commerce. These Regulations are also designed to help minimize potential
conflict with children at play, to allow for sufficient privacy and quiet in residential neighborhoods,
and to assist in maintaining the rural character of Milton. All access points, including driveway
entrances, shall be located to most adequately promote the safety, efficiency, and convenience of the
traveling public and the residents adjacent to the roadway. Access points to through highways, public
roads and streets shall be limited in number to protect the long term utility of the roadway.
B. Before any driveway or other access is constructed within the limits of the right-of-way of any
class I or class III highways or the state maintained portion of any class II highway, an approved,
written driveway permit must be obtained from the New Hampshire Department of Transportation as
per RSA 236:13. State approvals shall be submitted to the Board as part of the subdivision
application material.
C. Before any driveway or other access is constructed within the limits of the right-of-way of any
Town road or highway, a written permit must be obtained from the Town of Milton and shall be
submitted to the Board as part of the subdivision application material.
D. All subdivision plans (concerning access to any roadway in Town) shall indicate the location of
the driveway or other access points, the width of the driveway, entrance, exit or approach and the
safe sight distance for each access point.
Town of Milton Subdivision Regulations-Appendix A & B
6
1. The maximum width of any access point or driveway shall be thirty (30) feet measured
parallel to the highway centerline at the curb or shoulder line with a desirable width of
twenty-four (24) feet, except that an access point or driveway may be flared beyond a width
of thirty (30) feet at its junction with the highway to accommodate the turning radius of
vehicles expected to use the driveway or approach.
E. No more than two (2) driveways or access points shall be permitted to a single lot entering on a
single highway.
F. For proposed subdivision along Town or state roadway frontages that exceed six hundred (600)
feet, the construction of an internal street system or service road outside of the roadway right-of-way
will be required to provide greater safety for the development occupants, as well as the highway
users. Unusual land conditions may provide the basis for an exception; however, the Planning Board
must first review and approve the proposal.
3.0 Drainage and Provisions of Public Services
A. Pursuant to RSA 614:36, II land of such character as to create a danger to health, flood or fire
hazard, injury, or other menace, shall not be platted for development which would promote these
hazards, until appropriate measures have been taken by the developer to eliminate such hazards. No
natural drainage way will be obstructed unless adequate means are taken to provide for the runoff.
Scattered or premature subdivision of land that would constitute a threat to the prosperity of the
Town by reason of the lack of water supply, drainage, transportation, schools, fire protection, or
other public services that would necessitate an excessive expenditure of public funds or conflict with
the harmonious development of the Town, will not be platted for development.
B. If sewage and water connections are required, it shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to
install and connect to existing public water and/or sewage lines in accordance with current Federal,
State and Local water and sewage Regulations. If water and sewage connections are
not practical, all street plans will include adequate area for the future installation of public
utilities should such become necessary to control pollution. In areas shown on the official
sewer map as planned for Town sewer facilities, it shall be the responsibility of the subdivider
to install sewage lines in accordance with current sewer Regulations.
C. No water shall be permitted to run across the street on the surface but shall be directed
into catch basins, or otherwise into ditches, and shall be piped underground in a pipe of
not less than 18 inches in diameter, or such size as may be deemed necessary by the
Board. No artificial or unnatural drainage flow shall be directed to abutting property
to cause hardship to abutters.
D. Unless public sewage and/or water facilities are provided, it shall be the responsibility of the
subdivider to provide adequate information to prove that the area of each lot is adequate to permit the
installation and operation of both individual on-lot water and sewage systems.
E. All drainage or erosion control facilities must be consistent in design with the procedures and
guidelines used by the Strafford County Soil Conservation District or developed by NH DES, latest
revision, and the US Soil Conservation Service.
Town of Milton Subdivision Regulations-Appendix A & B
7
F. Paving, stone or check dams shall be provided in ditches where soil or velocity conditions warrant
protection from erosion.
G. Adequate measures to prevent soil erosion shall be taken during road construction and lot
clearing. Such measures may include, but not be limited to, maintenance of vegetative cover on steep
slopes, seeding of road shoulders and embankments, construction of settlement basins and temporary
dams.
H. Each water system shall comply with Federal, State and Local Regulations.
I. All stormwater and drainage infrastructure shall be designed to adequately perform in a 24-hour,
50-year storm event.
Appendix B
Special Conditions
1.0 For Subdivisions Providing Water Access Boating
A. Development plans for boating and swimming areas shall be submitted to the Planning Board
for review prior to making application to the appropriate state agency for a permit.
2.0 Conversions to Condominiums Or Time Sharing Units
A. Subdivision approval is required for conversion of developed property to the Condominium
or Time Share form of ownership, and no building permit shall be issued prior to Subdivision
approval.
B. The responsibility for maintenance, operation, replacement and protection of roads and other
infrastructure including the water supply and sewage disposal systems shall be clearly
established by the Condominium or time sharing agreement, Declaration, or Bylaws, copies
of which shall be furnished to the Board.
3.0 Subsurface Effluent Disposal Facilities Requirements
A. Existing subsurface sewage disposal facilities shall meet current construction design
Regulations and best practices requirements as set by the NHDES.
B. The developer shall demonstrate that the lot or land area is sufficient in size to support an
adequate subsurface sewage disposal system. Soils type and slope shall be identified on the
plat plan.
C. An inspection of the existing sewage disposal system and a detailed diagram showing type,
extent and location of the system, certified by a registered professional sanitary engineer
indicating that the system is adequate for its intended and proposed use shall be furnished to
the Board.
Town of Milton Subdivision Regulations-Appendix A & B
8
4.0. Protective Well Radius & Use Restrictions for Community Water Systems
A. Whenever a subdivision application involves the creation of four (4) or more lots, to be
served by a community water system, the applicant shall provide for a protective well radius.
B. Drinking water supplied from groundwater shall be protected by restricting land use and
prohibiting all activity detrimental to water quality within the protective radii based upon the
average daily demand on the system as follows:
1) System Demand Protective Radius
(Gallons Per Day) (In Feet from Source Of Supply)
400-----------------------------------------------------------------------------15
800----------------------------------------------------------------------------125
1200--------------------------------------------------------------------------150
1600--------------------------------------------------------------------------115
2000--------------------------------------------------------------------------200
2) No sewer, sewage or waste disposal system shall be permitted within the protective radius.
(refer to 8. 4b)
C. In order to protect the long-term quality of each community well, to promote public health and
safety and to prevent the contamination or pollution of water in community wells, no
buildings or other structures may be located within the protective well radius; nor may there
be any roadways or other improvements which would increase the risk of soil contamination
or other underground water contamination. A structure to house a pumping facility and/or
water storage related to the community water system may be located within the protective
radius. The size of the protective well radius shall be determined pursuant to paragraph
4.0(B)(1).
D. No portion of the protective well radius surrounding a community well shall be included in
any minimum lot size calculation.
5.0 Private Easements, Restrictions, Title
If the Board approves an application where a substantial dispute exists as to the existence,
enforceability or validity of private land restrictions or easements, or as to issues relating to title to
the property, the Board may require that the following or similar statement be added to the plat or to
the Board’s Notice of Decision; “By its approval of this application (plan), the Milton Planning
Board offers no opinion whether this application (plan) may be affected by private easements, land
use restrictions, restrictive covenants, title issues, or other private agreements or requirements
relating to the ownership or use of this property.”
Subdivision Regulations July, 2019 Page i
Subdivision Regulations July, 2019 Page ii
Exihbit 2
Subdivision Regulations July, 2019 Page iii
Site Plan Review
Regulations
Milton, New Hampshire
Adopted by the Planning Board
February 21, 1995
Revisions:
August 7, 2007
August 7, 2012
December 6, 2016
April 17, 2018
4/17/18 Revision
1
SITE PLAN REVIEW REGULATIONS MILTON, NEW HAMPSHIRE
1. Authority
Pursuant to the authority vested in the Milton Planning Board by the voters of the Town of Milton on March 12, 1994, in
accordance with chapter 674:43 & 44 of the New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated, the Milton Planning Board
adopts the following Regulations for the Submission of Site Plans for Review under Non-Residential or Multi-Family Site
Plan Review procedure.
No development, material change in use or material expansion of existing use for non-residential properties, or for multifamily
dwelling units other than one or two family dwellings, whether or not such development, change in use or
expansion and/or intensification of existing use include a subdivision or resubdivision
of the site shall be established, nor
shall any building (including its footprint) or other structure be erected, expanded or enlarged and no area for parking,
loading, vehicle services or driveway access, shall be established, expanded or changed except in conformity with a Site
Plan approved by the Planning Board .
No tree cutting or site work shall occur in advance of site plan review; such activity shall only occur after final approval by the
Planning Board.
2. Purpose
The intent of these Site Plan Review Regulations is to protect the public health, safety and welfare; to ensure the adequacy
of traffic access, circulation and parking; to ensure the provision of adequate buffers, landscaping and screening to protect
adjoining properties against any possible detrimental or offensive uses on the site, including but not limited to, unsightly or
obnoxious appearance, smoke, and noise; and to protect against adverse environmental impacts from a proposed
development , including inadequate sewage disposal, refuse and other waste and/or inadequate surface drainage.
These Regulations recognize that certain developments and uses of land, because of their complexity, size or possible
impact, may adversely affect the public health, safety and welfare unless careful consideration has been given to certain
critical design elements. It is the intent of these regulations to provide a vehicle for the review of such critical design
elements within the development subject to Site Plan Review, and to allow the Milton Planning Board to approve with or
without conditions, or to disapprove, applications pursuant to these regulations.
3. Jurisdiction
A Site Plan submitted to the Planning Board for review must be in compliance with the Town of Milton Zoning
Ordinance, Site Plan Regulations and any other Ordinance which pertains to the proposed development. All plans shall be
prepared in accordance with these Site Plan Regulations.
Applicants, who may from time to time seek to change or amend the use of or minimally alter or expand existing non-residential
or multi-family buildings or sites, may apply for site plan determination. The Planning Board may, after submittal of an executed
application for site plan determination, conduct a duly noticed public hearing and grant approval to such applications without
benefit of formal site plan review. For any proposal to be eligible for approval through site plan determination, the site or
building to be modified or expanded must have previously received site plan approval from the Planning Board. Proposals
eligible for approval through site plan determination shall be similar in nature to those involving one or more of the following
activities: (1) change of use of an existing building or site from one permitted use to another permitted use; (2) additions to
and/or renovations of existing structures such that the gross floor area of any existing structure does not increase by more than
10-percent or 2,000 square feet, whichever is less; (3) proposed site improvements or modifications which alter not more than
15,000 square feet of terrain or the addition of ten (10) or fewer parking spaces; and (4) other minor site plan proposals which
the Planning Board may elect to consider. Larger site plan revisions, and intensification of use shall require formal site plan
amendment submission to the Board.
4. Certificate of Use and Occupancy
Upon completion of construction and prior to the occupancy of the premises, a Certificate of Use and Occupancy shall be
obtained from the Town Code Enforcement Officer/Building Inspector, pursuant to the State of New Hampshire Building
Code, as revised from time to time, and must be in compliance with all applicable Ordinances of the Town of Milton and
with any conditions set by the Milton Planning Board and/or the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
5. Site Plan Application and Review Procedure
4/17/18 Revision
2
A. Applicability
The following activities shall be subject to site plan review:
a. Any development activity or combination of activities that, within any four (4) year period, results in the construction
of the following:
i. 5,000 square feet or more of new gross floor area;
ii. 10,000 square feet or more of new impervious surface; or
iii. A cumulative total of 10,000 square feet or more of gross floor area and impervious surface.
b. Construction of a multifamily development containing three (3) or more dwelling units.
c. Changes of use that affect 5,000 square feet or more of gross floor area.
d. Construction of accessory buildings and structures of 2,500 square feet or more of gross floor area.
e. Any use that results in the construction of a drive-through window.
f. Any development with a potential for regional impact.
B. Discussion/Applications Requirements
Prior to submission of an application for either site plan determination or site plan review by the Planning Board,
the Applicant shall meet with the Town Planner to review initial compliance with all land use regulations, zoning
and state and federal requirements and to determine permit needs and plan requirements. After this preliminary
consultation and prior to formal submission, the Applicant shall meet with the Technical Review Committee
(TRC). The Planner shall schedule a TRC meeting at the request of the applicant after plans have been developed
to at least 60 percent design stage. Said meeting(s) shall serve to assist the Applicant in preparing a development
proposal that is technically conforming to the regulations contained herein. The Technical Review Committee shall
make no decisions regarding land use as their role is simply an advisory one to the Planning Board and applicant.
The Technical Review Committee (TRC) shall be comprised of the Public Works Director/Road Agent, Town
Engineer (as required), Fire Chief, Police Chief, Code Enforcement Officer, and Town Planner, who shall act as
chairperson. All Committee members shall have a designated alternate available in their absence.
An applicant may informally appear before the Planning Board for concept review to discuss a proposal with the
Board and receive information from it on the requirements for submitted Site Plans, however, applicants must
meet with the Technical Review Committee to ensure the Planning Board receives the required TRC evaluation
report on technical compliance and completeness of the proposal, regardless of whether an informal review occurs
or not. A "rough drawn" preliminary sketch may be submitted to the Planning Board should the applicant choose
to meet informally for concept review to aid in the discussion.
An optional Design Review Phase conducted in accordance with NH RSA 674:4, II(b) may be requested by the
applicant. This phase is a non-binding review of the proposal beyond conceptual which may involve more specific
design and engineering details.
C. Application Procedure and Requirements
An owner or a designated agent shall file an application to the Land Use Office to be date stamped no later than
thirty (30) calendar days prior to the scheduled Planning Board meeting in which the application will be heard.
The Board shall only consider a completed application which consists of the following:
1) A properly completed application form obtained from the Land Use Office, including eight (8) copies, and
one (I) PDF copy.
2) An application fee payable to the Town of Milton.
3) Eight (8) half-size (11” x17”) and three (3) full-size hard copies and one (I) PDF copy of the Site Plan
and all other plans and documents required in Section 12.
D. Notification and Public Hearing Procedure
The board, before considering or taking formal action upon a Site Plan Review Application, shall hold a Public
Hearing in accordance with the procedure specified in RSA 676:4, to provide an opportunity for public
testimony relative to the consequences of the proposed Site Plan.
At the hearing, the applicant, any abutter or any person with a direct interest in the matter may testify in person or
in writing. Other persons may testify subject to Board approval at the hearing.
4/17/18 Revision
3
The applicant and all abutters shall be notified of the hearing by certified mail, return receipt requested, stating the
time and place of such hearing and a general description of the Site Plan proposal and its location, before the date
fixed for the hearing.
Hearing notice to the general public shall also be given at least ten (10) days before the date fixed for the hearing
by posting in 2 public places in the town and by publication in a newspaper of general circulation therein.
E. Board Action on Completed Application
The Planning Board shall take no action on an Applicant's development proposal until it has received a report
from the Technical Review Committee evaluating said proposal on compliance and completeness.
The Board shall consider a completed application within thirty (30) days of its submission and acknowledgment,
and shall act to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the application within sixty-five (65) days, subject
to an additional ninety (90) day extension approved by the Selectmen as provided in accordance with RSA 676:4,
I. (f). Additionally, the applicant may waiver the requirement and consent to a mutually agreeable extension of the
period for action.
Approval of the Final Site Plan shall be demonstrated by the issuance of a Notice of Decision and written
endorsement on the plan signed by the Chairman of the Board. In case of disapproval of any part of the plan, the
grounds for such disapproval shall be stated in the records of the Board and notice given to the applicant. If the
Board requests modification of the plan, the applicant shall submit a revised plan showing all modifications
which will become the final plat used for filing with the Town.
No Building Permits shall be issued on any plan acted upon by the Planning Board until such time as the
Selectmen or their authorized agent has received a copy of the approved Site Plan, any required approval from
the Zoning Board of Adjustment and the Building Permit Application.
6. Amendment of Approval
The Planning Board shall have the power to modify or amend its approval of a Site Plan on application of the owner, lessee,
or mortgagee of the premises, or upon its own motion, if such power is reserved by the Board in its original approval. Any Site
Plan coming before the Board for modification or amendment shall be placed on the agenda and posted in the usual
manner. The Board reserves the right to require certified mail, return receipt requested, notification to abutters in which
case the applicant shall then submit a list of abutter's names and addresses and letters ready for mailing. Notification shall
be as set forth in these Regulations under Section 5.c.
7. Performance Bond
A. The Planning Board may require the applicant to post a performance guarantee in the form of bond or an escrow
agreement (surety) in an amount approved by the Board to guarantee that improvements intended to insure
access, adequate streets and roads, sewer and water disposal, drainage or any other requirements and conditions
of the Planning Board in accordance with Site Plan Review Regulations to reduce impact upon the abutters
and/or the public are performed. When an acceptable surety is required, the Town's Engineer shall calculate said
surety amount for review and approval by the Board that secures for the Town the satisfactory construction and
installation of required site improvements. This calculation work shall be at the expense of the applicant.
B. Construction and installation of required improvements must be satisfactorily executed within the imposed time
constraints, or the applicant shall forfeit said surety, and it shall be used to complete and/or install said
improvement in accordance with the approved site plan and Town specifications. Where an applicant is required
to post a surety, it shall be posted prior to the start of any construction or improvement and prior to the issuance of
a Building Permit.
8. Statute of Limitations
Planning Board approval of a Site Plan shall be valid for two (2) years from the date of approval. If substantial site work
has not commenced or a Building Permit has not been issued or if a Building Permit has been issued but not substantially
acted upon within a two (2) year period
(which acts substantiate vesting), the Site Plan shall lapse unless a request for extension for an additional one (1) year time
period is applied for by the applicant, prior to the date of lapsing. If such a request is received by the Board, the Board may,
4/17/18 Revision
4
for cause, extend the valid time period of the Site Plan approval for one (1) year, one (1) time only. The applicant shall
appear before the Planning Board and document that the following criteria are met:
(1) The proposed project remains consistent with the Town's Master Plan.
(2) Surrounding conditions (i.e., traffic flow, school capacity, utility demand) have not changed to the point of
requiring reanalyzing of the proposed project.
(3) The proposed project complies with current Town, State and Federal regulations, ordinances and
statutes.
(4) Notification of abutters shall be required of all first-time extension requests. Said
notification shall be by certified mail and shall be at the expense of the applicant.
9. Fee Schedule
A Fee Schedule is available at the Land Use Office, which shall be revised from time to time.
10. General Requirements Checklist for Site Plan Submission
An application for Site Plan approval shall be accompanied by the following information and documents:
A. Base Survey
1) Bearings and lengths of the boundaries of the parcel.
2) Topography with not more than five (5) feet contour interval. At any construction site, contour interval
shall be no more than two (2) feet. Proposed, finish contours shall be shown as bold, solid lines. Existing
contours shall be shown as dashed lines.
3) Reference to established permanent bench mark based on USGS or other datum approved by the Town
Planner for both vertical and horizontal plan data.
4) Location and names of approved roadways and rights-of-way and any easements.
5) Boundaries of existing natural features (rivers, lakes, wetlands, swamps, ledges, etc.)
6) Surface cover of total area (weeded, cleared, graveled or paved areas.)
7) Any important specimen trees. Existing and proposed to remain limits of tree cover or other vegetated
cover.
8) Any existing features on and within a minimum of fifty (50) feet of the site boundaries. If the site is
located on a state highway, any existing features on and within one hundred (100) feet from the
property line comers on state highway, as measured along the state highways, as applicable. Existing
features include but are not limited to driveways, roads or other elements which may have an impact
on the sites operations or use.
9) Where a change in use is being proposed, the following additional items are required:
a) A table showing the expected amount of change in demand for parking, water and sewer use (if
utilities are available), and traffic.
B. Site Plan
1) Sheet size 36 x 24 with one (1) inch border on three (3) sides and two (2) inches on left edge.
2) Scale: l"=20' (Preferred), however, no smaller than l"=40'.
3) Title block in lower right comer giving name and location of development, scale, contour interval,
survey by, design by, seal of the surveyor, seal of the engineer or architect, legend and signature of
the engineer and/or surveyor.
4) North Arrow.
5) Locus - shows site in relation to surrounding portion of the town.
4/17/18 Revision
5
6) An intent of plan note describing the development, including the use or uses to be conducted on the lot
or any changes or intensification of an existing use.
C. Site Plan Detail
All planned roads and driveways shall comply with the Town's Subdivision Regulation standards for such
roads and driveways.
1) Planned Roads Showing:
a. Complete horizontal and vertical alignment data.
b. Planned road width (shoulder to shoulder), include typical cross section.
c. Access Management. To reduce the number of conflict points for vehicles, reduce traffic
congestion, and improve traffic safety along all corridors that have non-residential uses, the
following table sets forth minimum standards for driveway location and spacing in all zoning
districts:
VARIABLES ARTERIAL
ROADS
COLLECTOR
ROADS
LOCAL ROADS
Number of
Driveways Per Lot
-- One driveway per
400 feet of road
One driveway per
200 fee t o f road
One driveway per
125 feet of road
frontage or frontage or fraction frontage or fraction
fraction thereof thereof thereof
Minimum
driveway
spacing from
public street
intersections
Posted Speed Limit
310 feet
380 feet
470 feet
560 feet
230 feet
280 feet
350 feet
420 feet
155 feet
190 feet
230 feet
275 feet
35 mph
40 mph
45 mph
50 mph
Minimum spacing Posted Speed Limit
between
driveways
230 feet 185 feet 155 feet
35 mph
40 mph 280 feet 220 feet 190 feet
45 mph 350 feet 260 feet 230 feet
50 mph 420 feet 300 feet 275 feet
Note: The term Arterial Roads shall mean state numbered routes or state-maintained highways in the Town. (i.e. NH Rtes.
75, 153, 125 and any other state-maintained highways that may be added from time to time.) The definition of Collector and
Local roads shall adhere to the standard definition contained in the AASHTO A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways
and Streets, current Edition.
2) Spacing between public street intersections and driveways are measured from the point of tangency
of the intersecting street right-of-way to the nearest edge of the driveway where it intersects with the
right-of-way line. Spacing between driveways are measured from the nearest edge of each driveway
where intersecting with the street right-of-way. Existing driveways that do not meet the above
standards may be retained, but the elimination of unnecessary access points is strongly encouraged.
Notwithstanding the above standards, any lot of record shall be entitled to a minimum of one
driveway.
3) In recognition of the unique circumstances of some parcels of land, the Planning Board shall have
the leeway to vary the standards set forth in subsection c. above. The Planning Board may approve
projects that do not conform strictly to the access standards above, provided that a finding is made
by the Planning Board that safe and adequate access can be achieved. Any deviation from the
standards in subsection c. above can only be considered after first receiving a written
recommendation from the DPW Director/Road Agent and Town Planner.
4) When a non-residential zoned parcel straddles a residential zone, nonresidential
traffic shall be
prohibited from exiting into or entering from the residential zone, unless there is no other viable
option.
4/17/18 Revision
6
d. Incentives for Reducing the Number of Driveways in all zoning districts.
1) In addition to limiting the number and location of driveways, the Town of Milton
encourages shared driveways for adjacent parcels, the elimination of existing
driveways, and the construction of fewer driveways than permitted in applicable code
section. By limiting access points, the number of points where turning vehicles and
through vehicles conflict is reduced. To provide incentives for shared driveways in all
zoning districts, an incentive system has been developed.
2) An applicant may increase the maximum lot coverage permitted in the Table of Dimensional
Regulations referenced in the Zoning Ordinance for the commercial/residential and industrial
zones by electing to use one or more of the provisions listed below. The Planning Board
shall decide if the applicant complies with the provisions of the incentive system. An
applicant may utilize one or more of the following voluntary provisions:
a) Provide shared driveway to be the sole access to the subject parcel and one or more
adjacent parcels. To qualify for this incentive, the applicant shall provide appropriate
easements to ensure that the shared driveway will remain in existence and will be
adequately maintained.
b) For parcels with existing driveways, reduce either the number of separate driveways or
the total width of the existing driveways (as measured at the right-of-way line) by at
least fifty percent (50%), or reduce the number of driveways to one driveway of not more than
thirty-two feet (32') in width.
c) Reduce the total numbers of driveways permitted or increase the spacing between
driveways by twenty-five percent (25%) over the standards set in applicable section herein
or increase the spacing between driveways and public street intersections by twenty-five
percent (25%) over the standards set in applicable section herein.
3) If the Planning Board finds that an applicant has complied with one or more of the voluntary
provisions, the following incentives shall be granted. For each of the provisions achieved,
the Planning Board shall permit a reduction of five (5) percent of the green space
requirement in the Zoning Ordinance up to a maximum of ten (10) percent.
e. Interconnections between Parcels
1) In order to reduce the number of vehicles entering and exiting arterial and collector
roads, the provision of interconnecting driveways is required whenever feasible. These
interconnecting driveways or service roads are provided to allow customers and employees
to move from site to site without repeatedly using higher volume roadways.
2) In all zoning districts, an applicant shall integrate an interconnecting driveway into
the overall traffic and pedestrian circulation of the subject site. Interconnecting
driveways shall be provided to access abutting parcels. If an adjacent parcel(s) is
vacant, the applicant shall grant an easement for future access. The easements shall
be written to ensure that the interconnection(s) will remain open and will be
adequately maintained. The cross connections shall be located to encourage internal
traffic between abutting properties and shall be adequately marked with directional
signs. If cross connections are provided by an applicant, then the area of the cross
connection shall be counted towards the total lot size of the subject site.
3) In recognition of the unique circumstances of some parcels of land, the Planning
Board shall have the option to vary the standards set forth in subsection e. 2)
above. The Planning Board may approve projects that do not conform strictly to
the interconnection standards above, provided that a finding is made by the
Planning Board that the unique circumstances of the parcel make compliance
unreasonable, any deviation from the standards in subsection e. 2) above can
only be considered after first receiving a written recommendation from the
DPW Director/Road Agent and the Town Planner.
f. Site Development & Existing Conditions location.
4/17/18 Revision
7
1) Parking area, location with overall dimensions, parking method (parallel or
angle) capacity, type of surface, striping and method of calculating the required
parking in accordance with the town's zoning ordinance and this regulation.
2) Structures and Special Facilities:
a. Location to Scale
b. Proposed finished grade elevation at foundation
c. Finished Floor Elevations
3) Finished Contours - Proposed grades shown in solid lines.
4) Location of proposed and existing water lines, wells, sewage lines, sewage systems, surface
drainage system and utility lines, including power, telephone, high speed wireline and/or
wireless data communication access infrastructure, and further, including location of source,
tanks, drains, size of pipes, poles, and sewage disposal field, service areas, loading area.
5) Limit of lawn areas, location and type of landscape planting, existing trees to remain.
6) Location of walks, fences, stone walls, retaining walls and screening.
7) Location of signs and sign lighting.
8) Site lighting,
9) Show ingress and emergency egress, including walkways and ramps for the
handicapped,
10) Drainage on all site plans shall be designed to adequately treat storm water runoff for a
24-hour, 50-year storm event.
11) Dumpster with impervious pad and suitable screening.
D. Additional Material or Information Required
1) For on-lot sewage systems: NHDES Approval for Construction.
2) For sewer district hook-up: approval from sewer district superintendent.
3) Proof that the proposed site plan has been submitted with the application for a
Driveway Permit from NHDOT; this may be in the form of a coordination letter from
NHDOT Division VI to the Town.
4) Approved Driveway Permit from NHDOT or the Town of Milton.
5) Sight distance at entrance from the center line of the street entirely within the street
right-of-way, each point to be at a height of four (4) feet above the road surface.
6) Traffic Impact Assessment and Analysis - All proposed Site Review applications
shall be reviewed by the Technical Review Committee (TRC) and Planning Board to
ascertain that adequate provisions have been made by the applicant for traffic safety.
To facilitate this review, the applicant shall provide a Traffic Impact Assessment and
Analysis to document existing traffic conditions in the vicinity (adjacent roadway
network) of a proposed development project, to describe the volume and effect of
projected traffic generated by the proposed project, and to identify measures
proposed to mitigate any adverse impacts on traffic. All analyses must meet the
minimum requirements of a "Standard" analysis. If any of the following thresholds
apply, then an "Advanced" analysis must be completed:
a) Trip generation exceeding 400 average daily trips or 48 peak hour trips. Peak
hour is defined as any of the following:
i) AM peak hour (6-9 AM);
ii) PM peak hour (4-7 PM);
4/17/18 Revision
8
iii) Saturday midday peak hour (llAM-lPM); and
iv) Peak hour of generator for certain land uses (e.g., school, movie theater) if
it falls outside the three previously listed periods. Analysis of Saturday
midday peak only applies to commercial uses with retail trade.
Notwithstanding the threshold criteria above, the Town Planner may require an
"Advanced" analysis because of special circumstances. The requirements for a "Standard"
or an "Advanced" analysis are contained in the Policy document entitled, "Town of Milton
Traffic Impact Assessment and Analysis Standards". This document is available in the
Land Use Office and may be found on the Town web-site. Potential applicants are
strongly encouraged to consult with the Town Planner early in the project design
regarding the scoping of the Traffic Impact Assessment and Analysis, including
consideration of the study area boundary and any special considerations for the area
that the development is proposed. A draft of the Traffic Impact Assessment and
Analysis shall be completed prior to the final Technical Review Committee meeting
so that it can be included in the discussion. A complete version of the analysis shall
be finished prior to the first meeting at which the application will be presented to the
Planning Board so that Abutters and the Planning Board will have an opportunity for
review.
7) The Planning Board may require that the applicant hire a traffic consultant to prepare
a traffic impact study to determine if the development proposal will generate traffic
volumes that require traffic control measures such as deceleration or acceleration lanes,
adequate turning radii for driveways, or driveways designed with adequate entrance
depth.
11. Design Standards and Required Improvements Checklist
A. Off-Street Parking and Loading - General Requirements
1) All developments shall make adequate provisions for off-street parking and loading
facilities. The plan shall depict the striping, signage, curb stops or other means of
identifying required parking spaces. Such facilities shall be designed to ensure the
orderly flow of traffic on the site. The design shall also minimize the impact of
intrusive elements of parking and loading such as noise, dust, and glare upon
neighboring properties and land uses.
2) Whenever an existing use is expanded or changed to a new use, parking and/or
loading facilities shall be provided for such new use.
3) Every development shall provide an area for parking and loading on the site which
is properly drained.
4) All developments shall provide for parking and loading to be situated on the same
parcel of land as the primary use or structure except when off-street public parking is
available. The calculations used to determine the number of parking spaces shall be
shown on the plan using the Parking Table on following page in consultation with the
Town Planner and the Technical Review Committee (TRC).
4/17/18 Revision
9
PARKING REGULATION TABLE*
Columns are cumulative, not exclusive.
Vehicle parking spaces
Use
Per
Unit
Per
Seats
Per
Employee
on
maximum
shift
Per
bed
Per
Square
footage
Notes
Adult Dav Care 1 plus 5 visitor spaces per employee
Auditorium 0.25
Auto Retail 300
Bar/Nightclub
1
plus eating and drinking reqmnt.
Bed and Breakfast 1
Car dealership 1000 sf is for the total developed area of the lot
Carpet retailer 600
Childcare 1 plus 1 per 3 children at maximum capacity
Church 0.25
Congregate Care Facility
Apartment style
1
1
Congregate Care Facility Nursing
home style
2
1
Eating and Drinking
Establishment
0.5
1
200
gross floor area /alternative)
Education Institution (9-12,
College)
1
plus 1 per 6 students at maximum
capacity
Education Institution IK-8) 0.2 1 per seat calc. by largest assembly room
Elderly Assisted Care Home 1 2
Funeral Home 8 spaces per chapel, 10 spaces minimum
Furniture dealer 600
Gasoline Service 1 250 plus 1 space per pump
General Office 325
General Retail 250 net floor area
Grocery Store 200 net floor area
Group Home 1 0.5
10
Use
Per
Unit
Per
Seats
Per
Employee on
maximum
shift
Per
bed
Per
Square
footage
Notes
Hardware store 600
Hospital 0.5
Hotel/Motel 1 400 SF is added if public space is included
Laundry 300
Manufacturing 500
Medical/ dental office 1 200
Municipal Building>: 400
Museum 1 250 public floor area
Nursing Home 1 1 0.5
Personal Service Establishment 300
Pharmacy 200 net floor area
Professional office 1 300 gross floor area
Real Estate 300
Recreation (commercial or
public)
300
Residential (1 or 2 units) 2
Residential (3 or more units) 3
plus 1 space per bedroom over 2
bedrooms
Rooming House 1
Self-storage 0.1 1
Shopping plaza/center 200 gross leasable space
Theater 0.25
Wholesale Distribution 800
5) There shall be adequate parking for the handicapped in accordance with the
provisions contained in the Americans with Disabilities Act.
6) Consideration shall be made for the plowing and storage or removal of snow during
the winter months.
7) Parking lots shall be designed to avoid vehicles backing into the street.
8) Parking lots and driveway entrances for non-residential uses shall be designed to
prevent vehicles on the roadway from queuing up while waiting to access the site.
B. Signs
1) All development proposals shall submit designs for all signage. The size and
location of existing signs shall be noted on the plan.
2) Sign size, type, location, height and illumination shall conform to the Milton Zoning
Ordinance.
11
3) Any sign which refers to a discontinued commercial use shall be removed, pursuant
to the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Milton.
4) All signs shall be maintained in good condition and in good repair at all times.
C. Landscaping
1) All landscaping shall be maintained and cared for including mowing and pruning
where necessary, and shall be kept free from disease, pests, weeds, and refuse. In
general, landscape plans should incorporate plants of varying varieties, heights,
widths, and types.
2) When greenspace is proposed to be changed, a Landscape Plan shall be submitted
which shall include:
a. The location (present and future), size and type, including common names of
all new plant material, to be installed.
b. The location of all existing plant material, to be retained on the site.
c. The location, width and material of all walkways, pathways and handicapped
access.
d. The location, type material and dimensions of all fences, walls, and
outdoor recreation facilities.
3) Selective tree and/or shrub plantings may be required in established buffer areas or
other areas as determined by the board. Buffers of only wood chips or crushed
stone shall not be considered acceptable, where green areas are required.
4) A landscaped buffer area shall be required, or natural plant buffer area shall be
retained wherever a non-residential use of the site abuts an adjacent residential
parcel.
5) Where "screening" is required by Town regulations and ordinances or the Planning
Board, plants shall be of sufficient size and type to create complete and adequate
screening. Alternatively, a combination of plantings and fencing may be used to
create complete and adequate screening.
6) Where a vegetated buffer is required by Site Plan Regulation, Zoning Ordinance, or
the Planning Board, the buffer shall be natural or landscaped, and shall comply with
the requirements of this section.
7) Landscaping Standards:
Plants used in landscapes shall be:
a.) Drought tolerant
b.) Adapted to cold weather and our planting zone
c.) Native or naturalized
d.) Noninvasive and not destructive to native plants
e.) Strong wooded and not brittle; and
f.) Alive and in good condition at the time of planting
D. Building Design and Layout
1) All construction subject to these regulations shall be designed to provide for the
architecturally consistent, harmonious and aesthetically pleasing development of
Milton. The Planning Board shall determine whether applications meet the
requirements of the regulations.
12
2) Recognizing that every property is unique, the Planning Board shall allow some
flexibility of styles, however in all cases designs shall be consistent with traditional
community character and neighborhood context.
3) The Board shall determine whether the design and layout of the building(s) on the
site, including, but not limited to scale and mass, roof design, and the building(s)'
proportions are consistent with the intent of these regulations.
4) The following design elements are required:
a. All roofs shall be pitched or gabled.
b. External building materials shall have an appearance of natural wood,
brick or stone. Exposed cinder block, corrugated steel, aluminum, sheet
plastic, sheet metal or sheet fiberglass materials shall not be allowed as
external siding materials.
c. Architectural details shall be in proportion to the building.
d. Subtle, neutral colors shall be used on larger, plain buildings.
Bright colors shall not be allowed.
The foregoing design elements may be waived in whole or in part by the Board for
written, justified cause provided by the applicant as part of the application. The
Board shall, in consideration of said waivers, offer justification of their decision for
the record that addresses special circumstances where strict conformity would
cause undue hardship or injustice to the owner and that the general spirit, intent,
and purpose of these regulations will not be adversely or substantially affected or
harmed, and that the welfare of the citizens of Milton will be substantially served
and not adversely affected.
5) An accurate rendering or elevation views (to scale) of what the exterior of the
structure will look like shall be submitted as part of the site plan review
application.
6) For subdivisions that involve land designated as "Special Flood Hazard Areas"
(SFHA) by the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP):
a. The Planning Board shall review the proposed development to assure that
all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies
from which approval is required by Federal or State law, including Section
404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972,
33u.s.c. 1334.
b. The Planning Board shall require that all proposals for development greater
than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is the lesser, include Base Flood
Elevation (BFE) data within such proposals (i.e. floodplain boundary and
100-year flood elevation).
c. The Planning Board shall require the applicant to submit sufficient evidence
(construction drawings, grading and land treatment plans) so as to allow a
determination that:
(i) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage;
(ii) All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and
water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damage; and,
(iii) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
E. Internet Access Design and Layout
13
1) All new commercial developments shall design, layout and install underground
conduits or reserve space on specialty and/or utility poles for high speed wireline
and/or wireless data communication access infrastructure.
F. Reserved
1) Reserved.
12. Documentation
A. Applications for Site Plan approval shall include the following documentation:
1) A statement describing the development, including the use or uses to be conducted
on the lot or any changes of an existing use.
2) If the development is to be staged or phased, a description of the project in terms of
such stages which is consistent with said phases depicted on the site plans.
3) Deeds of easements and rights-of-way.
4) Covenants or restrictions that are intended to cover all or part of the land area to be
developed.
5) Articles of Incorporation of a Landowner's Association and the Bylaws of the
Associations.
6) If applicable, the Condominium Declaration, as it has been prepared for submittal to
the State of New Hampshire Attorney General's Office.
7) An electronic file in .pdf form of the site plan, application and materials shall be
submitted at time of application submittal.
13. Administration
A. Enforcement
The Planning Board shall have the power to modify or amend its approval of a Site
Plan on application of the owner, lessee, mortgagee of the premises, or upon its own
motion if such power is reserved by the Board in its original approval.
Further, if the Planning Board finds that any of the conditions of an Approved Final
Site Plan application are violated, the Planning Board shall give notice to the owner
to make such corrections as it deems necessary to bring the site into compliance
with the conditions of such approval. For violations that are structural or
infrastructural, an owner shall comply with such notice within a period of time
extending not more than sixty (60) days from the original violation notice.
For violations that are not structural or infrastructural, the owner shall comply
within 7 days of the violation notice.
All notices of violations shall be by Certified Mail, return receipt requested.
Where the owner fails to conform to the notice and order of the Planning Board,
the Board may, through its authorized agent, impose all fines and penalties
available to it through statutes and local ordinances in addition to other legal or
equitable remedy as may be afforded through appropriate legal action.
14
For any repeated offense the Board may, through its authorized agent, immediately
upon notification of the repeated offense impose all fines and penalties available to
it through statutes and local ordinances in addition to other legal or equitable
remedy as may be afforded through appropriate legal action.
B. Waivers
When, in the judgment of the Planning Board, special circumstances exist where
strict conformity ,with any specific requirements of these regulations would cause
undue hardship or injustice to the owner of the land to be developed and being
reviewed, and where the review procedures have been in general conformity with
these regulations and provided the general spirit, intent, and purpose of these
regulations will not be adversely or substantially affected or harmed, and further
provided that the public convenience and welfare of the citizens of Milton will be
substantially served and not adversely affected, the Planning Board may waive or
modify such specific requirements of these regulations.
In approving waivers, the Planning Board may require such conditions as will, in
its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements of
these regulations.
A petition for any waiver shall be submitted in writing by the applicant when the
application is filed for the consideration of the Planning Board. The petition shall
state fully the grounds for the waiver and all the facts relied upon by the petitioner.
C. Site Inspection
The Board and/or its designated agent shall conduct a Site Inspection for
determining natural/built-up conditions of the site and to review the layout of the
proposed improvements. All site improvements shall be constructed and/or
installed within a period of time mutually agreed upon by the applicant and the
Planning Board, unless such time is extended by written mutual consent of the
Planning Board and the applicant. Such improvements shall not be considered
complete until officially inspected and approved by the Town Engineer (as
appropriate), Town Planner, Fire Chief, Police Chief and DPW Director/Road
Agent or accepted by the Planning Board, as appropriate, and a Certificate of
Completion is issued.
D. Special Investigative Studies
Pursuant to RSA 674:44 it shall be the responsibility of the developer, if the Board
deems it necessary, to pay reasonable fees for the review of documents, the cost of
Special Investigative Studies, Board Administrative Fees and other matters which
may be required for specific applications.
E. Procedure for Applications Requiring the Zoning Board of Adjustment Action
An applicant who is proposing to develop, make a change in use, expand an
existing use or construct and/or operate a facility which requires a Special
Exception or Variance from the Zoning Ordinance-shall be required to submit
applications to the Milton Planning Board for a Site Plan Review, preferably
subsequent to obtaining any required variance relief or special exception from the
Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA). The applicant may, however, apply to the
Planning Board either concurrently or prior to obtaining approvals from the ZBA
or other Boards with the understanding that any approvals from the Planning Board
15
shall be conditional on receiving said required approvals from said Boards with
jurisdiction.
F. Final Approval
1) All approvals are subject to completion of Conditions of Approval if any exist. No
Occupancy Permits will be issued by the Building Inspector/Code Enforcement
Officer until all subsequent conditions are satisfied, including submission of an asbuilt
plan, unless otherwise permitted in the Notice of Decision.
2) Approved site plans shall be protected from future amendments in regulations and
ordinances in accordance with RSA 674:39. In order to be protected under RSA
674:39, the owner shall have completed active and substantial development, which
is defined as the construction of basic infrastructure to support the development,
including foundation walls and footings, driveway and parking lot construction to a
minimum of gravel base, utilities placed in underground conduits, construction of
all drainage improvements, and installation of all erosion and sediment control
measures. Substantial completion shall be defined as the completion of all on-site
and off-site improvements specified in the site plan approval.
3) The applicant shall submit three (3) sets of final plans and documents to the Land
Use Office in hard copy form and one (1) pdf format file of the application and
other written documents, along with a pdf file of the final plans in a size not to
exceed five (5) Mb at time of plan submittal for signing and recording.
G. Appeals
1) In accordance with RSA 676:5 III, Appeals to Board of Adjustments, if in the exercise
of subdivision or site plan review, the planning board makes any decision or
determination which is based upon the terms of the zoning ordinance, or upon any
construction, interpretation, or application of the zoning ordinance, which would be
appealable to the Board of Adjustment if it had been made by the administrative
officer, then such decision may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment under this
Section; provided, however, that if the zoning ordinance contains an innovative land
use control adopted in accordance with RSA 674:21, Innovative Land Use Controls,
which delegates administration, including the granting of conditional or special use
permits, to the planning board, then the planning board's decision made pursuant to
that delegation cannot be appealed to the board of adjustment, but may be appealed to
the superior court as provided by RSA 677:15, Court Reviews.
2) In accordance with RSA 677:15 I, any persons aggrieved by any decision of the
planning board concerning a plat or subdivision may present to the superior court a
petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal or unreasonable in
whole or in part and specifying the grounds upon which the same is claimed to be
illegal or unreasonable.
14. General Definitions
A. For the purpose of these regulations, certain rules of construction apply to the text, as follows:
a. Words used in the present tense include the future tense and the singular includes the plural, unless the
context indicates otherwise.
b. The word "person" includes a corporation or firm as well as an individual.
c. The word "structure" includes the word "building."
d. The word "lot" includes the word "plot," "tract", or "parcel."
e. The term "shall" shall be construed to mean mandatory and not discretionary; the word “should” shall
be construed to mean highly encouraged and the word "may" shall be construed to mean permitted but
16
not mandatory.
f. The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or structure shall be construed to include the
words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied."
g. Any word or term not herein defined shall be used with a meaning of common standard use.
B. Specific Definitions. For the purposes of these regulations, the following definitions shall apply to the
text, as follows:
Abutting: Having a common border with or being separated from such a common border by a right-ofway,
alley, easement or body of water, such as a river or stream.
Access Management: Providing or managing access to land development while simultaneously
preserving the flow of traffic on the surrounding road system in terms of safety, capacity and speed.
Accessory Building: A subordinate structure detached from but located on the same lot as the principal
structure, the use of which is incidental and accessory to that of the principal structure.
Active and Substantial Development: The threshold level of work as determined by the Planning Board,
with due regard for the scope and detail of a particular project, which shall constitute a sufficient level of
activity being conducted for the purpose of fulfilling paragraph I of NH RSA 674:39, Four Year
Exemption.
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA): Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990; broad legislation
mandating provision of access to employment, services and the built environment to those with
disabilities.
Antenna: Any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, television, personal communications
(PCS), pager networks or any other communications through the sending and/or receiving of
electromagnetic waves of any bandwidth.
Applicant: A person or persons submitting an application for development.
Application: The form and all accompanying documents and exhibits required of an applicant by an
approving authority for development review purposes.
Approval: Recognition by the approving authority, in most cases the Planning Board, certified by
written endorsement on the plan / plat, that the final submission meets the requirements of these
regulations and satisfies, in the judgement of the approving authority, all criteria of good planning and
design.
Approval, Conditional: Recognition by the approving authority that the plan/plat is approved,
contingent on the completion of specific tasks or items required for final approval. These items shall
only be administrative in nature and may be placed under time limits for completion. Until all the
requirements for an approval have been met, a conditional approval does not constitute, or shall be
construed as approval, either implied or granted, of the plan/plat, nor does it bind the approving authority
to approval of the final plan/plat.
Arterial Road: A road whose primary function is mobility, moving people and goods over long
distances quickly and efficiently.
As-Built Plan: A scaled engineering drawing depicting the actual placement of site elements on the
landscape.
Berm: A mound of soil, either natural or manmade, used to obstruct views.
Best Management Practices (BMP): In the context of storm water management, a proven or accepted
structural, non-structural, or vegetative measure the application of which reduces erosion, sediment or
peak storm discharge, or improves the quality of storm water runoff.
Bicycle Facility: A pathway, often paved and separated from streets and sidewalks, designed to be used
17
by bicyclists.
Buffer. The area between parcels within a zoning district or between zoning districts that shall be
landscaped to provide a visual screen and to absorb noise, dirt, dust and litter, pursuant to the standards
in these regulations.
Chicane: A form of curb extension that alternates from one side of the street to the other.
Choker: A barrier to traffic at the intersection of two streets in which one direction of the street is
blocked, but traffic from the opposite direction is allowed to pass through.
Co-location: The use of an existing tower or an existing telecommunications facility for duplicate or
multiple purposes and uses.
Color Rendering Index (CRI): A measurement of the amount of color shift that objects undergo when
lighted by a light source as compared with the color of those same objects when seen under a reference
light source of comparable color temperature. CRI values generally range from 0 to 100, where 100
represents incandescent light.
Collector Road: A road connecting arterial roads to local roads, whose function is divided between
providing mobility and access.
Commercial Hauler: Any person who owns, operates or leases vehicles for contracting to collect or
transport solid waste and/or source separated materials from residential, commercial or industrial
properties.
Curb: A stone, concrete or other improved boundary usually marking the edge of the roadway or paved
area.
Curb Cut: The opening along the curb line at which point vehicles may enter or leave the roadway.
Cutoff Angle: The angle formed by a line drawn from the direction of the direct light rays at the light
source with respect to the vertical, beyond which no direct light is emitted.
Critical Areas: Disturbed areas of any size within 50 feet of a stream, bog, waterbody or poorly or very
poorly drained soils; disturbed areas exceeding 2,000 square feet in highly erodible soils; or disturbed
areas containing slope lengths exceeding 25 feet on slopes greater than 15 percent.
Deceleration Lane: Right turn lanes and tapers removing turning and slow-moving vehicles from the
travel lane of the road.
Decibel: A standard unit of acoustic measurement having a zero-reference of two ten-thousandth
(0.0002) microbar. Microbar is a unit of pressure measurement.
Deed Restriction: A restriction of the use of land set forth in the deed.
Development: Any construction or land construction or grading activities other than for agricultural and
silvicultural practices.
Direct Light: Light emitted from the lamp, off the reflector or reflector diffuser, or through the refractor
or diffuser lens, of a luminaire.
Disturbed Area: An area where the natural vegetation has been removed, exposing the underlying soil,
or where it has been altered by human activity.
Driveway: A private roadway providing access to a street or highway.
Dwelling Unit: A room or group of rooms located within a dwelling forming a habitable unit for one
family.
18
Easement: A grant of one or more of the property rights by the owner to, or for the use by, the public, a
corporation or another person or entity. Elevation, Building: The view of a vertical plane of one side of
a building.
Erosion: The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity.
Façade, Building: The face of a building.
Farm/Farming: This term shall have the same meaning as that set forth in RSA 21:34-a, as amended.
Fill: Sand, gravel, earth or other materials of any composition whatsoever placed or deposited by
humans.
Fixture: The assembly that houses a lamp or lamps, and which may include a housing, a mounting
bracket or pole socket, a lamp holder, a ballast, a reflector or mirror, and/or a refractor, lens or diffuser
lens.
Floodplain: Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water
from any source.
Forced Turns: A form of traffic island that prevents traffic from executing specific movements at an
intersection.
Frontage: The length of any one property line of a premises which abuts a legally accessible street rightof
way.
Flood or Spot Luminaire: Any light fixture or lamp that incorporates a reflector or refractor to
concentrate the light output into a directed beam in a particular direction.
Full-Cutoff (FCO): A light fixture with a shield such that all its light output is aimed below horizontal to
the ground. Full cutoff fixtures cutoff all upward transmission of light.
Glare: Light emitted from a luminaire with an intensity great enough to produce annoyance, discomfort
or a reduction in a viewer's ability to see.
Hazardous Waste: Any refuse, sludge, or other waste material or combination of in a solid, semi-solid,
liquid or contained gaseous form which because of its quantity, concentration, chemical, physical, or
infectious characteristics may: 1) cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an
increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible illness; or 2) pose a substantial present or
potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of or otherwise managed. Categories of hazardous waste material include, but are not limited
to: explosives, flammables, oxidizers, poisons, irritants and corrosives. Hazardous waste material as
defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended.
Height of Luminaire: The vertical distance from the finished grade of the ground directly below to the
lowest direct light emitting part of the luminaire.
Highly Erodible Soils: Any soil with an erodibility class (K factor) greater than or equal to 0.43 in any
layer as found in Table 3-1 of the Storm Water Management and Erosion and Sediment Control
Handbook for Urban and Developing Areas in New Hampshire.
IESNA: Illuminating Engineering Society of North America. An organization that recommends
standards for the lighting industry.
Impervious Surface: Any material that substantially reduces or prevents the infiltration of storm water
into the soil. Impervious surfaces include but are not limited to roofs, patios, balconies, decks, streets,
driveways, parking areas, sidewalks and any concrete, stone, brick, asphalt or compacted gravel surface.
19
Indirect Light: Direct light that has been reflected off other surfaces not part of the luminaire.
Lamp: The component of a luminaire that produces the actual light.
Light Pollution: Night-sky brightness (sky glow) caused by the scattering of light in the atmosphere.
Sources include light projected above the horizontal plane or light reflected from illuminated sources
such as roadways.
Light Trespass: The shining of direct light produced by a luminaire beyond the boundaries of the lot or
parcel on which it is located.
Local Road: A road whose primary function is to provide access to adjacent development.
Locus Map: A map depicting the location of the subject site, subdivision or location within a larger
geographic area, such as a neighborhood, municipality or region, for the purpose of identifying the
relative location.
Lot: A parcel of land occupied, or intended to be occupied, by a building and its accessory buildings, or
by group dwellings and their accessory buildings, or by group dwellings and their accessory buildings
together with such open spaces as are required, having at least the minimum area required for a lot in the
zoning district in which such lot is located and having adequate principal frontage on a public street.
Lumen: A measure of light energy generated by a light source. One-foot candle is one lumen per square
foot. For purposes of these regulations, the lumen output shall be the initial lumen output of a lamp, as
rated by the manufacturer.
Luminaire: A complete lighting system, including a lamp or lamps and a fixture.
Median: A barrier placed between lanes of traffic flowing in opposite directions or between parking
spaces.
Multifamily Structure: A building containing three or more dwelling units, including units that are
located one over the other.
Noise: A loud and/or unwanted sound. [See Sound]
Nonresidential Use of Land: Any use of land excluding uses that are solely for residential purposes.
Nuisance: A use of property or course of conduct that interferes with the legal rights of others by
causing damage, annoyance or inconvenience.
Odor: The property or quality of a thing that affects, stimulates or is perceived by the sense of smell.
The perception experience when one or more chemicals come in contact with the olfactory nerves and
stimulate the olfactory nerve.
Off-Street Loading: Designated areas located adjacent to buildings where trucks may load and unload
cargo.
Off-Street Parking Space: A temporary storage area for a motor vehicle that is directly accessible to an
access aisle and that is not located on a dedicated street right-of-way.
On-Street Parking Space: A temporary storage area for a motor vehicle that is located on a dedicated
street right-of-way.
Parking Aisle: The area of a parking lot that allows motor vehicles ingress and egress from the
driveways or streets.
Parking Lot: An outdoor area where motor vehicles may be stored for the purposes of temporary, daily
or overnight off-street parking.
20
Parking Space: A temporary storage area for a motor vehicle.
Pedestrian: A person traveling on foot; a walker. A person operating a pushcart; a person riding on, or
pulling a coaster wagon, sled, scooter, tricycle, bicycle with wheels less than 14 inches in diameter, or a
similar conveyance, or on roller skates, skateboard, wheelchair or a baby in a carriage.
Pedestrian District: Districts characterized by dense mixed-use development with a concentration of
pedestrian-generating activities. Improvements in the right-of-way provide for the ease of pedestrian
movement using appropriate design treatments.
Permit: Written governmental permission issued by an authorized official, empowering the holder
thereof to do some act not forbidden by law but not allowed without such authorization.
Plat: 1) a map showing actual or planned features, such as streets and building lots; or 2) a map of a
town/city, section or subdivision indicating the location and boundaries of individual properties.
Project Area: The area within the subdivision or site plan boundaries.
Protected Parking: A landscaped island projecting out from the curb, separating parking bays from other
uses.
Right-of-way: An easement held by the municipality or the state over land owned by the adjacent
property owners that allows the holder to exercise control over the surface and above and below the
ground of the right-of-way. Property owners are typically responsible for the construction of
transportation improvements adjacent to their property. The municipality or the state maintains the
street, while the property owner is responsible for maintaining the sidewalk.
Road: See STREET.
Road Undulations: Raised humps in the paved surface of a street that extend across the driveway.
Roundabout: An intersection control measure composed of a circular, raised, center island with
deflecting islands on the intersecting streets to direct traffic movement around the circle. Roundabouts
shall meet the design requirements of FHWA, Roundabouts: An Informational Guide, publication
#FHWA RD-00-067, 2001 or its successors.
Rumble Strips: Patterned sections of rough pavement or cobblestone strips across a street that cause a
slight vibration in a motor vehicle.
Scaled Plan: A plan, not necessarily prepared by a professional engineer or surveyor, usually at a scale
of 1” = 40’ or 1” = 50’, that shows sufficient detail to enable the Planning Board to review such plans
according to the provisions of Section 3.3.1. A pre-existing septic design or subdivision plan may be
deemed appropriate for this review, or the reviewing body may require additional information to be
placed on such plans to enable sufficient and detailed review.
Sediment: Solid material, either mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is transported, or has been
moved from its site of origin by erosion.
Setback: The distance between any building and the lot line on a parcel of land. Typically described as
front, side and rear setback.
Semi-Diverter: A barrier to traffic at the intersection of two streets in which one direction of the street is
blocked, but traffic from the opposite direction is allowed to pass through.
Sidewalk: An improved facility intended to provide for pedestrian movement; usually, but not always,
located in the public right-of-way adjacent to a roadway. Typically constructed of concrete.
Sidewalk Corridor: The portion of the pedestrian system from the edge of the roadway to the edge of the
21
right-of-way, generally along the sides of streets, between street corners. The sidewalk corridor
functions to provide an environment for walking that is separated from vehicle movement.
Site Specific Soil Mapping Standards: Soil mapping standards consistent with the National Cooperative
Soil Survey Standards, acceptable to the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services under
authority of RSA 485-A.
Solid Waste: Garbage, refuse, demolition waste, sludge from a water supply treatment plant or air
contaminant treatment facility and other discarded waste materials and sludges, in solid, semi-solid,
liquid or contained gaseous form, resulting from industrial, commercial, mining and agricultural
operations and from community activities. It does not include hazardous waste, animal waste used as
fertilizer, earthen fill, boulders, rock, sewage sludge, solids or dissolved material in domestic sewage or
resources, such as silt. It does not include dissolved or suspended solids in industrial wastewater
effluents or discharges which are point sources subject to permits under Section 402 of the Federal
Waste Pollution Control Act, as amended. It also does not include source, special nuclear or by-product
material as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended.
Solid Waste Storage: The holding of solid waste near the point of generation.
Sound: An oscillation in pressure, partial velocity or other physical parameter in a medium with internal
forces that cause compression and refraction of the medium.
Sound Level Meter: An instrument, including a microphone, an amplifier, an output meter and
frequency weighting networks, used for the measurement of sound in a specified manner and calibrated
in decibels.
Special Exception: A use permitted in a particular zoning district upon showing that such use in a
specified location will comply with all the conditions and standards for the location or operation of the
use as specified in the zoning ordinance and authorized by the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
Stabilized: When the soil erosion rate approaches that of undisturbed soils. Soils which are disturbed
will be considered protected when covered with a healthy, mature growth of grass or a good covering of
hay or straw mulch (2 tons/acre). Mulch is only a temporary measure; ultimately, the site needs
vegetation.
Storm water Runoff: The water from precipitation that is not absorbed, evaporated, or otherwise stored
within the contributing drainage area. Stream: Areas of flowing water occurring for sufficient time to
develop and maintain defined channels but may not flow during dry portions of the year. Includes but is
not limited to all perennial and intermittent streams located on U.S. Geological Survey Maps.
Street: Any vehicular way that is: 1) an existing state or municipal roadway; 2) shown upon a plat
approved pursuant to law; or 3) approved by other official action; including rights-of-way, whether
improved or unimproved.
“T” Intersection: An at-grade intersection where one of the intersecting legs is perpendicular to the other
two.
Tax Map: The recorded map of delineated lots or tracts in a municipality showing boundaries, bearings,
sizes and dimensions, including the sheet and lot number.
Telecommunications Facility: Any structure, antenna, tower, or device that provides commercial mobile
wireless services, unlicensed wireless services, cellular phone services, specialized mobile radio
communications (SMR) and personal communications services (PCS), and common carrier wireless
exchange access services.
Temporary Decorative Lighting: The specific illumination of an outside area or object by any manmade
device located outdoors that produces light by any means for a period of less than 30 days, with at
least 180 days passing before being used again. All seasonal and temporary lighting should be rated less
than 1,800 lumens.
22
Tower: A structure that is designed and constructed primarily for supporting one or more antennas,
including self-supported lattice towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers,
microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and
the like.
Traffic Study: A traffic impact study to determine the effect of a proposed development, both on and off
site, and propose appropriate mitigation measures.
Traffic Calming: Methods for slowing traffic to prevent conflicts with pedestrians, bicycles and other
slow-moving vehicles.
Variance: Permission to depart from the literal requirements of a zoning ordinance as granted by the
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
Waiver: Permission to depart from the requirements of a regulation with respect to submission of
required documents or specific actions required.
Walkway: A pedestrian facility, whether in the public right-of-way or on private property, which is
provided for the benefit and use of the public.
Wetland: An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and
duration sufficient to support, and that, under normal circumstances, does support, a prevalence of
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic
vegetation.
15. Design & Construction Standards
A. Vehicular Circulation Standards
1) General Provisions. All site plans shall portray the design of all streets and driveways that provide
access to roadways within the municipality, unless otherwise specified. All site plans shall adhere
to the specifications and guidelines set forth in Section 5.0 of these regulations. The Planning
Board may require that work involving areas of special sensitivity or significance be conducted by
a traffic Engineer.
2) Street Impact. The applicant is responsible for assessing the impact of the proposed development
on street systems and shall be responsible for any associated improvements. If the Planning Board
deems it necessary, the applicant shall undertake to improve, repair or reconstruct such street
systems. If the Planning Board requires such actions, the applicant shall be responsible only for
the degree of improvement necessary to mitigate the impact of the proposed development.
3) Performance. The internal network of streets and driveways shall not be wider than needed to
accommodate demonstrated traffic demand. Each street or driveway’s design shall be based on its
anticipated role within the development and the municipality. The internal network of streets and
driveways shall be designed to permit the safe, efficient and orderly movement of traffic; to meet,
but not exceed, the needs of the present and future population served; to have a simple and logical
pattern; to respect natural features and topography; and to present an attractive streetscape.
4) General Street and Driveway Design.
a. Street Classification. The size and design needs of new streets shall be based upon
the projected number of vehicles they are to carry. All streets shall be classified in
the site plan review process according to the functional street classification defined
by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials
(AASHTO) “Green Book,” A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets.
b. Design and Dedication Standards. Streets intended for public dedication shall
23
satisfy the Street Standards found in the Milton Subdivision Regulations. Driveways
shall satisfy the Driveway Standards found in the Milton Subdivision Regulations &
the Milton Driveway Regulations. Where street design criteria are not provided,
then streets shall be designed in accordance with the American Association of State
Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) “Green Book,” A Policy on
Geometric Design of Highways and Streets. The Fire Chief and Town/City
Engineer shall review the design of all streets and driveways prior to final approval
by the Planning Board.
c. Travel Lanes. All streets and driveways shall only have turn lanes, deceleration
lanes or more than one travel lane in each direction if it can be demonstrated,
through a traffic model or study conducted by a Traffic Engineer, that more than
temporary congestion is anticipated. Where a total of four or more lanes are
planned, planted medians shall be utilized to reduce the visual impact of pavement.
d. Conservation of Scenic Features. The internal network of streets and driveways
shall conserve scenic features, including but not limited to mature trees, stone walls
and riparian vegetation.
e. Multi-Modal Transportation. The internal network of streets and driveways shall provide for
the smooth, safe, convenient and functional movement of all modes of transportation,
including vehicles, public transit, bikes and pedestrians. Priority shall be given to pedestrian
circulation. Conflicts between pedestrians, bicycles and vehicles shall be minimized.
Separation of systems shall be created through design elements such as changes in grade,
materials, screens and structures. All retail establishments, restaurants, banks and service
businesses which offer drive-through facilities shall be equipped with a designated drive
through lane for each individual window or piece of equipment intended to serve drive
through patrons. Each lane shall be at least 11-feet in pavement width, be striped and signed
properly for the intended use and shall accommodate a minimum of six passenger sized
vehicles without blockage of site circulation drives and parking spaces outside of the drive
through area.
f. Construction Requirements. All streets and driveways shall be built according to the
approved site plan, as determined by the Town/City Engineer, prior to the issuance
of a building permit for any portion of the development.
g. Applicants for non-residential and multi-family sites accessed from public streets
under the jurisdiction of the New Hampshire Department of Transportation
(NHDOT) shall be required to obtain a valid NHDOT driveway permit prior to final
approval for such development. In cases where a proposed non-residential or
multifamily site is to be accessed from a public street under the jurisdiction of the
Town of Milton, the applicant shall be required to obtain a local driveway permit
from the Town of Milton Road Agent as part of site plan review.
h. All private streets, and access drives to non-residential and multi-family sites shall be
afforded sight distance sufficient to fulfill the requirements of Section IV-B (4) (b) (6)
of the Milton Subdivision Regulations.
B. Parking Standards
1) Parking Provision. Parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the minimum and
maximum parking provision standards found in the Parking Regulation Table in this regulation
whenever any new use is established. Any use not referred to or listed shall provide parking as
recommended by the Town Planner and required by the Planning Board.
2) Shared Parking Provision. Parking provision for any combination of uses on the same site shall
consider the opportunity for combined visits (i.e. one parking space in front of a gas station pump
may count as one parking space for both the convenience store and the gas station in a combined
gas station/convenience store development). Shared parking arrangements with adjoining
nonresidential developments or other uses on site are encouraged. Off-site shared parking shall be
24
protected with a shared parking easement agreement which shall be reviewed and approved by the
Planning Board and recorded with the approved site plan.
3) On-Street Parking. A maximum of 20% percent of the minimum parking requirement may be
provided by on-street parking when such parking is provided within 400 feet of the proposed
development. A parking study outlining the ability of on-street parking to accommodate the
proposed development shall be submitted to the Planning Board for approval.
4) Dimensional Requirements.
a) Spaces shall be 9 feet x 18 feet, exclusive of drive aisle width. A maximum of 25%
of the required parking spaces are encouraged to be compact car spaces. Compact
car spaces shall be 9 feet x 17 feet, exclusive of drive aisle width.
b) Drive aisle width shall be 24 feet minimum, 26 feet maximum (either one or twoway
circulation) for 90º (perpendicular) parking. Aisle width shall be 12 feet
minimum, 14 feet maximum (one-way circulation only) for 0º (parallel) parking.
When any combination of these types of parking is used, facing the same aisle, the
more restrictive drive aisle width requirement shall apply.
5) Parking Lot Location.
a) Parking shall be located within 400 feet of the principal use and connected to the
principal use by a five (5) foot wide pedestrian path.
b) Parking shall not be permitted in any required setback or between the principal
structure and a public street, including corner lots. Parking shall be located to the
side or rear of the principal structure. The Planning Board may waive this
requirement in situations where lot configuration or use renders such parking lot
location impractical, however, effort shall be made to locate parking to the side or
rear of buildings. The maximum parking provision, shared parking, on-street
parking and compact space allowances reduce the amount of impervious surface.
c) Side yard parking shall be limited to a single row of vehicles.
6) Parking Lot Design Criteria.
a) To ensure safe pedestrian circulation, angle parking shall not be permitted except in
a village area where angle parking is the previously accepted practice. Only 0-
degree (perpendicular) or 90-degree (parallel) parking spaces shall be provided.
b) A minimum eight (8) foot wide planting median shall be provided between adjacent
rows of parking. One (1) shade tree shall be provided per each forty (40) feet length
of planting median. The maximum number of continuous parking spaces permitted
shall be eight (8). A minimum ten (10) foot wide landscape island shall be provided
to break up continuous parking areas. Each landscape island shall contain a
minimum of one (1) shade tree.
c) The purpose of locating the parking lot to the rear and/or side of the principal
structure is to avoid the “sea of parking” look common to many new commercial
developments. This provision ensures that the building is the focal point of the
development and allows for better pedestrian access from the street and a longer
throat length (driveway length) to facilitate access.
d) Parking to the rear and the side allows for full emergency service vehicle access to
the entire structure, as access to the front of the structure is from the roadway.
e) Parking lot location is especially important in historic rural town centers, as most
buildings are traditionally facing the street.
f) One shrub per 200 square feet of paved parking and access drive area shall be
provided within the planting median and landscape islands. At least 40% of such
shrubs shall be evergreen.
g) A minimum 5-foot wide pedestrian path shall be provided throughout the site,
connecting adjacent streets, sidewalks and parking area(s) to the entrances of all
structures. Pedestrian paths shall be marked by accent strips of brick, concrete block
or textured paving materials to define pedestrian walkways and crosswalks.
25
Pedestrian paths may be incorporated with accessible routes as required by the
Americans’ with Disabilities Act, as amended.
h) Parking areas shall be screened from view using land forms, vegetation and/or
fences of a design in keeping with the surrounding area.
i) Islands with trees or landscaped basins should be added to visually breakup large
areas of asphalt. The beds should be below the parking lot grade to capture the
rainwater. This will add water for the plants and help groundwater recharge. For
small rural parking lots, such landscaping standards may be unnecessary, especially
where existing trees surrounding the site are preserved as a landscape buffer.
j) A pedestrian path through the parking lot provides safe and attractive route to a
commercial development.
k) Every effort shall be made to use pervious parking surfaces as an alternative to
impervious asphalt or concrete for overflow parking areas. Pervious paving areas
can be used to facilitate groundwater recharge and reduce the need for curbs and
gutters as drainage features.
C. Landscaping Standards
1) Purpose. The intent of landscaping regulations is to achieve a high-quality site appearance, to
assure design compatibility, to direct character and form, to conserve water, and to enhance the
overall value of the community. The purpose of specific provisions contained in these regulations
is to:
a) Enhance the aesthetics of nonresidential and multifamily developments
b) Create a pedestrian-friendly environment
c) Break up the mass of buildings and impervious areas
d) Soften architectural and structural materials
e) Provide screening of service structures (dumpsters, etc.)
f) Enhance the public or private streetscape
g) Provide visual and climatic relief from broad expanses of pavement and
define areas for pedestrian and vehicular circulation
h) Control airborne particulates such as soot and dirt
i) Provide buffers between incompatible land-uses or sites
j) Retain as much of the original vegetation as possible and incorporate into
site design
k) Encourage preservation and enhancement of community character
2) Landscaping Plan. A landscaping plan shall be submitted with each application for major site plan
review showing existing and proposed features, and the locations of all plant materials. A plant
schedule shall accompany the plan, indicating the botanical and common names, size, quantity,
and description for all proposed plants. Existing trees, shrubs and plant beds to be retained shall be
described. Landscape plans shall incorporate water conservation planting techniques and hardy
plant materials. The landscaping plan shall incorporate the following:
a) All setbacks and areas of open space as required by the Zoning Ordinance
shall retain existing natural features or be landscaped as required by this
Section. Natural features and existing native vegetation should be retained
where possible.
b) Existing non-native invasive plants (including grasses, shrubs and trees)
shall be removed and destroyed.
c) Existing healthy mature native trees (6” caliper or greater) shall be retained
as practical and incorporated into the overall landscape plan.
d) No loam or other topsoil shall be removed from the site as part of site
development. Topsoil shall be appropriately stockpiled and stabilized for
redistribution within new planting areas.
26
e) Existing topography shall be maintained wherever feasible. Those areas
that shall be disturbed shall be replaced with a minimum of 4” of suitable
topsoil either from the stockpile or off-site and then be replanted with grass
seed, sod or other vegetative groundcover.
f) Revegetated areas shall be replanted with hardy native species appropriate
to the site.
g) Dead vegetation shall be promptly replaced, based on standard seasonal
planting practices with healthy living plants in all required landscape areas.
All planting areas shall be landscaped with a combination of climate tolerant
plant material and protective ground cover. Bare soil is not permitted.
h) All proposed plantings shall be appropriate for the soils, weather and
environmental conditions of the site. Attention shall be paid to potential
road salt and other deicing chemicals. Plant materials shall be of specimen
quality conforming to the American Standards for Nursery Stock (ANSI
Z60.1-1980 or later revision) and shall be guaranteed for at least one and
one-half years.
i) Side slopes shall not exceed thirty-three (33) percent (3:1 slope), and shall
be appropriately stabilized with loam and seed, hydroseed, sod, ground
cover or mulching materials.
j) Existing landscaping, trees and planting materials to be retained shall be
protected as necessary during construction to avoid damage.
k) Tree wells over 6 inches deep or other landscape features that have the
potential to present a falling hazard to the public shall have grates, fences or
other protective measures installed.
l) All trees where required shall be welled and protected against change of
grade. m. A minimum of twenty (20%) percent of land shall remain in its
natural state or be maintained as appropriately landscaped area. Undisturbed
wooded areas may be included in this calculation.
3) Planting Requirements. The purpose of planting requirements is to enhance the long-term
survival prospects of the plant materials used in site landscaping. These standards are also meant
to ensure that the benefits of site landscaping (buffering, aesthetic enhancement, erosion control,
etc.) are realized as early after planting as possible. The following standards for planting
requirements shall apply:
a) Planting holes for trees shall be at least two to three times the width of the
rootball and shall be no deeper than the container. Shrubs shall have a
planting hole three to five times the width of the rootball and shall not be
deeper than the rootball itself.
b) Evergreen trees shall be hardy with a minimum 6-foot height at planting,
full and well branched, unless otherwise specified by the guidelines.
Evergreen trees are typically planted in groups of a minimum of three trees,
diagonally spaced according to the species requirements.
c) Evergreen shrubs shall be a minimum of 2½ feet high at planting, full and
well branched, unless otherwise specified by the guidelines.
d) Deciduous or flowering shrubs shall be planted at 3½ foot height, full and
well branched, unless otherwise specified by the guidelines.
e) Ground cover shall be a low growing plant, other than turf or grass, which
forms a continuous cover over the ground surface.
f) All local and state requirements for setbacks and sight distance shall take
precedence for selection and placement of landscaping features, as
applicable. g. Plant materials shall be massed for maximum effect.
g) Front yard landscaping area may contain any of the following:
i) Public utility easements and open surface drainage easements shall not
occupy more than thirty (30) percent of the required landscape area.
27
ii) Mechanical installations may be used, if they do not encroach more than
five (5) feet into the required landscape area. Such equipment shall be
100% screened with landscape material from any view from a public
right-of-way, pedestrian walkway, or off-site area requiring buffering.
4) Shade and Street Trees (including street/sidewalk trees). All final applications shall meet the
following standards for shade and street trees:
a) Shade trees shall be hardy, drought and salt tolerant, 12 feet tall at planting
and deciduous. Such trees shall be planted at 2½ to 3-inch caliper.
b) Shade trees shall be required along streets, parking and drives as specified in
these regulations.
c) Street tree areas shall be planted in a continuous fifteen (15) foot wide strip
parallel to the lot frontage.
d) One evergreen tree shall be included for every 15 feet of lot line, and one
shade tree for every 40 feet of lot line, spaced not less than twenty (20) feet
apart. Trees may be clustered.
e) The placement of shade and street trees shall incorporate berms, fences and
walls as necessary.
D. Buffering
1) General Requirements. All non-residential and multi-family residential sites shall provide for a
residential buffer conforming with the requirements of this Section.
2) Residential Buffer Dimensions.
a) A continuous residential buffer, having a width of not less than 20 feet, shall
be provided.
b) Structures, pavement, utility construction, signage and similar hardscape
improvements shall not be permitted to encroach on any residential buffer
unless specifically permitted by the Planning Board.
3) Design Requirements for Residential Buffers. In general, the design intent for residential
buffers shall be to diminish the effects of the more intensive use of nonresidential and multifamily
sites on abutting residential properties. To achieve these goals, applicants of proposed
non-residential and multi-family residential sites may select one or more of the following
options for development of affective buffering:
a) Retention of Existing Vegetation and Forest Canopy. In cases where
existing forest exists along a boundary subject to the residential buffering
requirements of this section, existing, healthy forest canopy and associated
under story vegetation may be used to fulfill the requirements of this
section. In cases where existing vegetation is insufficient to provide for an
effective visual screen, the Planning Board may require supplemental
landscape plantings for the purposes enhancing the natural buffering
capabilities of the native vegetation.
b) Use of Fencing. An applicant may elect to erect a continuous length of solid
fencing of a type and style acceptable to the Planning Board. Fencing used
to fulfill this requirement shall not be less than six feet in height, nor impede
proper sight distances at intersections of driveways and streets. In cases
where applicants elect to utilize this option, a minimum of one deciduous or
evergreen shrub, with a minimum height and diameter of eighteen inches,
shall be planted along the face of said fencing at a spacing not to exceed an
average of one shrub per 10-feet of fence.
4) Screening of unsightly site features
a) General screening requirements. Refuse storage areas, stockpiled materials,
tractor trailers used for storage and other unsightly materials and objects
situated on any non-residential or multi-family residential site subject to
28
review and approval under these regulations, shall be located to be out of
view from abutting properties and public streets where possible. In cases
where such positioning is not possible, those items shall be effectively
screened. A minimum screening shall be achieved by use of landscape
plantings, fencing or enclosures of a height at least as tall as the item or
items to be screened
b) Screening requirements for loading and receiving areas. Loading docks and
receiving areas shall be situated to be out of view from abutting properties
and public streets where possible. Where such provisions are not possible,
the applicant shall propose a method of screening and buffering acceptable
to the Planning Board.
E. Shoreland Protection
1) As required by RSA 483-B, Comprehensive Shoreline Protection Act, all land located within
250 feet of the reference line of public waters must adhere to the following:
a) Where existing, a natural woodland buffer must be maintained.
b) Tree cutting limited to 50% of the basal area of trees, and 50% of the total
number of saplings in a 20-year period.
c) A healthy, well-distributed stand of trees must be maintained.
d) Stumps and their root systems must remain intact in the ground within 50
feet of the reference line
2) Maintenance and Replacement of Landscaping.
a) Landscaping shall be maintained in good condition. The property owner
will remove and replace dead or diseased plant materials immediately with
the same type, size and quantity of plant materials as originally installed,
unless alternative plantings are requested, justified, and approved by the
Board.
b) Avoid replacing landscape materials in the period from November – March.
c) A permanent water supply system may be required, as necessary (sprinklers
or hose bibs).
d) A maintenance bond to cover the cost of replacement plant materials and
maintenance equipment shall be provided for one year after the date of site
plan approval.
e) A note shall be provided on the Site Plan stating: “All conditions on this
Plan shall remain in effect in perpetuity”.
3) Street/Site Furniture. Site furnishings include benches, waste receptacles, planters, railings,
and bollards. Visual consistency of these elements is desired throughout each development.
All components of outdoor site furniture shall be low maintenance, highly durable and resistant
to vandalism and theft. In most cases, the provision of street furniture is optional, except in
cases involving public or private parkland, or when the proposal in question is located on street
with sidewalk frontage, when it may be required.
a) Outdoor Seating Standards.
a. Outdoor seating shall be comfortable, attractive, durable and easy to
maintain.
b. Locate benches at major building site entryways, drop-off areas, transit
stops, pedestrian courtyards and plazas.
c. Attempt to locate benches in areas that receive sunlight, are sheltered
from winds in the winter and are shaded in the summer.
d. Where seating is fixed, provide a variety of arrangements (both linear and
grouped), which accommodate two to six persons.
e. Benches shall face towards areas of interest and not towards the roadway.
4) Planter and Waste Receptacle Standards.
a. Design planters and waste receptacles to coordinate with other furniture
29
b. Use materials and colors similar to those used for benches and other
outdoor furniture
5) Tree Grate Standards. Use tree grates to prevent excessive soil compaction and to add interest
to the pavement. Choose tree grates that are fabricated of a strong, durable material. In areas
which receive heavy pedestrian traffic, tree guards may be appropriate to give added
protection to young trees.
F. Water Resources Standards
1) Water Quality Protection. All aspects of the application shall be designed so that:
a) No person shall locate, store, discharge, or permit the discharge of any
treated, untreated, or inadequately treated liquid, gaseous, or solid materials
of such nature, quantity, noxiousness, toxicity, or temperature that may run
off, seep, percolate, or wash into surface or groundwaters so as to
contaminate, pollute, or harm such waters.
b) All storage facilities for fuel, chemicals, chemical or industrial wastes, and
biodegradable raw materials, shall meet the standards of the New Hampshire
Department of Environmental Protection (NH DES), Water Supply and
Pollution Control.
c) All projects of such magnitude as to require a storm water permit from the
NH DES shall comply with the standards of the NH DES with respect to the
export of total suspended solids and/or phosphorous. If the project does not
require a storm water permit from the NH DES, it shall be designed to
minimize the export of phosphorous from the site to the extent reasonable
with the proposed use and the characteristics of the site.
2) Storm water Management. Adequate provisions shall be made for the collection and disposal
of all storm water that runs off proposed streets, parking areas, roofs, and other surfaces. All
construction activities, regardless of the area of disturbance, shall meet the following
performance guidelines:
a) An undisturbed buffer shall be retained around all wetlands and surface
waters as required by the wetland ordinance.
b) All storm water treatment areas, such as treatment swales, detention and
retention areas, and mitigation areas, shall be planted with grasses, shrubs
and/or other plantings sufficient to prevent soil erosion and to promote
proper treatment of the proposed runoff.
c) Buildings, streets, parking lots and other construction shall be located out of
the post-development flood plain to reduce construction and postconstruction
drainage problems.
d) Buffers may be used for greenway trails, and the creation of storm water
wetlands.
e) Snow and salt storage areas shall be located such that no direct discharges to
receiving waters are possible from the storage site. Runoff from snow and
salt storage areas shall enter treatment areas as specified above before being
discharged to receiving waters or allowed to infiltrate into the groundwater.
f) The plan shall attempt to retain storm water on the site using the natural
flow patterns of the site. Effort shall be made to utilize natural infiltration
best management practices (ie. bio-retention areas, expanded engineered
swales). However, artificial infiltration best management practices (ie.
infiltration trenches) shall be permitted with an acceptable maintenance plan
as required in Section E. 8, below.
g) Measures shall be taken to control the post-development peak rate of runoff
so that it does not exceed pre-development runoff for the 2-year, 24-hour
storm event and for additional storm event frequencies as specified in the
design criteria of the Rockingham County Conservation District, NH
Department of Environmental Services, Soil Conservation Service (now the
30
Natural Resources Conservation Service), Storm water Management and
Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Urban and Developing Areas
in New Hampshire, August 1992, as amended, a copy of which is available
from the Planning Board.
h) The applicant shall demonstrate that on- and off-site downstream channel or
system capacity is sufficient to carry the flow without adverse effects, such
as flooding and erosion of stream banks and shoreland areas.
i) Priority shall be given to preserving natural drainage systems including
perennial and intermittent streams, wetlands, swales, and drainage ditches
for conveyance of runoff leaving the project area. The biological and
chemical properties of the receiving waters shall not be degraded by the
storm water runoff from the development site. The use of oil and grease
traps in manholes, onsite vegetated waterways, and vegetated buffer strips
along waterways and drainage swales, and the reduction in use of deicing
salts and fertilizers may be required, especially where the development
storm water discharges into a gravel aquifer area or other water supply
source, or a great pond.
j) The design of the storm water drainage system shall provide for the disposal
of storm water without damage to streets, adjacent properties, downstream
properties, soils and vegetation.
k) The design of the storm drainage systems shall take into account upstream
runoff which shall pass over or through the site to be developed and provide
for this movement.
l) Whenever practical, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected or
supplemented. Any stripping of vegetation shall be done in a manner that
minimizes soil erosion.
m) Appropriate erosion and sediment control measures shall be installed prior
to any soil disturbance.
n) The area of disturbance shall be kept to a minimum. Disturbed areas
remaining idle for more than 30 days shall be stabilized.
o) Measures shall be taken to control erosion within the project area. Sediment
in runoff water shall be trapped and retained within the project area using
approved measures. Wetland areas and surface waters shall be protected
from sediment.
p) Off-site surface water and runoff from undisturbed areas shall be diverted
away from disturbed areas where feasible or carried non-erosively through
the project area. Integrity of downstream drainage systems shall be
maintained.
q) All temporary erosion and sediment control measures shall be removed after
final site stabilization. Trapped sediment and other disturbed soil areas
resulting from the removal of temporary measures shall be permanently
stabilized within 30 days unless conditions dictate otherwise.
3) Storm water Management and Erosion Control Plan Requirements.
a) The applicant shall submit a storm water management and erosion control
plan to the Planning Board for any tract of land being developed or
subdivided, where one or more of the following conditions are proposed:
i Construction or reconstruction of a street, road or parking lot.
ii A subdivision of more than three building lots.
iii Disturbed critical areas or slopes greater than 15%.
4) Storm water and Erosion Control Plans shall meet the following requirements and / or show
the following information:
a) The plan shall be in compliance with the EPA Phase II Storm Water Rules,
as amended.
31
b) All measures in the plan shall meet as a minimum the Best Management
Practices (BMP) set forth in the Storm Water Management and Erosion and
Sediment Control Handbook for Urban and Developing Areas in New
Hampshire, as amended.
c) A report section that includes:
i Design calculations for all temporary and permanent structural
control BMP measures.
ii A proposed schedule for the inspection and maintenance of all
BMPs.
iii Identification of all permanent control measures and responsibility
for continued maintenance.
iv Drainage report with calculations showing volume, peak discharge,
and velocity of present and future runoff.
v When detention structures are planned to reduce future condition
peak discharge the soil cover complex method shall be used to
compute the runoff volume and peak discharge for designing the
structure. The design will conform to the criteria outlined for those
types of structures given in the Storm Water Management and
Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Urban and Developing
Areas in New Hampshire.
5) Responsibility for Installation and Construction. The applicant shall bear final responsibility
for the installation, construction, inspection and disposition of all storm water management and
erosion control measures required by the provisions of these regulations. Site development
shall not begin before the storm water management and erosion control plan receives
conditional approval. Best Management Practices shall be installed as designed and scheduled
as a condition of final approval of the plan.
6) Bonding. The Planning Board may require a bond or other security in an amount and with
surety conditions satisfactory to the Board, providing for the actual construction and
installation of such measures within a period specified by the Planning Board and expressed in
the bond or the surety.
7) Plan Approval and Review. The Planning Board shall approve the storm water management
and erosion control plan if it complies with the requirements and objectives of these
regulations. Such approval shall be a component of the overall subdivision or site plan
approval. If disapproved, the Planning Board shall furnish the applicant with a list of plan
deficiencies and procedures for filing a revised plan. Technical review of any storm water
management and erosion control plan prepared under these regulations shall be reviewed by the
Conservation Commission or other qualified professional consultant, as determined to be
appropriate by the Planning Board, at the expense of the applicant.
8) Maintenance and Inspection.
a) After final Planning Board approval, a narrative description of ongoing
maintenance requirements required by storm water management and erosion
and sediment control plans shall be recorded on the deed to the property on
which such measures are located. The description shall comply with the
requirements of RSA 478:4-a.
b) The planning board may require routine inspections to insure compliance
with the Storm Water Management, Groundwater Protection, Impervious
Surfaces, and Erosion and Sedimentation Control sections of these
regulations. Such inspections shall be performed by the designated agent at
reasonable times to the landowner.
c) If permission to inspect is denied by the landowner, the designated agent
shall secure an administrative inspection warrant from the district or superior
court under RSA 595-B.
d) The selectmen may require a fee for routine inspections of water quality
protection measures. The fee shall be paid by the owner of the property. A
32
fee schedule shall be established by the board of selectmen which represents
the cost of performing an inspection on various types of water quality
protection measures. The procedure for adoption of the fee schedule shall
be as provided for in RSA 419: a.
e) Prior to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy, the applicant /
developer shall post a bond or other security to cover the cost of installation
of any storm water management and erosion control measures.
f) A set of As-Built Plans shall be submitted to the Planning Board within
thirty (30) days of the completion of construction, before any certificate of
occupancy can be issued. A post-construction inspection will be scheduled
as soon as possible after the As-Built Plans have been received. If the
Planning Board determines that the storm water management and erosion
control measures do not meet the above requirements or conditions of
approval, the Planning Board may revoke the site plan at a properly noticed
public hearing.
9) Groundwater Protection. The proposed site development and use shall not adversely impact
either the quality or quantity of groundwater available to abutting properties or to public water
supply systems. Applicants whose projects involve on-site water supply or sewage disposal
systems with a capacity of two thousand (2,000) gallons per day or greater shall demonstrate
that the groundwater at the property line will comply, following development, with the
standards for safe drinking water as established by the State of New Hampshire.
a) Within a groundwater or aquifer protection overlay district, all applications
shall meet the following standards for groundwater protection:
i No more than twenty percent (20%) of a single lot or building site
shall be rendered impervious to groundwater infiltration. To the
extent feasible, all runoff from impervious surfaces shall be
recharged to groundwater on-site. Recharge impoundments shall
have vegetative cover for surface treatment and infiltration.
ii All State of New Hampshire regulated substances with a capacity of
five (5) gallons or more shall be stored in product tight containers
on an impervious surface designed and maintained to prevent flow
to exposed soils, floor drains, and outside drains.
iii Outdoor storage of State of New Hampshire regulated substances
shall be protected from exposure to precipitation and shall be
located at least 50 feet from surface waters or storm drains, at least
75 feet from private wells, and outside the sanitary protective radius
or wellhead protection area of wells used for public water supply.
iv Secondary containment shall be provided for outdoor storage of
regulated substances if an aggregate of 275 gallons or more of State
of New Hampshire regulated substances are stored outdoors. e.
Containers in which State of New Hampshire regulated substances
are stored shall be clearly and visibly labeled and shall be kept
closed and sealed when material is not being transferred from one
container to another.
10) Impervious Surfaces. Impervious surfaces can negatively impact surface and ground water
quality in several ways. Impervious surfaces, such as paved parking lots decrease infiltration
and recharge of groundwater, provide an express route for runoff to reach waterways, provide
a surface upon which pollutants can accumulate, and prevent the natural processing of
pollutants in soil, plants, and wetlands. Therefore, all final applications shall minimize the
area of impervious surfaces and address the potential negative impact of impervious surfaces
on surface and groundwater resources. All final applications shall meet the following
standards for impervious surfaces:
33
a) The maximum permissible impervious area varies according to the type of
land-use. For purposes of these regulations, the total impervious area of a
lot or site is defined as the total area of impervious parking lots, streets,
driveways, roof area, decks, paved walkways, sidewalks, and any concrete,
stone, brick, asphalt to compacted gravel surface.
b) The total permissible impervious area by land-use is as follows:
i Multifamily greater than 3 units: 40%
ii Commercial/Retail: 70%
iii Industrial/Warehouse: 60%
c) These standards may be modified by the Planning Board if it can be shown
to their satisfaction that a greater amount of impervious surfaces will not
adversely impact surface and groundwater quality, or increase the postdevelopment
amount of storm water runoff. The Planning Board can
demand special engineering studies to decide on any request to exceed the
impervious limits specified herein.
d) Parking Lots. Every effort shall be made to use pervious parking surfaces
as an alternative to impervious asphalt or concrete, except in cases where it
is determined that a traditional impervious parking lot with engineered storm
water systems (catch basins with oil / water separators, vegetated swales,
detention basins, etc.) renders greater protection of surface and groundwaters
than pervious pavement. Pervious paving areas can be used to facilitate
groundwater recharge and reduce the need for curbs, gutters, and drainage
systems. Every attempt shall be made to use pervious parking surfaces for
all new lots of less than 50 parking spaces except in cases as noted above.
G. Utilities Standards
1) Subsurface septic system
a) The construction of on-site subsurface wastewater disposal system shall
fully comply with all applicable requirements of the New Hampshire Code
of Administrative Rules regarding such. The applicant shall receive all
required permits from the New Hampshire Department of Environmental
Services for water supply before the Planning Board can grant final
approval.
2) Water supply
a) The construction of the on-site water supply shall fully comply with all
applicable requirements of the New Hampshire Code of Administrative
Rules regarding water supply. The applicant shall receive all required
permits from the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services for
water supply before the Planning Board can grant final approval.
3) Other Utilities
a) All proposed on-site utilities (electric, telephone, cable T.V., etc.) shall be
installed underground in accordance with the specifications of the individual
utility companies involved and in accordance with all applicable local codes,
unless otherwise permitted by the Planning Board.
H. Miscellaneous Standards
1) Exterior Lighting Provisions.
a) All non-residential and multi-family residential site design plans presented
to the Planning Board for approval shall include a lighting plan which
provides for a method and level of lighting appropriate for the proposed use
or uses as determined by the Planning Board. All such lighting plans shall,
as a minimum, identify the location, number, height, type and intensity of all
exterior lighting fixtures to be installed. Proposed exterior lighting fixtures
shall provide for a level of illumination appropriate for the proposed use or
34
uses. Illumination patterns proposed shall be such that all sites subject to
these regulations will enjoy an adequate level of lighting to insure user
safety and security. However, care shall be taken to avoid lighting patterns
and intensities which “over light” a site, creating nuisance and glare at
abutting properties, public streets and the neighborhood in general. All
lighting plans shall be subject to review and approval by the Planning
Board. No changes or modifications in approved lighting plans may be
proposed without the specific approval of the Board.
b) Unless otherwise approved by the Planning Board, all pole mounted lighting
fixtures shall be fed electricity by the use of underground electrical lines
installed in accordance with applicable electrical code.
2) Solid Waste Storage Provisions
a) All solid waste storage areas shall be screened and shall be located a
minimum of 20 feet from any boundary line of a site.
b) In recognition of the fact that varying non-residential uses often produce
waste, which must be temporarily stored on site until the time of disposal, of
varying type and quantity, provisions for adequate storage shall be reviewed
by the Planning Board on a case by case basis. In general, the Planning
Board shall:
a. Require applicants to disclose anticipated volumes and types
of wastes to be produced by their proposed uses;
b. Find that the applicants’ proposal for storage and disposal of
waste conforms with all applicable local, state and federal
requirements;
c. Find that the applicants proposal for storage and disposal of
waste has incorporated reasonable safeguards insuring that
such wastes will not become an undue threat to the
environment nor create a public nuisance.
3) Snow Storage Provisions.
a) All site plans presented to the Planning Board for approval
shall identify an area or areas of sufficient size and
composition to allow for safe and convenient storage of snow
volumes anticipated to be provided by winter site
maintenance, or include a note indicating that snow is to be
removed from the site.
b) Snow storage areas shall not be specified at locations where:
accumulated volumes of snow will produce a visual nuisance
or impede proper lines of sight; inevitable snow melt will
create a nuisance on-site or to abutters; inevitable snow melt
will result in the flow of water onto a public street. Snow shall
not be stored in areas of jurisdictional wetland or in parking
spaces, aisles, fire lanes, access drives nor other areas of a site
where accumulated snow volumes would prevent proper use
of a site in terms of these regulations or in the judgment of the
Planning Board.
4) Commercial Signage Provisions. Each site plan presented to the Planning Board for approval
shall identify all proposed commercial signage and successfully demonstrate that the proposed
sign fully complies with the Town of Milton Zoning Ordinance.
2019 Edition
1
AUTHORITY
By-Laws and Rules for Procedure
Milton Zoning Board of Adjustment
These By-Laws are adopted under the authority of New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated,
674:33, 676:1, and the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Milton.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment is a quasi-judicial board charged with the hearing of Appeals
from Administrative Decisions, Variance requests, Special Exception requests, and Waivers of
Equitable Dimension Requirements.
OFFICERS: 673:3
1. A Chairperson shall be elected annually at the first meeting following town elections by a
majority vote of the Board. He/She shall preside over meetings and hearings, appoint such
committees as directed by the Board, and shall affix his/her signature in the name of the Board.
2. A Vice-Chairperson shall be elected annually at the first meeting following town elections by
a majority vote of the Board. Said Vice-Chairperson shall preside in the absence of the
Chairperson and shall have the full powers of the Chairperson on matters which come before
the Board during the absence of the Chairperson.
MEMBERS
Up to five (5) elected members, per RSA 673:3, who shall be residents of the municipality. Up to
five (5) alternates may be appointed by the Board with not more than 3 year terms to be
staggered. Alternate members may participate in meetings of the board as a nonvoting
member pursuant to rules adopted under RSA 676:1. Alternate members may ask questions of
the applicant and interact with the sitting members until the Chair closes the public hearing.
REMOVAL OF MEMBERS: 673:13
After public hearing, select people may remove a member of the Board upon written findings of
inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office.
FILLING VACANCIES IN MEMBERSHIP: 673:12
Vacancies in the membership of the Board occurring other than through the expiration of a
term of office shall be filled by appointment by the remaining Board members until the next
regular municipal election at which time a successor shall be elected to either fill the unexpired
term or start a new term, as appropriate.
DISQUALIFICATION OF MEMBER: 673:14
No member of a Board shall participate in deciding or shall sit upon the hearing of any question
which the Board is to decide in a judicial capacity if that member has a direct personal or
2019 Edition
2
pecuniary interest in the outcome which differs from the interest of other citizens as provided
in RSA 673:14.
MEETINGS:
1. The By-Laws and Rules for Procedure shall be adopted or modified at the first meeting
following the town elections by a majority vote. The By-Laws and Rules for Procedure can also
be amended from time-to-time as necessary with a majority vote by the Board.
2. Regular meetings will be held as needed. Meetings may be called by the Chairperson,
provided notice is given to each member at least 48-hours prior to the time of such meeting
and allowing for 24-hour public posting as required by RSA 91-A:2 II.
3. A quorum for regular business, public hearing and deciding an appeal shall consist of three
(3) members. If a member disqualifies himself/herself or is absent in a particular case, the
Chairperson shall appoint an alternate who shall have all the powers and duties of a regular
member in regard to the appeal or appeals under consideration on which the regular member
is unable to act.
4. The Chairperson shall preside over all meetings. In the absence of the Chairperson, the Vice-
Chairperson shall preside.
5. The order of business for regular meetings shall be as follows.
a. Public Comment
b. Disposition of appeals under consideration.
c. Hearing of appeals.
d. Executive session.
e. Minutes of previous meetings.
*(Note) Although this is the usual order of business, the Board may wish to change
order of business.
6. The conduct of public hearings shall be governed by the following rules:
a. The Chairperson shall call the meeting to order and call for the Chairperson’s report
on the first case.
b. The Chairperson shall publicly announce the number of sitting/voting members. If a
quorum is present but not all the 5 seats are filled, the Chair shall give each applicant
the option to continue the hearing at a date and time certain.
c. The Chair shall also ask the sitting members if any member has any reason to be
disqualified for each application before the Board.
2019 Edition
3
d. The Chairperson shall read the application and report on the manner in which public
notice and personal notice were given.
e. The Chairperson shall ask if all the fees are paid and proceed with the application.
f. The applicant shall be called to present his/her appeal. The public and town officials
will be allowed to speak or provide written comments concerning the application.
g. The Board will review the application in regard to RSA 36:54-58 “Review of
Developments of Regional Impact” to make a determination of the potential for regional
impact for all cases that come before the board.
h. Once the public hearing is closed and a motion to enter deliberative session is made,
seconded and (if) passed, no additional input from the applicant nor the public can be
heard, unless the Board has questions and requests answers from the applicant.
i. The Board can discuss the merits of the application and provide the Board members
with any additional information, pictures, data etc. concerning the application. Any
additional information provided by the members shall become part of the record.
j. The Board shall pass straw votes on each criterion for the applicant to understand
where the concerns may be in case they wish to appeal and then vote on the entire
application to pass or fail.
JOINT MEETINGS AND HEARINGS: 676:2
The Board shall follow the procedures for joint meeting and hearings as provided in RSA 676:2.
GENERAL RULES:
1. Members of the Board may ask questions at any point during testimony.
2. Each person who appears shall be required to state his/her name and address and indicate
whether he/she is a party to the case.
3. Any party to the case who desires to ask a question of another party to the case must do so
through the Chairperson.
4. Any person who desires the Board to compel the attendance of a witness shall present this
request in writing to the Chairperson no later than seven (7) days prior to the public hearing.
5. in accordance with RSA 676:7, IV, the Board may impose reasonable fees to cover its
administrative expenses and costs of special investigative studies, review of documents, and
other matters which may be required by particular appeals or applications.
6. Members of the Board may visit and make observations of a site which is the subject of an
application. At no time shall more than one member of the Board be present during a site visit
2019 Edition
4
unless the site visit has been called as a public meeting and proper public notice has been
given.
7. At no time shall the members of the board discuss current or past applications with each
other or with the applicant or the public outside of a posted meeting. Also, nothing shall be
posted in an email or other electronic media concerning a current or past application.
8. If four members vote on an application and there is a two-to-two vote, the approval of that
specific criteria fails. No member shall abstain.
9. The Board may attach conditions related to the land, not the applicant. The exceptions to this
rule are for granting a variance for the disabled (RSA674:33, V) and waiver for agricultural uses
(RSA 674:32-c)
APPEALS:
1. A person directly affected by a decision of the Board may file a written request for
reconsideration and/or rehearing with the Board to provide the Board with the opportunity to
correct any errors it may have made in its original decision. Grounds for reconsideration and/or
rehearing may include, but not limited to, new evidence, additional legal arguments or
evidence or law that was misapprehended or overlooked by the Board in its original decision.
2. Each application for an appeal shall be made on forms provided by the Board and shall be
presented to the Land Use Clerk, who shall record the date of receipt over his/her signature. At
each meeting the Land Use Clerk shall presented to the Board all applications received by
him/her prior to the beginning of the meeting.
3. An appeal to the Board on any Administrative Decision or requirement shall be taken within
30-days of the date of such decision or requirement.
4 The Board shall reject any petition not properly filled out and will post the time of hearing for
all other petitions when received.
5. The Board shall decide all cases within 30-days of hearing. Notification of the decision shall
be made on a form provided by the Board and shall be sent to the applicant, Strafford County
Registry of Deeds, and filed in the records of the Board.
1
DRIVEWAY
REGULATIONS
OF THE TOWN OF
MILTON
NEW HAMPSHIRE
Adopted: 8/23/2005
Amended: 3/6/2018
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section Page
I. Purpose 1
II. Statutory Authority 1
III. Applicability 1
IV. Definitions 1
V. Construction Permits 1-2
VI. Standards 2-4
VII. Violations and Penalties; Costs of Restoration 4
VIII. Modification of Standards 4
1
TOWN OF MILTON
DRIVEWAY REGULATIONS
I. Purpose:
The purpose of these regulations is to further the safe and orderly development of the
Town through the establishment of an administrative procedure by which the
location, method and materials used to provide vehicular access to and from Town
streets onto private property are subject to the review and approval of DPW
Director/Road Agent.
II. Statutory Authority:
This regulation is enacted pursuant to the provisions of NH RSA 674:35 and 236:13, V,
as amended.
III. Applicability:
The provisions of this regulation apply to the construction of any driveway, which
intersects with any Town-owned and/or Town maintained right of way.
IV. Definitions: For the purposes of this regulation, the following definitions shall apply:
All Season Sight Distance- A line which encounters no visual obstruction between 2 -
points, each at a height of 3-feet and 9-inches above the pavement and so located as to
represent the critical line of sight between the operator of a vehicle using the access and
the operator of a vehicle approaching from either direction.
Driveway- A vehicular access way from a public way to a single primary building,
which is located on a single lot. A “shared driveway” may service up to 2-lots if it
complies with the terms and conditions of the Subdivision Regulations or Site Plan
Review Regulations.
Lot- A parcel of land intended to be separately owned, rented, developed or
otherwise used as a unit.
V. Driveway Permits:
A. Henceforth, it shall be unlawful to construct any driveway until the DPW
Director/Road Agent has reviewed and approved of such construction and has issued a
written permit for such work. No permit shall be required for any existing driveway. For
purposes of this section, any driveway so constructed as indicated above which abuts or
is clearly designed to provide access to a public way as defined by New Hampshire
RSA 259:125 shall be presumed to be situated within the right-of-way. Pursuant to this
section, a written driveway permit application
2
must be obtained from and filed with the Public Works office by any landowner or his/her
agent.
B. Before any construction work is commenced, said permit application shall have been
reviewed and approved and a driveway permit issued by the DPW Director/Road Agent.
Said permit shall:
1. Describe the location of the driveway, entrance, exit or approach. The location
shall be selected to most adequately protect the safety of the traveling public.
The applicant may choose any driveway location that meets the minimum
standards under section VI of this regulation.
2. Describe any drainage structures, traffic control devices and
channelization islands to be installed by the applicant.
3. Establish grades that adequately protect and promote street drainage and
permit a safe and controlled approach to the street in all seasons of the year.
4. Include any other terms and specifications necessary for the safety of
the traveling public.
VI. Standards:
A. Unless an all -season safe sight distance, pursuant to the table listed below, in bot h
directions along the street can be obtained, no more than 1 -access to a single parcel of
land or to shared access for two adjacent lots, and this access shall be at that location the
DPW Director/Road Agent determines to be the safest. Final approval for use of any
additional access shall not be granted until it has been demonstrated that the all-season
safe sight distance has been met.
The all season safe site distance shall be as follows:
Road Speed: 30-MPH 35-MPH 40-MPH 45-MPH 50-MPH
Site Distance: 200-ft 250-ft 305-ft 360-ft 425-ft
B. Within 20-feet of the point where the driveway intersects the public right -of-way,
the maximum slope of a driveway to 2 or fewer dwelling units shall not exceed 12% and
the maximum slope for other driveways shall not exceed 8%. The grade of the approach
(within 20-feet) at the location to be agreed upon is to be such as will permit a safe and
controlled approach to the highway at all seasons and so designed that no water will
discharge from the approach upon the paved surface of the highway.
C. No driveway, including any flare, shall be within 5 -feet of a side property line,
except for shared driveways or when the Planning Board has approved a subdivision
with side - by-side driveways to alleviate road cuts.
3
D. The angle of the driveway with respect to the pavement edge shall not be less than 60
- degrees to 90-degrees, except that a smaller angle may be used for entrance driveways
along a divided street, permitting only one -way operation of the driveway.
E. At rural intersections, the minimum distance between the nearest edge of the driveway
and the crossroad edge of pavement, measured along the edge of pavement, shall be 100 -
feet. At urban intersections, this minimum distance may be reduced to 25 -feet.
Driveways to be located on the opposite side of T -intersections shall generally conform
to the urban intersections standard. The Planning Board may reduce or waive these
requirements, if justifiable based on specific site conditions, including lot size.
F. The type of construction where the driveway meets the edge of the traveled way shall
be commensurate with existing conditions with respect to drainage and curb
configuration and shall be subject to the approval of the DPW Director/Road Agent. The
property owner shall be responsible for the proper installation and maintenance of all
drainage facilities (driveway culvert, swale, etc.) and the driveway bed that lies between
the edge of the travel ed way and the parcel’s property line. It shall be the DPW
Director/Road Agent’s responsibility to make sure the drainage is proper.
G. In no case shall the permitted driveway construction cause water to stand on the
pavement, shoulders or within the street right -of-way limits. In those cases where
property development increases drainage runoff such that existing street drainage
structures are insufficient to adequately dispose of all drainage, the applicant will be
required to provide additional or larger drainage facilities to prevent any ponding
within the street right-of-way or adjacent lands thereto.
H. For access to a proposed commercial or industrial enterprise, to a subdivision, or to a
multifamily dwelling containing more e than 3-dwelling units, all of which for purposes
of this regulation shall be considered a single parcel of land, said permit application
shall be accompanied by such engineering drawings as may be required by the DPW
Director/Road Agent and the Planning Board for site plan review.
I. No construction permit shall allow a driveway entrance, exit or approach to be
constructed more than 30-feet in width. The driveway shall not funnel to less than 12 -
feet in unobstructed width. The material shall be suitable to maintain the weight of a fire
apparatus.
J. Driveways longer than 150-feet shall require 20 -feet in unobstructed width, a
turnaround, and must have suitable material to maintain the weight of a fire apparatus. The
Planning Board shall not have the authority to waive this requirement.
K. Buildings, which are protected with an approved automatic fire sprinkler system,
that are install ed in accordance to the National Fire Protection Association
4
codes, may be permitted up to 450-feet in distance from the Town road or right-of-way.
Once denied by the DPW Director/Road Agent based on non-compliance with this
requirement, and upon a waiver request from the applicant, the Planning Board shall
have the authority to waive or decrease the requirement.
L. The DPW Director/Road Agent may require additional work to be done by the
applicant in the case of construction/reconstruction of sidewalks.
M. The DPW Director/Road Agent shall determine swale requirements and culvert sizes,
locations and lengths. If denied by the DPW Director/Road Agent based on non -
compliance with this requirement, and upon a waiver request from the applicant, the
Planning Board shall have the authority to waive or decrease the requirement.
VII. Violations and Penalties; Costs of Restoration:
Penalties: Any person who violates any of the provisions of these regulations shall be subject to
fines and penalties as spelled out in RSA 676:17. The landowner shall be liable for the cost of
restoration of the affected public street to a condition, which conforms to the provisions of this
regulation to the satisfaction of the DPW Director/Road Agent. If a landowner fails to ensure
that the above said conformance is accomplished within 30 -days of receiving written
notification from the DPW Director/Road Agent, the restoration shall be accomplished by the
Town and charged to the landowner.
VIII. Modification of Standards:
Upon denial of a driveway permit application by the DPW Director/Road Agent, and upon a
request by the applicant to the Planning Board, t he standards of these regulations, except
where expressly non-waiverable, may be waived by the Planning Board when specific
circumstances surrounding a proposal, or a condition of the land, indicate that strict adherence
to the standards would not be possible or create an unnecessary burden for the landowner, and
such waiver will not be in conflict with the purpose and intent of these regulations.
These regulations may be amended by the Planning Board after a public hearing.











Approved by Planning Board at 5/7/2019 Meeting
1
2019 MILTON PLANNING BOARD BYLAWS
AUTHORITY
1. These Bylaws are adopted under the authority of New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated (RSA)
676:1.
MEMBERS AND ALTERNATES
1. The Planning Board shall consist of seven (7) members. The Selectmen shall designate one selectman as
an ex-officio member with power to vote.
2. Selection, qualification, term, removal of members, and filling of vacancies shall conform to RSA 673.
3. Alternate members may serve on the Planning Board as authorized by RSA 673:6 and participate as
non-voting members.
4. Up to five alternate members shall be appointed, as provided for by the local legislative body, and
should attend all meetings to familiarize themselves with the workings of the board to stand ready to
serve whenever a regular member of the board is unable to fulfill his/her responsibilities.
5. At planning board meetings, alternates who are not activated to fill the seat of an absent or recused
member or who have not been appointed by the chair to temporarily fill the unexpired term of a
vacancy, may participate with the board in a limited capacity. During a public hearing, alternates may
sit at the table with the regular members and may view documents, listen to testimony, and actively
participate and interact with other board members, the applicant, abutters and the public. However,
they shall not be allowed to make or second motions and shall not participate in any way during the
deliberations by the board. Upon the close of the public hearing, alternates must remove themselves
from the table and sit with other members of the public unless they are sitting in place of another
member. During work sessions or portions of meetings that do not include a public hearing, alternates
may fully participate, exclusive of any motions or votes that may be made. At all times, the chair shall
fully inform the public of the status of any alternate present and identify the members who shall be
voting on the application.
6. Members must reside in the community and are expected to attend each meeting of the board to
exercise their duties and responsibilities. Any member unable to attend a meeting shall notify the
chairman as soon as possible. Members, including the chairman and all officers, shall participate in
the decision-making process and vote to approve or disapprove all motions under consideration.
7. Each newly elected or appointed (including re-elected or re-appointed) member shall be sworn in and
take an oath of office as required by RSA 42:1.
8. The Secretary shall forward to the municipal clerk for recording the appointment/election and
expiration dates of the terms of each member of the Board.
2
OFFICERS
1. The officers of the Board shall be as follows:
• Chairman: The Chairman shall preside over all meetings and hearings; shall prepare, with the
assistance of the Secretary, an annual report; and shall perform other duties customary to the
office.
• Vice-Chairman: The Vice-Chairman shall preside in the absence of the Chairman and shall
have the full powers of the Chairman on matters that come before the Board in the absence of
the Chairman.
• Secretary: The Secretary shall keep a full and accurate record of the proceedings of each
meeting and record the names of the members present only in the event of Land Use Staff not
being present to fulfill such duties. In the absence of the Secretary, the Chairman shall appoint
a secretary pro tem to keep records of the meeting.
2. The officers of the Board shall be elected annually during the month of March, after the annual
Town Vote, by a majority vote of the Board. If requested by a majority of those present, voting
shall be by written ballot.
MEETINGS
1. The Planning Board shall meet on the first and third Tuesdays of each month at a time and place
designated by the Chairman, unless otherwise specified by the Chairman. Special meetings may be
called by the Chairman or, in his/her absence, by the Vice-Chairman, or at the request of three
members of the Board, provided public notice and notice to each member is given at least 48 hours
in advance of the time of such meeting. The notice shall specify the purpose of the meeting.
2. Nonpublic sessions shall be held only in accordance with RSA 91-A:3.
3. Quorum: A majority (four members) of the membership of the Board shall constitute a quorum,
including alternates sitting in place of regular members.
4. If any regular Board member is absent from a meeting or hearing or disqualifies him/herself from
sitting on a particular application, the Chairman shall designate one of the alternate members to sit
in place of the absent or disqualified member. Such alternate shall have all the powers and duties
of a regular member regarding any matter under consideration on which the regular member is
unable to act. The alternate should continue until the matter is completed; the regular member does
not vote on that matter.
5. Disqualification: If any member finds it necessary to be disqualified from sitting on a particular
case, as provided in RSA 673:14, s/he shall notify the Chairman as soon as possible so that an
alternate may be requested to fill the place. The disqualification shall be announced by either the
Chairman or the member before the discussion or the public hearing on the application begins. The
member disqualified shall leave the Board table during all deliberations and the public hearing on
the matter.
If uncertainty arises as to whether a Board member should disqualify him/herself, on the request of
that member or the request of another member of the Board, the Board shall vote on the question of
3
whether that member should be disqualified. Such request and vote shall be made prior to or at the
commencement of any required public hearing. A vote on a question of disqualification shall be
advisory and non-binding and may not be requested by persons other than board members.
(NOTE: Except as may otherwise be provided by local ordinance.)
6. Order of Business shall be as follows (unless change is directed at discretion of Chair)
a. Call to order by Chairman
b. Roll call
c. Other business - public comment (on planning issues other than agenda items)
d. Report of officers and committees
e. Unfinished business
f. Hearings on subdivision/site plans
g. Reading of communications/Town Planner comments directed to the Board
h. Minutes of previous meeting
7. A motion, duly seconded, shall be carried by an affirmative vote of a majority of the members
present. Voting shall be by roll call which shall be recorded in the minutes.
DESIGN REVIEW
1. Applications for a Design Review Phase (676:4, II (b)) meeting with the Board shall be made on
forms provided by the Board and shall be presented to the Board's agent who shall sign and record
the date of receipt.
2. Notice shall be given as required in RSA 676:4, l(d) 10 days before such application is submitted to
the Board.
3. The plan shall include at a minimum the following items:
a. A site location map placing the parcel in the larger context of the community;
b. A site survey showing pertinent features of the site;
c. An indication of any future subdivisions contemplated in or adjacent to the proposal;
d. A topographic map of the area;
e. Any soils information, such as permeability or boring data, that has been gathered; and
f. A sketch showing the proposed layout of lots, streets, and recreation areas; watercourses;
natural features and easements.
4. The board shall determine the conclusion of the Design Review Phase process and inform the
applicant.
APPLICATIONS FOR SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REVIEW
1. Applications for hearings before the Board shall be made on forms provided by the Board and
shall be presented to the Board's agent who shall sign and record the date of receipt.
4
2. Notice shall be given as required in RSA 676:4, l(d) 10 days before a completed application is
submitted to the Board.
3. Completed applications shall be accepted by majority vote of the Board and shall be scheduled for
consideration within 30 days of acceptance.
4. The board shall reject all applications not properly completed.
FORMS
1. All forms prescribed herein, and revisions thereof shall be adopted by resolution of the Board and
shall become part of these Bylaws.
NOTICE
1. Public notice of the submission of and public hearings on each application shall be given in the
local newspaper, on the Town Website, and by posting at both the Town Offices and the Post Office
not less than ten (10) days prior to the date fixed for submission and consideration of the
application.
2. Personal notice shall be made by verified mail to the applicant, all abutters, and any professional
whose seal appears on any plat not less than ten (10) days prior to the date fixed for submission of
the application to the Board.
PUBLIC HEARINGS
The conduct of public hearings shall be governed by the following rules:
1. The Chairman shall call the hearing in session, identify the applicant or agent, and ask for the Land
Use Secretary's report on the proposal.
2. The Land Use Secretary or Town Planner shall explain the nature of the application and report on
the manner in which public and personal notice was given.
3. The applicant or agent shall be called to present the proposal, and those appearing in favor of the
proposal shall be allowed to speak.
4. Members of the Board may ask questions at any point during the presentation by the applicant or
agent.
5. Any party to the matter who desires to ask a question of another party must go through the
Chairman.
6. Any applicant, any abutter or any person with a direct interest in the matter may testify in person or
in writing. Other persons may testify as permitted by the Board at each hearing.
7. Each person who speaks shall be required to state his/her name and address and indicate whether
s/he is a party to the matter or an agent or counsel to a party to the matter.
8. Those in opposition to the proposal shall be allowed to speak.
5
9. Those neither in favor nor in opposition may speak.
10. Other parties such as representatives of town departments and other town boards and commissions
who have an interest in the proposal shall be allowed to present their comments in person or in
writing.
11. The Chairman shall indicate whether the hearing is closed or adjourned pending the submission of
additional material or information or the correction of noted deficiencies. In the case of an
adjournment, additional notice is not required if the date, time and place of the continuation is
made known at the adjournment.
DECISIONS
1. The Board shall render a written decision within 65 days of the date of acceptance of a completed
application, subject to extension or waiver as provided in RSA 676:4.
2. The Board shall act to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove.
3. A short form decision notice shall be posted in the Town Offices the next day following the public
hearing, however, a Formal Notice of Decision (NOD) will be made available for public inspection
at the Town Offices within 5 business days after the decision is made, as required in RSA 676:3. If
the application is disapproved, the Board shall provide the applicant with written reason for this
disapproval.
RECONSIDERATION
The Planning Board may reconsider any decision to approve or disapprove an application, for good
cause, provided it is within the statutory appeal period. This may be done through a motion that
specifies the reasons for reconsideration. Upon successful passage of the motion, the board shall
schedule a public hearing, with notice as provided in 676:4, l(d), where they shall consider whether to
revise or alter their original decision. Should the board reach a new decision, a new appeal period shall
be considered to have begun pursuant to RSA 677:15, et seq.
RECORDS
1. The records of the Board shall be kept by the Land Use Secretary and shall be made available for
public inspection at the Land Use Office as required by RSA 91-A:4.
2. Minutes of the meetings, including the names of Board members, persons appearing before the
Board and a brief description of the subject matter, shall be open to public inspection within 5
business days after the meeting as required in RSA 91-A:2, II.
3. Since a Town website is maintained, RSA 91-A:2, II-b (effective January 1, 2018) requires that
approved minutes must also be posted on the website in a consistent and reasonably accessible
location, or a notice must be posted and maintained on the website stating where minutes may be
reviewed, and copies requested.
6
JOINT MEETINGS AND HEARINGS
1. The Planning Board may hold joint meetings and hearings with other "land use boards" including
the zoning board of adjustment, the Historic District Commission, the Building Code Board of
Appeals, and the Building Inspector. Each board shall have discretion whether to hold such joint
meeting or hearing (RSA 676:2) or not.
2. Joint business meetings with another local land use board may be held at any time when called
jointly by the chairmen of the two boards.
3. A joint public hearing must be a formal public hearing when the subject matter of the hearing is
within the responsibilities of the boards convened.
4. The Planning Board Chairman shall chair all joint meetings and public hearings when the subject
matter involves the Planning Board.
5. The rules of procedure for joint meetings and hearings, the subject matter of which involves the
Planning Board, shall be the same as these rules of procedure except that the order of business
shall be as follows:
a. Call to order by Chairman;
b. Introduction of members of both boards by Chairman;
c. Explanation of reason for joint meeting/hearing by Chairman;
d. In the case of a public hearing relative to a requested permit or an application for a plat
approval, or both, the applicant shall be called to present his/her proposal;
e. Adjournment.
6. Each board involved in a joint public hearing makes its own decision, based on its criteria for the
matter.
AMENDMENT
The Board's Bylaws may be amended by a majority vote of its members. The Board shall hold a public
hearing prior to adoption of new Bylaws or amendment of existing Bylaws. Notice for the time and
place of the hearing shall be as provided in RSA 675:7. The amended Bylaws shall be filed with the
municipal clerk.
Requirements for Obtaining a Building Permit:
1. Application:
Completed and signed by the Property Owner.
2. Septic System Approval:
Sate of New Hampshire Water Supply and Pollution Control approved plans and
approval number.
3. Driveway Permit:
Issued by the Town of Milton Road Agent or by the State of New Hampshire
Department of Transportation when on a State Route.
4. Site Plan*: ~ Foundation Certification
Draw to scale, indicating the size and location of all new and existing structures.
______ Distances from all four lot lines.
______ Distances from right-of-ways.
______ Road frontage.
______ Distances form any water bodies, wetlands and streams in accordance
with the current Zoning Regulations.
*This information is required in all instances even if all setbacks are met.
5. Building Plans*:
Drawn to scale with details of all proposed construction.
______ Foundation plans including steel in the footings and walls.
______ Framing plans including all evaluation of framing, floors, halls, and roof
structures.
______ Insulation thickness and "R" values.
______ Specification of materials.
______ Detailed floor plans for each floor with all dimensions.
______ Dimensions of windows in bedrooms showing 5.7 sq. ft. minimum of
clear opening.
______ NH Residential Energy Code Compliance.
* This information is required for outbuildings as well as dwelling units.
6. Lot and Building Compliance with all Town Ordinances:
The following approvals must be obtained, if applicable:
a. Zoning Variance or Special Exception
b. Recorded Subdivision
c. Recorded Site Plan Review
d. Recorded Notice of Limits of Municipal Responsibility and Liability for
private roads
7. Lot of Record/Proof of Ownership (if recently purchased)
ALL OF THE ABOVE MUST BE SUBMITTED BEFORE ANY APPLICATION WILL BE
CONSIDERED COMPLETE.

EARTH
EXCAVATION
- - - - - -- --- - - - --- - - - - --
REG ULA TIO NS
of the Town of
MILTON,
NEW HAMPSHIRE
REVISED BY THE
PLANNING BOARD
on January 20, 1998
Table of Contents
ARTICLE I. - AUTHORITY
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS
ARTICLE III. -APPLICATION FOR EXCAVATION PERMIT
A. General Procedures
B. Exempted Projects
C. Prohibited Projects
D. Submission Requirements
E. Application for Amendment
F. Permit Fees
G. Public Hearing: Timing of Consideration
ARTICLE IV. - SITE RESTORATION
ARTICLE V. - SITE REQUIREMENTS
ARTICLE VI. - PERFORMANCE SECURITY
ARTICLE VIL -ADMINISTRATION
ARTICLE I
AUTHORITY
In accordance with the provisions of New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated, Chapter 155-
E, the Milton Planning Board adopts the following regulations governing the excavation of earth
and the reclamation of excavation sites in the Town of Milton, New Hampshire.
ARTICLE II
DEFINITIONS
In this Ordinance, unless the context requires otherwise, the following terms have the meanings
indicated:
1. ABUTTER-Any person who owns land within 200 feet of the boundaries of the land imder
consideration. A way as defined in RSA 259:1. XXXV; shall not be considered to be a barrier,
but shall be included in the distance requirement for purposes of determining whether a person is
an abutter.
2. APPLICANT - The owner of the excavation site or person designated by the owner, in
writing, at the time of application.
3. APPLICATION -A complete submission of information and plans as required by Statute
RSA 155-E local regulations and in the excavation permit application.
4. AQUIFER-For the purpose of this Ordinance, aquifer means a geologic formation, group of
formations, or part of a formation that is capable of yielding quantities of groundwater usable for
a municipal or private water supply.
5. EARTH -Means clay, sand, gravel, rock, soil, or construction aggregate.
6. EXCAVATION - Means a land area which is used or has been used for the commercial
taking of earth, including all slopes.
7. EXCAVATION PIT AGREEMENT - An agreement between the excavation site owner and
the contractor describing the terms and procedures for material excavation.
8. STATIONARY MANUFACTURING and PROCESSING PLANTS- Structures that are
permanently placed and that are integral to the grading, crushing, and stockpiling of excavated
material.
ARTICLE III
APPLICATION FOR EXCAVATION PERMIT
A. GENERAL PROCEDURES:
Except where specifically exempted by Article III (B) of these regulations, an excavation permit
must be granted by the Milton Planning Board prior to the start of any commercial earth
excavation or land clearing in preparation of such excavation.
Any landowner or landowner's agent who proposes to excavate, shall apply for an Earth
Excavation Permit, to the Planning Board, using the application form supplied by the Board.
No excavation permit shall be issued before a duly notified Public hearing has been held on the
application, nor before a completed application has been received containing all of the following,
in satisfactory form:
1. Current names and mailing addresses of all abutters as herein defined.
2. Site Excavation Plan.
3. Site Restoration Plan.
4. Performance Security
5. Copies of any Federal and State permits required.
6. All applicable fees.
B. EXEMPTED PROJECTS:
The following activities are exempted from the pem1it requirements except where prohibited by
Article III (C).
1. Excavation that is incidental to the lawful construction or alteration of a bnilding or
structure, including a parking lot or driveway.
2. Excavation that is incidental to agricultural or silvacultural activities, normal
landscaping, or minor topographical adjustment.
3. Excavation from an area contiguous to or from contiguous land in common
ownership with stationary manufacturing and processing plants in operation as of
the effective date of RSA 155-E, which use earth obtained from such areas.
4. Excavation from a granite quarry.
5. Excavation performed exclusively for the lawful construction, reconstruction, or
maintenance of Class I, II, II, IV, or V Highway by a unit of government, having
jurisdiction for the highway or their contracting agent, provided that a copy of the
pit agreement executed by the owner, the agent, and the governmental unit shall be
filed with and accepted by the regulator prior to start of excavation.
C. PROHIBITED PROJECTS:
The Planning Board shall deny all excavation applications in the following circumstances:
1. Where an excavation is proposed below road level within 50 feet of any highway
right of way, unless such excavation is for the purpose of said highway.
2. For excavation within 75 feet of the boundary of a disapproving abutter, or within
25 feet of the boundary of an approving abutter, mtless approval is requested by said
abutter.
3. When the excavation is not pennitted by zoning or other applicable ordinance.
4. When the issuance of the permit would be tmduly hazardous or injurious to the
public welfare.
5. Where existing visual barriers in the areas specified in RSA 155-E:3, III would be
removed, except to provide access to the excavation.
6. Where the excavation would substantially damage a known aquifer, so designated
by the United States Geological Survey (USGS).
7. When excavation is planned beneath or adjacent to inland surface waters in such a
manner, that a permit is required from the water supply and pollution control
commission, the water resources board, the special board on dredge fill, or other
State or Federal agencies with jurisdiction over the premises: but the regulator may
approve the application when all necessary pennits have been obtained.
8. Where the project cannot comply with the restoration provisions of Article IV of
these regulations.
D. SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS:
The application permit shall be signed and dated by the applicant. The completed submission
shall contain the following:
1. The name and address of the owner of the land to be excavated. The name and
address of the person who will actually do the excavation. The current names and
addresses of all abutters of the land on which the excavation is proposed.
2. Excavation Plan: An excavation plan prepared by a Licensed Professional Engineer
shall be submitted which indicates the specific location and extent of the proposed
excavation project. The plan shall be prepared at a scale not to exceed 1" = 50". The
plan shall contain the following additional information:
a. Location of property lines, their dimensions and bearings.
b. Tax Map reference: map and lot/parcel numbers.
c. Date, north arrow, and locus map.
d. Parcel size (in acres); extent of parcel to be excavated (in acres).
e. topographic plans showing existing contours and planned excavation,
contours at two foot intervals: benchmark from U.S.G.S. datum where
required by the Planning Board.
f. The planned sequence of excavation, indicating approximate areas and
dates of excavation.
g. Cross section or sections showing existing and excavated site topography.
h. Location of existing or proposed easements and existing or proposed access
roads leading to and from the excavation site.
i. The distance between excavation areas and closest property line.
j. Location of existing or proposed visual barriers to be retained between the
excavation areas and public roadways or abutting property owners.
k. Known limits of any aquifer areas, as identified by the U.S.G.S. Also, indicate
any surface water, body or streams, adjacent to the proposed excavation.
I. The elevation of the highest seasonal high water table within or next to the
proposed excavation.
m. Erosion and sediment control plan indicating project phasing and the type
and location of erosion and sediment control measures to be used during
excavation.
3. Restoration Plan: The restoration plan shall be drawn at the same scale and shall use
the same base survey information as that utilized in the preparation of the
excavation plan. The restoration plan shall contain the following information:
a. Restored topography and drainage.
b. The phasing of site restoration, indicating areas and dates that restoration
will be completed.
c. Cross section or sections showing restored topography configuration.
d. Indicate soil fertilization, seeding and mulching specifications, and plant
material to be used in restoration, their size and quantities.
e. Erosion and sedimentation control plan indicating the type and location of
erosion and sedimentation control methods to be incorporated in the
restoration design.
4. Performance security as required in Article VI of these regulations.
5. Copies of applicable State and Federal permits which may be required including
Dredge and Fill Pennits required under NH RSA 483-A, and excavation pennits
required under RSA 149:8a.
6. Such other information as the Planning Board may reasonably require to adequately
evaluate the pennit application.
E. APPLICATION FOR AMENDMENT:
Whenever alterations in the excavation project are anticipated (such as size, location, rate of
removal, or changes in restoration plan), the land owner or person designated by the owner shall
submit to the Planning Board, an application for amendment of his excavation permit. The
application for amendment is subject to the same approval procedure as the original excavation
permit.
F. PERMIT FEES
A pennit application filing fee of$500.00 (payable to the Town of Milton) plus abutters'
notification fee of $8.00 per abutter, shall accompany the excavation application.
Reasonable fees in addition to the above may be imposed to cover the costs of special
investigative studies, review of documents, and other matters which may be required by
particular applications.
G. PUBLIC HEARING: TIMING OF CONSIDERATION
Prior to the approval of an application for an excavation permit, or an application for an
amendment excavation permit, a Public hearing shall be held as required by the provisions of
RSA 155-E:7.
A notice of said Hearing shall be sent to all abutters at least ten (10) days before the hearing date.
The hearing notice shall also be posted in at least three (3) public places and published in a
newspaper of general circulation at least fourteen (14) full days before the Hearing date.
The Public Hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days of receipt of a completed application
submission including all required related materials. Completed applications may only be
received at a Public Meeting of the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall approve or
disapprove the application w:ithin twenty (20) days of the hearing, giving reasons for
disapproval.
ARTICLE IV
SITE RESTORATION
Within eight (8) months after the expiration date in the pennit therefore, or the completion of the
excavation, whichever first occurs, the owner of the excavated land shall restore, or cause to be
restored, the area affected by the excavation to meet each of the following minimum conditions:
A. Except for exposed rock ledge, said area shall be covered with vegetation suitable to prevent
erosion and with soils suitable to sustain such vegetation.
B. Debris resulting from the excavation shall be buried or removed.
C. All excavated areas shall be graded to slopes sufficient to permanently sustain vegetation.
Slopes shall not exceed 2: I.
D. The elimination of any standing bodies of water created in the excavation project, as may
constitute a hazard to health and safety, unless the regulator specifies different restoration.
ARTICLEV
SITE REQUIREMENTS
A. TOPSOIL:
Prior to excavation of material, all topsoil shall be stripped and stored on-site for site restoration
upon the completion of the excavation project. This shall be done in a phased manner to
minimize possible erosion.
B. VISUAL BARRIERS:
A vegetative of topographical visual ban·ier or buffer shall be maintained between surrounding
roads. Commercial and residential land uses and the excavation site wherever possible, and shall
be indicated as such on the excavation plan.
C. ACCESS ROAD:
Access road leading to and from the excavation site shall intersect existing street and road, at
locations that have been duly approved by State and Local officials, and in a manner that will not
endanger the safety of highway users and local residents. The provision of RSA 236:13 and 14
shall be adhered to by the applicant and shall be shown on applicant's plans.
D. WASTE DISPOSAL:
No disposal of any waste material, including solid and/or hazardous waste, septage, dredge
spoils, or organic waste and debris, shall be undertaken on the excavation site.
E. VEHICULAR BARRIER:
A construction type gate/fence with a secure lock, to prohibit vehicular access when the quarry is
not in operation, shall be required.
F. HOURS OF OPERATION:
All gravel or sand pits are allowed to operate between seven a.m. (7:00 am) and five p.m. (5:00
pm). These operating hours shall be for Mondays through Saturdays. No operation will take
place on Sundays. Hours of operation other than those stipulated, may be permitted, if agreed
upon in writing with the Planning Board.
G. DUST CONTROL:
Dust control measures will be instituted at the direction of the Planning Board or its duly
authorized agent where necessary, to protect from nuisance abutting property owners.
H. ROAD REP AIR:
The applicant shall be held liable for the repair of Town maintained roads which are damaged as
a result of hauling earth from the site. The Planning Board may require the submission of
performance security, according to the provisions of Article VI, of these regulations, to insure
adequate repair of damaged road segments following site restoration.
ARTICLE VI
PERFORMANCE SECURITY
The submission of a performance security shall be required of the applicant prior to the issuance
of an excavation permit. The security shall be in a form amount with surety, and other
conditions all satisfactory to the Board, to guarantee 1. The restoration of the excavation site in
compliance with the approved restoration plan, and 2. The repair of Town maintained roads if
damaged as a result of the excavation. The security shall remain valid and available until drawn
upon by the Town or released in accordance with subparagraphs D and E below.
A. Further to the above, the security shall be one of the following:
1. Certified check, bank check, or savings account passbook properly endorsed to the
Town of Milton.
2. Security bond issued by a surety company, authorized to do business in New
Hampshire, and issued to the Town of Milton.
B. The performance agreement shall be reviewed and approved by Town Counsel as to proper
legal fonn and enforceability. The cost of this review shall be borne by the applicant.
C. The Board shall set the amount of performance bond required for site restoration, and a
separate bond will be established for road repairs.
D. The performance bond shall not be released until the board has certified, after inspection,
that the restoration and repair, as required by RSA 155-E:5 and Article V, Sections A-D of
these regulations, have been completed.
E. All security shall be held by the Selectmen of the Town. The Selectmen shall not draw upon
or release any security until they are in receipt of a resolution passed by a majority of the
Planning Board, stating the purpose and amount to be drawn or released. The Selectmen
shall enforce such securities by all appropriate legal and equitable remedies.
A. ENFORCEMENT:
ARTICLE VII
ADMINISTRATION
The Plmming Board or its duly authorized agent is responsible for the enforcement of these
regulations as provided by RSA 155-E: 10. The excavation permit may be suspended or revoked
of any person who has violated any provisions of this permit, these regulations or of Chapter
155-E, or made a material misstatement in the permit application upon which his permit was
granted. Such suspension or revocation shall be subject to a motion for a rehearing thereon and
appeal in accordm1ce with RSA 155-E:9.
B. APPEALS:
Any person, aggrieved by the official decision of the Planning Bom·d, may appeal for a rehearing
on such decision as provided by RSA 155-E:9.
C. OTHER REGULATIONS
Where these regulations are in conflict with other local ordinances and/or regulations, the more
stringent shall apply.
D. ADOPTION
These regulations shall become effective after a Public Hearing, adoption and certification by the
Plmming Board, and placed on file with the Board of Selectmen, The Town Clerk, m1d the
Strafford Registry of Deeds.
Standard Excavation Conditions:
Hours of operation shall be noted on the plan. ---
__ A 4-year bond shall be posted with the BOS, accepted by the
BOS and put in place before the plan is signed.
__ The property shall not be used for the storage or introduction of
any foreign materials.
___ Bonding shall be continued for 4 more years.
The permit to operate shall expire in 3 years unless the owner ---
obtains a renewal prior to the expiration date.
___ The pern1it shall expire if the ownership changes.
All previous conditions shall be maintained. ---
__ The conditions shall be listed on the plans.
Updated
May 24, 2005