Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 10-26-2017]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
The Town of Merrimack ordains that the ordinances, bylaws and articles
of the Town of Merrimack adopted by the Town Council of the Town of
Merrimack, codified and consolidated into chapters and sections, and
consisting of Chapters 1 through 193, together with the Charter and an
Appendix are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code
of the Town of Merrimack," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions; Charter not affected.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of the legislation in force immediately prior to the enactment of the
Code by this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such legislation
and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall
date from the date of adoption of the prior legislation. Nothing in this
ordinance shall be deemed to affect in any way the provisions of the Charter
of the Town of Merrimack.
§ 1-3. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the Town Council
to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such
Code so that reference to the "Code of the Town of Merrimack" shall be
understood and intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments
or supplements. Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or
supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed
A. A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, is on file in the office of the Town
Clerk and is available to persons desiring to examine the same during
all times while said Code is in effect.
B. The Town Clerk of the Town of Merrimack is hereby directed to make
copies of the Code of the Town of Merrimack available at no charge to
members of the Town Council, heads of municipal departments and any
public library within the Town. Any person may inspect the Code at the
office of the Town Clerk at no charge. Any person, other than those
enumerated as being able to obtain copies of the Code without charge,
shall be allowed to purchase copies of the Code from the Town Clerk.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5
1:3
and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said
Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-6. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk, or someone authorized and directed
by the Clerk, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing
the Code required to be filed in the Clerk's office for use by the public. All
changes in said Code and all legislation adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-7. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code may be purchased from the Clerk upon the payment of
a fee to be set by the Town Council, and the Town Council may also arrange
for procedures for the periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-8. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Town of
Merrimack to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or
any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not
more than $1,000.
§ 1-9. Severability of Code provisions and ordinance provisions.
A. Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an
independent section or part of a section, and the holding of any section
or a part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause
shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
B. Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the
holding of any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or
ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or
constitutionality of any other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-5 MERRIMACK CODE § 1-9
1:4
Chapter 11
CLERK AND TAX COLLECTOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 178.
§ 1-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-9
1:5

ARTICLE I
Offices Combined
[Adopted 3-10-1970 ATM by Art. 20]
[Article 20, voted in the affirmative 3-10-1970 by ballot by the
Annual Town Meeting, reads as follows: "To see if the Town will vote
to approve having the Office of Town Clerk combined with the Office
of Tax Collector as specified under N.H.R.S.A. 41:45-a."]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-9
1:7

ARTICLE II
Deputy Tax Collector
[Adopted 3-19-1976 ATM by Art. 31; amended by Town Council
11-5-2009; 10-26-2017]
§ 11-1. Appointment.
In accordance with RSA 41:38, the Tax Collector, with the approval of the
Town Council, is hereby authorized to appoint a Deputy Tax Collector.
§ 11-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-1
1:9

ARTICLE III
Compensation
[Adopted 4-1-1977 ATM by Art. 36; amended 5-14-1984 ATM by Art.
32; amended by Town Council 11-5-2009; 10-26-2017]
§ 11-2. Salaried position; fees.
Pursuant to RSA 41:25 and 41:33, the position of Town Clerk/Tax Collector
is hereby designated as a salaried position in lieu of statutory fees, and
the annual compensation of the Town Clerk/Tax Collector shall be as set in
the Town's salary schedule as it may be amended by the Town Council. All
fees collected by the Town Clerk/Tax Collector shall be paid to the Town
Treasurer, as directed by the Town Council, for the use of the Town.
§ 11-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-2
1:11
Chapter 19
CONSERVATION COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conservation areas — See Ch. 111.
§ 11-2 MERRIMACK CODE § 11-2
1:12
ARTICLE I
Conservation Fund
[Adopted 5-15-1981 ATM by Art. 22; last amended by Town Council
11-16-2017]
§ 19-1. Fund established.
A Conservation Fund as authorized by RSA 36-A:5 is hereby established,
to be administered by the Merrimack Conservation Commission subject to
the approval of the Town Council, for the purpose of promoting the better
utilization of our natural resources. The whole or any part of unexpended
Conservation Commission budget appropriations shall be allowed to
accumulate in the Conservation Fund from year to year and to be expended
for those purposes set forth by statute.
§ 19-2. Ceiling; deposits.
Pursuant to RSA 79-A:25 (II), this article creates a ceiling for the
Conservation Fund of $1,000,000. Upon reaching the balance of
$1,000,000, all current use funds collected thereafter will be deposited into
the General Fund. If the Conservation Fund falls below $1,000,000, 50%
of all future current use revenues will be deposited into the Conservation
Fund and 50% deposited into the General Fund until the Conservation Fund
is replenished to a balance of $1,000,000.
§ 19-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-2
1:13

ARTICLE II
Silviculture
[Adopted 5-15-1981 ATM by Art. 23; last amended by Town Council
11-16-2017]
§ 19-3. Authorization to perform silviculture on Town-owned lands.
The Conservation Commission is hereby authorized to perform silviculture
(selective cutting and trimming of cordwood or timber) on Town-owned
lands under the Commission's management, as may be designated by the
Town Council, and under the direction of the N.H. State Division of Forests
and Lands; and any proceeds therefrom shall be placed in the Conservation
Fund.
§ 19-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-3
1:15
Chapter 27
HERITAGE COMMISSION
§ 19-3 MERRIMACK CODE § 19-3
1:16
ARTICLE I
Heritage Fund
[Adopted 3-14-2000 ATM by Art. 27; amended by Town Council
11-5-2009; 1-26-2012; 11-16-2017]
§ 27-1. Fund established.
A Heritage Fund is hereby established under the provisions of RSA
674:44-d. The whole or part of money appropriated in any year and any
gifts of money received shall be placed in the Heritage Fund and allowed
to accumulate from year to year. Money may be expended from such fund
by the Heritage Commission for its purposes without further approval of
the Town Council. The Town Treasurer, pursuant to RSA 41:29, Subsection
I(c), shall have custody of all moneys in the Heritage Fund and shall pay out
the same only upon order of the Heritage Commission. The disbursement
of moneys in the Heritage Fund shall be authorized by a majority vote of
the Heritage Commission. Prior to the use of such funds for the purchase of
any interest in real property, the Heritage Commission shall hold a public
hearing with notice in accordance with RSA 675:7.
§ 27-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-1
1:17
Chapter 34
LIBRARY
§ 34-1. Money from income-generating equipment.
The Public Library is hereby authorized to retain all money it receives from
its income-generating equipment in accordance with RSA 202-A:11-a.
Chapter 42
MEETINGS, VOTING AND BALLOTING
§ 27-1 MERRIMACK CODE § 34-1
1:18
ARTICLE I
Election of Clerk and Treasurer
[Adopted 3-10-1970 ATM by Art. 26]
[Article 26, voted in the affirmative for both offices 3-10-1970 by
ballot by the Annual Town Meeting, reads as follows: "To see if the
Town will vote to establish three-year terms for the Town Clerk and
Town Treasurer commencing with those citizens elected at the 1970
election as specified in the applicable RSA of the State of N.H."1]
1. Editor's Note: See RSA 41:16-b, 41:26-b and 41:45-a.
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-1
1:19
Chapter 57
PLANNING BOARD AND ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
§ 34-1 MERRIMACK CODE § 34-1
1:20
ARTICLE I
Establishment of Subdivision Regulations
[Adopted 9-13-1966 STM by Art. 2; amended 4-1-1977 ATM by Art.
37]
[Article 2, voted in the affirmative 9-13-1966 by a Special Town
Meeting, read in the warrant as follows: "To see if the Town will
vote to place the authority for approval of subdivision developments
under the jurisdiction of the Planning Board." Article 2 was moved
as follows: "that the Planning Board is hereby authorized and
empowered pursuant to Section 19 of Chapter 36 of the New
Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated2 to regulate the subdivision
of land as provided in said Chapter 36, that it shall be the duty of
the Town Clerk to file with the Register of Deeds of Hillsborough
County a certificate or notice that the Planning Board has been so
authorized on the date of this Resolution and that it shall further
be the duty of the Town Clerk to issue on behalf of the Town
the certificate of the municipality described in Section 23 of said
Chapter 36."3
This motion was amended during the voting as follows: "that before
exercising the powers referred to in Section 19, RSA 36:21,4 the
Planning Board shall adopt proposed regulations governing the
subdivision of land within its Jurisdiction after it has held a public
hearing on the proposed regulations which will become local law
after approval by the Selectmen. Any regulation may be amended by
using the same process as used by their original adoption."
Article 2 was amended by Article 37, voted in the affirmative
4-1-1977 by the Annual Town Meeting, which reads as follows: "To
see if the Town will vote to rescind that portion of Article 35 of
the September 13, 1966 Special Town Meeting which designated
that the Board of Selectmen must approve any changes in the
subdivision regulations, as said designation of the Board of
Selectmen as an approval body is contrary to state law; but
otherwise to preserve the action of the 1966 Special Town Meeting
in its granting of authority to the Planning Board to establish
subdivision regulations."]
2. Editor's Note: See now RSA 674:35.
3. Editor's Note: See now RSA 676:4.
4. Editor's Note: See now RSA 674:36.
5. Editor's Note: Reads so in voting record. Article 3 of 9-13-1966 restricted dogs. Reference
appears to be to Article 2 of 9-13-1966, which assigned powers relating to subdivisions.
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-1
1:21
Chapter 66
TOWN COUNCIL
§ 34-1 MERRIMACK CODE § 34-1
1:22
ARTICLE I
Tax Title Deed Properties
[Adopted 5-16-1991 ATM by Art. 26; amended by Town Council
11-5-2009; 1-26-2012; 1-25-2018]
§ 66-1. Transfer of tax lien.
Pursuant to RSA 80:80, the Town Council is authorized to retain for public
use or to sell, either by private sale to the previous owner from which title
was obtained through the Tax Collector's Deed or public auction, and for
such price and upon such terms as in their judgment may seem best, any
real estate or interest therein to which the Town has obtained or shall obtain
title by Tax Collector's deed for the nonpayment of taxes, and further that
during the period when title to said property shall be held by the Town, that
the Town Council be given authority to rent, use or administer the same as
in their judgment may seem best.
§ 66-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-1
1:23
Chapter 79
WASTEWATER TREATMENT DEFICITS, PAYMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer use — See Ch. 158.
§ 79-1. Restrictions on use of funds.
The Town hereby agrees that the Town Council and/or its representatives
shall not use funds raised through ad valorem taxes to pay for deficits
which may result from operating and maintenance costs incurred at the
Merrimack Waste Treatment Facility.
Chapter 81
WATERLINES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer use — See Ch. 158.
Stormwater management standards — See
Ch. 167.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 169.
§ 66-1 MERRIMACK CODE § 79-1
1:24
ARTICLE I
Apportionment of Cost
[Adopted 3-10-1998 ATM by Art. 17; amended by Town Council
12-3-2009; 1-26-2012; 1-11-2018]
§ 81-1. Policy established.
It shall be the policy of the Town of Merrimack that in regard to any
and all street projects or sewer line projects that require the relocation of
waterlines, the cost of said relocation above $15,000 shall be considered
to be a project cost. The Merrimack Village District shall reimburse to the
Town all waterline relocation costs up to $15,000 on Town projects.
§ 81-2. Applicability.
This policy shall be applicable to the following types of projects:
§ 81-3. Additional costs.
It shall further be the policy of the Town of Merrimack that the Merrimack
Village District shall be responsible for paying any additional costs incurred
by the Town of Merrimack as the result of extending, upgrading or
enhancing their systems during any project that requires the relocation of
waterlines.
§ 81-4. Relocation at direction of town.
Furthermore, it shall be the policy of the Town of Merrimack that waterline
relocations will become part of any overall street project or sewer line
project, and shall be conducted at the direction of the Town of Merrimack.
Nothing herein shall preclude the Merrimack Village Commissioners from
assuming responsibility for relocating waterlines at the Village District's
own expense.
§ 81-5. Protection of separate interests.
Finally, it shall be the policy of the Town of Merrimack that the Public
Works Department of the Town of Merrimack and the Merrimack Village
District shall arrive at mutually agreeable procedures for coordinating the
relocation of waterlines to ensure that the interests of each are protected
prior to the bidding of any project.
A. Those projects related to the Town's capital improvement program; or
B. Any project of the Town of Merrimack that is not included in the capital
improvement program but which requires waterline relocation; the
Merrimack Village District shall reimburse to the Town up to $7,500 per
project for costs incurred in the relocation of the waterlines.
§ 81-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-6
1:25
§ 81-6. Bidding protection.
Nothing in this chapter prevents the Merrimack Village District from
bidding on the waterline portion of any street project or sewer line project
being completed by the Town of Merrimack.
§ 81-6 MERRIMACK CODE § 81-6
1:26
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 90
ALARM SYSTEMS
§ 90-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM BUSINESS — The occupation by any natural person, cooperation,
incorporated association, partnership or other entity of selling, leasing,
maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, removing or installing
any emergency alarm system or causing to be sold, leased, maintained,
serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved or installed any emergency
alarm system in or on any building, structure or facility. This definition does
not include a business which engages in the manufacture or sale of an
emergency alarm system unless such business services, installs, monitors
or responds to emergency alarm systems.
ALARM INSTALLATION — The design, installation, repair, alternation or
maintenance of emergency alarm systems.
ALARM USER — Any person on whose premises an emergency alarm
system is maintained within the Town of Merrimack, except for alarm
systems on motor vehicles or proprietary alarm systems.
ANSWERING SERVICE — A telephone answering service which provides
the service of receiving signals from emergency alarm systems and
thereafter immediately relays the message by live voice to the emergency
alarm monitoring facility.
APPLICANT — A person who files an application of a new or renewal permit
as provided by this chapter.
CENTRAL ALARM STATION — Any facility which is privately owned, or
owns or leases emergency alarm systems and whose facility is staffed by
employees who receive, record or validate alarm signals and relay the
information of such signals to the Merrimack Police Department
Communications Division by any means.
DIAL ALARM — An alarm system which automatically selects a telephone
line connected to a Central Alarm Station and reproduces a prerecorded
voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of an emergency
situation that the emergency alarm system is designed to detect.
DIRECT ALARM — Any system which is directly connected to the alarm
processing unit within the central alarm station.
EMERGENCY ALARM SYSTEM — An assembly of equipment and devices,
or a single device, designed to transmit a signal indicating an actual or
perceived emergency situation requiring urgent attention and to which
emergency personnel are expected to respond. For purposes of this chapter,
§ 81-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-1
1:27
an "emergency alarm system" shall not include residential smoke, fire and
carbon monoxide detectors. In this chapter, the term "emergency alarm
system" shall include the terms, "dial alarm," "direct alarm," "local alarm"
and "manual alarm," as those terms are hereinafter defined.
FALSE ALARM — Any activation of an emergency alarm system to which
the Town of Merrimack emergency services personnel respond and which is
not the result of an actual or perceived emergency or situation requiring the
assistance of emergency services personnel. Excluded from this definition
are:
FIRE CHIEF — The Chief of the Merrimack Fire Department or a named
and authorized designee.
LOCAL ALARM — Any alarm system not connected to a central alarm
station or answering service which, when activated, operates an audible
and/or visual signaling device at the premises within which the emergency
alarm system is installed.
MANUAL ALARM — Any emergency alarm system by which the activation
of the alarm is initiated by the direct action of the alarm user, his agents or
employees and is installed to elicit a police, fire or medical response to an
actual or perceived emergency situation.
PERMIT HOLDER — Any person who shall be granted a permit as provided
in this chapter and his or her agents or representatives.
PERSON — Any natural person, corporation, unincorporated association,
partnership or other legal entity.
POLICE CHIEF — The Chief of the Merrimack Police Department or a
named and authorized designee.
PROPRIETARY ALARM SYSTEM — Any and all alarm systems, sounding
and/or recording alarms and supervisory signals at a control center located
within the protected premises, the control center being under the
supervision of the proprietor of the protected premises or his employees
or agents. If a proprietary alarm system includes a signal line connected
directly to a central station or answering service, it thereby becomes an
emergency alarm system as defined by this chapter.
Alarms occurring during electrical storms, hurricanes, tornados,
blizzards and acts of God;
A.
The intermittent disruption or disruption of the telephone circuits
beyond the control of the alarm company and/or alarm user;
B.
Electrical power disruption or failure beyond the control of the alarm
company and/or alarm user;
C.
Alarms caused by a failure of the equipment at the central alarm
station; or
D.
Other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by
the permit holder.
E.
§ 90-1 MERRIMACK CODE § 90-1
1:28
TOWN — The Town of Merrimack, New Hampshire.
TWELVE-MONTH PERIOD — For purposes of determining the total number
of false alarms, this is the period that spans 12 rolling calendar months
from the date of the first and successive alarms that the Police or the Fire
Department is notified of and responds to.
§ 90-2. Application for permit; information required; use.
A. The Police Chief shall accept and approve (or deny) applications for
police-related emergency alarm systems permits.
B. The Fire Chief shall accept and approve (or deny) applications for firerelated
emergency alarm systems permits.
C. The Fire Chief shall accept and approve (or deny) applications for
medical emergency alarm system permits.
D. Permit required. The Police Chief and the Fire Chief are hereby
authorized to issue a permit to any owner of property located within the
Town of Merrimack or the lessee thereof to maintain, install or modify
an emergency alarm system upon application to them and subject to the
following provisions:
(1) All permits for emergency alarm systems shall require the approval
of the Police Chief for police-related alarms or the Fire Chief for
fire- or medical-related alarms.
(2) The alarm user applying for the permit shall state on the
application his name, address and telephone number or, if the
alarm user is a corporation or legal entity, the name(s), address(es)
and telephone number(s) of the person(s) responsible for upkeep,
maintenance and operation of the emergency alarm system and any
other information that the Police Chief or the Fire Chief may deem
necessary.
(3) The Police Chief or the Fire Chief, upon application to them for a
permit, shall, in their sound judgment, determine whether the
application conforms to the requirements of this chapter and that
the facts stated therein are true and accurate. The Police Chief or
the Fire Chief may cause such system to be inspected and/or tested
to determine that the system is reasonably operational.
(4) Any false statement of a material matter made by an applicant for
the purpose of obtaining an alarm permit shall be sufficient cause
for refusal to issue a permit.
(5) Any alarm permit cannot be transferred or assigned to another
person. A permit holder shall inform the Police Chief or the Fire
Chief of any change that alters any information listed on the permit
application within five business days. No fee will be assessed for
such changes.
§ 90-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-2
1:29
§ 90-3. Permit/contract fees and application; exemptions.
§ 90-4. Penalty for use without a permit; conformance.
§ 90-5. Denial or revocation of permit; hearing; appeal;
reapplication.
(6) All fees owed by an applicant must be paid before a permit may be
issued or renewed.
A. Anyone applying for an emergency alarm system permit must complete
the application form and return it to the Police Chief for police-related
alarms or the Fire Chief for fire- and medical-related alarms, with a onetime
permit fee of $10. A separate emergency alarm permit shall be
required for each individual emergency alarm system in any single
location, although only one permit fee will be required for a multiple
emergency alarm system.
B. All federal, state, county or local government agencies who operate
emergency alarm systems shall be exempt from all permit fees but shall
comply with all other requirements of this chapter.
C. All persons 65 years of age or older who are the principal occupant of
the private residence listed on an application for an emergency alarm
system or who are certified to be 100% medically disabled by a state or
federal government agency shall be exempt from all permit fees but
shall comply with all other requirements of this chapter.
A. Maintaining an emergency alarm system without a permit.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person or alarm user to maintain or
operate an emergency alarm system, as defined by this chapter,
without first obtaining a permit as provided.
(2) All emergency alarm systems presently operating shall conform to
this chapter prior to continued operation thereof.
B. Operating an emergency alarm system without a permit, penalty. Any
person or alarm user who maintains or operates an emergency alarm
system without a permit and causes a false alarm as defined herein
shall be issued a warning and given 30 days to acquire a permit. Failure
to acquire a permit after 30 days or six false alarms, whichever occurs
first, will result in the alarm user being guilty of a violation and, upon
conviction, shall be fined not less than $100.
A. Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter may
constitute grounds for the Police Chief or the Fire Chief to deny the
issuance of a permit. After the Police or Fire Department has been
notified of and responded to six false alarms within a one-year (twelvemonth
period) from any emergency alarm user, the emergency alarm
system user will be notified, in writing, that continued false alarms will
result in the assessment of a response fee (see § 90-9, False alarms;
§ 90-2 MERRIMACK CODE § 90-5
1:30
§ 90-6. Display of permit and record of inspections.
service charges; time limit for payment, for response fee schedule)
and could result in the revocation of the emergency alarm system
permit. The Police Chief or the Fire Chief may revoke the emergency
alarm system permit of any emergency alarm system user who, having
had six or more false alarms within a one-year (twelve-month) period,
fails to take appropriate action to prevent continued false alarms from
occurring.
B. Any person, business, corporation, unincorporated association,
partnership or other legal entity whose emergency alarm system permit
is denied or revoked may request a hearing before the Police Chief for
police-related alarms or the Fire Chief for fire- and medical-related
alarms by submitting a request for such hearing, in writing, within 30
calendar days of the date of denial or revocation stating therein the
basis for such request. The written request for a hearing shall be mailed
or hand-delivered to either the Police Chief or the Fire Chief.
C. At the hearing before the Police Chief or the Fire Chief, the holder of
the emergency alarm system permit shall have the right to present
evidence, cross-examine witnesses and to be represented by counsel.
Such a hearing shall be informal and shall not be subject to the rules of
evidence or formal courtroom procedures.
D. After the hearing, the Police Chief or the Fire Chief shall, within five
business days, either issue an order of denial or revocation of the
emergency alarm system permit or withdraw the notice of denial or
revocation and issue or reinstate the emergency alarm system permit.
E. Any alarm user aggrieved by the decision of the Police Chief or the Fire
Chief to deny or revoke an emergency alarm system permit may appeal
the decision to deny or revoke said permit to the Town Manager. Said
appeal shall be requested, in writing, within 10 business days of the
decision to deny or revoke said permit, stating therein the basis for
such appeal. The request for a hearing by the Town Manager shall be
mailed or hand-delivered to the Town Manager's Office at the
Merrimack Town Offices.
F. An emergency alarm system user whose permit has been denied or
revoked is not precluded under this chapter from applying for a new
permit. The Police Chief or the Fire Chief, however, shall not be
required to issue a new emergency alarm system permit unless they are
satisfied that the user's system has been properly serviced and its
deficiencies corrected. The Police Chief or the Fire Chief may also
impose reasonable restrictions and conditions upon the alarm user
before issuing a new permit. These restrictions and/or conditions shall
appear on the permit, and violation of these conditions may be cause for
the revocation of the permit.
§ 90-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-6
1:31
§ 90-7. (Reserved)
§ 90-8. Penalty for use after revocation.
Any alarm user who, after having an emergency alarm system permit
revoked and after exhausting his right to a hearing and appeal, fails to
disconnect his emergency alarm system shall be guilty of a violation and,
upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $100.
§ 90-9. False alarms; service charges; time limit for payment.
Any owner or lessee of property having an emergency alarm system on his/
her premises and any user of an emergency alarm system designated and
installed with the intent of eliciting a response of police, fire or medical
emergency service personnel shall pay to the Town of Merrimack a response
fee based on the following schedule for each and every false alarm to
which the emergency service personnel respond in excess of six false alarms
during a one-year (twelve-month) period:
Number of Alarms
Response Fee
(each)
7 to 10 $50
11 and up $100
§ 90-10. Appeal of service charges.
§ 90-11. New installations, renovation and upgrades.
Any owner or lessee of property installing, renovating and upgrading an
emergency alarm system on his/her premises will not be assessed a service
charge for false alarms for 30 calendar days from the date the emergency
A. All alarm users to whom a permit has been issued shall keep the permit
within the protected premises for which the permit was issued.
B. Any emergency alarm system permit issued under this chapter shall be
made available for inspection, suspension or revocation purposes upon
demand of the Police Chief or the Fire Chief. Each alarm business or
permit holder shall display to the Police Chief or the Fire Chief, when
requested, their record of inspection or repair of an installed
emergency alarm system.
A. Any alarm user, owner or lessee who possesses an emergency alarm
system permit may appeal false alarm response charges, in writing, to
the Police Chief or the Fire Chief within 10 business days after receipt
of the notice of such charge, stating therein the basis for such appeal.
B. The Police Chief or the Fire Chief may waive assessment of the service
charge when, in their judgment, reasonable attempts are being taken to
discover and eliminate the cause of the false alarms.
§ 90-6 MERRIMACK CODE § 90-11
1:32
alarm system is put in service, provided that a permit application is received
by the Police Chief or the Fire Chief.
§ 90-12. Instruction on proper use; maintenance.
§ 90-13. Liability of Town.
The Town of Merrimack, its emergency services employees and their agents
shall take every reasonable precaution to assure that emergency alarm
system signals are given appropriate attention and are acted upon with
dispatch. Nevertheless, the Town of Merrimack, its departments, employees
and agents shall not be liable for any defects in the operation of an
emergency alarm system, for any failure or neglect to respond appropriately
upon receipt of an alarm from such source nor for the failure or neglect of
any person in connection with the installation and operation of emergency
alarm systems or their components, the transmission of alarm signals and
prerecorded messages or the relaying of such signals and messages.
§ 90-14. Confidentiality.
The information furnished and secured pursuant to this chapter shall be
confidential in character and shall not be subject to public inspection and
shall be kept so that the contents thereof shall not be known except to
persons charged with the administration of this chapter.
Chapter 92
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
§ 92-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any machine which, upon the insertion of a coin,
slug, token or similar object, may be operated by the public generally for
use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a
score. It shall include such devices as electronic games, pinball machines,
skill ball, mechanical grab machines and all games, operations or
transactions similar thereto under whatever name they may be designated.
A. Each alarm business which installs or services an emergency alarm
system shall clearly instruct the alarm user of the emergency alarm
system in the proper use and operation of the alarm system, as
frequently as necessary, especially in those factors which cause false
alarms.
B. Each permit holder shall maintain each emergency alarm system in
good working order, providing the necessary service to prevent false
alarms, to prevent malfunctions endangering persons or property and
to prevent other malfunctions.
§ 90-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-1
1:33
The term does not include vending machines in which are not incorporated
gaming or amusement features, nor does the term include any coinoperated
musical devices or rides.
GAMES OF CHANCE — A game whose outcome is strongly influenced by
some randomizing device, and upon which contestants may choose to risk
money or anything of monetary value upon a future contingent event not
under one's control or influence, upon an agreement or understanding that
something of value will be received in the event of a certain outcome.
Common devices used include dice, spinning tops, playing cards, roulette
wheels, or numbered balls drawn from a container.
PERSON, FIRM, CORPORATION or ASSOCIATION — Includes any of those
entities or combinations thereof owning an amusement device or
maintaining an establishment where one or more amusement devices are
available for use by the public or having control over such establishment.
§ 92-2. Number of devices restricted.
No person, firm, corporation or association shall display for public
patronage or keep for public operation any amusement devices without
first obtaining a license from the Town. Any firm, person, corporation or
association may request permission to keep for public operation amusement
devices by submitting an application to the Town Manager; however, the
total number may not exceed 25 amusement devices. In accordance with
RSA 31:41-d, the Town Manager shall have the authority to establish
reasonable conditions for the issuance of a license as may be deemed
appropriate.
§ 92-3. Gambling devices prohibited.
Nothing in this chapter shall in any way be construed to authorize, license
or permit any gambling or gambling devices not permitted by state law.
§ 92-4. License denial.
The Town Manager may deny the application for a license herein for good
cause shown or on the basis of previous violations by the applicant or their
agents of the terms of this chapter. If the application is denied by the Town
Manager, the applicant may file, within seven business days of the receipt
of the Town Manager's decision, a written appeal to the Town Council for
review of the application. The Town Council shall consider the appeal at the
next available regular Town Council meeting.
§ 92-5. License term.
Any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire on the first day
of July of each year and may be renewed only after compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 92-1 MERRIMACK CODE § 92-6
1:34
§ 92-6. License required.
The application for an amusement device license shall, in addition to such
information as may be required by the Town Council or its designee, contain
no less than the following:
§ 92-7. Amusement device management plan.
Any application for an amusement device license shall contain a
management plan containing at least the following:
§ 92-8. License fee.
The applicant, before being granted a license, shall pay a license fee of $50
per year or any part thereof for each device used or played or exhibited for
use or play. All license fees shall be payable in advance. In no case shall any
portion of the license fee be repaid to the licensee.
§ 92-9. Location restrictions.
All amusement devices shall be kept and placed in plain view of any person
or persons who may frequent or be in any place of business where such
devices are kept or used.
§ 92-10. Operation by minors prohibited; exception.
No person shall permit a person under 16 years of age to play or operate
any amusement game of chance as defined in this article; provided,
however, that, the provisions of this section shall not apply to any person
A. The name and address of the applicant and, if a firm, corporation,
partnership or association, the principal officers thereof and their
addresses.
B. A full description of the premises, including the character of the
business as carried on at such place.
C. A general description of the type of device or devices to be licensed,
including the number of proposed amusement devices and their
location on said premises.
A. The actual hours of operation.
B. The number of qualified employees to be present at all times.
C. A plan to control loitering and bicycle/motor vehicle parking in the
vicinity of the premises.
D. A description of proposed operations to show proper control of noise,
glare and overcrowding.
E. Provision for a designated area within the establishment where all
amusement devices shall be located.
§ 92-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-10
1:35
under 16 years of age accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other
suitable adult person having care and custody of such minor.
§ 92-11. Transfer of license.
A license shall not be transferable from person to person, nor place to place,
and shall be usable only at the place and by the person designated on the
license.
§ 92-11.1. Prohibited practices.
§ 92-11.2. Inspections.
The Police Chief or designee shall inspect or cause the inspection of any
establishment, place or building in which any amusement device or devices
are operated or set up for operation and to inspect, investigate and test
such devices as often as reasonably necessary, but no less than once a
year, to secure compliance with any chapter provision or to detect violations
thereof. It shall be the duty of the licensee or the person in charge of
the premises to be inspected to admit the Police Chief or designee for the
purpose of making the inspection at any reasonable time that admission is
requested.
§ 92-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, corporation or association found to have violated this
chapter shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
subject to a penalty not to exceed $1,000.
§ 92-13. Revocation or suspension of license.
A license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked or
suspended upon determination that a violation of this chapter has been
committed by the license holder, his agent or employee. Such revocation or
suspension shall be carried out by the Town Manager only after due notice
and hearing.
§ 92-14. Waiver of license.
The Town Manager may, at his/her sole discretion, waive some or all of the
provisions of this chapter.
A. No person shall be awarded or receive any monetary prizes in
connection with the use of an amusement device.
B. Consumption of alcoholic beverages in the designated amusement
device area is prohibited.
§ 92-10 MERRIMACK CODE § 92-15
1:36
§ 92-15. Severability.
Each separate provision of this chapter shall be deemed independent of
all other provisions herein, and it is further ordained that if any of the
provisions of this chapter are found to be invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, all other provisions thereof shall remain valid and enforceable.
§ 92-16. Effective date and duration.
This chapter originally became effective 7-1-1993.
Chapter 102
BLASTING AND EXPLOSIVES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fireworks — See Ch. 130.
§ 102-1. Purpose.
§ 102-2. Authority.
§ 102-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AIRBLAST — An airblast is an airborne shock wave resulting from the
detonation of explosives. The movement of overburden or release of
expanding gas in the air resulting from the detonation of explosives may
also cause airblast. Airblast may or may not be audible.
APPLICANT — The person, company or corporation, or the employee of any
person, company or corporation, responsible and accountable for managing
and conducting the blasting operations.
BLAST AREA — The area of a blast within the influence of flying rock
missiles, gases, and concussion. The area including the blast site and the
immediate adjacent area that is owned-leased or controlled by the blast
operation.
A. This chapter is established to promote the health, safety, fire protection,
and general welfare of the residents of the Town of Merrimack.
B. This chapter outlines specific requirements governing blasting,
explosives demolition or other use of explosives within the Town of
Merrimack.
A. This chapter is enacted pursuant to the statutory authority granted to
the Town of Merrimack by RSA 31:39 and Town Charter Article 5 § 4.
§ 92-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-3
1:37
BLAST SITE — The area in which explosive materials are being or have
been loaded and include all holes loaded or to be loaded for the same blast
and for a distance of 50 feet in all directions.
BLASTING — The detonation of an explosive device as defined by the
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 495 Explosive Materials Code.
BLASTING MAT — A rubber or steel mat used to protect personnel, dampen
sound, keep the charge in the hole, prevent flyrock and contain debris.
BLASTING OPERATION — All blasting anticipated to be undertaken during
the completion of a contract or series of contracts, for demolition,
excavation, construction, and development. A blasting operation includes
all work involving the preparation, drilling, loading and detonation as well
as the excavation and clean up of the blasted area, the location of blasting
magazine, and quantity of explosives.
DEPARTMENT — The Town of Merrimack Fire Department.
EXPLOSIVES — Those materials as defined in New Hampshire Code of
Administrative Rules Saf-C 1600 and RSA 158:29, XI, and any chemical
compound, mixture, or device, the primary or common purpose of which
is to function by explosion; that is with substantially instantaneous release
of gas and heat, unless such compound, mixture or device is otherwise
specifically classified by the U.S. Department of Transportation. All material
which is classified as Class 1 Explosives by the U.S. Department of
Transportation (49 CFR 173.50,) Classification of explosives by the U.S.
Department of Transportation is as follows:
Division 1.1. Explosives. Consists of explosives that have a mass
explosion hazard. A mass explosion is one which affects almost the
entire load instantaneously. Examples: dynamite, detonator (cap)
sensitive emulsions, slurries, water gels, cast boosters, and mass
detonating detonators.
A.
Division 1.2. Explosives. Consists of explosives that have a projection
hazard but not a mass explosion hazard. Examples: certain types of
ammunition, mines, and grenades.
B.
Division 1.3. Explosives. Consists of explosives that have a fire hazard
and either a minor blast hazard or a minor projection hazard or both,
but not a mass explosion hazard. Examples: certain types of fireworks,
propellants, and pyrotechnics.
C.
Division 1.4. Consists of explosives that present a minor explosion
hazard. The explosive effects are largely confined to the package and no
projection of fragments of appreciable size or range is to be expected.
An external fire must not cause virtually instantaneous explosion of
almost the entire contents of the package. Examples: safety fuse and
certain electric, electronic, and nonelectric detonators.
D.
Division 1.5. Consists of very insensitive explosives. This division is
comprised of substances which have a mass explosion hazard but are
so insensitive that there is very little probability of initiation or of
E.
§ 102-3 MERRIMACK CODE § 102-3
1:38
FIRE CHIEF — The Chief of the Merrimack Fire Department or a named
and authorized designee.
FLY ROCK — Any rock or material that is propelled through the air or has
the potential to be propelled through the air beyond the blast area.
GROUND VIBRATIONS — The shaking of ground that is registered and
documented by a seismograph caused by the blast wave emanating from the
detonation of an explosive.
HABITABLE STRUCTURE — A structure which persons are occupying or
may occupy, including residential dwellings, commercial and industrial
buildings, garages, sheds, barns, and storage buildings.
HERTZ — A term used to express the frequency of ground vibrations and
airblast. One hertz is one cycle per second.
NFPA — The National Fire Protection Association.
PARTICLE VELOCITY — A measure of ground vibration. "Particle velocity"
describes the velocity at which a particle of ground vibrates when excited
by a force producing ground motion such as an earthquake or an explosion,
measured in inches per second.
PEAK PARTICLE VELOCITY (PPV) — A measurement of maximum ground
vibration, in any of the three mutually perpendicular components of particle
velocity.
PREBLAST ADMINISTRATOR — The person and/or company conducting
the preblast survey.
PREBLAST SURVEY — An evaluation of a structure within the required
distance to identify any structural problem before the commencement of the
blasting operation.
SEISMIC MEASURING EQUIPMENT — That equipment utilized to measure
ground effects of blasting and/or explosive detonation which may include
but is not limited to creepmeters, seismographs, seismometers,
strainmeters, or magnetometers. These meters shall always be placed on
undisturbed soil and not placed on sand or heavy sand soils.
SEISMOGRAPH — An instrument that measures and records earthborn
vibration. The instrument shall produce a direct printout of ground motion
frequency, acceleration, particle velocity and amplitude, or produce a
record from which any of these parameters can be calculated.
transition from burning to detonation under normal conditions of
transport. Examples: blasting agents, ANFO, non-cap sensitive
emulsions, blends, slurries, water gels, and other explosives that
require a booster for initiation.
Division 1.6. Consists of extremely insensitive articles which do not
have a mass explosive hazard. This division is comprised of articles
which contain only extremely insensitive detonating substances and
which demonstrate a negligible probability of accidental initiation or
propagation.
F.
§ 102-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-3
1:39
SITE — The area as outlined by the boundaries which are identified as a
map and lot number by the Town.
STRUCTURE — Anything which is built or constructed on a property (i.e.,
property improvements) including activity for which a building permit or
site permit is required, such as foundations, driveways, roadbeds, parking
lots, swimming pools, wells, waste disposal systems, and utility
installations.
TOWN — The Town of Merrimack, New Hampshire.
§ 102-4. Permit required.
§ 102-5. Administrative responsibility.
§ 102-6. Adoption of codes.
§ 102-7. Fee required.
A. No blasting or explosives detonation shall be conducted within the
Town unless a permit has first been obtained for that purpose.
A. The Fire Chief shall administer this chapter, conduct appropriate
oversight of all blasting and explosives, in cooperation with other
officials, Police Department or agencies to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
A. The Town adopts the following codes for the purpose of establishing
rules and regulations for blasting and explosives, including permits and
penalties:
(1) State of New Hampshire Chapter Saf-1600, Explosives, RSA 160-C,
Saf-C 5003, Saf-C 6018 as amended;
(2) National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 70, National Electric
Code, as amended;
(3) National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 498, Standard for Safe
Havens and Interchange Lots for Vehicles Transporting Explosives,
as amended;
(4) National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 495, Explosives
Materials Code, as amended.
A. No permit shall be issued unless the nonrefundable fee of $100 for the
first week (defined as Monday through Friday) and $20 for each
weekday thereafter.
B. The fees shall be collected at the time of application.
C. The Town Council has the authority to waive any fees outlined in this
section.
§ 102-3 MERRIMACK CODE § 102-8
1:40
§ 102-8. Permit application.
§ 102-9. Authority to issue.
A. Applications for a permit shall be made to the Merrimack Fire
Department, 432 Daniel Webster Highway in Merrimack, New
Hampshire, during normal working hours as identified by the Fire
Department (posted on the web site, excluding holidays and weekends).
B. Permits will be issued no more than seven calendar days in advance of
the blast and will be valid for no more than five calendar days as
identified by the dates listed on the permit. In the event that Monday is
a holiday, permits will be valid for four days.
C. The application form (OFM-FRM-101) shall be submitted seven
business days (exceptions on case-by-case basics as determined by the
Fire Chief) prior to the issuance of a permit.
D. The following requirements must be appended to the application:
(1) A copy of license issued by the State Police to the applicant
allowing use, purchasing, transportation, and license along with
proof of identification, under RSA 158:9-b, if applicable.
(2) A copy of blasting supervisor's certificate of competency issued by
the State Police pursuant to RSA 158:9-h, if applicable.
(3) Written evidence of the licensing, experience, and qualifications of
the blaster who shall be directly responsible for the loading and
firing of explosives.
(4) A list of owners of all such properties identified, together with a
notation as to whether such properties are improved by a structure
and the type of occupancy (i.e., residential, commercial, industrial)
where applicable.
(5) A letter of permission from the property owner of the blasting or
explosives discharge site.
(6) Evidence of general liability and property damage insurance where
applicable issued by a carrier authorized by the State of New
Hampshire Insurance Commissioner to do business in New
Hampshire in an amount of not less than $1,000,000 combined
single limit per occurrence. Proof of proper insurance will be kept
on file with the Department for a period of one year and shall be
updated by the applicant on an annual basis.
A. Permit applications shall be received, reviewed and the information
contained therein verified as necessary by the Fire Chief.
B. Prior to acting on any permit the Fire Chief may consult with such
federal, state and/or Town officials and employees whose area(s) of
§ 102-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-9
1:41
§ 102-10. Amendments of adopted codes.
§ 102-11. Pre-blast condition survey requirements.
responsibility are, or may be, affected by the proposed blasting
operation.
C. After review and verification, the Fire Chief shall act on the application
and either issue the permit, with any condition(s) necessary to achieve
the purposes of this chapter, or deny the permit application, along with
the reason(s).
A. In addition to any other requirements of state law, the codes adopted by
reference in § 102-2 are hereby amended in the following particulars
along with additions for local requirements and the following additional
requirements shall apply to blasting activity within the Town of
Merrimack.
B. All blasting operations, including the storage and handling of explosives
and blasting agents, shall be performed in accordance with the
applicable provisions of this chapter and all other pertinent federal,
state, and local regulations, as may be amended or superseded by other
similar regulations from time to time, to include:
(1) NFPA 1, Fire Prevention Code.
(2) NFPA 101, Life Safety Code.
(3) NFPA 495, Explosive Materials Code.
(4) New Hampshire State Building Code.
(5) New Hampshire Code of Administrative Rules Saf-C 1600, RSA
160-C, Saf-C 5003, Saf-C 6018.
C. Whenever explosives are used, they shall be of such character and in
such amount as are permitted by the state and local laws and
ordinances, and all respective agencies having jurisdiction over them.
A. Property owners are not obliged to accept a pre-blast/post-blast
inspection offer.
B. Prior to conducting any pre-blast survey the applicant or their agent
shall register with the Merrimack Fire Department utilizing the Pre-
Blast Survey Registration Form Number OFM-FRM-102, and a copy of
this form will accompany the persons conducting the pre-blast survey.
C. Pre-blast inspections are hereby amended in the following particulars:
(1) Prior to conducting any blasting, the applicant or their agent shall
conduct a pre-blast structural condition survey of all structures/
habitable structures, and conditions on the site, adjacent to the
site, or in the vicinity of the site.
§ 102-9 MERRIMACK CODE § 102-11
1:42
(2) This survey shall extend to such structures or conditions as may be
affected by the applicant's construction operations. At a minimum,
pre-blast condition surveys shall be performed on all structures/
habitable structures within 500 feet from the site of the proposed
blast or such extended distance as may be specified by the Fire
Chief or actions of the Town.
(3) The individual person conducting the survey shall give written
notice, not less than 10 days in advance, to the owner of the
property concerned, as well as to any tenants of the property.
(4) The written notification must describe, at a minimum:
(a) The blasting that will take place.
(b) When blasting may occur, including dates and times, or a range
of dates and times.
(c) A five-business-day window for a property owner to request
pre-blast/post-blast inspection.
(d) The mailing address, e-mail address and telephone number
that property owners can use to obtain information regarding
the blasting or inspections, and to request, at no cost, pre-blast
inspections.
(e) The mailing address, e-mail address and telephone number
and instructions about how and where to contact the applicant,
or his/her representative concerning blast-related complaints
or claims.
(f) The ability to receive notification, one hour before each
impending blast, to an e-mail or telephone number supplied by
the resident or property owner.
D. The applicant must provide to the Fire Chief a list of all parties and
property owners notified indicating whether or not a pre-blast
inspection request was received by the applicant in each case.
E. The applicant shall make at least three in-person attempts and at least
one certified mail notice over a fourteen-day period to notify the owner
of the need for such surveys.
F. The pre-blast structural inspection condition survey shall consist of a
written description of the interior and exterior condition of each of the
structures examined.
G. Descriptions shall locate any existing cracks, damage, or other defects,
and shall include such information so as to make it possible to
determine the effect, if any, of the blasting operations on the defect.
H. Where significant cracks or damage exists, or for defects too
complicated to describe in words, photographs shall be taken.
§ 102-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-11
1:43
§ 102-12. Blasting damage complaints.
§ 102-13. Seismic measuring devices.
I. The applicant or their agent shall utilize an audio/video survey, in a
format approved by the Fire Department, with appropriate audio
descriptions of locations, conditions, and defects. The applicant or
agent taking the survey shall notify the property owner when the audio
or video recordings are active and inactive.
J. An audio/video survey cannot be used in lieu of a written form.
K. The applicant, as well as the owner of the property being surveyed,
shall sign all such surveys once completed.
L. A property owner refusal, for whatever reason, to allow the execution of
a pre-blast survey, or to sign a pre-blast survey form, shall be noted on
the pre-blast survey form and that form filed with the Fire Department.
M. This survey shall be kept by the blaster and be made available to the
Town, upon request, for a minimum of seven years.
N. The preblast administrator and/or permit applicant shall provide copies
of the completed audio/video survey to each property owner who
requests a copy of the preblast survey within 14 working days (Monday
thorough Friday) from the time of the property owner's request. The
preblast administrator may charge the property owner a fee not to
exceed the cost of materials used to make the copies.
A. Any person or firm alleging damage as a result of blasting operations
shall make a complaint to the firm performing the blasting operation.
B. Upon receipt of a blasting damage complaint the permit holder and the
blaster in charge shall notify the Fire Chief of the complaint within 24
hours and provide a copy of the blasting complaint and the investigation
findings when completed to the Fire Chief.
A. Prior to conducting any blasting, the applicant or their agent shall
identify the two closest structures to the blasting site not owned by the
owner of the blast site, that are within 500 feet or such distance as
designated by the Fire Chief, and request written permission from the
owner(s) thereof to install and monitor seismic measuring equipment.
B. The applicant shall make four attempts to obtain such permission.
C. The fourth and final attempt shall be made in writing via certified mail
and, if unsuccessful, the seismic measuring equipment shall be
installed between the structure and the blast location as close as
reasonable to the structure.
D. An explanation of the reason for such location shall be made on the
vibration monitoring report for such structure and the ppv (in/sec.)
shall be extrapolated to the structure using standard relations.
§ 102-11 MERRIMACK CODE § 102-13
1:44
§ 102-14. Blast plan.
§ 102-15. Additional surveys; seismic devices.
§ 102-16. Blast vibration control and monitoring.
E. Prior to conducting any blasting, seismic measuring equipment shall be
installed as described above and shall always be placed on undisturbed
soil and not placed on sand or heavy sand soils.
F. The Fire Chief may require additional measuring devices when
necessary to protect property.
G. If an owner refuses to allow for or waives the placement of seismic
measuring equipment, the applicant shall note this on the vibration
monitoring report.
H. Documentation of any such refusal shall be filed with the Fire
Department to include the date, time and, if available, the names of the
persons giving the refusal.
A. The applicant shall provide a detailed map and plan (unless waived by
the Fire Chief), accurate to a scale of not greater than one inch equals
200 feet in a format outlined by the Merrimack Fire Department,
locating the blast site, blast area, all buildings and structures within
500 feet of the blast area or such extended distance as may be specified
by the Fire Chief, access roads, the location of all measuring devices
required hereunder (include device serial number and distance from
shot corner to device) and any other specific requirements identified by
the Fire Chief.
B. Additionally unless waived by the Fire Chief, in the format outlined, a
site specific blasting plan shall be prepared and submitted by the
master blaster or their authorized designee.
A. The Town reserves the right to require additional condition surveys
and/or placement of seismic measuring equipment on properties should
the need arise due to complaints or other causes.
B. The Town reserves the right to require geological surveys of the area
around the blasting location should conditions warrant such analysis
(mapping the area of disturbance and topography changes).
C. The costs associated with these additional requirements shall be borne
by the applicant.
D. Such additional requirements shall be prerequisites to obtaining any
permit renewals.
A. The applicant shall be required to comply with the blasting vibration
limits established by the applicable State of New Hampshire rules and
§ 102-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-16
1:45
§ 102-17. Vibration monitoring instrumentation.
§ 102-18. Report of monitoring results.
regulations or as outlined in or as outlined in § 102-18, Report of
monitoring results.
B. The Town/Fire Chief reserves the right to impose lower maximum
vibration and sound limits.
C. All blasting, if required by the Fire Chief within the Town of Merrimack,
New Hampshire, requires seismograph monitoring.
A. All vibration monitoring instrumentation proposed for use on the
project by the applicant shall comply with the International Society for
Explosives Engineers (ISEE) Field Practice Guidelines for Blasting
Seismographs, current edition, requirements.
B. All seismographs used on the project shall display the date of the most
recent calibration. Said calibration must have occurred within the last
12 months and been performed to a standard traceable to the National
Institute of Standards and Technology.
A. If the results exceed the requirements outlined in this document, or if
required by the Fire Chief, the applicant shall provide at a minimum
and in writing a Noncompliant Blast Report Form OFM-FRM-103 to the
Fire Chief by the end of the day of a noncompliant blast.
B. A report covering the results of the blast monitoring at each instrument
location, including PPV in inches per second, decibels as well as a copy
of the chart recording for each monitoring location, marked with the
date, time, location of the equipment, and signature of the seismograph
operator shall be required for each blast.
C. This report (OFM-FRM-103) is to be submitted even if there is no
trigger of the device.
D. Unless otherwise authorized by the Fire Chief, if the seismic ground
vibration or air concussions or both ground vibration and air
concussions caused by the applicant's blasting operation attain or
surpass, at any structure not owned or controlled by the property
owner, the compliance limit for air response of 133dB as recommend by
USBM standards, or the "Safe Level Blasting Criteria from USBM RI
8507" (see "Blasting Level Criteria" below in RED) or at the property
line of the blasting operation, blasting operations shall cease and the
permit revoked pending review by the Fire Chief. In the event that the
blasting operation exceeds the identified criteria or complaints are
received in a manner that exceeds an acceptable level as identified by
the Fire Chief, a buffer limit may be imposed (see "Alternate Blasting
Level Criteria" below in GREEN) at any time during the project.
E. Alternate Blasting Level Criteria chart.
§ 102-16 MERRIMACK CODE § 102-18
1:46
§ 102-19. Notice and warning signals.
A. The applicant shall publish a notice in a local paper no later than one
week prior to blasting operations noting the place, date of blasting
operations, and estimated number of days of blasting. This is required
only if blasting more than 1,152 cubic feet of material (12 feet by 12
feet by eight feet).
B. The applicant shall contact the Fire Department at 603-424-3690 and
the Merrimack Police Dispatch Center at 603-424-3774, not less than
one hour before the scheduled time of blast, and again 15 minutes
before the scheduled blast and provide the address of the blasting site,
the total pounds of explosives and the number of charged holes. The
applicant shall notify the Fire Department when the "all clear" has been
given after the scheduled blast.
C. If requested by any resident and/or property owner the applicant shall
notify residents and property owners of a blast time using the e-mail or
telephone number provided by resident or property owner not less than
one hour before the scheduled time of blast.
D. Signboards and flags indicating areas where blasting operations are
occurring shall be placed along the property line and/or if required by
the Fire Chief 500 feet from the blast area, 50 feet apart or as otherwise
directed by the Fire Chief.
E. These signs shall be clearly visible and legible from all points of access
to the area.
F. The signs shall clearly describe the audible signal system for warning of
impending blasts.
G. Blast area signs shall clearly indicate the length and nature of audible
blast warning and all clear signals.
H. All warning systems shall comply with the requirements of local, state,
and federal agencies.
§ 102-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-19
1:47
§ 102-20. Fly rock control.
§ 102-21. Blasting monitoring.
§ 102-22. Dust control.
I. Adequate audiometric warnings shall be given to all personnel in
proximity to the blast site at least three minutes in advance of each
blast.
J. Blasting shall be performed only after ensuring that all people and
equipment have been removed to a safe location.
K. The applicant shall use sirens or horns or both sirens and horns with
sufficient intensity such that they can be heard for a minimum distance
of 1,000 feet in all directions.
A. Except as previously approved by the Fire Chief, all blasts within 1,000
feet of any structure, power transmission line or communications tower
shall be covered with an adequate blasting mat or shield and secured
together properly.
B. In the event that flyrock is identified beyond the blast site or lands on or
within 15 feet of a traveled roadway, the blasting contractor shall cease
all blasting operations and the current blasting permit shall be revoked
without any financial reimbursement.
C. Immediate notification shall be made to the Fire Chief and Police Chief
of the flyrock incident and the locations of where the flyrock had
landed.
D. The blasting contractor shall review the flyrock incident and determine
the cause and solution for the incident. This report shall be filed with
the Fire Chief prior to issuance of any further blasting permits.
A. The Fire Chief reserves the right to have personnel on site at any time
at a cost to the applicant to monitor any and all activities of the
applicant.
B. These representatives shall have the right to order all blasting
operations to cease at anytime.
C. The applicant shall provide the Fire Chief with copies of Material Safety
Data Sheets (MSDS) information for all products, materials and
compounds that will be used on the site in association with the blasting
operation.
A. Dust control plans and procedures shall be submitted at the time of all
blasting permit applications for review, and approval by the
Department of Public Works, and Community Development
Department.
§ 102-19 MERRIMACK CODE § 102-22
1:48
§ 102-23. Storage of explosive material.
§ 102-24. Baseline and ongoing blasting groundwater monitoring
and mitigation.
B. Dust migrations from blasting operations, including rock removal and
rock processing to adjacent properties, shall be controlled and kept to a
minimum.
A. Part Saf-C 1609, Storage of Explosive Materials, is hereby amended in
the following particulars:
(1) The storage of explosive materials or blasting agents, whether
supervised or not, is hereby prohibited in the Town [exception
reference § 102-25C(3)].
(2) The storage of explosive materials, blasting agents and black
powder for the purpose of sale or resale with the exception of retail
sporting goods stores (in amounts identified by the Fire Chief for
retail only) is prohibited in the Town.
(3) The storage amount on-site in the Town of explosive materials for
blasting purposes is limited to the amount planned for a single
daytime use for times outlined in the blasting permit.
(4) Loaded explosives intended for detonation are considered storage
for blasting purpose, in the event that there are issues that may
arise preventing the detonation of explosives; the applicant shall
immediately make notification to the Fire Chief for further actions
and requirements.
A. The implementation of a baseline and ongoing blasting groundwater
monitoring and mitigation program requirements will apply to any
blasting operation which is associated with the removal of 36,000 cubic
yards (approximately an area of 180 feet wide by 180 feet long by 30
feet deep) or greater of material from a specific site location/property of
the blasting project and/or within 2,000 feet of a public or private well,
wellhead protection area or public water supply.
B. The total quantity of material removed or blasted shall be calculated
over a period of one year for a specific site or property.
C. In order to assess and/or address the potential adverse impact that may
arise when using substances to blast rock or when altering the surface
of the rock, a plan that includes the following elements shall be
prepared and implemented to collect water quality data to determine if
nearby water supply wells are being impacted from the effects of rock
blasting:
(1) Establish an inventory of water users within 2,000 feet or an
alternative distance, as may be required by the Fire Chief based on
site-specific conditions and magnitude of blasting in the permit
§ 102-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-24
1:49
§ 102-25. Baseline sampling program.
application of the blasting sites, blasted rock stockpile, and water
retention pond.
(2) Using records of the New Hampshire Water Well Board and
municipalities(s) and by surveying homeowners with written
questionnaires identify the following to the extent possible for each
water supply well:
(a) Well type (bedrock, dug, driven point, etc.).
(b) Well driller.
(c) Date installed.
(d) Well depth.
(e) Depth to groundwater.
(f) Well diameter.
(g) Well casing depth.
(h) Estimated yield or reported yield.
(i) Estimated depth to bedrock.
(j) Age of pump.
(k) A description of any water treatment equipment being used
and the frequency in which maintenance on the equipment is
currently being performed.
(l) Any historic or existing water quality or supply problems with
the well.
(m) A description of the most recent maintenance activity
performed on the well.
(n) Copies of all laboratory results associated with water samples
collected from the well.
(3) Historic water quality analysis shall only be used if it can be
reasonably determined what water treatment systems may have
been online that could affect historic water quality sample results.
A. The applicant shall complete a baseline water quality sampling
program for public and private water supply wells listed on the
inventory which shall include but not be limited to the following, prior
to initiating blasting at the site:
(1) Water samples must be obtained at a point in the water system
prior to any treatment unless it is demonstrated and approved by
§ 102-24 MERRIMACK CODE § 102-25
1:50
§ 102-26. Continuing sampling program.
§ 102-27. Baseline and ongoing bedrock aquifer water level
monitoring program.
the Fire Chief that access cannot be gained to sampling points that
meet this requirement.
(2) The applicant shall obtain raw (untreated) water samples from
each well identified in the inventory and have them analyzed for
benzene, pH, total iron, total manganese, total arsenic, dissolved
iron, dissolved manganese, dissolved arsenic, nitrate, nitrite,
perchlorates and turbidity.
(3) The applicant may be required by the Fire Chief to include an
analysis of other compounds that may be unique to the blasting
materials or products used on a particular project.
A. The continuing sampling program shall include routine sampling of
either all water supply wells in the inventory or a sufficient number of
monitoring wells that are representative of the water supply wells in
the inventory.
B. The frequency of the water quality sampling shall be determined by the
frequency of blasting estimated travel time of contaminants and
distance of receptors to the blasting location.
C. The frequency of sample collection must reflect the fact that nitrate in
drinking water is an acute health concern.
A. The water level monitoring program shall consist of:
(1) The use of pressure transducers and data loggers to measure water
levels in a sufficient number of monitoring wells and/or drinking
water supply wells in the inventory that are representative of the
existing water supply wells that are most susceptible to being
impacted by blasting of bedrock or groundwater dewatering
activities.
(2) Manual or automated measuring devices may be used at locations
that are less susceptible to being impacted by blasting.
B. The monitoring locations shall be adequate to provide representative
data for all water supply wells located within 2,000 feet of the area
being blasted.
C. The monitoring program shall include provisions that ensure sanitary
practices are being implemented when measurements are being
collected in drinking water supply wells.
D. Develop and implement an adverse impact response and mitigation
plan to mitigate water quality or quantity impacts caused by the
blasting and/or dewatering activities ("mitigation plan").
§ 102-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-27
1:51
E. The mitigation plan should include:
(1) Procedures (including time frames) to investigate complaints about
impacts to wells associated with the rock blasting and/or
dewatering activities.
(2) Provisions (including time frames) for immediate responses such as
the provision of bottled water.
(3) Provisions (including time frames) for longer-term responses, such
as the installation of water treatment equipment or the repair,
modification, deepening or replacement of wells adversely
impacted by the blasting activity.
F. Blasting-related activities that result in the violation of ambient
groundwater quality standards, primary drinking water standards or
secondary drinking water standards in untreated samples collected
from water supply wells shall require mitigation in accordance with the
mitigation plan.
G. For impacts to water levels, the adverse impact criteria shall be as
follows:
(1) Reducing the withdrawal capacity of a private water supply well of
a single residence as a result of the reduction of available water
that is directly associated with the blasting. This is determined by
the following:
(a) Any reduction in capacity for wells with a capacity which is less
than Water Well Board recommended optimum minimum of
four gallons per minute for four hours before the blasting
occurred;
(b) Any reduction in capacity below four gallons per minute for
four hours, for wells that had a capacity greater than four
gallons per minute for four hours before the blasting occurred;
or
(c) A reduction in capacity where the well still has a capacity
between four gallons and 10 gallons per minute for four hours
and the user provides information indicating that the reduction
in flow has resulted in the inability to meet his or her water
needs.
(2) Reducing the capacity of a public drinking water supply below the
minimum withdrawal rates required per consumer determined by
the following:
(a) Minimum daily amounts of drinking water shall be determined
per use based on the design flow criteria established for public
water supply systems established in rules adopted by the State
of New Hampshire.
§ 102-27 MERRIMACK CODE § 102-27
1:52
§ 102-28. Abutter notification.
§ 102-29. Emergency notifications.
(b) Where it is verified that such wells were unable to produce the
design flow before the withdrawal began, the adverse impact
shall be any reduction in the ability to produce water.
(3) Reducing the capacity of a water supply that is used for a multipledwelling-
unit residence, but that is not a public water supply, which
results in the inability to continue established activities or maintain
existing water capacity requirements.
(4) Reducing the capacity of a private, nonresidential, non-drinking
water supply that results in the inability of a commercial,
industrial, agricultural, or retail facility to continue established
services or production volumes; and reducing the ability of a
registered water user to produce volumes equivalent to the
average daily withdrawal for a specific calendar month as
determined by discharge measurements and reports made to the
department in accordance with the water user requirements under
RSA 488 or other previous water use reporting requirements of the
department (NHDES).
A. The applicant shall:
(1) Update the inventory as necessary to reflect the current owners, at
least 30 days prior to initiating blasting.
(2) Provide written notice via certified mail to each owner of a water
supply well listed on the inventory with reference to the initiation
of blasting activities, between 15 to 30 days prior to initiating
blasting.
(3) Include the following in the notice:
(a) Contact information for a representative of the permittee;
(b) Contact information for the staff member of the governing
body assigned to the project;
(c) A statement concerning the potential for impacts of blasting on
water supply wells should be forwarded to the representatives
of the permittee and the Department as listed on the
notification;
(d) Date that blasting is expected to commence.
(4) Send a written notice as specified in § 102-30 to each owner listed
on the inventory via certified mail every six months after blasting
commences until such time blasting is completed.
§ 102-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-29
1:53
§ 102-30. Nonemergency notification.
§ 102-31. Required reports.
§ 102-32. Prohibitions.
A. A licensee shall immediately report, to the Town of Merrimack Fire
Department and Merrimack Police Department:
(1) The discovery of any loss, theft, or unlawful removal of explosive
materials (this will not relieve the licensee of other notifications,
which are required by the state or federal government) (Police
Department 603-424-3774, Fire Department 603-424-3690).
(2) If there is any explosion, fire or other accident occurring in
connection with the keeping, storage, manufacture, handling,
transportation, use or other disposition of explosives causing loss
of life or injury to any person or damage to property (911).
(3) Any loading of holes or blasting which occurred without a valid
permit issued by the Fire Department (603-424-3690).
A. Notification shall be made by telephone at (603) 424-3690 for incidents
involving, but not be limited to:
(1) Improper loading of holes;
(2) Minor damage following any blast;
(3) Any complaints received.
B. Provide a written account of the incident.
A. The licensee shall submit a written accident/incident report within 24
hours of any emergency or nonemergency incident on Form OFMFRM-
004.
A. No blasting or explosives discharge shall be conducted without first
obtaining a valid permit.
B. Permit holders shall only detonate explosives between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 4:00 p.m. unless authorized by the Fire Chief.
C. No blasting or explosive discharge shall be conducted on Saturday or
Sunday or on days observed as state or national holidays unless
approval has been obtained from the Fire Chief.
D. No blasting or loading of explosives shall be conducted after an order to
cease blasting operations has been issued by the Fire Chief and
communicated to the permit holder or blasting company.
E. No drilling shall take place within 50 feet of any loaded hole(s).
§ 102-29 MERRIMACK CODE § 102-32
1:54
§ 102-33. Revocation of permit.
§ 102-34. Violations and penalties.
F. No holes shall be loaded except those to be fired in the next round of
blasting and no holes can be loaded containing water unless the water
has been pumped out first. If water continues to fill the hole the holes
must be sleeved (alternative protection measures may be granted by
the Fire Chief after review).
G. All explosives are to be shot on the day they are loaded between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. Extension of these times may be
granted by the Fire Chief.
H. After loading, all remaining explosives shall be immediately returned to
the appropriate magazine or storage containers. Any residue spilled
shall be completely cleaned up and containerized or reloaded into
another hole to be shot.
A. The Fire Chief may revoke any permit upon a showing that the permit
holder has violated any provision of this chapter or any requirement or
condition of the issued permit.
B. Any blasting or explosive discharge that occurs without a permit may
result in a thirty-day revocation pending an investigation by the Fire
Chief and/or the New Hampshire State Police.
C. Any permit may be revoked or suspended upon a showing that a
condition or conditions exist which warrant such revocation or
suspension.
A. Failure to follow this chapter or file any report required by this chapter
or the Fire Chief may result in suspension of blasting privileges within
the Town of Merrimack for up to one year.
B. Any person found to have infringed any provisions of this chapter may
be guilty of a violation and follow the measures outlined within this
chapter.
C. Each violation and/or each day of violation may be regarded as a
separate violation of this chapter.
D. First violation may result in the immediate cancellation of the permit
and a fine of $100.
E. Second violation may result in immediate cancellation of the permit, a
fine of $500 and suspension of explosive operations within the Town of
Merrimack for a period of 60 days.
F. Third violation may result in the immediate suspension of the permit, a
fine of $1,000 and suspension of explosive operations within the Town
of Merrimack for a period of one year.
§ 102-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-34
1:55
§ 102-35. Restoration of permit.
§ 102-36. Waiver of penalty.
§ 102-37. Waivers in emergency conditions.
§ 102-38. Interpretation.
§ 102-39. Severability.
§ 102-40. When effective.
Chapter 111
G. Any subsequent violations may result in immediate termination of the
privilege to conduct explosive operations within the Town of Merrimack
for a period of five years.
A. The Fire Chief may restore any permit that has been revoked upon a
showing that the condition(s) leading to the revocation has (have) been
corrected.
A. The Town Council has the authority to waive any penalty if issued
outlined in § 102-34.
A. In situations that pose a possible or perceived danger to safety, the Fire
Chief may, for a limited time, waive such provisions of this chapter as
may be necessary to avoid and/or lessen that danger.
A. This chapter is intended to complement, supplement, and not conflict
with federal and state regulation of blasting operations and explosives
and shall be interpreted in accord with that intent or the availability of
staffing to enforce.
B. The provision that imposes the higher standard shall govern should the
requirements of this chapter differ from any requirement or regulation
prescribed by any law, statute, ordinance, rule or other regulation
governing blasting operations and explosives.
A. If any provision of this chapter, or its application to any person or
circumstance, is held to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
such invalidity shall not affect any other provision or application of this
chapter that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application and, to this end, the provisions of this chapter shall be
severable.
A. The chapter shall take effect on the date designated by the Town
Council.
B. Any amendments to this chapter shall take effect on the date(s)
designated by the Town Council.
§ 102-34 MERRIMACK CODE § 102-40
1:56
CONSERVATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conservation Commission — See Ch. 19.
§ 111-1. Rules of conduct.
A. No person shall remain, stay or loiter in or on any conservation area
during the period from 1/2 hour after sunset to 1/2 hour before sunrise,
except under the authorization of the Conservation Commission or its
designated agents. This provision is not intended to preclude
authorized activities from occurring outside of the prescribed times.
B. There shall be no fires on conservation areas except as approved by the
Merrimack Conservation Commission in conjunction with New
Hampshire Statutes and with a permit issued by the Forest Fire
Warden.
C. No person shall bring or carry any glass containers within any
conservation area.
D. No person shall throw, leave or discard any trash, rubbish or garbage
within any conservation area. All trash or refuse will be carried out by
individuals.
E. No person shall use, consume, bring or carry any alcoholic beverages or
unlawful drugs within any conservation area.
F. Use of vehicles within conservation areas.
(1) No person shall park or drive any vehicle within conservation areas
except in specifically designated areas.
(2) No person shall drive, operate or maintain any motor vehicle or offhighway
recreational vehicle (as defined in RSA 215-A:1, VI) in any
conservation area without prior authorization from the
Conservation Commission or its designated agents, excluding fire,
police or ambulance personnel for emergency purposes.
G. No person shall bring any domesticated animal upon any conservation
area, unless such animal is controlled by the use of a leash or rein or is
within a cage.
H. No person shall discharge any air-powered or spring-powered gun, any
type of bow or any firearm within any conservation area.
I. No person shall remove or deface any building, equipment, tree, shrub
or flower within any conservation area.
§ 102-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 111-2
1:57
§ 111-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person found violating the provisions of this chapter may be assessed a
penalty up to the amount set forth in NH RSA 31:39, III; said penalty to be
placed in the Town of Merrimack's General Fund.
§ 111-3. Designation of conservation areas.
Areas designed as conservation areas shall consist of the following parcels:
Chapter 119
DOGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 142.
§ 119-1. Running at large restricted.
Notwithstanding any provisions of RSA 466, it shall be unlawful for any
dog to run at large, except when accompanied by the owner or custodian,
and when used for hunting, for guarding, working, or herding livestock, as
defined in RSA 21:34-a, II(a)(4), for supervised competition and exhibition,
or for training for such. For the purpose of this section, "accompanied"
means that the owner or custodian must be able to see or hear, or both, or
have reasonable knowledge of where the dog is hunting, where training is
being conducted, where trials are being held, or where the dog is guarding,
working, or herding livestock. Nothing herein provided shall mean that the
dog must be within sight at all times.
§ 119-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AT LARGE — Off the premises of the owner or keeper and not under the
control of any person by means of personal presence and attention as will
A. Parcel 5C/658, commonly known as "Wildcat Falls Conservation Area."
B. Parcel 4B/035, commonly known as "Riverside Drive."
C. Parcel 6B/087-099, commonly known as "French Court."
D. Parcel 6B/085-097, commonly known as "Hitchinpost Lane."
E. Parcel 6B/085-98, commonly known as "18 Woodward Road."
F. Parcel 6B/2241, commonly known as "Mitchell Street."
§ 111-2 MERRIMACK CODE § 119-2
1:58
reasonably control the conduct of such dog, unless accompanied by the
owner or custodian.
§ 119-3. Enforcement.
Any authorized person may seize, impound or restrain any dog in violation
of this chapter and deliver said dog to a person or shelter authorized
to board dogs. Such dogs shall be handled as strays or abandoned dogs
pursuant to applicable laws.
§ 119-4. Duty to dispose of waste.
It shall be the duty of each person who owns, possesses or controls a dog to
remove and dispose of any feces left by his/her dog on any sidewalk, street
or other public area. It shall further be the duty of each person who owns,
possesses or controls a dog to remove and dispose of any feces left by his/
her dog on any private property neither owned nor occupied by said person.
§ 119-5. Violations and penalties.
In addition to and in accordance with New Hampshire RSA 466:31-a,
Penalties, impounding a dog found at large or in violation of this chapter,
any law enforcement officer may issue in the name of the owner or keeper
of such dog a notice of violation. Such notice shall impose upon the owner
or keeper of such a dog a forfeiture of $25 for the first offense and $50 for
the second offense. Third and subsequent offenses shall be handled in the
9th Circuit District Division, Merrimack Court. Fines must be paid to the
Merrimack Town Clerk within 96 hours of the date and time notice is given,
in full satisfaction of the assessed penalty. In the event such penalty is not
paid to the Merrimack Town Clerk within the time limitations specified, a
summons shall be issued for appearance in Merrimack District Court, and
any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this section shall be
guilty of a violation.
§ 119-6. Authority.
The provisions of this chapter were adopted by the Town pursuant to RSA
466:30-b.
Chapter 123
EMERGENCY LANES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 183.
§ 119-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-1
1:59
§ 123-1. Determination of need.
Emergency lanes shall be established and maintained for all places of public
assembly or any nonresidential structure with a gross first floor area of
over 3,000 square feet or any building containing more than seven dwelling
units, upon a joint determination by the Fire Chief and the Police Chief that
a hazardous or potentially hazardous condition exists or may exist. Upon
such joint determination, emergency lanes shall be established within any
private way or private parking lot which prohibits parking at all times within
30 feet of the above-described buildings and that henceforth it shall be
unlawful to park any vehicle within said emergency lanes.
§ 123-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIRE CHIEF — The Chief of the Merrimack Fire Department or a named
and authorized designee.
POLICE CHIEF — The Chief of the Merrimack Police Department or a
named and authorized designee.
§ 123-3. Violating vehicles to be towed.
Any vehicle unlawfully parked within any emergency lane shall be towed at
the owner's expense.
§ 123-4. Applicability; reduction of required widths.
These provisions shall apply to both new and existing buildings, and the
width of the emergency lanes may be reduced by the Fire Chief and Police
Chief in the event a lesser distance is all that is reasonably required or
feasible for the provision of access by emergency vehicles.
§ 123-5. Markings and signs.
Within established emergency lanes prohibiting parking, the Fire Chief
and Police Chief may require the words “No Parking - Fire Lane” to be
painted and maintained by the owner on the macadam of the way or lot
in standard traffic safety-size letters. In conjunction with the painting, the
Police Chief and Fire Chief may require the owner to install and maintain
signs reading “No Parking - Fire Lane - Tow Zone” in conspicuous places.
Such markings and sign installations shall be accomplished not later than
60 days of written notification by the Police Chief and Fire Chief that they
are required and the specifications which are to be followed.
§ 123-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense, and a separate
§ 123-1 MERRIMACK CODE § 123-6
1:60
offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 128
FIREARMS
§ 123-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-6
1:61

ARTICLE I
Target Shooting at Horse Hill Nature Preserve
[Adopted 4-12-2005 ATM by Art. 23; amended in its entirety
12-21-2017]
§ 128-1. Authority.
Pursuant to an affirmative vote of Article 23 of the 2005 Annual Town
Meeting, the Town has prohibited target shooting with firearms at the
Horse Hill Nature Preserve.
§ 128-2. Target shooting with firearm prohibited.
No person shall target shoot with a firearm on the Horse Hill Nature
Preserve property.
§ 128-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following term(s) shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIREARM — A small arms weapon, as a rifle or pistol, from which a
projectile is fired by gunpowder.
HORSE HILL NATURE PRESERVE — That area of land off of Naticook
Road and Amherst Road in Merrimack described in a deed from Nas Tam
Associates, f/k/a TNK Associates, to the Town of Merrimack dated July 19,
2002, and recorded in the Hillsborough County Registry of Deeds at Book
6670, Page 2730, and known as the "Horse Hill Nature Preserve."
TARGET SHOOTING — The firing of rifles, pistols, and shotguns for sport,
and when used in conjunction with specific targets typically used to develop
accuracy.
§ 128-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 128-3
1:63
Chapter 130
FIREWORKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Blasting and explosives — See Ch. 102. Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 142.
§ 130-1. Purpose; statutory authority.
This chapter is enacted by the legislative body of the Town of Merrimack
for the protection and preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the
general public as authorized pursuant to RSA 160-B:10 and RSA 160-C:6.
§ 130-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following term(s) shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISPLAY — The use, explosion, activation, ignition, discharge, firing of a
firework as defined by RSA 160-5:1.
FIRE CHIEF — The Chief of the Merrimack Fire Department or a named
and authorized designee.
FIREWORKS — Any composition or device designed to produce a visible
or audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation as defined
by RSA 160-B:1 and RSA 160-C:1. Fireworks shall include all fireworks,
including but not limited to, "consumer fireworks," "display fireworks,"
or "permissible fireworks" as defined by RSA 160-B:1 and RSA 160-C:1.
Fireworks shall not include auto flares, party poppers, sparklers, paper caps
containing an explosive content of 0.25 grain (16.2 mg) or less, and toy
pistols, guns, canes or other devices for use of such caps, the sale and use
of which shall be permitted at all times.
PERSON — Any natural person, corporation, unincorporated association
or other legal entity, including that person's agents, legal representatives,
heirs, and/or successors and assigns.
POLICE CHIEF — The Chief of the Merrimack Police Department or a
named and authorized designee.
SALE — To sell, give, or transfer to another, with or without consideration,
as defined by RSA 160-B:1 and RSA 160-C:1.
§ 130-3. Sale of fireworks.
Pursuant to RSA 160-B:10 and RSA 160-C:6, the sale of fireworks within the
Town of Merrimack shall be prohibited.
§ 128-3 MERRIMACK CODE § 130-4
1:64
§ 130-4. Disposal of unfired fireworks.
The Fire Chief/Police Chief shall be authorized to seize, take, remove or
cause to be removed, at the expense of the owner, all fireworks possessed
or offered for sale in violation of this chapter.
§ 130-5. Compliance with other laws; conflicting provisions.
The regulations set forth in this chapter are to be read in the context of
and in concert with all applicable local, state and federal regulations. To the
extent that these regulations differ from other applicable local, state and
federal regulations, the more stringent regulations apply.
§ 130-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter, in addition to the
penalties set forth in RSA 160-B:1 et seq. and RSA 160-C:1 et seq., shall be
subject to civil fines and penalties not to exceed $1,000 for each offense.
§ 130-7. Discharge of fireworks.
§ 130-8. Severability.
In the event any of the provisions of this policy are held by a court of
competent jurisdiction to be unenforceable or contrary to any state or
federal law, the remaining provisions of this policy shall remain in full force
and effect.
Chapter 136
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 136-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Town Council of the Town of Merrimack and the
Health Officer, in accordance with RSA 128:3.
HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer of the Town of Merrimack, New
Hampshire, or his or her designated representatives. He or she shall have
A. The discharge of fireworks shall be performed only on property owned
by the person or a person who has legal rights to the property or shall
have written permission from the legal property owner to discharge
fireworks on said property in their possession.
B. Fireworks shall not be discharged between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
10:00 a.m. of each day. The Fire Chief may issue a Fireworks Discharge
Permit between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. if they, at their
sole discretion, deem the request reasonable.
§ 130-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-1
1:65
such police powers as may be designated by the New Hampshire Revised
Statutes Annotated.
RESTAURANT and FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — Includes all such
establishments defined as such by the State of New Hampshire, Department
of Health and Human Services, Sanitary Production and Distribution of
Food He-P 2300.
SANITARY FOOD CODE — The Sanitary Food Code, as adopted and
amended, from time to time, by the State of New Hampshire, Department of
Health and Human Services, Sanitary Production and Distribution of Food
He-P 2300.
§ 136-2. Compliance required; adoption of standards.
Every restaurant and food service establishment within the Town of
Merrimack shall comply with the provisions of the Sanitary Production and
Distribution of Food He-P 2300, which is herein incorporated by reference
and made a part of this chapter.
§ 136-3. License required; nontransferability; posting.
§ 136-4. Issuance of license.
Any person desiring to operate a restaurant or other food service
establishment shall make written application for a license on forms
provided by the Health Officer. Upon receipt of such an application and
the designated license administrative fee, and after the inspection confirms
that the applicable requirements of the regulations have been met, a license
shall be issued to the applicant by the Health Officer.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, entity or corporation to operate a
food service establishment within the Town of Merrimack without a
valid license issued by the Health Officer.
B. No license shall be issued to or retained by any applicant who shall fail
to comply with the requirements of the regulations herein set forth.
C. No license shall be transferable to any other person, entity or
corporation, nor from one location to another.
D. A valid license shall be posted in every restaurant and food service
establishment.
E. A license for temporary food service establishments shall be issued for
a period of time not to exceed 14 days.
A. License fees and fee schedule shall be as stated in the New Hampshire
Sanitary Production and Distribution of Food Code He-P 2300 as
amended from time to time by the State of New Hampshire.
§ 136-1 MERRIMACK CODE § 136-5
1:66
§ 136-5. Expiration of license.
Licenses expire 12 months after the issue date of license and must be
renewed.
§ 136-6. Notice of violation and procedure for administrative fines.
§ 136-7. Suspension of license and closure.
§ 136-8. Reinstatement of suspended license.
Any person whose license has been suspended may, at any time, make
application for a reinspection for the purpose of reinstatement of the
A. Whenever the Health Officer shall make an inspection of a restaurant or
food service establishment and discover that any of the requirements of
the Sanitary Food Code have been violated, the Health Officer shall
notify the license holder or operator of such violations by means of an
inspection report form or other written notice. In such notification, the
Health Officer shall:
(1) Identify each violation;
(2) Inform the license holder of the amount of the proposed fine under
He-P 2302.29;
(3) Inform the license holder of the right to appeal the Health Officer's
decision to assess a fine by submitting a written request for a
hearing to the Board of Health no later than 10 calendar days from
the date of receipt of the notice;
(4) Inform the license holder of the opportunity to waive the right to a
hearing by paying the fine within 10 days of the receipt of the
Health Officer's notice of administrative fine; and
(5) Inform the license holder that if he or she does not request an
appeal as specified in Subsection A(3) above, the Health Officer's
decision to assess a fine shall become final after the ten-day period
specified in Subsection A(3) above and the fine shall be paid to the
Town no later than 10 days from that date.
A. Any restaurant or other food service establishment within this Town
which shall fail to comply with the requirements of this chapter may be
closed by the Health Officer without a hearing for a ten-day period or
until the violation is corrected and the sanitary condition is approved by
the Health Officer as per He-P 2300 2302.32.
B. Whenever a licensee has failed to comply with any notice or order of the
Health Officer under the provisions of this chapter, the licensee shall be
notified, in writing, that the license is immediately suspended. Any
licensee may apply for a hearing before the Board of Health, which shall
be scheduled within 10 days after its receipt.
§ 136-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-8
1:67
license. Within five days following receipt of a written request, including
a statement signed by the applicant that, in his opinion, the conditions
causing suspension of the license have been corrected, the Health Officer
shall make a reinspection. If the establishment is in compliance with the
requirements of this chapter, the license shall be reinstated.
§ 136-9. (Reserved)
§ 136-10. Hearings.
The hearings provided for in § 136-6 and § 136-7 shall be conducted by the
Board of Health at a time and place designated by it. Based upon the record
of such hearing, the Board of Health shall make a finding and shall sustain,
modify or rescind any official notice or order considered in the hearing.
A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the license
holder by the Board of Health within five days of decision.
§ 136-11. Inspections.
§ 136-12. (Reserved)
§ 136-13. Applicability to establishments beyond Town's
jurisdiction.
Food from food service establishments outside the jurisdiction of the Town
of Merrimack may be sold within the Town of Merrimack if such food service
establishments conform to the provisions of this chapter. To determine the
extent of compliance with such provisions, the Health Officer may accept
reports from responsible authorities in other jurisdictions where such food
service establishments are located.
A. At least twice per year, the Merrimack Health Officer shall inspect each
restaurant and food service establishment located in the Town of
Merrimack and shall make as many additional inspections and
reinspections as are necessary for the enforcement of this chapter.
B. The Health Officer shall prepare a written form as a guideline for all
inspections, and such form shall be incorporated herein by reference
and made a part of this chapter.
C. The Health Officer after proper identification shall be permitted to
enter, at any reasonable time, any restaurant or food service
establishment within the Town of Merrimack for the purpose of making
inspections to determine compliance with this chapter. The Health
Officer shall be permitted to examine the records of the establishment
to obtain pertinent information pertaining to food and supplies
purchased, received or used and persons employed.
§ 136-8 MERRIMACK CODE § 136-14
1:68
§ 136-14. Approval of plans for new establishments.
When a restaurant or food service establishment is hereafter constructed or
extensively remodeled or when an existing structure is converted for use as
a food service establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for
such construction, remodeling or alteration, showing layout, arrangement
and construction materials of work areas and the location, size and type of
fixed equipment and facilities shall be submitted to the Health Officer for
approval before such work is begun. No building permit shall be issued by
the Building Inspector until such approval has been given by the Health
Officer.
§ 136-15. (Reserved)
§ 136-16. Severability.
Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter
be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, the remainder of said
chapter shall not be affected thereby.
Chapter 137
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
[Article 28, voted in the affirmative 5-12-1988 by the Annual Town
Meeting, reads as follows: "To see if the Town will vote to adopt
an ordinance to control containment and cleanup of hazardous
materials in accordance with the provisions of RSA 31:39 and 41:11
as they appear on pages 15, 16 and 17 of the 1987 annual report of
the Town of Merrimack, New Hampshire."]
Chapter 139
MOTOR VEHICLES, REGISTRATION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 183.
§ 136-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-16
1:69

ARTICLE I
POW Exemption
[Adopted 5-16-1986 ATM by Art. 27 in accordance with RSA
261:157-a; reaffirmed by Town Council 12-3-2009; amended
1-26-2012; 10-26-2017]
§ 139-1. Waiver of registration fee.
The Town of Merrimack shall waive the fee for a permit to register one
motor vehicle owned by any person who was captured and incarcerated
for 30 days or more while serving in a qualifying war or armed conflict,
as defined in RSA 72:28, V, and who was honorably discharged, provided
that the person provides the Town Clerk with satisfactory proof of these
circumstances.
§ 139-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 139-1
1:71
Chapter 142
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conservation areas — See Ch. 111.
Dogs — See Ch. 119.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 174.
§ 142-1. Legislative intent.
In accordance with the provisions of RSA 31:39I(a), the Town of Merrimack
hereby adopts this chapter to regulate, protect and preserve the use of
Abbie Griffin Park, Veterans Memorial Park, the park portion of Wasserman
Park, the park areas at Twin Bridges, Martel Field, Weston Park, Harold
and Barbara Watson Park, Cpl. Tim Gibson Memorial Athletic Complex,
Joseph and Josephine Twardosky Ball Field, Merrimack Skate Park, Reeds
Ferry Athletic Fields, Bise Field, Depot Street Boat Ramp, Frazier Square,
the ATV facility off West Road and the tennis courts, ice rinks, Merrimack
Dog Park, Bishop Field and any other Town-owned property designated as
being a park or for recreational area (hereinafter referred to collectively
as "restricted recreational area(s)"). The declared purpose for this chapter
is to enhance certain opportunities for the public for recreation, education,
cultural development and other activities consistent with the existing uses
and preservation of these restricted recreational areas. Any park rules in
addition to those set forth herein shall be posted on the property. This
chapter shall be enforced by the Merrimack Police Department.
§ 142-2. Park hours.
No person may occupy, remain, stay or loiter upon any restricted
recreational areas prior to 1/2 hour before sunrise or 1/2 hour after sunset,
except under the direction of or with the written permission from the Town
Council, the Town Manager or his designated agents. (This provision shall
in no way be intended to preclude authorized and regularly scheduled
activities or events from occurring outside of the prescribed times.)
§ 142-3. Fires.
No person shall make or kindle any fire in any restricted recreational area,
except in picnic stoves or other designated areas provided for that purpose.
§ 142-4. Glass containers.
No person shall possess any glass containers in any restricted recreational
area.
§ 139-1 MERRIMACK CODE § 142-5
1:72
§ 142-5. Waste disposal.
No person shall throw, leave or discard any trash, rubbish or garbage in any
restricted recreational area except in containers provided therefor.
§ 142-6. Alcoholic beverages and unlawful drugs.
§ 142-7. Use of vehicles.
§ 142-8. Animals.
No person shall bring or allow any animal to be in any restricted
recreational area, except on a leash or in a cage, in accordance with RSA
466:30-a. The only exception is the Merrimack Dog Park.
§ 142-9. Weapons; hunting, trapping and fishing.
A. No person shall use, consume, carry or bring any alcoholic beverages or
any unlawful drugs as defined by RSA 318-B:1 upon or within any
restricted recreational area for any reason. With prior written
permission of the Town Council or its designee, alcoholic beverages
may be consumed in predesignated areas.
A. No parking is allowed in any restricted recreational area, except in
designated areas.
B. No person shall drive, operate or maintain any off-highway recreational
vehicle as defined in RSA 215-A:1(VI) in any restricted recreational
area-except as otherwise permitted herein. "Off-highway recreational
vehicle" means any mechanically propelled vehicle used for pleasure or
recreational purposes, running on rubber tires, belts, cleats, tracks,
skis or cushion of air and dependent on the ground or surface for travel
or other unimproved terrain, whether covered by ice or snow or not,
where the operator sits in or on the vehicle.
C. No person shall drive, operate or maintain any motorized vehicle off the
roads and designated parking areas within any restricted recreational
area.
D. Any off-highway recreational vehicle within any restricted recreational
areas in violation of Subsection B may be impounded by the Merrimack
Police Department. All expenses, i.e., towing or transportation and
storage, shall be paid by the owner of said vehicle prior to redemption,
such reasonable charges to be determined by the Chief of Police or his
designated agent.
E. Exception: Off-highway recreational vehicle as defined in RSA
215-A:1(VI) shall be permitted to be driven, operated or maintained
only in the ATV facility, located off West Road.
A. No person shall discharge firearms within any restricted recreational
area.
§ 142-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-9
1:73
§ 142-10. Defacing equipment and plants.
No person shall remove or deface any building, equipment, tree, shrub or
flower located in any restricted recreational area.
§ 142-11. Smoking.
No smoking shall be permitted in any restricted recreational area except in
designated areas.
§ 142-12. Temporary closure.
Town parks/facilities under the jurisdiction of the Director of Public Works
or the Director of Parks and Recreation may periodically be closed, in whole
or in part, and access denied to the public. No person shall enter upon
or use these facilities while under closure without the expressed written
permission of the Town. The Town Council and Town Manager shall be
notified of all closures before they are effected and notice shall be posted
at each point of public access, on the Town website and other electronic
media, and in at least two public places in the Town notifying the public of
the closure.
§ 142-13. Access limited.
§ 142-14. Wasserman Park Beach.
B. No hunting or trapping will be done or permitted within any restricted
recreational area unless necessitated by reasons of wildlife
management, preservation or conservation practices.
C. Fishing shall be permitted at designated times and locations within
restricted recreational areas.
A. Use of the ATV facility off West Road shall be limited to Town of
Merrimack residents only.
B. Swimming activities shall be prohibited from the boat ramp at Veterans
Park.
A. The Wasserman Park Town Beach shall be for the exclusive use of
Merrimack residents and their authorized guests. Nonresident visitors
are permitted to use the area only when accompanied by a Merrimack
resident or have the appropriate parking pass affixed to their vehicle.
Passes shall consist of either a valid Merrimack Facility Pass or rear
view mirror placard.
B. The waterfront parking lot, which is located across from the theater,
shall be restricted to Merrimack residents only. Signs will identify the
parking lot.
§ 142-9 MERRIMACK CODE § 142-14
1:74
§ 142-15. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
violation and shall be subject to a penalty not to exceed $1,000; such
penalty may be used to improve or repair the Town's park facilities.
Chapter 145
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 145, Peddling and Soliciting, which consisted of Art. I,
Charitable Donations, adopted 4-8-1997 ATM by Art. 35, as amended
by Town Council 12-3-2009, was repealed 1-25-2018.]
Chapter 158
SEWER USE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Payment of wastewater treatment
deficits — See Ch. 79.
Stormwater management standards — See
Ch. 167.
C. In accordance with New Hampshire Code of Administrative Rules Env-
Wq 905.07(b)(2), domestic animals shall be prohibited from the beach
and swimming area between June 15 and August 31.
§ 142-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-15
1:75

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 158-1. Intent.
This chapter regulates the use of public and private sewers and drains,
private wastewater disposal, the installation and connection of building
sewers and the discharge of waters and wastes into the public sewer system
and provides penalties for violations thereof in the Town of Merrimack,
County of Hillsborough, State of New Hampshire.
§ 158-2. Purpose and policy.
This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the wastewater
collection and publicly owned treatment works (POTW) for the Town of
Merrimack and enables the Town to comply with all applicable state and
federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) and
the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR Part 403). The objectives of
this chapter are:
§ 158-3. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all users of the POTW. This chapter authorizes
the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; authorizes monitoring,
compliance and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review
procedures; requires industrial user reporting; and provides for the setting
A. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will
interfere with the operation of the POTW;
B. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which will pass
through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or
otherwise be incompatible with the POTW;
C. To ensure that the quality of the wastewater treatment plant sludge is
maintained at a level which allows its use and disposal in compliance
with applicable statutes and regulations;
D. To protect POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater and
sludge in the course of their employment and to protect the general
public;
E. To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and
sludge from the POTW;
F. To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance and improvement of the POTW; and
G. To enable the Town to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) permit conditions, sludge use and
disposal requirements and any other federal or state laws to which the
POTW is subject.
§ 158-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-3
1:77
of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program
established herein.
§ 158-3 MERRIMACK CODE § 158-3
1:78
ARTICLE II
Allocation Policy
§ 158-4. Requests for allocations and connections.
All requests for sewer connections and sewer allocations for proposed
developments shall be referred to the Public Works Director. The Director
shall evaluate the request within the parameters established by the Town
of Merrimack Sewer Master Plan, latest edition. The Director may request
of the applicant projected construction phasing and implementation of
requested allocation schedules. The Director may make aforementioned
schedules a condition of approval of allocation requests. Existing allocations
are nontransferrable upon sale of the property or change of use. A new
allocation request must be made to the Director.
§ 158-5. Grant or referral of requests.
After proper evaluation, the Public Works Director may grant sewer
connection and allocation. In the event that the sewer allocation request
falls outside the parameters as described above, the Public Works Director
shall refer the request, with his recommendation, to the Town Manager.
§ 158-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-5
1:79

ARTICLE III
Definitions and Abbreviations
§ 158-6. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
used in this chapter shall be as follows:
ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the "Clean
Water Act," as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The EPA Regional Administrator.
AUTHORIZED AGENT — Must be an individual or position having
responsibility for the overall operation of the facility or the pretreatment
program and who has been given the authority by the Town Manager.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — The term "best management
practices," or BMPs, means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices,
maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement
the prohibitions listed in 40 CFR § 403.5(a)(1) and (b). BMPs also include
treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control
plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage
from raw materials storage.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in five days at 20° C., expressed in milligrams per liter, as
prescribed in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, latest edition.
BUILDING LATERAL — The sewer lateral from the building to the public
sewer; also called "house connection."
BUILDING SEWER — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from inside the walls of the building
and conveys it to the building lateral, beginning 30 inches outside the inner
face of the building wall.
BYPASS — The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of
an industrial user's pretreatment facility.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer intended to receive both wastewater and
storm- or surface water; such system as it exists in the Town shall be
separated.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any building or portion thereof where
commerce is transacted. "Commercial facility" may include, but not be
limited to, office buildings, medical centers including dental facilities,
restaurants, food service facilities, hotels, malls, retail stores, farm land,
multifamily housing buildings, warehouses, septage haulers, and garages.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — The sample resulting from the combination of
individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an
increment of either flow or time.
§ 158-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-6
1:81
CONTROL AUTHORITY — The Town of Merrimack, in compliance with the
EPA approval of the pretreatment program on February 27, 1985.
DENTAL DISCHARGER — A facility where the practice of dentistry is
performed, including, but not limited to, institutions, permanent or
temporary offices, clinics, home offices, and facilities owned and operated
by federal, state or local governments, that discharges wastewater to a
publicly owned treatment works (POTW).
DENTAL MOBILE UNIT — A specialized mobile self-contained van, trailer,
or equipment used in providing dentistry services at multiple locations.
DOMESTIC WASTEWATER or SANITARY SEWAGE — Normal water-carried
household and toilet wastes or waste from sanitary conveniences, excluding
ground-, surface or stormwater.
DWELLING UNIT — A building or portion of a building in which no more
than one family lives.
EASEMENT — An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
ELEMENTARY NEUTRALIZATION SYSTEM — Tanks, tank systems, or
containers, used for neutralizing wastes that are hazardous only because
they exhibit the corrosivity characteristic. Corrosivity characteristics of
hazardous wastes are exhibited by liquids that have a pH equal to or less
than 2.0 or greater than or equal to 12.5. These systems neutralize the
waste which may be discharged to the Town between a pH of 5.0 and 9.5
per Town of Merrimack Code, § 158-38B(3).
EXISTING SOURCE — Any source of discharge, the construction or
operation of which commenced prior to the publication of proposed
categorical pretreatment standards which will be applicable to such source
if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of
the Act.
FEDERAL — The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
FLOATABLE OIL — Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it
will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil
or fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with
the collection system.
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, and serving of foods.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a onetime
basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream and without
consideration of time.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE — A facility that discharges waste into a publicly
owned treatment works (POTW) from any nondomestic source regulated
under Section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act.
§ 158-6 MERRIMACK CODE § 158-6
1:82
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any building or portion thereof where
people or companies are engaged in industrial production or enterprise.
INDUSTRIAL USER — A person who discharges industrial wastes to the
wastewater facilities of the Town of Merrimack.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The wastewater from industrial processes, trade,
or business as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes.
INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT — The
maximum concentration (or loading) of a pollutant allowed to be discharged
at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited
sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration
of the sampling event.
INTERFERENCE — An indirect discharge that, alone or in conjunction with
indirect discharge(s) from other sources:
MAY — Is permissive (see "shall").
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any regulations containing
pollutant discharge limits promulgated by USEPA in accordance with
Section 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which apply
to a specific category of industrial users and which are found in the Code of
Federal Regulations, 40 CFR, Subchapter N, Parts 401 through 471.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined
sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or any other body of
surface or groundwater.
Inhibits or disrupts the POTW's treatment processes or operations, or
its processing, use, or disposal of sludge in compliance with applicable
statutes and rules; or
A.
Is a cause of a violation of any requirements of the POTW's federal or
state discharge permit; or
B.
Prevents sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the
following statutory provisions and rules or permits issued thereunder:
(1) Env-Sw 100 et seq. relative to solid waste management;
(2) Env-A 100 et seq. relative to air pollution control;
The General Pretreatment Regulations For Existing and New
Sources of Pollution, 40 CFR 403;
(3)
(4) The Federal Toxic Substances Control Act;
(5) The Federal Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act; and
Env-Wq 800 and 40 CFR 503 relative to use or disposal of sewage
sludge.
(6)
C.
§ 158-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-6
1:83
NEW DEVELOPMENT — Any new subdivision or condominium
development.
NEW SOURCE —
Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or
may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced
after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section
307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section,
provided that:
The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a
site at which no other source is located; or
(1)
The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the
process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
(2)
The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining
whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the
extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing
plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the
same general type of activity as the existing source, should be
considered.
(3)
A.
Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results
in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does
not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the
criteria of Subsection A(2) or (3) above but otherwise alters, replaces,
or adds to existing process or production equipment.
B.
Construction of a new source as defined under this definition has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site
construction program:
Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
(a)
Significant site preparation work, including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or
facilities, which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or
installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
(b)
(1)
Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of
facilities or equipment which is intended to be used in its operation
within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which
can be terminated or modified without substantial loss and
(2)
C.
§ 158-6 MERRIMACK CODE § 158-6
1:84
NHDES — The New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — The water used for cooling which does
not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product,
waste product, or finished product.
PASS-THROUGH — The discharge of pollutants through the POTW into
surface waters in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in
conjunction with discharges from other sources, are a cause of a violation of
any requirements of the POTW's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration
of a violation) or of applicable water quality criteria.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation,
group, partnership, municipality, governmental subdivision or other entity.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion concentration.
The concentration is the weight of hydrogen-ions, in grams, per liter of
solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of 7 and a hydrogen-ion
concentration of 10-7.
pH EXCURSION — An unintentional and temporary incident in which the
pH value of discharge wastewater exceeds the range set forth in the
applicable effluent limitations guidelines. Any pass-through or interference
episode shall supersede an excursion event.
PHARMACEUTICAL WASTE — A prescription drug, as defined by RSA
318:1, XVII, or a nonprescription or proprietary medicine, as defined by
RSA 318:1, XVIII, that is no longer suitable for its intended purpose or is
otherwise being discharged.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes,
industrial wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked
or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, agricultural and industrial
wastes, and the characteristics of the wastewater [i.e., pH, temperature,
total suspended solids (TSS), turbidity, color, biochemical oxygen demand
(BOD), chemical oxygen demand (COD), toxicity, and odor].
POTW or PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS — A wastewater
treatment plant which is owned by the Town of Merrimack. This definition
includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling
and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial waste of a liquid nature.
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of introducing such pollutants
into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical,
chemical or biological processes, by process changes, or by other means,
except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an
applicable pretreatment standard.
contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not
constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection.
§ 158-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-6
1:85
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment imposed on an industrial user, other
than a pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS — Prohibitive discharge
standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits.
PRIVATE SEWER — A sewer or sewer system privately owned, maintained,
and used by one or more properties.
PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL SYSTEM — Any privately owned and
operated and maintained system, device, or facility for the collection,
treatment and disposal of wastewaters. For example: condominiums
developments, septic systems, and laterals from the main to the building.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES —
The absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these
prohibitions appear in Article VII, § 158-38B.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The animal or vegetable wastes from
the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded
to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater
than 1/2 inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER — A common sewer controlled by a governmental agency
or public utility.
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR (DIRECTOR) — The public works director or
his/her designee shall be responsible for all the functions and duties of the
public works department as established by federal laws, state laws, Town of
Merrimack ordinances, or resolutions.
RADIOLOGICAL WASTE — A radioactive waste as regulated by RSA 125-F.
RESIDENTIAL USER — Discharge of wastewater from household and toilet
wastes or from sanitary conveniences, excluding ground-, surface or
stormwater.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Per RSA 674:24, VII, "right-of-way" means and includes
all present and proposed Town, state and federal highways and land on
either side of same as covered by statutes to determine the widths of rightsof-
way.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes
from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions
together with minor quantities of ground-, storm-, and surface waters that
are not admitted intentionally.
SCREENING LEVEL — That concentration of a pollutant which, under
baseline conditions, would cause a threat to personnel exposed to the
pollutant or would cause a threat to structures of wastewater facilities.
If any of the sewer screening levels based on fume toxicity values are
exceeded in the sewer system, the industrial user may be required at the
discretion of the Town to further evaluate the health, flammability and
chemical reactivity in the collection system.
§ 158-6 MERRIMACK CODE § 158-6
1:86
SEPTIC TANK WASTE — Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
SEWAGE — The spent water of a community. The preferred term is
"wastewater."
SEWER — A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
SHALL — Is mandatory (see "may").
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER —
Except as provided in Subsections B and C of this definition, the term
"significant industrial user" means:
All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards
under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N; and
(1)
Any other industrial user that discharges an average of 25,000
gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW
(excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown
wastewater); contributes a process waste stream which makes
up 5% or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic
capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or is designated as such by
the Control Authority on the basis that the industrial user has a
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation
or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement [in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6)].
(2)
A.
The Control Authority may determine that an industrial user subject to
categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR
Chapter I, Subchapter N, is a nonsignificant industrial user rather than
a significant industrial user on a finding that the industrial user never
discharges more than 100 gallons per day (gpd) of total categorical
wastewater (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler
blowdown wastewater, unless specifically included in the pretreatment
standard) and the following conditions are met:
The industrial user, prior to the Control Authority's finding, has
consistently complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment
standards and requirements;
(1)
The industrial user annually submits the certification statement
required in 40 CFR 403.12(q) together with any additional
information necessary to support the certification statement; and
(2)
The industrial user never discharges any untreated concentrated
wastewater.
(3)
B.
Upon a finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria in Subsection
A(2) of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely
affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment
standards or requirement, the Control Authority may at any time, on its
own initiative or in response to a petition received from an industrial
C.
§ 158-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-6
1:87
SLUG LOAD — Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which causes
a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in Article VII, § 158-38B,
of this chapter or any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including
but not limited to an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) CODE — A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the U.S.
Office of Management and Budget.
STORM DRAIN (sometimes termed "storm sewer") — A drain or sewer for
conveying stormwater, groundwater, subsurface water, or unpolluted water
from any source.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting therefrom, including snowmelt.
SUPERINTENDENT — The supervisor of wastewater facilities, or of
wastewater treatment works, or of water pollution control of the Town of
Merrimack, or his authorized deputy, agent, or representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS) — Total suspended matter that either floats on
the surface of or is in suspension in water, wastewater, or other liquids
and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater and referred to as
"nonfilterable residue."
TOWN — The Town Council, Town of Merrimack, County of Hillsborough,
State of New Hampshire.
TOWN MANAGER — The Town of Merrimack Principal Executive Officer.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — One of 126 pollutants, or combination of those
pollutants, listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA under the
provision of Section 307 (33 U.S.C. § 1317) of the Act.
TREATMENT PLANT EFFLUENT — Any discharge of pollutants from the
POTW into waters of the state.
UNPOLLUTED WATER — Water of quality equal to or better than the
effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving
water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the
sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
WASTEWATER — The spent water of a community. From the standpoint
of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes
from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions,
together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be
present.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES — The structures, equipment, and processes
required to treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS — An arrangement of devices and
structures for the treatment of wastewater, industrial waste and sludge.
user or POTW, and in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine
that such industrial user is not a significant industrial user.
§ 158-6 MERRIMACK CODE § 158-6
1:88
Also known as "POTW or publicly owned treatment works," "wastewater
treatment plant," "wastewater treatment facility" or "water pollution control
plant."
WATERCOURSE — A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water
either continuously or intermittently.
§ 158-7. Abbreviations.
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
COD Chemical oxygen demand
EPA U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency
gpd Gallons per day
l Liter
mg Milligrams
mg/l Milligrams per liter
NHDES New Hampshire Department of
Environmental Services
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System
O&M Operation and maintenance
POTW Publicly owned treatment works
PWD Public Works Department
RCRA Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act
ROW Right-of-way
SIC Standard industrial classifications
SWDA Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C.
§ 6901 et seq.)
TSS Total suspended solids
USC United States Code
§ 158-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-7
1:89

ARTICLE IV
Use of Public Sewers Required
§ 158-8. Unlawful deposit.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable
waste in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
Town of Merrimack, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said Town.
§ 158-9. Unlawful discharge.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Town
of Merrimack, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said Town, any
wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has
been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
§ 158-10. Privies and septic tanks.
When a public sewer is available, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tanks, cesspool, or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of wastewater, except as hereinafter
provided.
§ 158-11. Owner requirements.
A. The owner(s) of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within
the Town and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which
there is now located a public sanitary sewer of the Town, is hereby
required at the owner's expense to install suitable toilet facilities
therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public
sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the
International Plumbing Code as adopted, within 180 days after date of
official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within 200
feet of the said building.
B. Upon written request from the owner to defer connection to the public
sewer, the Town, through the Town Council, may defer the requirement
to connect to the public sewer provided the owner meets the following
criteria:
(1) Has had an inspection performed by a New Hampshire licensed
subsurface disposal designer approved by the Town demonstrating
the system is properly functioning which has been reviewed and
approved by the Health Officer and Public Works Director.
(2) The system has received approval by the New Hampshire
Department of Environmental Services (NHDES).
(3) The system was installed less than 30 years from the time of the
request.
§ 158-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-12
1:91
§ 158-12. Industrial wastes.
A. Persons discharging industrial process wastes into the public sewer or
Town wastewater treatment facility shall comply with the applicable
requirements of the federal (including the National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards, as amended) and New Hampshire Department
of Environmental Services (NHDES) pretreatment regulations (as
amended) in addition to this chapter.
B. All industrial and commercial facilities in the Town of Merrimack that
will be discharging to the sewer system must complete and submit an
industrial wastewater classification survey to the Director. A completed
survey must be received by the director within 30 days of the
occurrence of any of the following:
(1) Receipt of a survey questionnaire with a request for completion and
submittal a Town Official;
(2) Application for a building permit for initial construction, expansion
or remodeling; and/or
(3) Change of use of the facility.
C. The survey questionnaire must be submitted for review before the
building permit is issued.
D. All industrial and commercial users shall update their industrial
wastewater classification survey on file with the Town of Merrimack
whenever significant changes are made in an industrial operation or
process. Significant changes include, but are not limited to, an increase
or decrease in wastewater volume, changes in the concentration or
mass loadings of waste materials or substances, or changes in types of
waste discharged to the POTW sewer. The Pretreatment Manager may
also require the submittal of a new industrial wastewater discharge
application in accordance with § 158-24 as deemed necessary.
§ 158-12 MERRIMACK CODE § 158-12
1:92
ARTICLE V
Private Wastewater Disposal
§ 158-13. Use of private system.
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
Article IV, § 158-11, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this article.
§ 158-14. Permit required; permit and inspection fees.
Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal
system, the owner(s) shall first obtain design approval from the New
Hampshire Department of Environmental Services (NHDES) and a written
permit signed by the Town Building Inspector or designee. The application
for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the Town, which
the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications, and other
information as are deemed necessary by the Town. A permit and inspection
fee as established by the Town Council shall be paid to the Town at the
time the application is filed. Additional payments shall be made to the Town
for inspection of private wastewater facilities serving larger industrial and
commercial users. In such cases, the payment shall be based on the actual
cost to the Town.
§ 158-15. Inspections.
A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Town.
The Town shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction,
and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the Town when
the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions
are covered. The inspection shall be made within 72 hours of the receipt of
notice by the Town.
§ 158-16. Construction standards.
The type, capacities, location, layout and installation (including inspection)
of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all laws and
regulations of the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services
(NHDES) and the Town of Merrimack. No septic tank or cesspool shall be
permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
§ 158-17. Abandonment.
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property serviced by
a private wastewater disposal system, as provided in Article IV, § 158-11,
a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 180 days and
any abandoned holding tank or tanks and connections thereto shall be filled
and sealed in accordance with the provisions of the Town's International
Plumbing Code as adopted.
§ 158-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-18
1:93
§ 158-18. Operation and maintenance.
The owner(s) shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the Town. At
no time should any quantity of industrial waste be discharged to a private
wastewater disposal facility.
§ 158-19. Additional requirements.
No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with
any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Building Inspector
or designee of the Town of Merrimack pursuant to RSA 147:8.
§ 158-20. Construction in public streets.
No private sewer or drain shall be laid within the limits of any public
street, except by an experienced, bonded drain layer approved by the Town.
The bonded drain layer shall be held liable for any expense to the Town
on account of any imperfect work within the street limits done by his
employees.
§ 158-21. Contractor.
All contractors who apply for a permit for making excavation within the
limits of the public streets of the Town for the purpose of laying private
sewers must comply with the following requirements:
§ 158-22. Septage hauler requirements.
Additional septage hauler requirements are as follows:
A. Applicant shall post a surety bond in an amount sufficient to cover the
cost of the project as required in the permit to work in the Town rightof-
way (ROW) as issued by the Public Works Department (PWD),
Highway Maintenance Division.
B. All work performed by contractors under this permit shall comply with
all Town regulations.
C. All contractors will cause the excavation to be properly guarded at all
times for the protection of the public.
D. All contractors will properly make all connections and joints in every
sewer and will indemnify and hold harmless the Town of Merrimack
from any damage or cost for which it may be liable by reason of injury
resulting from neglect, carelessness, or incompetence in constructing,
repairing or connecting any private sewer, or proper fencing or lighting
any excavation or obstruction, or in performing any other work
connected therewith.
§ 158-18 MERRIMACK CODE § 158-22
1:94
A. The Town shall require septage haulers to obtain an individual user
pretreatment permit prior to discharging to the Merrimack POTW.
These permits will be reissued on a periodic basis.
B. Septage haulers can only discharge loads at locations specifically
designated by the Town.
C. The Town may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure
compliance with applicable pretreatment standards.
D. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the Town.
E. The Town may require the hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load
prior to discharge.
F. The waste hauler must use the POTW waste tracking form to record
every load that is pumped and delivered to the POTW.
G. Septage haulers are strictly prohibited from discharging industrial
septage at the Merrimack POTW, unless prior consent is granted by the
Town and New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services
(NHDES).
§ 158-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-22
1:95

ARTICLE VI
Building Sewers and Connections
§ 158-23. Permit required.
No unauthorized person(s) shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the Town.
§ 158-24. Application for permit.
There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: for residential and
commercial service producing only domestic wastewater (or sanitary
sewage) as defined herein, and for service to establishments producing
industrial wastes and commercial facilities that produce a process
wastewater effluent or discharge. Commercial facility may include, but not
be limited to, office buildings, medical centers including dental facilities,
restaurants, food service facilities, hotels, malls, retail stores, farm land,
multifamily housing buildings, warehouses, septage haulers, and garages.
In either case, the owner(s) or agent shall make application on a special
form furnished by the Town. The permit application shall be supplemented
by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in
the judgment of the Town. A permit and inspection fee, as established
by the Town Council from time to time, for a residential or commercial
building sewer permit shall be paid to the Town at the time the application
is filed. The permit and inspection fee for industrial service and commercial
facilities that produce a process wastewater effluent or discharge shall be
based on the actual cost to the Town.
A. The Town may stipulate special conditions and terms upon which the
industrial user permit is predicated, and this may include, but shall not
be limited to, the following:
(1) Limitation on quantity, rate of discharge and wastewater
characteristics.
(2) Installation of flow monitoring and sampling facilities.
(3) Requirements for monitoring programs (including monitoring
waivers approved in accordance with § 158-44, Monitoring),
including flow measurement, wastewater sampling and analysis
and schedule for reporting and submission of data. The Town will
review the data furnished and has the authority to request
additional information if required.
(4) Pretreatment requirements, including schedules of compliance and
progress notification.
(5) Special fees and service charges.
(6) Wastewaters discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time
period.
§ 158-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-24
1:97
§ 158-25. Costs and expenses.
All costs and expenses incidental to the installation, maintenance and
connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner(s). The
owner(s) shall indemnify the Town from any loss or damage that may
directly or indirectly be occasioned by the improper maintenance or
installation of the building sewer. Furthermore, the building owner is
responsible for all costs of maintenance, cleaning and repair of the lateral
connection from the sewer main to the building. All costs and expenses
incidental to the installation, maintenance, cleaning and connection of the
(7) Chemical analyses of wastewaters.
(8) Information on raw materials, processes, and products affecting
wastewater volume and quality.
(9) Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent, or
other materials important to sewer use control.
(10) A plot plan of sewers on the user's property showing sewer and
pretreatment facility location.
(11) Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities.
(12) Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials
through spills to the municipal sewer.
(13) Other requirements to comply with federal, state and local
regulations.
B. Discharge permits shall not be transferred or reassigned.
C. A permit expiration date can be extended and will remain enforceable if
the permit is not reissued provided the permittee complies with the
following:
(1) The permittee has submitted a complete permit application at least
60 days prior to the expiration date of the user's existing permit.
(2) The failure to reissue the permit prior to expiration of the previous
permit is not due to any act or failure to act on the part of the
permittee.
(3) The extension shall not exceed a one-year period or 365 days.
D. It is the responsibility of the permittee to ensure that all the
characteristics of the wastewater have been fully disclosed. The
permittee shall certify that there are no material omissions or
misrepresentations in the application hereto and that neither the
application nor the attached information contains any untrue statement
of a material fact or omit to state any material facts necessary to issue a
wastewater discharge permit. Permittees shall be subject to the
remedies, including penalties for failure to disclose.
§ 158-24 MERRIMACK CODE § 158-25
1:98
building sewer shall be borne by the owner(s). The owner(s) shall indemnify
the Town from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation and maintenance of the building sewer,
including the proper installation, maintenance and cleaning of backflow
preventers (check valve) and building laterals where the building lateral
fails or develops a blockage.
§ 158-26. Separate building sewer required.
Unless specifically authorized by the Town, a separate and independent
building sewer shall be provided for every building, except where one
building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer
is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining
alley, court, yard, or driveway, the front building sewer may be extended
to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, but
the Town does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility
for damage caused by, or resulting from, any such single connection
aforementioned.
§ 158-27. Use of old building sewers.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and testing by the Town, to meet
all requirements of this chapter. All costs of such testing and inspection,
including any pipeline video recording [see Town Public Works Department
(PWD) Construction Standards for testing requirements], shall be borne by
the owner(s).
§ 158-28. Materials and methods of construction.
The size, slope, alignments, materials of construction of a building sewer,
and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing, and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of
the Town's Building and Plumbing Codes and the appropriate sections of
the Town's standard specification for sewer construction. In the absence of
code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set
forth in appropriate specifications of the latest edition of the ASTM Water
Environment Federation Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
§ 158-29. Elevation of building sewer.
Whenever possible, any building sewer shall be brought to the building at
an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow from the sanitary facilities to the
public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted
by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer at the owner's
expense.
§ 158-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-30
1:99
§ 158-30. Surface runoff and groundwater.
No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains,
areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a
building sewer or building drain which, in turn, is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
§ 158-31. Connection specifications.
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform
to the requirements of the Town's Building and Plumbing Codes and other
applicable rules and regulations of the Town or the procedures set forth
in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the Water Environment
Federation Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made
gastight and watertight and verified by Town inspection. Any deviation from
the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the Town
before installation.
§ 158-32. Inspection and supervision.
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Town when the
building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer.
The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the
Town.
§ 158-33. Guarding of excavations; restoration of disturbed
property.
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Town at the expense
of the owner.
§ 158-34. New discharge; increase or change in discharge.
A. Any person proposing a new discharge into the system or an increase in
the volume, beyond limits previously permitted, or in the strength or
character of pollutants that are discharged into the system shall make
application to the Town at least 60 days prior to the proposed change or
connection. No person shall operate with such an increase or change
without first having received a modification to his permit. Proposed new
discharges from residential or commercial sources involving loading
exceeding 50 population equivalents (5,000 gpd) or any extensions of
the sanitary sewer collection system with eight-inch pipe or larger,
including manholes, etc., any new industrial discharge, or any
alteration in either flow or waste characteristics in industrial discharge
may require approval by the New Hampshire Department of
Environmental Services (NHDES).
§ 158-30 MERRIMACK CODE § 158-34
1:100
§ 158-35. Contractor.
All contractors who apply for a permit for making excavation within the
limits of the public streets of the Town for the purpose of laying private
sewers must comply with the following requirements:
B. In the event a permittee intends to cease to discharge from a regulated
process or plans to disconnect from the wastewater system, the Public
Works Director must be notified no later than 60 days prior to
commencement of any action by the permittee. The notification shall
provide a closure management plan that includes the following
information, as a minimum:
(1) Date of planned disconnect;
(2) Methods of disposal of regulated process tanks, chemicals, sludges,
plating wastes, cleaning solutions;
(3) Methods of cleaning tanks, barrels or other vessels containing
regulated pollutants;
(4) Names of carriers and ultimate disposal site(s) of the regulated
pollutants and the EPA permit numbers for transportation of the
wastes, if a permit is required by EPA.
C. The permittee shall be responsible for all discharges to the wastewater
system and shall not be disconnected until the Director or his/her
designee has determined the permittee has disposed of the regulated
wastes in a proper and safe manner and has requested termination of
the discharge permit in writing. The permit shall be terminated in
accordance with § 158-59C.
A. Applicant shall post a surety bond in an amount sufficient to cover the
cost of the project as required in the permit to work in the Town rightof-
way (ROW) as issued by the Public Works Department (PWD),
Highway Maintenance Division.
B. All work performed by contractors under this permit shall comply with
all Town regulations.
C. All contractors will cause the excavation to be properly guarded at all
times for the protection of the public.
D. All contractors will properly make all connections and joints in every
sewer and will indemnify and hold harmless the Town of Merrimack
from any damage or cost for which it may be liable by reason of injury
resulting from neglect, carelessness, or incompetence in constructing,
repairing or connecting any private sewer, or proper fencing or lighting
any excavation or obstruction, or in performing any other work
connected therewith.
§ 158-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-35
1:101

ARTICLE VII
Use of Public Sewers
§ 158-36. Discharge of unpolluted waters.
No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged to the wastewater
facilities any unpolluted waters such as stormwater, groundwater, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, or noncontact cooling water to any sanitary
sewer.
§ 158-37. Stormwater; industrial cooling water.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or a natural outlet
approved by the Town. Industrial cooling water or process waters require a
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit and Town
approval prior to discharge to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
§ 158-38. Pollutants; prohibited discharges.
A. Pollutants introduced into the POTW by an industrial or commercial
user shall not pass through or interfere with operation or performance
of the POTW.
B. No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
(1) Pollutants which could create a fire or explosion hazard in the
POTW, including but not limited to waste streams with a closed-cup
flash point of less than 140° F. or 60° C. using the test methods
specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
(2) Any industrial wastes, including oxygen demanding wastes (BOD,
etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate or concentration which
will cause interference with the wastewater treatment works,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance,
exceed any applicable National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards, or cause pass-through.
(3) Any waters or wastes having pH lower than 5.0 or higher than 9.5
or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage
or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the
wastewater works.
(4) Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers and/or interference with
the proper operation of the wastewater facilities, such as, but not
limited to, ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal,
glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole
blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper
dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by
garbage grinders.
§ 158-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-38
1:103
(5) Wastewater sufficiently hot to cause the influent at the wastewater
treatment facilities to exceed 104° F. (40° C.) or cause inhibition of
biological activity in the POTW.
(6) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through.
(7) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems.
(8) Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the POTW and at such times as are established by
the Town.
(9) Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, deionized water, noncontact cooling
water, and unpolluted industrial wastewater, unless specifically
authorized by the Town.
(10) Any wastewater causing the treatment plant's effluent to fail a
whole effluent toxicity testing standard.
(11) Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents, or other
substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW.
(12) Strong acid pickling waste and concentrated plating solutions,
whether neutralized or not.
(13) Any medical/infectious wastes, pharmaceutical waste, or
radiological waste except as specifically authorized in a discharge
permit.
(14) Household hazardous wastes, including but not limited to paints,
stains, thinners, pesticides, herbicides, antifreeze, transmission
and brake fluids, motor oil and battery acid.
(15) Any hazardous waste listed or designated by New Hampshire
Department of Environmental Services (NHDES) under Chapter
Env-Hw 400 (Identification and Listing of Hazardous Wastes) of the
New Hampshire Code of Administrative Rules.
(16) Any substance with color not removed at the POTW, such as, but
not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.
(17) Any emulsifying agents, solvents or enzymes that causes fats, oils
or grease to pass through an interceptor causing blockages of or
the requirement for excessive maintenance of the sanitary sewer.
(18) Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or treatment
residues, biosolids or scums to be unsuitable for reclamation and
reuse or which may interfere with such reclamation and reuse
process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW
§ 158-38 MERRIMACK CODE § 158-38
1:104
§ 158-39. Limited discharges; enforcement.
The following described substances, materials, waters, or waste shall be
limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentrations or quantities
which will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or
equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or
will not otherwise endanger life, limb, or public property or constitute
a nuisance. The Town may set limitations lower than the limitations
established in the regulations below if in its opinion such limitations are
necessary to meet the above objectives. In forming its opinion as to the
acceptability, the Town will give consideration to such factors as the
quantity of subject waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers,
materials of construction of the sewers, the wastewater treatment process
employed, capacity of the wastewater treatment plant, and other pertinent
factors. The Town shall not permit those discharges which are prohibited
by § 158-38 of this article. The limitations or restrictions on materials or
characteristics of waste or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer
which shall not be violated are as follows:
cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with biosolids use or
disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under
Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, any criteria, guidelines or
regulations affecting biosolids use or disposal developed pursuant
to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, ambient ground water quality
regulations, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act
or state or local standards applicable to the biosolids management
method adopted by the city.
(19) Any substance which damages or causes unusual wear of POTW
equipment.
(20) Any wastewater that has not been specifically disclosed in the
permit application.
(21) Molybdenum-based corrosion inhibitors from commercial and
industrial dischargers.
A. Wastewater containing more than 100 milligrams per liter of petroleum
oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils, or product of mineral oil origin.
Compliance shall be determined using Method 1664 A HEM and
Method 8015 or an equivalent method which has been approved by the
Director. If the facility also discharges FOG to the sewer system, then
the facility shall substitute Method 1664 A HEM with Method 1664 A
SGT (TPH method).
B. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded (see the definition of
"properly shredded garbage" in Article III, § 395-6). Garbage grinders
may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions,
restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or similar places where
garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the
purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers.
§ 158-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-39
1:105
C. Any waters or wastes containing heavy metals, solvents, and similar
objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any such
materials discharged to the public sewers exceed the limits established
by the Town, the New Hampshire Department of Environmental
Services (NHDES), or the National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards, as promulgated by the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, for such materials.
D. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odorproducing
substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which
may be established by the Town, as necessary, after treatment of the
composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or
other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge.
E. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as
may exceed limits established by the Town in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations.
F. Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a "slug" as
defined herein. Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes
constituting "slugs" as defined herein. Any unusual concentrations,
spills, or slugs shall be reported immediately to the Assistant Public
Works Director/Wastewater Division of the wastewater treatment plant.
A written report shall be sent by the industrial user to the Town within
five days of the incident describing the reason for the spill, remedial
action taken, and the steps taken to prevent its reoccurrence.
G. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes
employed or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the
wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the permitted
discharge.
H. Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or wastes in
the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form suspended
solids which interfere with the collection system, or create a condition
deleterious to structures and treatment processes.
I. Wastewater with any of the following constituents at concentrations
greater than those indicated below:
Cadmium 0.09 mg/l
Total chromium 1.54 mg/l
Copper 1.03 mg/l
Lead 0.15 mg/l
Nickel 0.44 mg/l
Silver 2.1 mg/l
Zinc 2.1 mg/l
Arsenic 0.19 mg/l
§ 158-39 MERRIMACK CODE § 158-39
1:106
Selenium 1.0 mg/l
Mercury 0.17 mg/l
Total cyanide 3.73 mg/l
(1) At the discretion of the Public Works Director or his designee, the
Town may impose mass limitations in addition to or in place of the
concentration-based limitations above.
(2) The daily maximum allowable discharge standards are
concentration limitations based on contributory flow from
industrial users discharging industrial process wastewater to the
Town's wastewater treatment facility. Industrial users that have
historically discharged at or below the domestic or background
concentrations for all or any one of the pollutants listed above may
not discharge above their current level. If the industrial user
intends to increase its contribution above its current level, the
industrial user must submit a formal request to the Town for
review.
(3) The Town shall review industrial monitoring results to ensure that
an industrial user previously discharging a particular pollutant at
or below the domestic or background concentrations has not
exceeded the respective threshold level. If a significant change in
the concentration of a particular pollutant(s) is identified, the Town
shall evaluate its current allowable headworks loading value(s) for
that particular pollutant(s). If necessary to ensure the maximum
headworks loading thresholds are not exceeded, the Town shall
recalculate and adjust the discharge standards accordingly.
(4) If an industrial user exceeds any of the discharge standards, the
industrial user shall notify the Town within 24 hours of becoming
aware of the violation. The industrial user must attempt to identify
the source and duration of noncompliance and initiate corrective
action immediately. A written report on noncompliance must be
submitted to the Town within 30 days of the event. The industrial
user shall also repeat analysis to the Town within 30 days after
becoming aware of the violation. Where the Control Authority has
performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user,
the Control Authority must perform the repeat sampling and
analysis unless it notifies the user of the violation and requires the
user to perform the repeat analysis. However, the industrial user is
not required to resample if the Town performs sampling at the
industrial user at a frequency of at least once per month or the
Town performs sampling at the industrial user between the time
when the initial sampling was conducted and the time when the
industrial user or the Town receives the results of this sampling.
(a) All compliance reports must be based upon data obtained
through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during
the period covered by the report, which data are
§ 158-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-39
1:107
representative of conditions occurring during the reporting
period. The Control Authority shall require that frequency of
monitoring necessary to assess and assure compliance by
industrial users with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements. Grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide,
total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic
compounds. For all other pollutants, twenty-four-hour
composite samples must be obtained through flow-proportional
composite sampling techniques, unless time-proportional
composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the
Control Authority. Where time-proportional composite
sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the Control
Authority, the samples must be representative of the discharge,
and the decision to allow the alternative sampling must be
documented in the industrial user file for that facility or
facilities. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation)
specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance,
multiple grab samples collected during a twenty-four-hour
period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows:
for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be
composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile
organics and oil and grease the samples may be composited
in the laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters
unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in
approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the Control
Authority, as appropriate.
(b) For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and
ninety-day compliance reports, a minimum of four grab
samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and
grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for facilities for
which historical sampling data do not exist; for facilities for
which historical sampling data are available, the Control
Authority may authorize a lower minimum. For the periodic
reports on continued compliance and reports for industrial
users not subject to categorical pretreatment standards, the
Control Authority shall require the number of grab samples
necessary to assess and assure compliance by industrial users
with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
J. The Town reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater
discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on
discharges to the POTW if deemed necessary to comply with the
objectives present in Article I, General Provisions (§ 395-2, Purpose and
policy), of this chapter or the general and specific prohibitions in Article
VII of this chapter.
K. If any of the following sewer screening levels are exceeded in the sewer
and the repeat analyses indicate noncompliance with this screening
level, then the industrial user shall implement, within 30 days of receipt
§ 158-39 MERRIMACK CODE § 158-39
1:108
of the repeat analyses, a study to evaluate the potential impact of
the discharge of this pollutant to the Town collection system or the
wastewater treatment facility. This study must be conducted under
the supervision and approval of the Town. The screening level for
sulfate shall be adjusted to account for the type of concrete used in
sewer construction and the dilution present (community-specific list of
screening levels).
Chloride 1,500 mg/l
Sulfate 1,500 mg/l
Sulfide 1.0 mg/l
Sulfite 2.0 mg/l
L. If any individual sewer screening levels based on fume toxicity values
are exceeded in the sewer system (list below is not all inclusive), the
industrial user may be required at the discretion of the Town to further
evaluate the health, flammability and chemical reactivity in the
collection system. Such screening levels, generated on the basis of
standard conditions, shall be adjusted for the particular conditions
applicable to the specific discharge.
Compound mg/l Compound mg/l
Acrylonitrile 6.08 Vinyl Acetate 2.47
Benzene 0.071 Tetrahydrofuran 163.4
Bromomethane 0.002 Naphthalene 3.99
Carbon Disulfide 0.073 Cresols 380
Carbon Tetrachloride 1.34 1,2 Dichlorocthane 0.89
Chlorobenzene 2.4 Styrene 2.02
Chloroform 2.04 o,p,m-xylene 2.6
Chloromethance 0.013 Aldrin 0.38
1,2 Dichlorobenzene 3.7 Chlordane 0.13
1,4 Dichlorobenzene 5.21 p-Choler-m-cresol 29.35
Dichlorodifluorometha0n.e04 Chlorobenzene 2.4
1,1 Dichlorocthane 2.3 DDT 1.55
trans 1, 2
Dichloroethylene
0.29 2,4
Dichlorophenoxy
Acetic Acid
> 1,000,000
1,2 Dichloropropane 5.39 Dieldrin 13,000
1,3 Dichloropropane 0.09 Diethylphthalate 102.04
Ethyl Benzene 2.01 Dimethylphthalate 57
Ethyl Dichloride 0.21 2,4 Dinitrotoluene 8.2
Formaldehyde 0.12 Endosulfan 0.25
§ 158-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-39
1:109
Compound mg/l Compound mg/l
Heptachlor 0.003 Endrin 6.1
Hexachloro-1,
3-butadiene
0.0002 Isobutyl alcohol 714.29
Hexachloroethane 0.98 Isophorone 595.74
Methyl ethyl ketone 373.42 Pentachlorophenol 4.4
Toluene 2.07 Pyridine 52,401
1,2,4
Trichlorobenzene
0.389 Toxaphene 0.0001
Trichloroethylene 0.81 1,1,2
Trichloroethane
1.5
Vinylidene 0.01 Vinyl Chloride 0.0008
Aroclor 1242 0.01 Acetone 1.545
Acetic Acid 565.6 Methylene
Chloride
83.73
Tetrachloroethylene 2.19 1,1,1
Trichlorocthane
2.0
Trichlorofluoromethane1.25 Aroclor 1254 0.005
Isopropanol 5,500 Chlorine 0.0045
M. The Town shall enforce the provision of this chapter in accordance with
EPA guidelines and will define noncomplying events using the following
terms:
(1) Significant noncompliance (SNC). Any violation of pretreatment
requirements (limits, sampling, analysis, reporting and meeting
compliance schedules and regulatory deadlines) is an instance of
noncompliance for which the industrial user is liable for
enforcement, including penalties. Instances of significant
noncompliance (SNC) are industrial user violations which meet one
or more of the following criteria:
(a) Violation of wastewater discharge limits.
[1] Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined
here as those in which 66% or more of all of the
measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter
during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a
numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including
instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1).
[2] Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as
those in which 33% or more of all of the measurements
taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month
period equal or exceed the product of the numeric
pretreatment standard or requirement, including
§ 158-39 MERRIMACK CODE § 158-39
1:110
§ 158-40. Authority of Town.
instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1)
multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS,
fats, oil, and grease and 1.2 for all other pollutants except
pH).
[3] Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or
requirement as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1) (daily
maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or
narrative standard) that the POTW determines has caused,
alone or in combination with other discharges,
interference or pass-through (including endangering the
health of POTW personnel or the general public).
[4] Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health/welfare or to the POTW's
exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such
a discharge.
(b) Violation of compliance schedule milestones, contained in the
industrial user permit (IUP) or an enforcement order, for
starting construction, completing construction, and attaining
final compliance by 90 days or more after the schedule date.
(c) Failure to provide reports for compliance schedules, selfmonitoring
data, or categorical standards within 30 days from
the due date.
(d) Failure to accurately report noncompliance.
(e) Any other violation or group of violations that the Town
considers to be significant.
N. Dental dischargers shall comply with the best management practice
requirements identified in Code of Federal Regulations Title 40 CFR,
Part 441, Dental Office Point Source Category, and the requirements
identified in New Hampshire Code of Administrative Rules Env-Wq 306,
Standards For Management of Mercury-Containing Amalgam. These
rules do not apply to wastewater discharges from dental mobile units.
A. If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters or wastes contain the
substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in § 158-39 of
this article, or which, in the judgment of the Town, may have a
deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment,
or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or
constitute a public nuisance, the Town may, subject to limitations in
§§ 158-38 and 158-47 of this article:
(1) Reject the wastes.
§ 158-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-40
1:111
(2) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers.
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge, which
includes flow equalization.
(4) Require industrial users with the potential to discharge flammable
substances to install and maintain an approved combustible gas
detection meter.
(5) Require any industrial user to develop and implement an accidental
discharge/slug control plan. If required, slug control plans must be
included in their industrial user discharge permit. At a minimum,
this slug control plan must include a description of discharge
practices, including nonroutine batch discharges and a description
of stored chemicals. This requirement will give the Town the
flexibility to review the need for a slug control plan or other action
as necessary on a continuing basis. Any additional significant
industrial users must be evaluated within one year of being
designated a significant industrial user. For purposes of this
subsection, a slug discharge is any discharge of a nonroutine,
episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a
noncustomary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to
cause interference or pass-through or in any other way violate the
POTW's regulations, local limits or permit conditions. Significant
industrial users are required to notify the POTW immediately of any
changes at their facility affecting potential for a slug discharge.
(6) Require payment to cover added cost of handling and treating the
wastes.
(7) Require procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental
or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to,
inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer
of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site
runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or
equipment, and measures for containing toxic organic pollutants
(including solvents and equipment for emergency response).
B. If the Town or federal effluent limitations require pretreatment or
equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of such facilities
shall be subject to the review and approval of the Town and the New
Hampshire Department of Environmental Services (NHDES) and
subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and
laws. Such facilities shall not be connected to the sanitary sewer until
said approval is obtained in writing. Such approval shall not relieve the
owner of the responsibility of discharging treated waste meeting the
requirements of this chapter. Plans and specifications for a proposed
pretreatment facility shall be the result of the design of a professional
engineer registered in New Hampshire.
§ 158-40 MERRIMACK CODE § 158-40
1:112
§ 158-41. Grease, oil and sand interceptors.
C. To determine compliance with respect to prohibited discharges and
categorical limitations on wastewater discharges with respect to the
industrial user discharge permit, prohibitions and limitations may be
made on the basis of either instantaneous grab samples or composite
samples of the wastewater. Sampling of industrial wastewaters for the
purpose of compliance determination will be performed at such
frequency as the Town designates and may be on either a scheduled or
random basis to ensure compliance.
A. Grease interceptors, oil separators and sand interceptors shall be
installed for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable
oil or grease, as specified in § 158-39A on the building drain of the
following users of the sewer system:
(1) All commercial establishments engaged in the preparation and sale
of foodstuffs to the general public such as restaurants, cafes, lunch
counters, cafeterias, bars, kitchens in hotels, hospitals, factories or
other profit or nonprofit organizations providing food services;
(2) Establishments engaged in automatic and coin-operated laundries,
car washes, filling stations, commercial garages or similar
businesses having wash or grease racks;
(3) All establishments operating a commercial garbage grinder;
(4) Dairies, slaughterhouses, commercial processing plants and other
similar sources of grease and fat byproducts, unless such
establishments are otherwise regulated by a discharge permit
issued under this chapter;
(5) Any other users producing quantities of grit, sand, grease, fat or
other materials which have the potential of causing partial or
complete obstruction of the building sewer or other areas in the
sewer system, require excessive maintenance of sewer lines or
impede the transmission or treatment of sewage.
B. Interceptor design, installation, operation and maintenance.
(1) All interceptors shall be designed and installed in accordance with
the requirements of current version of the International Plumbing
Code, published by the International Code Council, Inc. All
interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Town
and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection.
(2) The design standards are such that excessive amounts of grease,
oil, sand, and other inert solids are effectively prevented from
entering the POTW sewer. All other requirements of the
International Plumbing Code, including safety considerations,
§ 158-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-41
1:113
§ 158-42. Pretreatment standards.
Persons discharging industrial process wastes into the public sewer or Town
wastewater treatment facility shall comply with the National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards, found in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts
405 to 471, which are hereby incorporated into this chapter. In addition,
compliance is required with National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
that have yet to be promulgated or amended, and the New Hampshire
Department of Environmental Services (NHDES) pretreatment regulations
(as amended), in addition to this chapter.
access provisions for maintenance and cleaning, design of vents
and covers, and types of construction materials shall be applicable.
(3) They shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and equipped
with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be
gastight and watertight. In the maintaining of these interceptors
the owner(s) shall be responsible for the proper removal and
disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall
maintain records of the dates and means of disposal which are
subject to review by the Town.
C. All interceptors shall be installed, maintained, repaired and operated by
the discharger at his or her own expense. The installation shall be kept
in continuous operation at all times, and shall be inspected and cleaned
on a regular basis as required for efficient operation, by a service
contractor qualified to perform such cleaning and inspection.
Bioremediation may be used in addition to regular maintenance
provided that the grease does not pass through the interceptor and
cause blockages or excessive maintenance requirements.
(1) Certificates of inspection and maintenance shall be kept on the
premises of the interceptor installation and shall be made readily
available to city-authorized personnel for review and inspection.
Wastes removed from the interceptor must not be reintroduced into
an interceptor or sewer. Dischargers shall be subject to the
remedies, including penalties for failure to inspect and maintain
interceptors.
D. Enforcement. Any person, firm, partnership or corporation found to be
violating, or in violation of, this provision will be subject to enforcement
actions in accordance with § 158-79, Continuing violations, of this
chapter. For all continuing violations, the response will include a
compliance schedule. Additional enforcement responses available to
the Town are consent orders, show-cause hearing, compliance order,
cease-and-desist order, administrative fines and civil or criminal
prosecution.
§ 158-41 MERRIMACK CODE § 158-43
1:114
§ 158-43. Industrial wastes.
The Town, with the advice of a professional engineer registered in New
Hampshire, shall determine the quantity and quality of all industrial wastes
which can be properly taken into the sewerage system and treated at the
sewage treatment works, in addition to the sanitary sewage from the Town,
and the Town may regulate, by separate industrial user permit(s) approved
by the Town Council, the flow of industrial wastes into the sewerage system.
§ 158-44. Monitoring.
A. When required by the Town, the owner(s) of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
structure, together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances, in the building sewer to facilitate observation,
sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such structure, when
required, shall be accessible and safely located and shall be constructed
in accordance with plans approved by the Town. The structure shall be
installed at the owner's expense and shall be maintained by the
owner(s) to be safe and accessible at all times.
B. All industrial users discharging into a public sewer shall perform such
monitoring as the Public Works Director or duly authorized employees
or agents of the Town may reasonably require, including installation,
use and maintenance of monitoring equipment, keeping records and
reporting the results of such monitoring to the PWD. Such records shall
be made available upon request by the PWD to other agencies having
jurisdiction over discharges to the receiving waters.
C. All industrial users shall be allowed to apply for a monitoring waiver to
forego sampling of a pollutant regulated by a categorical pretreatment
standard if the permittee has demonstrated through sampling and other
technical factors that the pollutant is neither present nor expected to be
present in the discharge, or is present only at background levels from
intake water and without any increase in the pollutant due to activities
of the industrial user. This authorization is subject to the following
conditions:
(1) A monitoring waiver may also be granted where a pollutant is
determined to be present solely due to sanitary wastewater
discharged from the facility provided that the sanitary wastewater
is not regulated by an applicable categorical standard and
otherwise includes no process wastewater.
(2) The monitoring waiver shall only be valid for the duration of the
effective period of the permit. The user must submit a new request
for the waiver with each permit application.
(3) In making a demonstration that a pollutant is not present, the
permittee must provide data from at least one sampling of the
§ 158-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-44
1:115
facility's process wastewater prior to any treatment present at the
facility that is representative of all wastewater from all processes.
(4) The request for a monitoring waiver must be signed in accordance
with 40 CFR § 403.6(a)(2)(ii). Nondetectable sample results may
only be used as a demonstration that a pollutant is not present if
the EPA-approved method from 40 CFR 136 with the lowest
minimum detection level for that pollutant was used in the analysis.
D. In lieu of continuous monitoring for total toxic organics (TTO), the
permittee may submit a toxic organic management plan to the Town
following receipt of TTO analyses results indicating full compliance
with the federal categorical standard.
(1) At a minimum, the solvent/toxic organic management plan shall
consist of:
(a) Identification of the toxic organic compounds used [source(s)
of pollutant(s)];
(b) Method of disposal (control options exercised); and
(c) Procedures for assuring that toxic organics do not routinely
spill or leak into wastewater discharge to the Town
(effectiveness of control options).
(2) Upon approval of the plan by the Town, the permittee shall submit a
certification statement by June 1 and December 1 of each calendar
year in lieu of performing the laboratory analysis for total toxic
organics (40 CFR 122), Appendix D, Table II.
(3) The certification statement shall be as follows:
"Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible
for managing compliance with the pretreatment standard for Total
Toxic Organics (TTO), I certify that, to the best of my knowledge
and belief, no discharge of toxic organics into the wastewaters
has occurred since filing the last discharge monitoring report. I
further certify that this facility is implementing the Toxic Organic
Management Plan submitted to the Town of Merrimack."
(4) The certification statement shall be signed by an individual as
defined in Part 4, Section H of this permit and submitted to the
office of the Merrimack Wastewater Treatment Facility, Industrial
Wastewater Pretreatment Manager.
(a) Any change in toxic organic management at the permitted
facility, including any change in the toxic organic compounds
used, shall nullify the plan approval, and shall require an
additional TTO analyses results (compliant with standards) be
submitted to the Town. In addition, a revised toxic organic
management plan [see Subsection D(1) above] shall be
submitted for approval in lieu of continued TTO monitoring.
§ 158-44 MERRIMACK CODE § 158-45
1:116
§ 158-45. Information to be provided.
The Town may require a user of sewer services to provide information
needed to determine compliance with this chapter. These requirements may
include:
§ 158-46. Measurements, tests and analyses.
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined
in accordance with the EPA-approved methods published in the Code of
Federal Regulations, Title 40, Part 136 (40 CFR 136), or if none are
available, then sampling and analysis shall be performed using validated
analytical methods or other applicable procedures approved by the Town.
Sampling methods, location, times, duration, and frequencies are to be
determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the Town.
§ 158-47. Special agreements.
A. Wastewater discharge peak rates and volume over a specified time
period.
B. Chemical analyses of wastewaters.
C. Information on raw materials, processes, and products affecting
wastewater volume and quality.
D. Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent, or other
materials important to sewer use control.
E. A plot plan of sewers on the user's property showing sewer and
pretreatment facility location.
F. Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities, including plans and
specifications.
G. Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials
through spills into the municipal sewer.
A. No statement contained in this article, except in § 158-38, shall be
construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement
between the Town and any industrial user whereby an industrial waste
of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the Town for
treatment, provided that such agreements do not contravene any
requirements of existing federal or state laws and/or regulations
promulgated thereunder, are compatible with any user charge system
in effect, and do not waive applicable National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards. Special agreements may not, under any
circumstances, be less stringent than any corresponding federal
limitations established for the parameter of concern. Any special
agreement established is subject to a mandatory annual evaluation.
§ 158-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-47
1:117
§ 158-48. Reporting.
Each significant industrial user must report twice a year to the Town on
the first of June and first of December of each year, or such other time as
designated by the Town, a semiannual report containing information as to
the minimum, average and peak flows of industrial wastewater discharges
during the previous year and at time or times designated, analyses and
wastewater samplings taken in an acceptable manner at approved times
during the flow measuring periods.
§ 158-49. Septic tank waste.
B. In addition, if at any time during the year the industrial user's
process(es) or discharge(s) changes from the conditions to which the
special agreement applies, or if a new industrial user connects to the
Town's wastewater treatment facility whose discharge may impact the
total industrial allocation of the specific parameter for which the special
agreement has been reached, the Town may at that time reevaluate the
special agreement and change the conditions of the agreement or
revoke the agreement entirely, as determined to be necessary.
A. Septic tank waste (septage) may be accepted into the sewer system at a
designated receiving structure within the treatment plant area, and at
such times as are established by the Public Works Department,
provided such wastes do not contain toxic pollutants or materials, and
provided such discharge does not violate any other special
requirements established by the Town. Septage will not be accepted at
the treatment facility which exhibits a pH of less than five standard pH
units. Permits to use such facilities shall be under the jurisdiction of the
Public Works Department or its duly authorized representatives. The
discharge of industrial wastes as "industrial septage" requires prior
approval of the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services
(NHDES). Fees for dumping septage will be established as part of the
user charge system. The Town shall have authority to limit the disposal
of such wastes if such disposal would interfere with the treatment plant
operation or violate the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) permit. Procedures for the disposal of such wastes
shall be in conformance with the operating policy of the Town, and
disposal shall be accomplished under supervision of the Town unless
specifically permitted otherwise. Municipalities need not accept
septage if it would interfere with the proper operation of municipal
treatment and disposal facilities (RSA 486:13).
B. Additional septage hauler requirements are as follows:
(1) The Town shall require septage haulers to obtain an individual user
pretreatment permit prior to discharging to the Merrimack POTW.
These permits will be reissued on a periodic basis.
(2) Septage haulers can only discharge loads at locations specifically
designated by the Town.
§ 158-47 MERRIMACK CODE § 158-49
1:118
§ 158-50. Dilution.
It shall be illegal to meet requirements of this chapter by diluting wastes in
lieu of proper pretreatment.
§ 158-51. Protection from accidental discharge.
Each industrial user shall provide protection from accidental discharge
of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this chapter.
Facilities to prevent accidental discharges shall be provided and maintained
at the industrial user's expense.
§ 158-52. Bypass.
Bypass is prohibited except where the bypass is unavoidable to prevent loss
of life, personal injury, or severe property damage. The industrial user shall
notify the Town immediately in the event of any bypass. Prior authorization
must be obtained from the Town to accommodate maintenance activities.
Industrial users must still comply with Article VII of this chapter whenever
permission is granted to bypass.
§ 158-53. Notification of spill or other incident.
A notice shall be permanently posted, plainly visible to an industrial user's
personnel responsible for managing wastewater discharges, which shall
instruct all employees whom to call in the event of a spill, slug discharge,
pretreatment upset or bypass. Employers shall ensure that all employees
who may cause or suffer such a discharge to occur know of the required
notification of the Town.
§ 158-54. Sampling.
If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the user
shall notify the Town within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation.
The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results
(3) The Town may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure
compliance with applicable pretreatment standards.
(4) No load may be discharged without prior consent of the Town.
(5) The Town may require the hauler to provide a waste analysis of any
load prior to discharge.
(6) The waste hauler must use the POTW waste tracking form to record
every load that is pumped and delivered to the POTW.
(7) Septage haulers are strictly prohibited from discharging industrial
septage at the Merrimack POTW, unless prior consent is granted
from the Town and New Hampshire Department of Environmental
Services (NHDES).
§ 158-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-54
1:119
of the repeat analysis to the Town within 30 days after becoming aware of
the violation, except that the industrial user is not required to resample if:
A. The Town performs sampling at the industrial user at a frequency of at
least once per month; or
B. The Town performs sampling at the industrial user between the time
when the user performs its initial sampling and the time when the user
receives the results of this sampling.
§ 158-54 MERRIMACK CODE § 158-54
1:120
ARTICLE VIII
Industrial Pretreatment
§ 158-55. Applicability.
All persons discharging industrial process wastes into public or private
sewers connected to the Town's wastewater works shall comply with
applicable requirements of federal and state industrial pretreatment
regulation (as amended), in addition to the requirements of these industrial
pretreatment rules.
§ 158-56. Industrial user permit (IUP).
A. Industrial user permit (IUP) required. Effective 120 calendar days after
this provision is adopted by the Town, the discharge of any industrial
process waste to the Town's wastewater works or to a public or private
sewer connected to the Town's wastewater works is prohibited without
a valid industrial user permit (IUP).
B. Industrial user permit (IUP) application. Within 60 days after the
effective date of these industrial pretreatment rules, and subsequently
when required by the Town, persons subject to these rules shall submit
an application for an industrial user permit (IUP) containing
information required under applicable federal and state industrial
pretreatment reporting regulations. Such information, as a minimum,
shall include:
(1) The name and address of the facility, including the name of the
operators and owners.
(2) A list of all environmental permits held by or for the facility.
(3) A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and
standard industrial classification of the operations carried out at
such facility.
(4) An identification of the categorical pretreatment standards
applicable to each regulated process.
(5) An analysis identifying the nature and concentration of pollutants
in the discharge.
(6) Information showing the measured averaged daily and maximum
daily flow, in gallons per day, to the public sewer from regulated
process streams and from other streams.
(7) A schedule of actions to be taken to comply with discharge
limitations; including a slug control plan if applicable.
(8) Additional information as determined by the Town may also be
required.
§ 158-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-56
1:121
(9) Any other information which may be needed to meet the baseline
monitoring requirements applicable to industrial users subject to
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
C. Provisions. The industrial user permit (IUP) will outline the general and
specific conditions under which the industrial process waste is
accepted for treatment at the Town's wastewater treatment plant.
(1) Specifically, included in the permit are the following:
(a) Pretreatment and self-monitoring facilities required.
(b) Parameters to be monitored, type of samples, and monitoring
frequencies required.
(c) Location of sampling site.
(d) Notification by the industrial user of slugs, bypass or
noncompliance.
(e) Penalties for noncompliance.
(f) Compliance schedule.
(g) Effluent limitation on the industrial process waste.
(2) Reporting requirements.
(a) Industrial users shall submit periodic reports as required, but
not less often than semiannually, indicating the nature and
concentration of pollutants in the discharge from the regulated
processes governed by pretreatment standards and the
average and maximum daily flow for these process units. The
reports shall state whether the applicable categorical
pretreatment standards and effluent limitations are being met
on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation and
maintenance practices and pretreatment are necessary.
Additional requirements for such reports may be imposed by
the Town.
(b) If an individual user subject to the report requirements in
Subsection C(2)(a) monitors any pollutant more frequently
than required by the Town, using procedures prescribed in
Article VII, § 158-46, the results of this monitoring shall be
included in the report. All industrial users must submit
analytical results performed in accordance with 40 CFR Part
136.
(c) The permittee shall submit a certification statement by June 1
and December 1 of each calendar year in lieu of performing the
laboratory analysis for total toxic organics in accordance with
§ 158-54D.
(3) Monitoring records.
§ 158-56 MERRIMACK CODE § 158-56
1:122
(a) Industrial users subject to the reporting requirements under
this section shall maintain records of information resulting
from monitoring activities required to prepare such reports;
such records shall include for each sample:
[1] The date, exact place, method and time of sampling and
name of person or persons taking sample.
[2] The dates analyses were performed.
[3] The laboratory performing the analyses.
[4] The analytical techniques and methods used.
[5] The results of such analyses.
(b) Such records shall be maintained for a minimum of five years
and shall be made available for inspection and copying by the
Town.
(4) Additional conditions.
(a) The permit will be in effect for a period not to exceed three
years and may be renewed upon review and receipt of a
properly completed permit application. Permits may be
extended in accordance with § 154-24C for up to a one-year
period.
(b) The permit is nontransferable and may be revoked by the Town
for noncompliance or modified so as to conform to discharge
limitation requirements that are enacted by federal or state
rules and regulations.
(c) An industry proposing a new discharge or a change in volume
or character of its existing discharge, beyond limits previously
permitted, must submit a completed industrial user permit
(IUP) application to the Town at least 60 days prior to the
commencement of such discharge. The submitted application
must include plans and engineering drawings, stamped by a
registered professional engineer, of the proposed pretreatment
facilities. Upon approval of the application by the Town, an
indirect discharge request is submitted by the Town to the New
Hampshire Department of Environmental Services (NHDES)
on behalf of the industry. Upon approval of the indirect
discharge request by the New Hampshire Department of
Environmental Services (NHDES), the industry and the Town
will enter into a new or amended IUP in accordance with the
procedure outlined in this section.
(d) Industrial users and commercial facilities that produce a
process wastewater effluent or discharge shall be assessed an
annual fee by the Town as established by the Town Council
from time to time to defray the administrative cost of the
§ 158-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-56
1:123
industrial user permit (IUP) program. These costs may include
all personnel, operational, maintenance and capital costs
necessary to operate a successful pretreatment program.
(5) Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited
to, the following:
(a) Limits on the average or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge, and requirements for flow regulation and
equalization.
(b) Limits on the instantaneous, daily and monthly average or
maximum concentration, mass, or other measure or identified
wastewater pollutants or properties.
(c) Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment
devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the
introduction of pollutants into the treatment works.
(d) Development and implementation of spill control plans or other
special conditions, including management practices necessary
to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or routine
discharges.
(e) Development and implementation of waste minimization plans
to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW.
(6) Compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve
the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable
federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which
become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge
permit.
D. Signature for reports. The reports required by Subsections B and
C(2)(a) of this section and § 158-60E and F of this article shall include
the certification as set forth in Subsection E of this section and shall be
signed as follows:
(1) By a responsible corporate officer, if the industrial user submitting
the reports required in this chapter is a corporation. For the
purpose of this subsection, a "responsible corporate officer" means:
(a) A president, manager, treasurer, or vice president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any
other person who performs similar policy- or decision-making
functions for the corporation; or
(b) The manager of one or more manufacturing production or
operation facilities, provided the manager is authorized to
make management decisions which govern the operation of the
regulated facility, including having the explicit or implicit duty
of making major capital investment recommendations, and
§ 158-56 MERRIMACK CODE § 158-56
1:124
initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure
long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws
and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are
established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate
information for control mechanism requirements; and where
authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to
the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.
(2) By a general partner or proprietor if the industrial user submitting
the reports required by this chapter is a partnership or sole
proprietorship, respectively.
(3) By a duly authorized representative of the individual designated in
Subsection D(1) or (2) if:
(a) The authorization is made in writing by the individual
described in Subsection D(1) or (2);
(b) The authorization specified either an individual or a position
having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility
from which the industrial discharge originates, such as the
position of plant manager, operator of a well or well field,
superintendent, or a position of equivalent responsibility, or
having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the
company; and
(c) The written authorization is submitted to the Town.
(4) If an authorization under Subsection D(3) is no longer accurate
because a different individual or position has responsibility for the
overall operation of the facility or overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company, a new authorization
satisfying the requirement of Subsection D(3) must be submitted to
the Town prior to, or together with, any reports to be signed by an
authorized representative.
E. Certification. All reports required to be signed as specified in
Subsection D shall include the following certification:
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with
a system designed to ensure that qualified personnel properly gather
and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the
person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly
responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is,
to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete.
I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false
information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for
knowing violations.
F. Annual certification by nonsignificant categorical industrial users. A
facility determined to be a nonsignificant categorical industrial user
§ 158-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-56
1:125
§ 158-57. Wastewater discharge permit appeals.
Any person, including the industrial user, may petition the Town to
reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of its
issuance.
pursuant to 40 CFR 403.3(v)(2) must annually submit the following
certification statement, signed in accordance with the signatory
requirements in 40 CFR 403.12(1). This certification must accompany
any alternative report required by the Control Authority:
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible
for managing compliance with the categorical pretreatment standards
under 40 CFR __________, I certify that, to the best of my knowledge
and belief that during the period from __________ (month)/_____
(day)/_____ (year) to _____ (month)/_____ (day)/_____ (year)
a) The facility described as ____________________ (facility name) met
the definition of a nonsignificant categorical industrial user as
described in 40 CFR 403.3(v)(2);
b) The facility complied with all applicable pretreatment standards
and requirements during this reporting period;
c) And the facility never discharged more than 100 gallons of total
categorical wastewater on any given day during this reporting
period. This compliance certification is based upon the following
information:
G. Signatory requirements for POTW reports. Reports submitted to the
approval authority by the POTW in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(i)
must be signed by a principal executive officer, ranking elected official
or other duly authorized employee who must be an individual or
position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility or
the pretreatment program. This authorization must be made in writing
by the principal executive officer or ranking elected official and
submitted to the approval authority prior to or together with the report
being submitted.
H. Upon reduction of efficiency of operation, or loss or failure of all or part
of the treatment facility, the permittee shall, to the extent necessary to
maintain compliance with its permit, control its production or
discharges (or both) until operation of the treatment facility is restored
or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies, for example, when the primary source of power of the
treatment facility fails or is reduced. It shall not be a defense for a
permittee in an enforcement action that it would have been necessary
to halt or reduce the permitted activity in order to maintain compliance
with the conditions of this permit.
A. Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a
waiver of the administrative appeal.
§ 158-56 MERRIMACK CODE § 158-57
1:126
§ 158-58. Wastewater discharge permit modification.
The Town may modify the wastewater discharge permit for good cause,
including but not limited to the following:
B. In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater
discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection,
and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater
discharge permit.
C. The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be
stayed pending the appeal.
D. If the Town fails to act within 30 days, a request for reconsideration
shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater
discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to
modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final
administrative action for purposes of judicial review.
E. Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative
wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint
with the name of court for jurisdiction within appropriate state statute
of limitations.
A. A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge. This may include
the promulgation of new applicable national categorical pretreatment
standards.
B. If new federal, state, and/or local standards are promulgated, the
Director shall so notify the industrial discharger in writing. The
industrial discharger must submit a proposed schedule for complying
with the new standards within 30 days of notification. The modified
permit shall contain the new limits and a compliance schedule.
C. Changes in the requirements of this chapter.
D. Changes in state, federal or local regulations pertaining to the POTW
biosolids or discharge.
E. Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to
the Town's POTW, Town POTW personnel, or the receiving waters, or a
revision of federal or state water quality rules (groundwater or surface
water).
F. To address changes or additions to the industrial user's operation,
processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of
wastewater discharge permit issuance. Changes in operational status
may include but not be limited to:
(1) R&D facility commencing manufacturing activities;
§ 158-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-58
1:127
§ 158-59. Wastewater discharge permit revocation.
(2) Manufacturing facility downgrading production and becoming an
R&D facility;
(3) Increasing the concentration of a chemical or the addition of a new
chemical which has the potential to impact operations at POTW;
(4) Addition of new production activities including but not limited to:
installation of new processing equipment, increasing
manufacturing activities, addition of additional manufacturing
capacity.
G. Changes in available POTW capacity or modifications to the POTW
treatment processes which necessitate changes to industrial discharges
to the wastewater system.
H. Changes required as a result of any new information which was
discovered or was not available or provided at the time of permit
issuance.
I. Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge
permit.
J. Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the
wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting.
K. Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge
permit.
L. Revisions or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13.
M. Correct typographical errors.
N. Transfer of facility ownership or operation to a new owner.
A. Wastewater discharge permits may be revoked for the following
reasons:
(1) Failure to notify the Town of significant changes to the wastewater
prior to the changed discharge.
(2) Failure to provide prior notification to the Town of changed
condition.
(3) Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application.
(4) Falsifying self-monitoring reports.
(5) Tampering with monitoring equipment.
(6) Refusing to allow the Town timely access to the facility premises
and records.
§ 158-58 MERRIMACK CODE § 158-59
1:128
§ 158-60. National Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
(7) Failure to meet effluent limitations.
(8) Failure to pay fines.
(9) Failure to pay sewer charges.
(10) Failure to meet compliance schedules.
(11) Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater
discharge permit application.
(12) Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted
facility.
(13) Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement or any
terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter.
B. Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon nonuse, cessation
of operations, or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater
discharge permits are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater
discharge permit.
C. Upon verification that the industrial user has closed the facility in
compliance with all regulations, there is no hazardous waste stored at
the facility, and all sewer fees have been paid, the Director may issue a
letter which terminates the permit.
A. Notification. All industrial users shall comply with the notification
requirements per Code of Federal Regulations Title 40 CFR 403.6,
National pretreatment standards: Categorical standards.
B. Compliance date for categorical standards. Compliance with
categorical pretreatment standards shall be achieved within three
years of the date such standards are effective, unless a shorter
compliance time is specified in the standards.
C. Amendment to industrial user permit (IUP) required. An industrial user
subject to categorical pretreatment standards shall not discharge
wastewater directly or indirectly to Town wastewater works after the
compliance date of such standards unless an amendment to its
industrial user permit (IUP) has been issued by the Town.
D. Application for industrial user permit (IUP) amendment. Within 120
days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, an
industry subject to such standards shall submit an application for an
industrial user permit (IUP) amendment.
E. Categorical compliance schedule reports. Each user subject to a
compliance schedule as required under Subsection G(7), or federal
regulation Code of Federal Regulations Title 40 CFR 403.12(b)(7), shall
§ 158-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-60
1:129
report on progress toward meeting compliance with these regulations
as follows:
(1) Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the
final date for compliance, the industrial user shall submit a
progress report to the Town indicating whether or not it complied
with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not,
the date on which it expects to comply, the reason for the delay, and
the steps being taken by the industrial user to return the progress
to the schedule established.
(2) The time for any increment in the schedule, or the interval between
reports required in Subsection E(1), shall not exceed nine months.
An increment is the time between the dates for commencement and
completion of major events leading to the construction and
operation of pretreatment facilities necessary to achieve
compliance with this chapter and National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards.
F. Report on compliance with categorical standard deadline. Within 90
days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical
pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new industrial user
following introduction of wastewater into the Town POTW, any
industrial user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements
shall submit to the Town a report indicating the nature and
concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated
process which are limited by pretreatment standards and the average
and maximum daily flow for these process lines. The report shall state
whether the applicable pretreatment standards are being met on a
consistent basis. If the new industrial user is unable to meet these
applicable pretreatment standards, the industrial user shall then be
required to implement and install the necessary operational,
maintenance and pretreatment upgrades in order to bring the
industrial user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment
standards. This statement shall be signed by an authorized
representative (see § 158-56D) and certified by a qualified professional
engineer.
G. Baseline monitoring reports. Within either 180 days after the effective
date of a categorical pretreatment standard or the final administrative
decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a),
whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or
scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit a report which
contains the information listed in Article VIII, § 158-56B, of this chapter.
At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new
sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the
promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit a
report which contains the information listed in Article VIII, § 158-56B,
of this chapter. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it
intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source
also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of
§ 158-60 MERRIMACK CODE § 158-60
1:130
pollutants to be discharged. Users described above shall submit the
information set forth below:
(1) Identifying information. The name and address of the facility,
including the name of the operator and owner.
(2) Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits
held by or for the facility.
(3) Description of operations. A brief description of the nature,
average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications
of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should
include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of
discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes.
(4) Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average
daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from
regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to
allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in Code of
Federal Regulations Title 40, CFR 403.6(e).
(5) Measurement of pollutants.
(a) The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process.
(b) The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature of
the process wastewater, concentration and mass where
required by the standard. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and
long-term average concentrations or mass where required
must be included in the report. The sample shall be
representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in
accordance with procedures set out in Article VII, § 158-46, of
this chapter.
(6) Certification. A statement reviewed by the user's authorized
representative and certified by a qualified professional indicating
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if
not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and
additional pretreatment are required to meet the pretreatment
standards and requirements.
(7) Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and O&M are
required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule
by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and
O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than
the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment
standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this subsection must
meet the requirements set out in Code of Federal Regulations Title
40, CFR 403.12(b)(7).
§ 158-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-60
1:131
§ 158-61. Slug discharge notification.
All industrial users shall notify the Town immediately of all unapproved
discharges to the wastewater treatment facilities, including any slug
loadings as defined in Article III, § 158-6. Within five days of the unapproved
discharge, the industrial user shall provide the Town with a written report
fully describing the unapproved discharge and the measures taken to avoid
recurrence of the unapproved discharge.
§ 158-62. Reports of potential problems.
§ 158-63. Notification of discharge of hazardous waste.
(8) Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be
signed and certified in accordance with Article VIII, § 158-56E, of
this chapter.
A. In the case of any discharge, including but not limited to accidental
discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a
noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load, which may cause
potential problems for the POTW (including a violation of the prohibited
discharge standards in Article VII, § 158-38B of this chapter), it is the
responsibility of the industrial user to immediately telephone and notify
the Town of the incident. This notification shall include the location of
discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and
corrective actions taken by the industrial user.
B. Within five days following such discharge, the industrial user shall,
unless waived by the Town, submit a detailed written report describing
the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the
industrial user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification
shall not relieve the industrial user of any expense, loss, damage, or
other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the
POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property,
nor shall such notification relieve the industrial user of any fines, civil
penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this chapter.
C. Failure to notify the Town of potential problem discharges shall be
deemed a separate violation of this chapter.
D. A notice shall be permanently posted on the industrial user's bulletin
board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the
event of a discharge described in Subsection A above. Employers shall
ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a discharge to
occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure.
A. In accordance with New Hampshire's Code of Administrative Rules,
Env-Wq 305.06, Prohibited Wastes, hazardous wastes are prohibited
from discharge to the sewer system.
§ 158-60 MERRIMACK CODE § 158-63
1:132
§ 158-64. Imminent endangerment.
The Town may, after informal notice to the industrial user discharging
wastewater to the public sewer, immediately halt or prevent any such
discharge reasonably appearing to present an imminent endangerment to
the health and welfare of person or any discharge presenting, or which
may present, an endangerment to the environment or which threatens
to interfere with operation of the public sewer or wastewater treatment
facilities. Actions which may be taken by the Town in response to violations
of this chapter include ex parte judicial injunctive relief, entry on private
property to halt such discharge, blockage of a public sewer to halt such
discharge, or demand of specific action by the industry.
§ 158-65. Monitoring and surveillance.
The Town shall, as necessary, sample and analyze the wastewater
discharges of contributing industrial users and conduct surveillance and
inspection activities to identify, independently of information supplied by
such industrial users, occasional and continuing noncompliance with
industrial pretreatment standards. All industries discharging to the Town
system shall allow unrestricted access to Town, New Hampshire
Department of Environmental Services (NHDES), and EPA personnel for
the purposes of investigating and sampling discharges from the industrial
users. Each industrial user will be billed directly for costs incurred for
analysis of its wastewater.
§ 158-66. Investigations.
The Town shall investigate instances of noncompliance with industrial
pretreatment standards and requirements.
§ 158-67. Public information.
Information and data submitted to the Town under this article relating
to wastewater discharge characteristics shall be available to the public
without restriction. Other such information shall be available to the public
at least to the extent provided by 40 CFR 2.302.
B. Facilities may obtain a permit from the DES, Hazardous Waste
Management Bureau, for an elementary neutralization system in
accordance with New Hampshire Code of Administrative Rules, Env-
Hw 304.04, Limited Permits. These systems neutralize the waste which
may be discharged to the Town between a pH of 5.0 and 9.5 per Town of
Merrimack Code, Chapter § 158-38B(3). [NOTE: Per § 158-38B(3), any
waters or wastes having pH lower than 5.0 or higher than 9.5 or having
any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment, and personnel of the wastewater works are
specifically prohibited from discharge.] All industrial users shall
provide a copy of the limit permit within five business days of receipt.
§ 158-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-68
1:133
§ 158-68. Public participation.
The Town shall comply with the public participation requirements of 40
CFR Part 25 in the enforcement of industrial pretreatment standards and
requirements. A list of significant violators shall be published in the local
daily newspaper at least annually.
§ 158-69. Confidential information.
Information and data on an industrial user obtained from reports, surveys,
wastewater discharge applications, wastewater discharge permits, and
monitoring programs, and from Town inspection and sampling activities,
shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the industrial
user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the Town, that the release of such information would divulge information,
processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets
under applicable state law. When requested and demonstrated by the
industrial user furnishing a report that such information should be held
confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or
secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public
but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental
agencies for uses related to the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) program or pretreatment program and in enforcement
proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater
constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40
CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be
available to the public without restriction.
§ 158-68 MERRIMACK CODE § 158-69
1:134
ARTICLE IX
Powers and Authority of Inspectors
§ 158-70. Right of entry.
The Town or other duly authorized employees and agents of the Town
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter
all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, inspection and copying of records and testing pertinent to
discharge to the wastewater facilities, in accordance with the provision of
this chapter.
§ 158-71. Information regarding industrial processes.
The Town or other duly authorized employees and agents are authorized
to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a bearing
on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater collection system.
The industrial user may request that the information in question not be
made available to the public if it can establish that revelation to the public
might result in an advantage to competitors. [The information in question
shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for
uses related to this chapter, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) permit, or the pretreatment program.] The burden of proof
that information should be held confidential rests with the industrial user.
However, information about wastewater discharged by the industrial user
(flow, constituents, concentrations and characteristics) shall be available to
the public without restriction.
§ 158-72. Owner to be held harmless.
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in
§ 158-70, duly authorized employees of the Town shall observe all safety
rules applicable to the premises, and the owner(s) shall be held harmless
for injury or death to the Town employees, and the Town shall indemnify
the owner(s) against loss or damage to its property by Town employees and
against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage
asserted against the owner(s) and growing out of the gauging and sampling
operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the
owner(s) to maintain safe conditions as required in Article VII, § 158-44.
§ 158-73. Entry on easements.
Duly authorized employees and agents of the Town bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the Town holds a duly negotiated easement for
the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater
facilities lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any,
on said easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly
negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
§ 158-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-73
1:135

ARTICLE X
Charges for Sewer Service
§ 158-74. Connection charges.
The owner(s) of existing houses, buildings, or other properties used for
human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated
within the Town and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which
a public sewer has been installed shall be required to connect to the Town
sewer and shall be required to pay to the Town a connection charge,
provided that said building or its existing individual on-site sanitary disposal
system is within 200 feet of said public sewer. In cases where the building
is beyond 200 feet of said public sewer, the owner(s) shall pay to the
Town a connection charge when, and if, such structure or its individual onsite
sanitary disposal system is connected to the public sewer system. The
amounts of the connection charges shall be established by the Town Council
from time to time.
§ 158-75. Sewer user charges.
Each user connected to the sewerage system shall pay a sewer user charge
(sewer rental charge), unless the property owner has received a waiver
per Article IV, § 158-11B, of this chapter. The sewer user charge shall be
as established by the Town Council from time to time to cover the annual
operating, maintenance and capital expenses of the municipal sewerage
system. The normal sewer user charges shall be based on water use
wherever possible. If records of metered use are not available or do not
properly reflect the quantity of waste discharged, the sewer user charge
shall be based upon estimated water use or an actual measurement of the
volume of waste discharged into the sewerage system. Sewer surcharges
shall be levied by the Public Works Department/Wastewater Division. The
surcharge shall be based on total monthly flow and a flow-weighted monthly
average for biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) and total suspended solids
(TSS) to users whose waste characteristics are above normal strength
[biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) 250 mg/l; total suspended solids (TSS)
300 mg/l], unless a special agreement as stated in Article VII, § 158-47, has
been approved and granted by the Town.
§ 158-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-75
1:137

ARTICLE XI
User Fees
§ 158-76. Schedule of payment.
All affected property owners will be charged customary sewer user fees
(sewer rental charge) commencing 180 days after notice that the public
sewer is available to them or upon connection to the public sewer,
whichever occurs earlier. Any prior notice, including the first sewer billing
from the Public Works Department/Wastewater Division, given to property
owners shall be used in the calculation of the one-hundred-eighty-day notice
requirement, unless the property owner has received a waiver per Article
IV, § 158-11B, of this chapter.
§ 158-77. Payment not to remove obligation to connect.
Payment of the sewer user fee will not relieve a property owner of his
obligation to connect to the public sewer as required by this chapter.
§ 158-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-77
1:139

ARTICLE XII
Conflict of Ordinances
§ 158-78. Most restrictive requirements to govern.
When, in any specific case, different provisions of this chapter shall conflict
with other ordinances or state or federal laws, the most restrictive
requirements shall govern.
§ 158-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-78
1:141

ARTICLE XIII
Violations and Enforcement
§ 158-79. Continuing violations.
Any person, firm, partnership or corporation found to be violating, or in
violation of, any provision of this chapter may be served by the Town of
Merrimack with a written notice stating the nature of the violation as
determined by the Town, for the satisfactory correction thereof. Followup
actions for continuing or reoccurring violations will be taken within
60 days of the initial enforcement response. For all continuing violations,
the response will include a compliance schedule. Additional enforcement
responses available to the Town are consent orders, show-cause hearing,
compliance order, cease-and-desist order, administrative fines, and civil or
criminal prosecution.
§ 158-80. Notice to Department of Environmental Services.
In accordance with RSA 149-I:6, the Public Works Department/Wastewater
Division, Town Manager or duly authorized agent shall give notice of the
alleged violation to the New Hampshire Department of Environmental
Services (NHDES) within 10 days of commencement of any action under
this article.
§ 158-81. Responsibility for enforcement.
The Town Council or its agent shall be responsible for the enforcement of
this chapter.
§ 158-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-81
1:143

ARTICLE XIV
Administrative Actions and Fines
§ 158-82. Notice of violation.
Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter may be served
by the Town with written notice stating the nature of the violation and
providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The
offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently
cease all violations. The Town may, after informal notice to the person
discharging wastewater to the POTW, immediately halt or prevent any such
discharge reasonably appearing to present an imminent endangerment to
the health and welfare of the public or any discharge presenting, or which
may present, an endangerment to the environment or which threatens to
interfere with the operation of the public sewer or wastewater treatment
facilities. Actions which may be taken by the Town in response to violations
of this chapter include ex parte judicial injunctive relief, entry on private
property to halt such discharge, blockage of a public sewer to halt such
discharge, or demand of specific action by the person.
§ 158-83. Violations and penalties.
Any person found to be violating any provisions of this chapter may be
fined in the amount not to exceed $10,000 per day of such violation.
Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a
separate offense. In addition civil and criminal penalties, and injunctive
relief, for noncompliance with pretreatment conditions by industrial users
may consist of a fine of up to $10,000 per day of such violations, or by
imprisonment, or both. The permittee may also be subject to additional
enforcement actions under state and/or federal law.
§ 158-84. Enforcement response guide.
Violations of this chapter shall be enforced as outlined in the Enforcement
Response Guide (Attachment A).6 As required, the Enforcement Response
Guide may be revised in accordance with EPA or New Hampshire
Department of Environmental Services (NHDES) regulation modification or
guidance policy.
6. Editor's Note: Said attachment is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 158-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-84
1:145

ARTICLE XV
Liability
§ 158-85. Liability for expense, loss or damage.
Any person, firm, partnership or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this chapter shall become liable to the Town of Merrimack for any
expense, loss, or damage occasioned by the Town by reason of such
violation, including reasonable attorneys' fees and costs.
§ 158-86. Public participation.
The Town, pursuant to Code of Federal Regulations Title 40, CFR
403.8(f)(2)(viii), shall comply with the public participation requirements of
Code of Federal Regulations Title 40 CFR Part 25, including provision for at
least annually providing public notification of industrial users which, during
the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance (SNC) with
applicable pretreatment standards or other pretreatment requirements. For
the purpose of this section, a significant noncompliance violation (SNC) is
described in Article VII, § 158-39M.
§ 158-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-86
1:147

ARTICLE XVI
Date of Enactment
§ 158-87. When effective.
This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
approval, recording and publication as provided by law.
§ 158-87 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-87
1:149
Chapter 163
SOLID WASTE FACILITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 137.
§ 163-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
ATTENDANTS — Those persons employed by the Town of Merrimack at the
Solid Waste Facility who shall have the authority to enforce the terms of
this chapter and require compliance with any other rules and regulations
pertaining to the Solid Waste Facility.
BULKY WASTE — Includes, but not by way of limitation, discarded large
and small household appliances, furniture, carpets, mattresses, and white
goods.
CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS and DEMOLITION WASTE — Waste generated
from construction, renovation, or demolition activities which may contain
bulky, heavy materials, including steel, wood, roofing shingles, gypsum,
metals and plastics. Construction debris and demolition waste also includes
building components such as doors, windows, and plumbing fixtures.
DISPOSAL — The management of solid waste that is not salvaged or
recycled, in order to facilitate the final placement of the material.
FACILITY — The Town of Merrimack Solid Waste Facility situated in the
Town of Merrimack on Fearon Road.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Waste as defined by RSA 147-A:2, VII, as amended.
HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE — Hazardous waste generated from
noncommercial usage by residents in their household.
HOUSEHOLD SOLID WASTE — That solid waste generated solely by a
residential household.
INFECTIOUS WASTE — Any waste which, because of its infectious nature,
may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an
increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness, or pose a
substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment
when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise
managed.
MIXED COMMERCIAL LOADS — Any load of solid waste containing a
mixture of metal, bulky waste, demolition debris and building materials or
other solid waste which, in the opinion of the facility attendants, requires
separation before disposal at the facility.
§ 158-87 MERRIMACK CODE § 163-1
1:150
PUTRESCIBLE — Capable of decaying or rotting.
RECYCLING — The collection, storage, processing and redistribution of
separated solid waste so as to return material to the marketplace.
SOLID WASTE — Any matter consisting of putrescible material, refuse and
other discarded or abandoned material. It includes solid, liquid, semisolid or
contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining
and agricultural operations and from community activities. For the purposes
of this chapter, it does not include hazardous waste or infectious waste as
defined in this chapter, solid or dissolved materials and irrigation return
flows, septage or sludge as defined at RSA 485-A:2, IX-a and XI-a, or
municipal and industrial discharges which are point sources subject to
permits under Section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as
amended, or source special nuclear or byproduct material as defined by the
Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended.
TIPPING FEE — Costs associated with the management and disposal of the
Town's solid waste.
TRANSFER STATION — A site or area designated by the Director of Public
Works, within the Town, which accepts waste generated within the borders
of the Town and temporarily stored for transportation by the Town to a
permanent disposal facility.
§ 163-2. Purpose.
The Merrimack Solid Waste Facility is operated solely for the disposal of
authorized solid waste generated within the geographic limits of the Town
of Merrimack as required by RSA 149-M, as amended. Accordingly, these
regulations are intended to:
§ 163-3. Use regulations.
The following shall apply to all persons, parties, companies and
corporations using the Merrimack Solid Waste Facility:
A. Prevent unauthorized entrance and use of the facility.
B. Prohibit the deposit of illegal and unacceptable waste.
C. Control the disposal of authorized solid waste to facilitate compliance
with operating standards, including but not limited to facility operation,
disposal and improvement of efficiency to maximize the life of the
facility.
D. Establish charges (fees) for the use of the facility.
E. Encourage the recycling of materials brought into the facility.
A. Entrance to the facility shall be by permit and disposal shall be only
during normal operating hours.
§ 163-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-3
1:151
§ 163-4. Fees.
B. Stumps, lumber, brush as well as construction debris and demolition
waste generated within the Town may be deposited in any legally
operated landfill which is under agreement with the Town to accept
such solid waste subject to the landfill owner's regulations and fees.
Should the Town not have such an agreement, stumps, lumber, brush
and construction debris and demolition waste materials may be
deposited at designated locations in the Town facility subject to § 163-4
of this chapter.
C. Bulky metals and metal scraps hauled by a commercial carrier will not
be accepted at the facility. Such metals should be taken directly to
commercial scrap dealers.
D. The Town reserves the right to reject any material which it considers to
be detrimental to the facility operation or which would require special
handling for disposal procedures.
E. Prohibited items include but are not limited to: vehicle parts, vehicle
bodies, mounted tires, fuel tanks, fuel cylinders, drums, home-heating
oil tanks, liquids (except household motor oil), hazardous waste,
nuclear waste, septage, concrete, rocks, ledge, dirt, trees, logs and
stumps exceeding five inches in diameter, infectious waste or sharps,
pool chemicals, hot ashes or any other material capable of causing
ignition or spontaneous combustion and other wastes not permitted by
state regulation.
F. All refuse must be deposited in the appropriate designated area, in
accordance with the instructions of the landfill attendants. Mixed
commercial loads are not permitted.
G. Scavenging (picking) is prohibited. The Town may make items available
to the general public at the facility, such as lumber and wood chips.
H. The Solid Waste attendants may prohibit the deposit of any material or
refuse which they deem to be in violation of these regulations. This
decision may be appealed through written notice to the Director,
Department of Public Works.
A. Household solid waste generated within the geographic limits of the
Town, but excluding bulky metals and metal scraps in excess of 1,000
pounds, vehicle parts, vehicle bodies, hazardous, nuclear and other
illegal or unacceptable materials, may be deposited at the facility free
of charge, provided that:
(1) Refuse is hauled in a private (not for hire) vehicle, having a net
legal load limit of 1,000 pounds or less;
(2) Refuse is properly separated and deposited in designated areas;
and
§ 163-3 MERRIMACK CODE § 163-4
1:152
(3) A current Transfer Station decal, available from the Town Clerk,
the Public Works Administration Office, or at the Transfer Station,
is displayed conspicuously on the driver's side lower interior
windshield to be effective July 1, 2007.
B. All commercial, industrial and agricultural uses and operations in the
Town of Merrimack shall pay a fee per ton of solid waste to dispose of
solid waste at the facility, as established by the Town Council.
C. The Town Council shall establish a list of household solid waste items
that will be accepted by the Town upon the payment of a disposal fee.
The list of items and/or disposal fees for the listed items shall be
established and/or modified by the Town Council after a public hearing
at a regular meeting of the Town Council, and they shall publish a
notice of any fee increase in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Town at least 30 days prior to the implementation of any new or
amended fee schedule.
D. The Town Council of the Town of Merrimack shall have the authority to
revise the fees charged commercial customers per ton, per trip, or by
such other means they should deem fit, including the authority to
charge and impose fees for the disposal of solid waste requiring special
handling. Before the adoption of any such revised fee schedule or
before the imposition of fee collection for the special handling of certain
materials, the Council shall hold a public hearing, and they shall publish
a notice of any fee increase in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Town at least 30 days prior to the implementation of any increase or
implementation of a new fee schedule for the special handling of certain
materials.
E. Tipping fees charged for household refuse generated in Merrimack and
brought in by commercial haulers shall be the same irrespective of
origin within the Town.
F. The Town Council may set and adjust disposal fees for the following
items:
(1) Passenger tires.
(2) Truck tires.
(3) Off-road tractor tires.
(4) Propane tanks (20-30#).
(5) Refrigerators.
(6) Air conditioners.
(7) Electronic equipment, to include TVs, VCRs, DVD Players, CD
Players, computers, monitors, microwave ovens and any other
items that contain electronic components.
§ 163-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-5
1:153
§ 163-5. Amendments by and appeals to Town Council.
§ 163-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall pay
a civil fine of not more than $500 for each offense. Any penalties assessed
shall enure to such uses as the Town of Merrimack may direct, pursuant to
RSA 31:39-c, as amended.
Chapter 167
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Waterlines — See Ch. 81. Sewer use — See Ch. 158.
§ 167-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect water quality in the Town of
Merrimack (Town).
A. The Merrimack Town Council shall have the authority to set and change
the operating days and hours of the Merrimack Solid Waste Facility.
B. The Merrimack Town Council shall have the authority to amend the
operational procedures and policies of the Merrimack Solid Waste
Facility where the Town is required or ordered to comply with newly
promulgated regulations and laws, or court orders, issued by the state
and federal government. Any such amendments shall be later voted
upon and ratified by subsequent Town Meeting.
C. The Merrimack Town Manager shall hear all appeals concerning the
interpretation and application of this chapter. Any such appeals from
orders or directives issued by the facility attendants or the Director of
Public Works shall be presented to the Town Manager within 30 days
from the date of the order or directive.
D. Before acting upon any amendment to the operational procedures of
the facility or before setting or adopting the operating days and hours
of the facility, the Merrimack Town Council shall hold a public hearing,
and they shall publish a notice of any proposed new operational policies
or hours of operation in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town
at least 30 days prior to the implementation of any new operational
procedures or new operating hours.
§ 163-5 MERRIMACK CODE § 167-2
1:154
§ 167-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — As set forth in the New
Hampshire Stormwater Manual, a proven or accepted structural,
nonstructural or vegetative measure which reduces the quantity or
improves the quality of stormwater runoff.
DISTURBANCE — Any construction, land altering or grading activities,
other than for agricultural practices.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA) — Federal agency
responsible for implementing the Clean Water Act.
EROSION — Detachment or movement of soil or rock fragments by water,
wind or ice.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) —
The water quality program, as part of the Clean Water Act, implemented
by the EPA to control the discharge of pollutants into surface waters of the
United States.
NEW HAMPSHIRE STORMWATER MANUAL — Reference guide prepared
by the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services to manage
stormwater, which, unless expressly exempted by the Town, shall include
any and all amendments adopted subsequent to the enactment of these
standards.
PROJECT AREA — Disturbed area plus any area with associated off-site
improvements.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — Entity responsible for submitting a SWMP such
as the owner, developer, applicant or owner's legally designated
representative.
RUNOFF — Water that is not absorbed, evaporated or otherwise stored
within the contributing drainage area.
SEDIMENT — Mineral or organic matter transported or deposited by water
or air.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN (SWMP) — A plan, required by the
Town, which manages stormwater runoff through site design, pollutant
source controls, structural BMPs and construction phase practices.
§ 167-3. Applicability.
Prior to disturbance, the responsible party shall submit a SWMP to the
Community Development Department (CDD) for any tract(s) of land that
results in a total disturbance of 20,000 or more square feet of land.
§ 167-4. SWMP requirements.
A. Construction stormwater management.
§ 167-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-4
1:155
(1) Design standards. Design of erosion and sediment control BMPs
shall be in accordance with, at a minimum, the design guidance set
forth in the New Hampshire Stormwater Manual, which are hereby
incorporated by reference.
(2) Pre-construction meeting. Responsible party and its engineer or
technical representative shall attend a mandatory pre-construction
meeting with the CDD and the Department of Public Works (DPW)
at least two weeks prior to commencement of disturbance. Two
copies of the SWMP shall be provided at that time. All documents
shall bear the seal and signature of a New Hampshire registered
professional engineer (PE).
(3) Responsibility. The responsible party shall install, inspect, report,
operate and maintain all stormwater management and erosion
control measures required by these standards.
(4) Bonding. A bond or other security shall be provided in an amount,
with surety conditions satisfactory to CDD and DPW, for
construction and installation of control measures.
(5) Site development commencement. Development shall not
commence before the SWMP receives approval from CDD and DPW
and BMPs are installed in accordance with the approved SWMP.
(6) Reporting. A log and report must be submitted to CDD each week
and within 24 hours of any storm event with greater than 0.5 inches
of rainfall. Reports shall detail all inspections, actions taken per the
SWMP, dates of action and follow-up action required.
B. Post-construction stormwater management.
(1) Design standards. Design of post-construction stormwater
management shall be in accordance with, at a minimum, the design
guidance set forth in the New Hampshire Stormwater Manual,
which are hereby incorporated by reference.
(2) Post-construction meeting. The responsible party and its engineer
or technical representative shall attend a post-construction
meeting with CDD and DPW.
(3) Responsibility. The responsible party shall install, inspect, report,
operate and maintain any post-construction stormwater
management and erosion control measures.
(4) Bond release requirements.
(a) Ongoing inspection and operational maintenance
requirements for water quality measures required by the
SWMP shall be a condition of site plan approval or, in the case
of other development not subject to site plan approval,
included as a covenant in the underlying deed(s).
§ 167-4 MERRIMACK CODE § 167-4
1:156
§ 167-5. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
The purpose of this section is to enact locally, administrative and
enforcement procedures set forth in RSA Title LXIV, specifically RSA
676:15, 17, 17-a and 17-b, and to authorize penalties and remedies for
enforcement of the provisions of these standards. Any violation of these
standards shall be subject to enforcement by either the Code Enforcement
Officer or the Planning and Zoning Administrator or their designated agent.
§ 167-6. Conflicts of law.
Nothing contained herein, or any SWMP granted pursuant hereto, shall
be construed to exempt any responsible party from complying with all
applicable state or federal laws/regulations. In the event of conflicting
requirements, the stricter standard shall apply.
§ 167-7. Waivers.
A waiver of these standards, in whole or in part, may be granted when the
strict application of these standards would impose unnecessary hardship
because of the unique characteristics of the land including, but not limited
to, the size, character, location, nature of use, or other unspecified
conditions of the project area. Waivers shall only be granted with approval
of both CDD and DPW.
§ 167-8. SWMP validity.
All construction contemplated by the SWMP shall be completed within a
period of four years from the date of approval.
(b) Attendance by the responsible party at a post-construction
meeting.
(c) As-built plans bearing the seal and signature of a New
Hampshire registered PE.
(d) Approval of the bond release by both CDD and DPW.
(5) Reporting. Each SWMP shall require annual site inspections by the
responsible party that shall be documented and, at a minimum,
include review of stormwater flow paths, accumulation of any
sediment, condition of contaminant control devices, stormwater
quality observations, corrective actions and time frames. All
records of the inspections shall be submitted to CDD.
§ 167-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-8
1:157
Chapter 169
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency lanes — See Ch. 123. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 183.
§ 169-1. Permit required for excavation of public places.
No person shall break or excavate the ground in any street, road, sidewalk,
town-owned land or common in the Town or construct/reconstruct/pave/
repave any driveway connecting to a public street or erect any staging for
building or deposit any building materials thereon or remove any building
through any street or public place without first having received a written
permit from the Director of Public Works or designee and complying in all
respects with the conditions of said permit.
§ 169-2. Granting permit for excavation or obstruction.
The Director of Public Works or his designated representative may grant a
permit, in writing, to any person for building or removing any building or
for any other lawful purpose to excavate, obstruct or encumber so much
of any street, road, sidewalk or other public place in the Town as may
be necessary for such purpose and on such terms as the Director or his
designated representatives shall deem safe and proper.
§ 169-3. Safety around and repair of excavation or obstruction.
Whenever any street, road, sidewalk or other public place in the Town shall,
under permit granted in the previous section, be excavated, obstructed,
encumbered or otherwise rendered unsafe or inconvenient for travelers, the
permittee shall erect and at all times maintain a suitable railing around
the sections or parts of said area so excavated and shall keep two or
more lighted fixtures attached thereto or in some proper manner. Within
such reasonable time as the Director of Public Works or his designated
representative shall direct, said permittee shall amend and repair such
street, road, sidewalk or other public place to the acceptance of the Director
or his designated representative.
§ 169-4. Snow obstruction on streets.
No person shall put or place or cause to be put or placed any snow or ice
upon the surface of the traveled portion of any street, nor shall such snow or
ice be put or placed on a street so as to block sidewalks or hydrants. Where
snow is pushed across the traveled surface of a street for the purpose of
snow removal from land adjoining said street it must be pushed from the
traveled way so as not to block the street, and any remaining on the surface
of the traveled portion of the street must be cleaned up, immediately.
§ 167-8 MERRIMACK CODE § 169-5
1:158
§ 169-5. Rubbish shall not be thrown on streets, sidewalks, or
within the public right-of-way.
No person shall put, or place, or cause to be put or placed, in or on
any street, lane, alley, sidewalk, or other public place within the Town,
any house dirt, ashes, garbage, shreds, shavings, brush, or other rubbish,
except in such place and in such manner as the Director of Public Works
may prescribe. In an emergency situation, the Director of Public Works may
identify locations in public ways for the disposal of debris.
§ 169-6. Obstructions shall not be placed on sidewalks.
No person shall unnecessarily place any obstruction on any sidewalks or
crosswalks on any street, lane or alley within the Town. No person shall
encumber the street or sidewalk with any boxes, shelves, stands,
merchandise, or other items.
§ 169-7. Violations and penalties.
If any person shall violate the terms of this chapter, he shall be fined $100.
Each calendar day of violation shall be considered a separate offense.
Chapter 174
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 174, Swimming Pools, adopted by the Board of
Selectmen 6-23-1969, as amended by Town Council 12-3-2009, was
repealed 12-7-2017.]
Chapter 178
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Clerk and Tax Collector — See Ch. 11. Tax title deed properties — See Ch. 66, Art. I.
§ 169-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-7
1:159

ARTICLE I
Elderly Tax Exemptions
[Adopted 3-2-1976 ATM by Art. 10; last amended 12-3-2009 STM by
Art. 2]
§ 178-1. Exemptions established; qualifications.
A. The elderly exemptions from property tax in the Town of Merrimack,
based on assessed value, for qualified taxpayers, are as follows:
(1) For a person 65 years of age up to 75 years: $75,000.
(2) For a person 75 years of age up to 80 years: $100,000.
(3) For a person 80 years of age or older: $125,000.
B. To qualify, the person must have been a New Hampshire resident for at
least three years, own the real estate individually or jointly, or if the real
estate is owned by such person's spouse, they must have been married
for at least five years. In addition, the taxpayer must have a net income
of less than $45,000 or, if married, a joint income of less than $60,000
and own net assets not in excess of $200,000, excluding the value of the
person's residence.
§ 178-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 178-1
1:161

ARTICLE II
Election Not To Collect Resident Tax
[Adopted 11-4-1986]
[The Town has chosen, pursuant to the provisions of RSA 72:1-c, not
to assess, levy and collect a resident tax.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 178-1
1:163

ARTICLE III
Exemption for the Blind
[Adopted 5-13-1986 ATM by Art. 13]
[The Town has adopted the provisions of RSA 72:37 for the
exemption for the blind from property tax. This statute provides
that every inhabitant who is legally blind shall be exempt each year
from the property tax on a residence to the value of $15,000.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 178-1
1:165

ARTICLE IV
Optional Veterans' Credit
[Adopted 5-8-1990 ATM by Art. 22; amended 4-13-2004 ATM by Art.
17; 2007 ATM by Art. 6; 4-10-2018 ATM by Art. 3; 11-21-2019]
The Town has adopted the provisions of RSA 72:28 and 72:28-b for
an optional veterans' property tax credit and an expanded qualifying
war service for veterans seeking the tax credit. The optional
veterans' tax credit is $500 per year. In order to qualify, a veteran
must meet the qualifications contained within RSA 72:28 and
72:28-b.
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 178-1
1:167

ARTICLE V
Optional Property Tax Credit
[Adopted 5-8-1990 ATM by Art. 23; amended 4-13-2004 ATM by Art.
16; 11-21-2019]
[The Town has adopted the provisions of RSA 72:35 for an optional
property tax credit on residential property for a service-connected
total disability. The credit is $4,000 per year. In order to qualify,
a veteran, or his or her spouse, must meet the qualifications
contained within RSA 72:35.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 178-1
1:169

ARTICLE VI
Exemption for the Disabled
[Adopted 4-8-1997 ATM by Art. 29; amended 4-9-2002 ATM by Art.
24; 2007 ATM by Art. 6; 10-26-2017]
[The Town has adopted a property tax exemption for the disabled.
The exemption, based on assessed value, for qualified taxpayers
shall be $75,000. To qualify, the person must have been a New
Hampshire resident for at least five years and own and occupy the
real estate individually or jointly, or if the real estate is owned by
a spouse, they must have been married for at least five years. In
addition, the taxpayer must have a net income of not more than
$50,000 or, if married, a combined income of not more than $67,500
and own net assets not in excess of $200,000, excluding the value of
the person's residence. In order to qualify, the applicant must meet
the qualifications contained in RSA 72:37-b.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 178-1
1:171

ARTICLE VII
Credit for Veterans' Surviving Spouses
[Adopted 4-13-2004 ATM by Art. 18; amended by Town Council
12-3-2009]
[The Town has adopted the provisions of RSA 72:29-a, II, to increase
a surviving spouse's property tax credit for surviving spouses of
veterans who died while on active duty in the Armed Forces of the
United States. The tax credit for a surviving spouse shall be $2,000
per year. In order to qualify, a surviving spouse of a veteran must
meet the qualifications contained within RSA 72:29-a.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 178-1
1:173

ARTICLE VIII
Solar Exemption
[Adopted 11-21-2019]
§ 178-2. Exemption adopted.
A. Pursuant to RSA 72:27-a, the Town of Merrimack has adopted a solar
energy systems real property tax exemption, based on assessed value,
as follows:
(1) "Solar energy system" means a system which utilizes solar energy
to heat or cool the interior of a building or to heat water for use in a
building and which includes one or more collectors and a storage
container. The term "solar energy system" also means a system
which provides electricity for a building by the use of photovoltaic
panels.
(2) Criteria for exemption. The exemption will be given if it follows the
prescribed definition of the solar energy system as described in
Subsection A(1) of this section and all necessary applications and
information have been received from the applicant.
(3) Amount of exemption. The exemption shall equal 100% of the total
assessed value in the solar energy system, up to a maximum of
$25,000.
§ 178-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 178-2
1:175
Chapter 180
TEMPORARY SALES LOCATIONS AND VENDORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 142. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 169.
§ 180-1. License required.
§ 180-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION — Any nonprofit organization, association or
corporation, including any policemen, firemen, veteran, civic, fraternal or
religious organization, organized under the laws of this state and holding
or eligible to receive an Internal Revenue Service nonprofit organization
number.
DISQUALIFYING CRIMINAL CONVICTION — Any felony convictions, any
conviction involving harassment, violence, theft, fraud, loitering, prowling,
or endangering the welfare of a child or incompetent.
HAWKER and PEDDLER — Any person, either principal, agent or employee,
who travels from town to town or from place to place in the same town
selling or bartering, or carrying for sale or barter or exposing therefor, any
goods, wares, or merchandise, as defined in RSA 320:1 and 358-A:1.
ITINERANT VENDOR — Any person, as defined in RSA 321:1 and includes
all persons, as defined by RSA 358-A:1, both principals and agents,
including those persons whose principal place of business is not in this
state who engage in a temporary or transient business in this state, either
in one locality or traveling from place to place, selling goods, wares and
merchandise, from stock or by same for future delivery, and who, for the
purpose of carrying on such business, hire or occupy a temporary place of
business.
LICENSEE — Any vendor, hawker or peddler.
A. All itinerant vendors, hawkers, peddlers, traders, merchants, or other
persons who sell, offer to sell, or take orders for merchandise from
temporary or transient sales locations within the Town of Merrimack or
who go from place to place within the Town for such purposes, as
defined in RSA 31:102-a, RSA 320 and RSA 321, must before engaging
in such activities apply to the Town Council for and receive a license
prior to the sale of or the distribution of items or goods.
B. License application forms shall be available at the office of the Town
Manager, Merrimack, New Hampshire, and the Town of Merrimack
website.
§ 178-2 MERRIMACK CODE § 180-2
1:176
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle used for the displaying, storing or
transporting of articles offered for sale by a vendor which is or would be
required to be licensed and registered by the Department of Motor Vehicles.
STAND — Any table, showcase, bench, rack, pushcart, wagon or any other
wheeled vehicle or device which may be moved without the assistance
of a motor and which is not required to be licensed and registered by
the Department of Motor Vehicles used for the displaying, storing or
transportation of articles offered for sale by a hawker, peddler or vendor.
§ 180-3. License requirements.
A. Before the issuance of a license hereunder, the applicant shall provide
to the Town Council a completed criminal background investigation and
a motor vehicle record provided by the applicant in writing from the
State of New Hampshire and the applicant's state of residence.
B. License requirement exceptions. The following shall be exempt from
the licensing requirement of this chapter but shall comply with the
requirements and restrictions of §§ 180-8 through 180-11 and 180-14 of
this chapter:
(1) Any nonprofit organization, community chest, fund or foundation
organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable,
scientific, literary or educational purposes when no part of the
entity's earnings benefit any private shareholder or individual.
(2) Any person conducting business in any industry or association
trade show.
(3) An itinerant vendor who operates a permanent business in this
state, occupies temporary premises, and prominently displays the
permanent business' name and permanent address while business
is conducted from the temporary premises.
C. License requirement exemptions. The articles of this chapter shall
apply to all vendors, hawkers, peddlers and transients doing business
or conducting sales within the Town of Merrimack, except the
following:
(1) The sale of balloons, popcorn or other souvenirs and food products
at a parade, as long as the parade has been licensed in accordance
with RSA 286:2.
(2) Any person selling, at or on his or her own property or residence,
the product of his or her own labor, the labor of his or her family or
the product of his or her own farm or the one he or she tills.
(3) Any person conducting the sales of personal household goods at or
on his or her own property or residence, or property of others with
the property owner's permission. Written permission shall be
available for display upon request at all times.
§ 180-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-3
1:177
§ 180-4. Canvassing hours restricted.
No door to door canvassing shall occur from dusk to 9:00 a.m.
§ 180-5. Application for license; prerequisites.
§ 180-6. Application for license; information required.
The license required by this chapter shall be issued by the Town Council
or their designee in accordance with the Town Charter, Article V. The
application for the peddler/vendor/hawker license shall include the
following:
(4) Any vendor or person participating in a farmer's market affiliated
with the Town of Merrimack Agricultural Commission.
A. The applicant for a license hereunder must first obtain and provide a
copy of a current and valid hawkers, peddlers and vendors license
issued by the New Hampshire Secretary of State prior to applying for a
license from the Town of Merrimack.
B. Any hawker, peddler or vendor shall register with the Merrimack Police
Department prior to commencing sale activity. Information required
shall include the name, date of birth and photo identification.
C. The applicant shall provide a copy of their approved itinerant vendor
license to the Merrimack Police Department.
A. The name and home and business address of the applicant and the
name and address of the owner, if other than the applicant, of the
vending business, stand or motor vehicle to be used in the operation of
the vending business.
B. A description of the type of food, beverage or merchandise to be sold
and, in the case of products of farm or orchard, whether produced or
grown by the applicant.
C. A description of the proposed location of the vending business, except
that vendors from motor vehicles shall describe the general area.
D. A description and photograph of any stand or motor vehicle to be used
in the operation of the business, including the license and registration
number of any motor vehicle used in the operation of the business.
E. A certificate of inspection as required by § 180-10.
F. Written consent of the property owner if the business activity is to be
conducted on private property, any political subdivision property,
agency or division of the State of New Hampshire or the federal
government.
G. Proof of an in-force insurance policy issued by an insurance company
licensed to do business in the State of New Hampshire protecting the
§ 180-3 MERRIMACK CODE § 180-6
1:178
§ 180-7. Expiration of license; fees; nontransferability.
§ 180-8. Prohibited conduct.
licensee and the Town from all claims for damages to property and
bodily injury, including death, which may arise from operations under
or in connection with the license shall be required for any vending
business conducted within a public right-of-way or on any other Townowned
property. Such insurance shall name as additional insured the
Town and shall provide that the policy shall not terminate or be
canceled prior to the expiration date with 10 days advance written
notice to the Town. Such policy shall provide coverage in the amount of
not less than $100,000 for personal injury and property damage.
H. A completed criminal background investigation dated within the last six
months provided by the applicant in writing from the State of New
Hampshire and the applicant's state of residence. Applicants who are
engaged in their peddler/vendor/hawker activities at an event, with
approval from the event sponsor, and when said event has obtained all
other required approvals from the state and the Town, are exempt from
this criminal background check requirement.
I. A completed motor vehicle record dated within the last six months
provided by the applicant in writing from the State of New Hampshire
and the applicant's state of residence for those utilizing a motor vehicle
for vending (for example: ice cream trucks or catering trucks).
A. One-day license: Each license shall be valid for only the calendar day
for which the license is issued. The fee for such a license shall be $50.
B. One-week license: Each license shall be issued for a specific time period
from two to up to seven consecutive days. The expiration date shall
appear on the approved license. The fee for such license shall be $100.
C. Annual license: Each license shall expire one year from the date of
approval unless an earlier expiration date was established. The fee for
such a license shall be $250 annually per cart, stand or motor vehicle
from which goods are sold.
D. Licenses are not transferable and shall be issued only for a specific cart,
stand or vehicle to be located at a specific location. An additional
license shall be required for each additional cart, stand or vehicle or for
any change in the location of the vending business.
A. No vendor or peddler shall:
(1) Vend within 500 feet of the grounds of any elementary or secondary
school between 1/2 hour prior to the start of the school day and 1/2
hour after dismissal at the end of the school day.
§ 180-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-8
1:179
(2) Store, park or leave any stand overnight on any street or sidewalk
or park any motor vehicle other than in a lawful parking place, in
conformance with the Town and state parking regulations.
(3) Sell food or beverage for immediate consumption unless he has
available for public use his or her own litter receptacle which is
available for his or her patrons' use.
(4) Leave any location without first picking up, removing and disposing
of all trash or refuse remaining from the sales made by the
licensee.
(5) Allow any items relating to the operation of the vending business to
be placed anywhere other than in, on or under the stand or motor
vehicle or outside of the approved vending area.
(6) Set up, maintain or permit the use of any table, crate, carton, rack,
sign or any other device to increase the selling or display capacity
of his or her stand or motor vehicle where such items have not been
described in his or her application or may be in violation of any
other Town ordinance or regulations.
(7) Solicit or conduct business with persons in motor vehicles within
the traveled way.
(8) Sell or distribute anything other than what is described and
permitted in their license or application.
(9) Sound or permit the sounding of any device which produces a loud
and/or raucous noise or use or operate any loud speaker, public
address system, radio sound amplifier or similar device to attract
the attention of the public, with the exception of ice cream trucks,
while moving.
(10) Sell, offer or solicit for sale, any goods or merchandise on any
Town-owned property unless expressly approved by the Town
Council.
(11) Vend within 50 feet of any building or storefront housing a business
selling the same or similar food, merchandise, or project except
during special one-day events or while such business is closed.
(12) Vend within 20 feet of an entranceway to any building.
(13) Vend within 30 feet of any driveway entrance to a police or fire
station or within 10 feet of any other driveway entrance.
(14) Vend within 20 feet of a crosswalk at any intersection.
(15) Allow the stand or any other item relating to the operation of the
vending business to lean against or hang from any building or other
structure.
B. No vendor/peddler vending from a motor vehicle shall:
§ 180-8 MERRIMACK CODE § 180-8
1:180
§ 180-9. Health and sanitation requirements for food and beverage
vending.
Peddlers and vendors processing food or beverages for sale shall comply
with the inspection provisions and standards of the health regulations
relative to the licensing of food service establishments adopted by the Town
Council or their designee in accordance with RSA 147:1. The equipment
used in vending such food and beverages shall be inspected by the Health
Official or their designee upon application for a license and receive a
certificate of inspection upon compliance with this section from the Health
Official or their designee.
§ 180-10. Safety requirements.
(1) Conduct his or her business in such a way as would restrict or
interfere with the ingress or egress of the abutting property owner
or tenant or create or become a public nuisance, increase traffic
congestion or delay or constitute a hazard to traffic, life or property
or an obstruction to adequate access to fire, police or sanitation
vehicles.
(2) Stop, stand or park his or her vehicle upon any street for the
purpose of selling or sell on any street under any circumstances
during the hours when parking or stopping or standing has been
prohibited by signs or curb markings or is prohibited by statute or
ordinance.
(3) Stop, stand or park his or her vehicle within 30 feet of the edge of
the traveled way of any intersection. Vehicles vending products
likely to attract children as customers shall park curbside when
stopping to make a sale.
(4) Vend without the insurance coverage specified in § 180-6G.
(5) Leave any motor vehicle or stand unattended.
A. No licensee shall operate under a license issued hereunder without a
fire extinguisher of a type approved by the Fire Chief of the Town of
Merrimack, or his designee, if the licensee utilizes heat generating
equipment.
B. All motor vehicles in or from which food is prepared or sold shall be
inspected by the Police Department or their designee for compliance
with the following requirements prior to the approval of the application
by the Town Council or their designee.
(1) All equipment installed on any exterior part of the vehicle shall be
secured in order to prevent movement during transit and to
prevent detachment in the event of a collision or overturn.
§ 180-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-10
1:181
§ 180-11. Advertising.
No advertising, except the posting of prices, the name of the product and/
or the name and address of the vendor shall be permitted on any stand or
motor vehicle. A sign permit shall be required for any freestanding sign and
for any signage that remains at the site after the vending business' hours of
operation.
§ 180-12. Site plan review.
Planning Board site plan review shall not be required for temporary
peddler/vendor sales on private property, provided that the duration of the
business activity does not exceed 35 days within any ninety-day period and
that:
§ 180-13. Display of licenses.
It shall be required that the individual or individuals who obtain a license, as
provided herein, shall keep the license displayed openly. In the case of sales
being conducted from or upon a vehicle, cart or wagon, such license shall
be displayed openly upon said vehicle, cart or wagon which it is licensing.
§ 180-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this chapter shall
be fined up to but not exceeding $100 for each offense, and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which the
violation occurs or continues.
§ 180-15. Denial, revocation or waiver of license.
(2) All utensils shall be adequately stored to prevent their being hurled
out of the vehicle in the event of a sudden stop, collision or
overturn.
A. The vending business does not occupy any parking spaces, except such
spaces that exceed the minimum number of parking spaces otherwise
required for the site.
B. No required entrances, exits, driveways or fire lanes shall be
obstructed.
A. Denial of license.
(1) The Town Council or designee may deny a license under
circumstances where it is reasonably perceived that the product(s)
sold would be incompatible with the surrounding neighborhood.
(2) Any person/hawker/peddler having his license denied may request
in writing reconsideration by the Town Council.
B. Revocation of license.
§ 180-10 MERRIMACK CODE § 180-15
1:182
§ 180-16. Additional requirements, fees and conditions.
Chapter 181
TRAFFIC AND SPECIAL EVENT MANAGEMENT
§ 181-1. Purpose.
The Merrimack Town Council recognizes that certain planned special
events conducted within the Town of Merrimack may, from time to time,
require action by the Town Council to manage the traffic, parking and
pedestrian circulation associated with such events to ensure the safety/
convenience of the participants, residents and businesses of the Town of
Merrimack. Accordingly, and in response to specific traffic and safety
concerns created by such special events, the Town Council may vote to
enact a traffic and special event management plan as provided for herein.
§ 181-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SPECIAL EVENT — Any planned occurrence which, in the opinion of the
Police Chief and Town Manager, causes or may cause an adverse effect upon
(1) Any licensed peddler who shall be guilty of fraud, cheating or
misrepresentation, whether through himself or through an
employee, while acting as a hawker/peddler in Merrimack, or who
shall sell any good, merchandise, service, or wares other than those
specified in the application for a license shall be deemed guilty of a
violation of this chapter.
(2) Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall have his
license revoked by the Town Council or their designee.
C. Waiver of license.
(1) The Town Council may, at their sole discretion, waive some or all of
this chapter.
A. This chapter, and the requirements imposed hereunder, are in addition
to any requirements, fees and licenses imposed by the State of New
Hampshire in accordance with RSA 320 and RSA 321, where
applicable. All definitions used and referred to in RSA 320 and RSA 321
shall be applicable to the interpretation of this chapter and the laws of
the State of New Hampshire; the more stringent provision of said law
shall apply.
B. Nothing herein shall be construed to require the Town Council to issue
a license that would be in conflict with any contract, permit, approval or
franchise agreement granted to persons or organizations to exclusively
vend food or merchandise from a fixed location.
§ 180-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-2
1:183
public safety and welfare such that adoption of a traffic and special event
management plan is warranted.
§ 181-3. General provisions.
§ 181-4. Emergency exceptions.
After consultation and when deemed necessary by the Police Chief, Fire
Chief, Director of Public Works, and the Town Manager, whether during
emergency conditions or otherwise, shall temporarily allow for specific
traffic, parking and pedestrian exceptions until such time the Town Council
may be afforded an opportunity to vote on a traffic and special event
management plan if applicable.
§ 181-5. Violations and penalties.
A. In the event the Town Manager, in consultation with the Police Chief,
Fire Chief and Director of Public Works, concludes that an upcoming
special event is likely to create traffic and/or safety concerns, the Town
Manager shall bring forth a traffic and special event management plan
to the Town Council for consideration and approval at any single
regular or special meeting. The proposed traffic and special event
management plan shall include the duration of the plan and a
description of any of the following proposed requirements, restrictions
or actions:
(1) Roads subject to closure or local traffic only.
(2) Restrictions on parking along Town roads.
(3) Required traffic, event or pedestrian police or security details.
(4) Designation of overflow parking to offsite or alternative locations.
(5) Limitations on pedestrian circulation to certain routes or locations.
(6) Location and type of any postings, signalization or signage
required.
(7) Such other actions or restrictions as deemed appropriate and
necessary.
B. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent, restrict or abrogate the
authority of the Town of Merrimack, or any department thereof, to take
any action as may be otherwise permitted or required by local, state or
federal law, land use approval or any specific development agreement.
A. The penalties for violation of any restrictions or condition imposed by
this ordinance or by the associated Traffic and Special Event
Management Plans are as follows:
(1) Parking violations: $25.
§ 181-2 MERRIMACK CODE § 181-5
1:184
Chapter 183
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency lanes — See Ch. 123.
Registration of motor vehicles — See Ch. 139.
Traffic and special event management — See
Ch. 181.
Police Department — See Ch. A198.
(2) Unlawful use of closed roads: $100.
(3) Unlawful use of road closed to local traffic only: $100.
(4) Pedestrian violations: $25.
B. The Merrimack Police Department shall have primary authority to
enforce violations of this chapter and any traffic and special event
management plans adopted pursuant hereto.
§ 181-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-5
1:185

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 183-1. Amendments.
The provisions of this chapter may be amended by ordinance of the Town
Council.
§ 183-2. Repealer.
All prior ordinances, other enactments or parts of such of this Town
regulating traffic and parking are hereby repealed, except that this repeal
shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person
for any act done or committed in violation of any ordinance or enactment
hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of this chapter. This provision
shall not apply to any Code sections or ordinances previously adopted and
which may currently be a part of the Code of the Town of Merrimack.
§ 183-3. Severability.
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or provision
of this chapter shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid, such adjudication shall not affect, impair or invalidate the
remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation to the article,
section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or provision thereof
directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 183-4. Traffic control.
Authorization is hereby conferred upon the Department of Public Works,
Police Department and Fire Department to erect, construct and maintain
the appropriate signs and signals in order to carry out the provisions of
this chapter. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to disobey
the instructions of any traffic sign or signal placed in view in accordance
with this chapter or state law, except upon the direction of any person
authorized to control and regulate traffic, pursuant to RSA 265:3 (Police
Officers), 265:3-a (School Crossing Guards) and 265:3-b (Flag Persons).
§ 183-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-4
1:187

ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 183-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this article shall,
for each violation and upon conviction thereof, pay a fine of not more than
$500.
§ 183-6. Travel restricted on certain streets.
§ 183-7. Through trucking restricted.
§ 183-8. School zone speed limits.
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle in excess of the speeds indicated
in Schedule II, School Zone Speed Limits (§ 183-29), in the locations
indicated at times when the flashing yellow "school zone" signs are in
operation, or as may be otherwise posted.
§ 183-9. Speed limits.
A. Only emergency vehicles shall be allowed to use the access to the F.E.
Everett Turnpike off O'Gara Drive.
B. Only authorized and emergency vehicles are authorized to use
Valleyview Drive between the posted signs indicating "AUTHORIZED
AND EMERGENCY VEHICLES ONLY."
[For the purpose of this chapter, "authorized vehicles" are defined as
vehicles owned by the Town of Merrimack and includes, but is not
limited to, those of the Merrimack Police, Merrimack Fire Rescue and
Public Works Departments. "Emergency vehicles" are defined as such
under RSA 259:28.]
A. Through trucking shall not be permitted on any of the streets and parts
of streets indicated in Schedule I, Through Truck Restrictions
(§ 183-28), during the periods indicated.
B. The term "truck" is defined by RSA 259:115-b: "Truck" shall mean every
motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property.
C. State and local fire apparatus, state and local police vehicles, licensed
ambulances and other motor vehicles, when special permits are
granted by the Town of Merrimack to said motor vehicles, may enter
and operate on any of the streets and highways described in Subsection
A in the performance of their official duties or in accordance with the
terms and conditions of the special permit. Permits required by this
provision shall be issued by the Merrimack Police Department.
§ 183-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-9
1:189
§ 183-10. Stop intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule IV, Stop Intersections (§ 183-31),
are hereby designated as stop intersections.
A. It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle at a speed greater than 30
miles per hour unless otherwise posted. Speed limit signs entering the
Town of Merrimack shall be posted at the following locations:
Name of Street Location
Baboosic Lake Road At the Amherst Town line
Back River Road By the Bedford Town line
Bedford Road At Bedford Town line
Bedford Road At Davis Road
Boston Post Road At the Amherst Town line
Boston Post Road At Milford Road (Rte 101A)
Boston Post Road At the intersection of Seaverns
Bridge Road
Camp Sargent Road At Gull Lane
Craftsman Lane At the Amherst Town line
Daniel Webster Highway (Route 3) Southbound by Bedford Road
Daniel Webster Highway (Route 3) Northbound lane by Greeley
Street
Lawrence Road At the Bedford Town line
Manchester Street At the Nashua Town line
Naticook Road By Pennichuck Square Shopping
Center
Pearson Road At the Bedford Town line
South Baboosic Lake Road At the Amherst Town line
Stowell Road At the Bedford Town line
Stuart Drive By Tinker Road and Thornton
Road
Tinker Road By Thornton Road
Wilson Hill Road By the Amherst Town line
Wire Road By the Bedford Town line
Woodward Road At the Bedford Town line
B. It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle in excess of the speeds
indicated in Schedule III, Speed Limits (§ 183-30), in any of the
locations indicated.
§ 183-9 MERRIMACK CODE § 183-11
1:190
§ 183-11. Yield intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule V, Yield Intersections (§ 183-32),
are hereby designated as yield intersections.
§ 183-12. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the location of
those streets described in Schedule VI, Traffic Control Signals (§ 183-33),
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 183-13. Prohibited turns at intersections.
No person shall make a turn of the kind designated (left, right, all or Uturn)
at any of the locations described in Schedule VII, Prohibited Turns at
Intersections (§ 183-34), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 183-14. One-way streets.
The streets and parts of streets described in Schedule VIII, One-Way Streets
(§ 183-35), are hereby designated as one-way streets.
§ 183-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-14
1:191

ARTICLE III
Parking Restrictions
§ 183-15. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC STREETS AND HIGHWAYS — All ways serviced by public snow
removal equipment and all streets accepted by the Town.
§ 183-16. Removal of vehicles.
In addition to all other penalties, fines or violations imposed under this
article, all vehicles found in violation of this article may be removed by
order of the Police Department. Costs of such removal and of subsequent
storage of removed vehicles shall be paid by the vehicle owners prior to
release of such vehicles to said owners.
§ 183-17. All-night parking in winter.
No vehicle or trailer shall be parked on any public street or highway
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. from November 15 to April
15.
§ 183-18. Impeding snow removal.
No vehicle or trailer shall be parked on any public street or highway
between November 15 and April 15 in such a manner as to impede snow
removal.
§ 183-19. Parking prohibited at all times.
A. No person shall park a vehicle or trailer at any time upon any of the
streets or parts of streets thereof described in Schedule IX, Parking
Prohibited at All Times (§ 183-36), attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
B. Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in
compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic
control device, no person, except a person driving an emergency
vehicle, shall:
(1) Stop, stand or park a vehicle:
(a) On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the
edge or curb of a street.
(b) On a sidewalk.
(c) Within an intersection.
(d) On a crosswalk.
§ 183-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-19
1:193
§ 183-20. Overnight parking.
(e) Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet
of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety
zone.
(f) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction
when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
(g) Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a way or
within a highway tunnel.
(h) On any railroad tracks.
(i) At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
(j) In any parking place, whether on public or private property,
specially designated for the physically handicapped by means
of a sign stating that the space is reserved for the physically
handicapped or displaying the wheelchair symbol as defined in
RSA 275-C:9, 1(a), unless that person has special number
plates, a number plate decal or a tag or card issued pursuant to
RSA 261:86, 261:87 or 261:88.
(k) On any controlled access highway.
(l) In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including
crossovers.
(2) Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except
momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers:
(a) In front of a public or private driveway.
(b) Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
(c) Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection.
(d) Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop
sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway.
(e) Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station, and
on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station
within 75 feet of said entrance when properly posted by a sign.
(f) At any place where official signs prohibit standing.
A. No person shall park any of the following defined vehicles on any street
or highway in the Town of Merrimack for a period of time longer than
30 minutes between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., local time, of
any day, except persons on emergency calls:
(1) Camper: A separate vehicle designed for human habitation and
which can be attached or detached from a pickup truck.
§ 183-19 MERRIMACK CODE § 183-20
1:194
§ 183-21. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this article shall,
for each violation and upon conviction thereof, pay a fine of not more than
$500.
§ 183-22. Registered owners.
Any motor vehicle parked or left in violation of any part of this article
shall be presumed to have been left by the registered owner thereof. Such
presumption shall be prima facie evidence of responsibility for such
violation.
(2) Motor home: A self-contained vehicle, designed for human
habitation, with its own motive power and with a passageway from
the body of the home to the driver's and front passenger's seat.
(3) Trailer: A vehicle without motive power, designed for carrying
persons or property on its own structure and to be drawn by a
vehicle with motive power. The term "trailer" shall include trailer
coach, semitrailer, travel trailer or utility trailer.
(4) Motor truck: Any motor vehicle with an empty weight of more than
5,000 pounds.
B. Notwithstanding the above provisions, the Chief of Police may grant, at
his discretion, if traffic and safety considerations permit, permission to
park a vehicle on any street or highway for a period of time not to
exceed 48 hours.
§ 183-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-22
1:195

ARTICLE IV
(Reserved)
§ 183-23. through § 183-27. (Reserved)
§ 183-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-23
1:197

ARTICLE V
Schedules
§ 183-28. Schedule I: through truck restrictions.
In accordance with the provisions of § 183-7, there shall be no through
trucking on the following streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Hours/Days Limits
Back River Road All/All From Bedford Road
north to Bedford Town
line
Bishop Street All/All Entire length in east
and west directions
Camp Sargent Road 9:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m./All
From Amherst Road to
Continental Boulevard
Camp Sargent Road 9:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m./All
From Continental
Boulevard to Tinker
Road
Depot Street 9:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m./All
From Daniel Webster
Highway (Route 3) to
the railroad tracks
Mill Street 9:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m./All
From Front Street to
Depot Street
Naticook Road 9:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m./All
From Camp Sargent
Road to Continental
Boulevard
Pleasant Street 9:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m./All
From Maple Street to
Depot Street
Tinker Road 12:00 midnight to
11:59 p.m./All
Intersection of Camp
Sargent Road/Drouin
Way and Tinker Road
(south) to the
intersection of Tinker
Road and Stuart Drive
§ 183-29. Schedule II: School Zone Speed Limits.
A. In accordance with the provisions of § 183-8, it shall be unlawful to
operate a vehicle in excess of the indicated speed in the following
locations when the flashing yellow "school zone" signs are in operation:
§ 183-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-29
1:199
§ 183-30. Schedule III: Speed limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 183-9, it shall be unlawful to operate
a vehicle in excess of the indicated speed in any of the following locations:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(miles per hour) Limits
Amherst Road 35 From Lester Road west to
Seaverns Bridge Road
Baboosic Lake Road 35 From the intersection of
Bean Road west to the
Amherst Town line
Continental Boulevard 35 West from the intersection
of Greeley Street and
Camp Sargent Road to
Camp Sargent Road
§ 183-31. Schedule IV: Stop Intersections.
As provided in § 183-10, the following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections, and stop signs shall be installed as
follows:7
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(miles per hour) Limits
Baboosic Lake Road 20 From McElwain Street to
O'Gara Drive
Camp Sargent Road 20 Between the 2 "school
zone" speed signs
B. In accordance with the provisions of § 183-8, it shall be unlawful to
operate a vehicle in excess of the indicated speed in the following
locations when passing a school during recess or while children are
going to or leaving school during opening or closing hours:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(miles per hour) Limits
Pearson Road 20 Between the two "school
zone" speed signs
7. Editor's Note: Stop signs shall be installed on streets listed in the first column, unless
noted elsewhere.
§ 183-29 MERRIMACK CODE § 183-31
1:200
Street Intersection Qualifier
Abby Road Peaslee Road
Al Paul Lane Manchester Street
Allen Drive Hilton Drive
Angelo Lane Daniel Webster
Highway
Arbor Street Camp Sargent Road
Ash Lane Baboosic Lake road
Atherton Road John Lane
Balsam Lane Turkey Hill Road
Bambi Trail Baboosic Lake Road
Bancroft Street Newton Street Northeast intersection
Bancroft Street Newton Street Southwest intersection
Bancroft Street Turkey Hill Road
Barbie Court Pearson Road
Bates Road Peaslee Road
Bates Road Seaverns Bridge Road
Beacon Drive Turkey Hill Road East intersection
Beacon Drive Turkey Hill Road West intersection
Bean Road Baboosic Lake Road
Bean Road Bedford Road
Bean Road Woodward Road
Beaver Brook Patten Road
Bedford Road Wire Road East and west
intersection
Beebe Lane South Baboosic Lake
Road
Beech Street Camp Sargent Road
Bel Aire Avenue McGaw Bridge Road North intersection
Bel Aire Avenue McGaw Bridge Road South intersection
Belmont Drive Back River Road
Berry Lane Amherst Road
Bigwood Drive Turkey Hill Road North intersection
Bigwood Drive Turkey Hill Road South intersection
Birch Street Currier Road Both sides
§ 183-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-31
1:201
Street Intersection Qualifier
Bishop Street McElwain Street East and west
intersection
Blueberry Court Four Winds Road
Bon Avenue Turkey Hill Road
Boston Post road Craftsman Lane
Bradford Drive Belmont Drive
Bramber Lane Bedford Road
Brant Drive Mallard Point
Brenda Lane Bedford Road
Brenda Lane Whispering Pines Lane South entrance
Bretton Drive Columbia Circle
Bridle Path Woodward Road
Brieann Drive Bean Road
Brieann Drive West Road
Brookfield Drive Back River Road North intersection
Brookfield Drive Back River Road South intersection
Brookside Drive Patten Road North and south
intersections
Bryant Circle Wire Road
Bryce Drive Amherst Road
Buck Meadow Lane Wire Road
Cabot Road Cathy Street
Cabot Road Woodridge Road East and west
intersections
Cambridge Drive Continental Boulevard
Cambridge Drive Ingham Road
Camp Sargent Road Continental Boulevard South intersection
Camp Sargent Road Naticook Road North intersection
Camp Sargent Road Naticook Road South intersection
Carrie Drive Patten Road
Carter Road Baboosic Lake Road
Castleton Court Camp Sargent Road
Cathy Street Bedford Road
Cathy Street Constance Street
Catskill Drive Bedford Road
§ 183-31 MERRIMACK CODE § 183-31
1:202
Street Intersection Qualifier
Catskill Drive Wire Road
Cavalier Country Lane Baboosic Lake Road
Cedar Lane Camp Sargent Road
Center Street Front Street North intersection
Center Street Front Street South intersection
Chadsworth Court Bedford Road
Chapel Lane Daniel Webster
Highway
Charles Road Bates Road
Christopher Road West Chamberlain
Road
Christopher Road Wildcat Falls Road
Church Street Baboosic Lake Road
Church Street Daniel Webster
Highway
Collins Avenue Buck Meadow Lane East/west
Columbia Circle Columbia Circle
Columbia Circle Daniel Webster
Highway
Conservation Drive Linden Way
Cota Road Iris Drive South
Cota Road Turkey Hill Road
Country Club Lane Back River Road
Courtland Drive Baboosic Lake Road
Cramer Hill Road Seaverns Bridge road North intersection
Cramer Hill Road Seaverns Bridge road South intersection
Crane Lane Ichabod Drive
Cranston Circle Whittier Road
Crestview Circle Lawrence Road
Cross Street Amherst Road
Crows Nest Circle Mast Road
Cummings Road Naticook Road
Currier Road Baboosic Lake Road
Cynthia Road Naticook Road
Dahl Road Peaslee Road
§ 183-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-31
1:203
Street Intersection Qualifier
Danbury Drive Baboosic Lake Road Both directions
Danforth Road Naticook Road
Daniel Webster Drive Daniel Webster
Highway
Danville Circle Whittier Road
Davidson Avenue Amherst Road
Davis Road Bedford Road
Den Avenue Turkey Hill Road
Dena Avenue Erik Street
Dena Avenue Peaslee Road
Depot Street Daniel Webster
Highway
Derry Street Burt Street Both directions
Derry Street Joppa Road
Dick Drive Baboosic Lake Road
Dirt Road Naticook Road
Dolly Road Front Street
Drake Lane Mallard Point
Drouin Way Tinker Road
Dumas Lane Brieann Drive
Dunbarton Road Tinker Road
Dunloggin Drive Joppa Road
Dwyer Street Woodward Road
Eagle Drive Wire Road
East Chamberlain Road Daniel Webster
Highway
Eden Street Turkey Hill Road
Edgewood Avenue Baboosic Lake Road
Edward Lane John Lane East intersection
Edward Lane John Lane West intersection
Ellie Drive Jessica Drive
Ellie Drive McQuestion Road
Elm Street Daniel Webster
Highway
Elm Street Front Street Both directions
§ 183-31 MERRIMACK CODE § 183-31
1:204
Street Intersection Qualifier
Englewood Drive Whittier Road
Erik Street Greenleaf Street Both directions
Fairway Drive Back River Road
Falcon Drive Bedford Road
Farmer Road Amherst Road
Farrar Lane Wire Road
Fields Farm Road Peaslee Road
Findlay Way Englewood Drive
Forest Drive Joppa Road
Four Seasons Lane South Baboosic Lake
Road
Four Winds Road Bates Road
Fox Meadow Lane Meetinghouse Road East intersection
Fox Meadow Lane Meetinghouse Road West intersection
Franconia Drive Joppa Road
Freedom Street Independence Drive North intersection
Freedom Street Independence Drive South intersection
French Court Woodward Road
Front Street Elm Street 4-way
Front Street Maple Street Both directions
Fuller Mill Road Amherst Road
Gail Road Joey Road
Gauthier Road Peaslee Road
Glenwood Lane Baboosic Lake Road
Glenwood Lane Joppa Road
Grapevine Road Pearson Road
Greatstone Drive Baboosic Lake Road
Greenleaf Street Erik Street Both directions
Greenleaf Street Seaverns Bridge Road
Greens Pond Road Continental Boulevard
Greens Pond Road Naticook Road
Greenwich Drive Patten Road
Greenwood Road South Baboosic Lake
Road
§ 183-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-31
1:205
Street Intersection Qualifier
Hadley Road McElwain Street North intersection
Hadley Road McElwain Street South intersection
Haines Terrace Peaslee Road
Haise Way Bedford Road
Halletts Way Baboosic Lake Road
Halletts Way Joppa Road
Hamilton Court Pearson Road
Hamlet Circle Woodward Road
Hampstead Road Tinker Road
Hancock Lane Baboosic Lake Road
Hansom Drive Bates Road
Harrington Drive Wilson Hill Road
Harris Avenue Daniel Webster
Highway
Hartwood Drive Independence Drive
Hartwood Drive Joppa Road
Hartwood Drive Woodland Drive Both directions
Hassell Road Naticook Road
Henry Clay Drive Daniel Webster
Highway
Heritage Drive Patten Road
Herrick Street Daniel Webster
Highway
Herrick Street King Street Both directions
Hillside Terrace Baboosic Lake Road
Hillside Terrace Wire Road
Hilton Drive Daniel Webster
Highway
Hitchinpost Lane Woodward Road
Holts Landing Tinker Road
Hoyt Street Daniel Webster
Highway
North intersection
Hoyt Street Daniel Webster
Highway
South intersection
Hutchinson Road Naticook Road
Ichabod Drive Wire Road
§ 183-31 MERRIMACK CODE § 183-31
1:206
Street Intersection Qualifier
Independence Drive Baboosic Lake Road
Ingham Road Camp Sargent Road
Iris Drive Cota Road North
Iris Drive Turkey Hill Road
Island Drive D.W. Drive
Island Drive Extension Daniel Webster
Highway
Ivy Drive Wire Road
Jade Road Turkey Hill Road
Jakes Lane Patten Road North and south
intersection
Jason Drive Wire Road
Jebb Road Baboosic Lake Road
Jefferson Drive Bean Road
Jessica Drive Baboosic Lake Road
Jessica Drive Ellie Drive Both directions
Jessica Drive Jessica Drive
Jo Ellen Drive Amherst Road
Jo Ellen Drive Sunrise Drive
Joanne Street Cathy Street
Joey Road Naticook Road
John Lane Edward Lane
John Lane Wildcat Falls Road
Joppa Road Baboosic Lake Road North and south
intersection
Joppa Road Bedford Road
Joppa Road Turkey Hill Road
Kendall Court Grapevine Drive
King Street Herrick Street Eastbound
King Street Herrick Street Westbound
Kittredge Lane Davis Road
Klara Drive Bean Road
Knollwood Drive Joppa Road
Kyle Road Dahl Road
Lamson Drive Naticook Road North intersection
§ 183-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-31
1:207
Street Intersection Qualifier
Lamson Drive Naticook Road South intersection
Landau Way Seaverns Bridge Road
Lawrence Road Bedford Road
Leblanc Lane Tinker Road
Lesa Drive Baboosic Lake Road
Lester Road Amherst Road
Lilac Court Bedford Road
Linda Lane McQuestion Road
Lois Lane (Formerly
Whispering Pines Lane)
Bedford Road
Lois Lane (Formerly
Whispering Pines Lane)
Wire Road
Longa Road Baboosic Lake Road
Loop Road Daniel Webster
Highway
North intersection
Loop Road Daniel Webster
Highway
South intersection
Lorraine Road Naticook Road
Lyons Road Pearson Road
Madeline Bennett Drive
Maidstone Drive Baboosic Lake Road
Maidstone Drive Patten Road
Mallard Point Road Wire Road North intersection
Mallard Point Road Wire Road South intersection
Manchester Street Daniel Webster
Highway
Maple Street Daniel Webster
Highway
Marty Drive Baboosic Lake Road East intersection
Marty Drive Baboosic Lake Road West intersection
Mary Paul Lane Baboosic Lake Road
Maryann Lane Bates Road
Mason Road Amherst Road
Mast Road Daniel Webster
Highway
Mast Road Railroad Both directions
§ 183-31 MERRIMACK CODE § 183-31
1:208
Street Intersection Qualifier
Mayhew Road Baboosic Lake Road
McElwain Street Baboosic Lake Road
McGaw Bridge Road Daniel Webster
Highway
McGaw Bridge Road Wire Road
Meadowview Lane McQuestion Road
Meetinghouse Road Amherst Road
Meetinghouse Road Turkey Hill Road
Merrill Road Amherst Road
Merrymeeting Drive McQuestion Road
Mill Street Depot Street
Miriam Road Baboosic Lake Road
Mitchell Street Baboosic Lake Road
Mountain View Drive Parkhurst Road
MUES Parking Lot School Street
Mullikan Road Wilson Hill Road
Nathan Hale Lane Meetinghouse Road
Naticook Road Amherst Road
Naticook Road Continental Boulevard
Naticook Road Peaslee Road
Naticook Terrace Naticook Road
Naticook/Camp
Sargent Road
Connector
Naticook Road Naticook/Camp Sargent
Road
Nora Road Lamson Drive
Nora Road Peter Road
O'Gara Drive Baboosic Lake Road
Oak Ridge Avenue McGaw Bridge Road
Oak Street Bretton Drive
Old Blood Road Wilson Hill Road
Olde Road Baboosic Lake Road
Olde Road Tomahawk Drive
Packard Drive Back River Road
Paige Drive Pearson Road
Palmeri Drive Naticook Road
§ 183-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-31
1:209
Street Intersection Qualifier
Parker Drive Baboosic Lake Road
Parker Drive South Baboosic Lake
Road
Parkhurst Road Baboosic Lake Road
Parkhurst Road Woodward Road
Patten Road Baboosic Lake Road East and west branch
Patten Road Joppa Road
Pearson Road Bedford Road
Peaslee Road Amherst Road
Penrose Lane Turkey Hill Road
Peter Road Naticook Road
Pheasant Run Back River Road
Piedmont Avenue Amherst Road
Pilgrim Avenue Baboosic Lake Road
Pilgrim Avenue Turkey Hill Road
Pine Street Daniel Webster
Highway
Pine Street Front Street
Pinetree Lane Joppa Road
Pinewood Drive Hilton Drive
Pleasant Street Maple Street
Pollard Road Amherst Road
Portside Drive Tinker Road
Priscilla Lane Daniel Webster
Highway
Proctor Road Parkhurst Road
Profile Drive Bean Road
Quincy Lane Baboosic Lake Road
Rainbow Avenue Daniel Webster
Highway
Railroad Avenue Daniel Webster
Highway
South intersection
Railroad Avenue North spur at Railroad
Avenue
Raymond Drive Back River Road
Reeds Ferry Way Level Street
§ 183-31 MERRIMACK CODE § 183-31
1:210
Street Intersection Qualifier
Reeds Ferry Way Paige Drive
Ridgewood Drive Joppa Road
Ries Drive Back River Road
Riley Lane Cassie Lane
Riley Lane Fox Meadow Lane
Rimmon Court Springfield Circle
Rivergate Road Wilson Hill Road
Riverside Drive Amherst Road
Rose Lane Baboosic Lake Road
Rushmore Court Peaslee Road
Rutherford Street Oxford Street
Rutherford Street West Chamberlain
Road
Samuel J Drive Baboosic Lake Road
Sarah Drive Turkey Hill Road
Savannah Way County Road
Savannah Way Springfield Circle
Seaverns Bridge Road Amherst Road
Seaverns Bridge Road Boston Post Road
Shady Lane Baboosic Lake Road
Small Lane Bedford Road
Smith Road Daniel Webster
Highway
North intersection
Smith Road Daniel Webster
Highway
South intersection
Souhegan Drive Currier Road Both sides (south
intersection)
South Baboosic Lake
Road
Baboosic Lake Road
Spaulding Drive Peaslee Road
Spruce Street Camp Sargent Road
Star Drive Daniel Webster
Highway
Steeplechase Drive Woodward Road
Stevens Avenue Amherst Road
Stowell Road Parkhurst Road
§ 183-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-31
1:211
Street Intersection Qualifier
Stuart Drive Thornton Road West
Stuart Drive Tinker Road
Sunrise Drive Turkey Hill Road
Taconic Drive Springfield Circle
Tallant Road Continental Boulevard
Tanglewood Way Joppa Road
Thomas Road Baboosic Lake Road
Thornton Road West Stuart Drive East intersection
Thornton Road West Stuart Drive West intersection
Thornton Road West Tinker Road North and south
intersection
Tiffany Lane Birch Street
Tiffany Lane Souhegan Drive
Timber Lane Joppa Road
Tinker Road Camp Sargent Road
Tinker Road Thornton Road
Tomahawk Drive Baboosic Lake Road
Tomahawk Drive Greatstone Drive
Tomasian Drive Amherst Road
Trowbridge Road South Baboosic Lake
Road
North intersection
Trowbridge Road South Baboosic Lake
Road
South intersection
Turkey Hill Road Amherst Road
Turkey Hill Road Baboosic Lake Road
Turkey Hill Road McQuestion Road
Twin Bridge Road Daniel Webster
Highway
Upham Road Wilson Hill Road
Valleyview Drive Patten Road
Walden Drive Patten Road
Wallace Drive Jo Ellen Drive
Wallace Drive Turkey Hill Road
Warren Lane Boston Post Road
Wasserman Heights Naticook Road
§ 183-31 MERRIMACK CODE § 183-31
1:212
Street Intersection Qualifier
Watkins Road Amherst Road
Webb Drive Daniel Webster
Highway
West Chamberlain
Road
Turkey Hill Road
West Road Bean Road
Westborn Drive Naticook Road
Westcott Drive Bean Road
Weston Road Davis Road
Whispering Pines Lane Bedford Road
Whispering Pines Lane Wire Road
Whittier Road Camp Sargent Road East intersection
Whittier Road Camp Sargent Road West intersection
Wildcat Falls Road John Lane
William Street Daniel Webster
Highway
Wilson Hill Road McQuestion Road
Windover Lane Pearson Road
Windsor Drive Baboosic Lake Road North intersection
Windsor Drive Baboosic Lake Road South intersection
Windy Hollow Circle Tomasian Drive
Wintergreen Drive Sycamore Lane Both directions
Wintergreen Drive Turkey Hill Road
Wire Road Bedford Road North and south
intersection
Wire Road Daniel Webster
Highway
Wood Street Sunnydale Drive
Woodbine Lane Bean Road East intersection
Woodbine Lane Bean Road West intersection
Woodbury Street Daniel Webster
Highway
Woodhaven Circle Pearson Road North intersection
Woodhaven Circle Pearson Road South intersection
Woodland Drive Baboosic Lake Road
Woodland Drive Hartwood Drive Both directions
§ 183-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-31
1:213
Street Intersection Qualifier
Woodridge Road Bedford Road
Worster Avenue Baboosic Lake Road
Wright Avenue Boston and Maine
Railroad
East and west
intersection
Wright Avenue Daniel Webster
Highway
§ 183-32. Schedule V: Yield intersections.
As provided in § 183-11, the following described intersections are hereby
designated as yield intersections, and yield signs shall be installed as
follows.8
Street Intersecting Street Qualifier
Craftsman Lane Boston Post Road
Erik Street Erik Street Circle North entrance
Erik Street Erik Street Circle South entrance
Railroad Avenue Daniel Webster
Highway
North intersection
Railroad Avenue spur Railroad Avenue
Woodbury Street McElwain Street
§ 183-33. Schedule VI: Traffic control signals.
In accordance with the provisions of § 183-12, traffic control signals shall
be installed at the following described locations:
Intersection Action Date
Baboosic Lake Road and Madeline
Bennett Lane and McQuestion Road
Continental Boulevard, Amherst
Road, Greeley Street and Camp
Sargent Road
Daniel Webster Highway (Route 3)
and Baboosic Lake Road
Daniel Webster Highway (Route 3)
and Bedford Road
Daniel Webster Highway and
Connell's Shopping Center
8. Editor's Note: Yield signs shall be installed on streets listed in the first column, unless
noted elsewhere.
§ 183-31 MERRIMACK CODE § 183-33
1:214
Intersection Action Date
Daniel Webster Highway (Route 3)
and Front Street
Daniel Webster Highway (Route 3)
and the Merrimack Village Mall
access
Daniel Webster Highway (Route 3)
and Rainbow Avenue
Daniel Webster Highway (Route 3)
and Shaw's Shopping Center
between Pole Nos. 112 and 113
§ 183-34. Schedule VII: Prohibited turns at intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 183-13, no person shall make a turn
of the kind designated below at any of the following locations:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited
Turn
At Intersection
of
Church Street East Left Daniel Webster
Highway
Daniel Webster
Drive
North Left Daniel Webster
Highway
Daniel Webster
Highway
North Right Loop Road (north
exit)
Daniel Webster
Highway
North Left Woodbury Street
Daniel Webster
Highway
South Left Daniel Webster
Drive (north exit)
Daniel Webster
Highway
South Left Walgreens
Loop Road North Left Daniel Webster
Highway
Woodbury Street East Left Daniel Webster
Highway (between
2:00 p.m. and 3:00
p.m. on school
days)
§ 183-35. Schedule VIII: One-way streets.
As provided in § 183-14, the following described streets or parts of streets
are hereby designated as one-way streets, and vehicles traveling on them
shall proceed only in the direction indicated:
§ 183-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-35
1:215
Name of Street Direction of Travel Limits
Erik Street South Erik Street circle
Erik Street North Erik Street Circle
§ 183-36. Schedule IX: Parking prohibited at all times.
In accordance with the provisions of § 183-19, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Baboosic Lake Road Both From Daniel Webster Highway to
the west side of F.E. Everett
Turnpike overpass (except for
vehicles used for attending
funerals and weddings parked on
the south side from McElwain
Street to the Merrimack Middle
School)
Bishop Street Both From McElwain Street west to
School Street during school hours
(7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.) on school
days
Columbia Circle Both Entire length
Daniel Webster
Highway
Both From Greeley Street to Bedford
Road
Hadley Road South South entrance of Hadley Road, on
the south side of the street, for a
distance of 400 feet
Island Drive North From Daniel Webster Drive east
for 845 feet
Island Drive South From Daniel Webster Drive east
for 830 feet
Loop Road East 300 feet from the south entrance
off of Daniel Webster Highway
Loop Road West Entire length
Mastricola Middle
School access road
East From Baboosic Lake Road to
Bishop Street
McElwain Street East/west From Baboosic Lake Road south
for 105 feet
McGaw Bridge Road East From Daniel Webster Highway
south to a point opposite Oak
Ridge Avenue
§ 183-35 MERRIMACK CODE § 183-36
1:216
Name of Street Side Location
McGaw Bridge Road West From Daniel Webster Highway
south for 280 feet
Naticook/Camp
Sargent Road
connector
Both From Camp Sargent Road to
Naticook Road
Naticook Road Both From the intersection of Camp
Sargent Road to the intersection of
Dirt Road
Naticook Road/Camp
Sargent Road
Both From New England Telephone
Company Pole No. 2450/2 (public
service pole No. 25) to Drouin Way
Sunset Drive Both From the end of Sunset Drive to 40
feet north of the pump station
fence
§ 183-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-36
1:217
Chapter 193
WELFARE GUIDELINES
§ 193-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGENCY — Any private or public health, social service or other entity that
provides services to a client. The Welfare Official may refer a client for
additional resources and/or assistance to any such entity.
APPELLANT — A recipient or applicant who has requested, either in person
or through an authorized representative, a fair hearing under § 193-6 of
these guidelines.
APPLICANT — A person who, in person or by an authorized representative,
applies to receive general assistance or to have his/her eligibility reviewed
and whose application has not been withdrawn.
APPLICATION (RE-APPLICATION) — A process where a completed
application, on a form provided by the Welfare Official, is submitted by
a person or their authorized representative, who requests assistance,
completes an interview and has their signed application verified with the
Welfare Official.
ASSETS — All cash, real property, stocks, bonds, retirement funds,
securities, personal property and future assets owned by the applicant/
recipient.
AVAILABLE LIQUID ASSETS — Cash on hand, bank deposits, credit union,
checking, savings and debit accounts, stocks, bonds, and securities. IRAs
(individual retirement accounts), 401Ks accounts and insurance policies
with loan value and nonessential personal property shall be considered as
liquid assets when they have been converted into cash.
CASE RECORD — Official files, electronic or paper, containing forms,
correspondence and narrative records pertaining to the application,
including determination eligibility, reasons for decisions and actions by the
Welfare Official, and expenditures of assistance given.
CLIENT — An individual, family or household who receives services such
as referrals or assistance but does not always necessarily receive general
assistance expenditures from the Welfare Department.
ELIGIBILITY — Determination by the Welfare Official, in accordance with
welfare guidelines, an applicant's need for general assistance under the
formula provided in § 193-10.
FAIR HEARING — A hearing which an applicant or recipient may request to
contest a denial, termination or reduction of assistance. The standards for
such a hearing are in § 193-6.
§ 183-36 MERRIMACK CODE § 193-1
1:218
FIRST NOTICE — Notice given to applicants and recipients which contains
requirements and laws that the applicants or recipients must comply with
to receive general assistance.
FIRST NOTICE WITH CONDITIONS — In addition to the first notice
requirements and laws, this notice is provided to applicants with conditions
recipients need to meet in order to continue assistance if eligible.
GENERAL ASSISTANCE — Assistance, which may or may not include
financial assistance, provided to recipients in accordance with RSA 165 and
these welfare guidelines. Under no circumstances shall financial assistance
be provided directly to a recipient or household in the form of cash
payments.
HOUSEHOLD —
IN LOCO PARENTIS — A person who intentionally accepts the rights and
duties of a natural parent with respect to a child(ren) not their own and
who lived at least the last 30 days in household with the child(ren) to form
a psychological family.
MINOR — A person under 18 years of age.
NEED — The basic maintenance and support requirements of an applicant
and household members, as determined by a Welfare Official under the
standards of § 193-10E of these guidelines. This does not always mean that
an assistance payment of a need is allowed under general assistance and
these guidelines.
NOTICE OF DECISION — A written decision or any conditions of assistance
is rendered by the Welfare Official to the applicant or recipient approving,
denying or pending assistance.
RECIPIENT — A person who is receiving financial assistance under general
assistance of these welfare guidelines as required in RSA 165.
RELIEVE AND MAINTAIN — The provision of basic needs necessary to
the health and welfare of a household as provided under these welfare
guidelines.
RESIDENCE or RESIDENCY — The place of abode or domicile is that place
designated by an applicant as their principal place of physical presence
for the indefinite future to the exclusion of all others. Such residence or
residency shall not be interrupted or lost by a temporary absence from it, if
there is an intent to return to such residence or residency as the principal
place of physical presence (RSA 165:1, I; and RSA 21:6-a).
The applicant/recipient and persons residing with the applicant/
recipient in the relationship of father, mother, stepfather, stepmother,
son, daughter, husband, wife (legally married or defined as such under
cohabitation statutes RSA 457:39) or domestic partner; and/or
A.
The applicant/recipient and any adult (including an unrelated person)
who resides with the applicant/recipient "in loco parentis" (in the role
of a substitute parent) to a minor child.
B.
§ 193-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-1
1:219
RESIDENTIAL UNIT — A place of abode or domicile where individuals
physically reside together and share expenses of the residence such as rent,
utilities and expenses of the residence. Within this unit could be a household
or individual resident applying for general assistance.
RSA — Revised Statutes Annotated. This is New Hampshire State Law noted
throughout the guidelines.
SHELTER — A physical abode that provides permanent or temporary
housing in which an individual or household may or may not pay rent or
mortgage. It can also be emergency housing like a shelter program until
permanent or other housing can be found.
UTILITY — Any service such as electric, heat, oil, water or sewer necessary
to maintain the health and welfare of the household.
VENDOR/PROVIDER — Any landlord, utility company, store or other
individual or business which provides necessary goods or services needed
by the applicant/recipient.
VOUCHER SYSTEM — The system whereby a municipality issues vouchers
to the recipient's vendors and providers. The vendors must turn in the
vouchers with verification of expense for check payment to them (RSA
165:1, III).
WELFARE ADMINISTRATOR — The Welfare Official appointee by the Town
Manager who performs overall administrative duties as well as the day-today
administration of the general assistance program subject to the overall
fiscal responsibility vested in the Town Manager by the Town Council.
WELFARE OFFICIAL — The person(s) appointed by the Town Manager, who
performs the function of administering general assistance. Such official has
the authority to make all decisions regarding the granting of assistance
under RSA 165 during normal work hours. The term includes "overseers of
public welfare" (RSA 165:1; RSA 41:46) and "administrator of town or city
welfare" (RSA 165:2).
WELFARE WORK PROGRAM or WORKFARE — Labor performed by welfare
recipients at municipal sites as reimbursement for benefits received as
provided in RSA 165:31.
WITHDRAWN APPLICATION — A voluntary written or verbal request by
the applicant to stop the process of eligibility determination of general
assistance.
§ 193-2. Purpose.
A general assistance program is administered as required in RSA 165 to
meet the Town's legal obligation. These guidelines are designed:
A. To assist the Welfare Official in administration of this general assistance
program.
B. To outline guidance in the rights and responsibilities of the applicant/
recipient.
§ 193-1 MERRIMACK CODE § 193-3
1:220
§ 193-3. Confidentiality of information.
Information given by or about an applicant or recipient of general
assistance is confidential and privileged, and is not a public record under
the provisions of RSA 91-A. Such information shall not be published,
released, or discussed with any individual or agency without written
permission of the applicant or recipient except when disclosure is required
by law, legal process, or when necessary to carry out the purposes of the
law in accordance with RSA 165:2-c.
§ 193-4. Roles of Town Council, Town Manager, Welfare
Administrator and Welfare Officials.
§ 193-5. Right to notice of adverse action.
A. Adoption of required guidelines. The Town Council shall adopt the
welfare guidelines regarding general assistance in accordance with
RSA 165:1(II). The Town Council shall review and revise these
guidelines at least every five years per the Town Charter, § 5-6C, and as
appropriate and necessary when there are changes in the New
Hampshire State Law or conditions of the Town.
B. Appointment of the Welfare Administrator and Welfare Officials. The
Town Manager shall appoint a Welfare Administrator and Welfare
Officials in accordance with Town Charter § 7-7B. The Welfare
Administrator will be responsible for administration and supervision of
back up Welfare Officials in accordance with the provisions of the New
Hampshire State Law and the Town Charter.
C. Authority and responsibility of the Welfare Officials. The Welfare
Administrator and duly appointed Welfare Officials shall administer the
general assistance program in accordance with New Hampshire State
Law and the adopted welfare guidelines of the Town of Merrimack, New
Hampshire, in the Town Code, Chapter 193.
A. Right to a written decision. All persons have a constitutional right to be
free of unfair, arbitrary or unreasonable action taken by government.
This includes applicants for and recipients of general assistance whose
assistance has been denied, terminated or reduced. Every applicant
and recipient shall be given a written notice of every decision regarding
assistance (see § 193-7E). The Welfare Official will make every
reasonable effort to ensure that the applicant understands the decision.
B. Action taken for reasons other than noncompliance with the guidelines.
(1) Whenever a decision is made to deny assistance or to refuse to
grant the full amount of assistance requested for reasons other
than noncompliance with these guidelines or state law, a notice of
decision shall be given or mailed to address on record in the
Welfare Office to the applicant either the same day or next work
day following the rendering of the decision or within five working
§ 193-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-5
1:221
days from the time the application was submitted, whichever
occurs first. A copy of the notice of decision shall be placed in the
case file.
(2) The notice of decision shall contain:
(a) A clear statement of the reasons for the denial or proposed
termination or reduction of assistance.
(b) A statement advising the recipient of his/her right to a fair
hearing and that any request for a fair hearing must be
submitted in writing within five working days of the date of the
notice of decision.
(c) A form on which the recipient may request a fair hearing.
(d) A statement that assistance may continue (only if there was
initial assistance being given prior to this new request and only
in that previous amount) until the date of hearing, if requested
by the appellant. Continued assistance must be repaid if the
appellant fails to prevail at the hearing.
(3) In any case where the Welfare Official intends to terminate or
reduce assistance for reasons other than noncompliance with the
guidelines, the Official shall mail written notice of the intended
action to the recipient to the address of record in the Welfare Office
at least seven days in advance of the effective date of the notice of
decision stating the intended action.
C. Suspension for noncompliance with the guidelines.
(1) Due process. Recipients must comply with these guidelines, state
law and the reasonable requests of the Welfare Official. The
Welfare Official must enforce the guidelines while ensuring that all
recipients and applicants receive due process. Recipients shall be
given reasonable notice of the conditions and requirements of
eligibility and continuing eligibility and notice that noncompliance
may result in reduction, suspension or termination.
(2) Conditions. Any applicant/recipient otherwise eligible for
assistance shall become ineligible under RSA 165:1-b if he/she
willfully and without good cause fails to comply with the
requirements of these guidelines relating to the obligation to:
(a) Disclose and provide verification of income, resources or other
material financial data, as set out in § 193-6C and D and
§ 193-9 of these guidelines, including any changes in this
information;
(b) Participate in the work program under § 193-7C and D, as
assigned by the Welfare Official;
§ 193-5 MERRIMACK CODE § 193-5
1:222
(c) Comply with the work search requirements imposed by the
Welfare Official under § 193-7C and D; and
(d) Apply for other public assistance as required by the Welfare
Official under § 193-7C and D.
(3) First notice. No recipient otherwise eligible shall be suspended for
noncompliance with conditions and requirements under these
guidelines or state law unless he/she has been given a written
notice of the actions required in order to become or remain eligible
and a seven-day period within which to comply. The first notice
shall be given at the time of the notice of decision and with every
notice of decision thereafter as conditions change. Additional
notice of actions or conditions or assistance required shall also be
given, as eligibility is re-determined, but without an additional
seven-day period unless new actions are required (RSA 165:1-b, II).
(4) Noncompliance after first notice or conditions of assistance. If a
recipient willfully fails to come into compliance during the sevenday
period, or falls into noncompliance during the duration of
assistance, the Welfare Official shall give the recipient an
ineligibility or suspension notice notifying the recipient of their
ineligibility or suspension, as set forth in § 193-5C(5) below.
(5) Ineligibility or suspension notice. Written notice to a recipient that
he/she is suspended from assistance due to failure to comply with
the conditions required in a first notice or conditions of assistance
shall include:
(a) A list of the guidelines with which the recipient is not in
compliance and a description of those actions necessary for
compliance;
(b) The period of suspension [see § 193-5C(6) below];
(c) Notice of the right to a fair hearing and that such request must
be made in writing within five days of receipt of the ineligibility
or suspension notice;
(d) A form on which the individual may request a fair hearing as
well as request the continuance of currently received
assistance pending the outcome; and
(e) A statement that assistance may continue in accordance with
the prior eligibility determination until the fair hearing
decision is made if the recipient so requests on the request
form for the fair hearing. If the recipient fails to prevail at the
hearing the suspension will start after the fair hearing decision
and such assistance must be repaid by the recipient from the
date of the notice of decision.
§ 193-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-5
1:223
§ 193-6. Fair hearings.
(6) Suspension period. The period of ineligibility for failure to comply
with these guidelines shall last:
(a) Either seven days, or 14 days if the recipient has had a prior
suspension which ended within the past six months, plus
(b) For any period of time following this initial seven- or fourteenday
period that the recipient continues to fail to comply with
the guidelines, and
(c) Notwithstanding § 193-5C(6)(b) above, a recipient who has
been suspended for noncompliance for at least six months may
file a new application for assistance without coming back into
compliance.
(7) Fair hearing on continuing noncompliance. A recipient who has
been determined ineligible or suspended until he/she complies with
the guidelines may request a fair hearing to resolve a dispute over
whether or not he/she has satisfactorily complied with the required
guidelines; however no continued assistance shall be available
under § 193-5C(5)(e).
(8) Compliance after suspension. A recipient who has been subject to a
suspension and who has come back into compliance shall have his/
her assistance resumed, provided he/she is still otherwise eligible.
If more than 30 days have lapsed since the last appointment to
determine eligibility of assistance, the Welfare Official shall require
a new appointment and new or updated application with required
verification to be completed by the recipient so that the Welfare
Official can determine if the recipients are still eligible. The notice
of decision stating that assistance has been resumed shall again set
forth the actions required to remain eligible for assistance, but
need not provide a seven-day period for compliance unless new
conditions have been imposed.
A. Request. A request for a fair hearing before a Fair Hearing Officer, by
the applicant or recipient, or any authorized person acting for him/her,
"appellant," must be in writing.
B. Time limit to file request. When a request for assistance is denied or
when an applicant desires to challenge a decision made by the Welfare
Official relative to the receipt of assistance, the applicant must present
a request for a fair hearing to the Welfare Official within five working
days of receipt of the notice of decision at issue, unless otherwise
provided in these guidelines.
C. Time limits for hearings. Hearings requested by appellants will be held
within seven working days of the receipt of the request. The Welfare
Official shall give notice to the appellant setting the time and location of
the hearing and that the hearing will be recorded. This notice must be
§ 193-5 MERRIMACK CODE § 193-6
1:224
given to the appellant at least 48 hours in advance of the hearing, or
mailed to the appellant at least 72 hours in advance of the hearing.
The hearing may only be postponed and rescheduled one time.
D. The Fair Hearing Officer(s). The Fair Hearing Officer or Officers shall
be chosen by the Town Manager. The Fair Hearing Officer(s) and date of
appointment shall be recorded on Fair Hearing Officer appointment
sheet. The person(s) serving as the fair hearing authority must:
(1) Not have participated in the decision causing the appellant's
dissatisfaction;
(2) Be impartial;
(3) Be sufficiently skilled in interviewing to be able to obtain evidence
and facts necessary for a fair determination;
(4) Be capable of evaluating all evidence fairly and realistically; and
(5) Be capable to explain to the appellant the laws and regulations
under which the Welfare Official operated, and to explain to the
Welfare Official the Fair Hearing Officer's interpretation of any
evidence of unsound, unclear or inequitable policies, practices or
action.
E. Fair hearing procedures.
(1) All fair hearings shall be conducted in such a manner as to ensure
due process of law and shall be audio or video recorded and place
in the appellant's case file.
(2) The burden of proof shall be on the appellant, who shall be required
to establish his/her case by a preponderance of the evidence.
(3) The Fair Hearing Officer shall not review the case record or other
materials prior to introduction at the hearing.
(4) The parties may stipulate to any facts.
(5) An appellant or his/her duly authorized representative has the right
to examine, prior to a fair hearing, all records, papers and
documents from the appellant's case file which either party may
wish to introduce at the fair hearing, as well as any available
documents not contained in the case file but relevant to the Welfare
Official's action of which the appellant complains. The appellant
may introduce any such documents, papers or records into
evidence. No record, paper or document, which the appellant has
requested to review but has not been allowed to examine prior to
the hearing, shall be introduced at the hearing or become part of
the record.
§ 193-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-6
1:225
(6) The Welfare Official responsible for the disputed decision shall
attend the hearing and testify about his/her actions and the reasons
therefor.
(7) Fair hearings shall not be conducted according to strict rules of
legal procedure and evidence. Both parties shall be given the
opportunity to offer evidence and explain their positions as fully
and completely as they wish.
(8) The appellant shall have the opportunity to present his/her own
case or, at the appellant's option, with the assistance of others, and
to bring witnesses, to establish all pertinent facts, to advance any
arguments without undue interference, to question or refute
testimony or evidence, including the opportunity to confront and
cross-examine adverse witnesses. However, in order to protect the
right of cross-examination, the Fair Hearing Official shall not rely
upon any hearsay evidence in making his/her decision if any party
objects to its introduction.
(9) The Welfare Official (or a duly authorized representative) shall have
the right to examine at the fair hearing all documents on which the
appellant plans to rely at the fair hearing and may request a
twenty-four-hour continuance if such documents contain evidence
not previously provided or disclosed by the appellant. Should the
applicant have new documentation relevant to the disputed
decision, he/she may reapply for assistance and file a written
withdrawal of the fair hearing request.
(10) The decision of the Fair Hearing Officer(s) shall be based solely on
the record, in light of these guidelines. Evidence, both written and
oral, which is admitted at the hearing, shall be the sole contents of
the record.
F. Decisions.
(1) Decisions shall be in writing, set forth the reasons for decision and
enumerate the facts on which the Fair Hearing Officer relied in
reaching the decision.
(2) Fair hearing decisions shall be dated and rendered within seven
working days of the hearing.
(3) A copy of the decision shall be mailed to the appellant to the
address on record in the Welfare Office and to the Welfare Official.
If appropriate relief is decided, the fair hearing decision shall set
forth the scope of the relief in the decision.
(4) Fair hearing decisions shall be rendered on the basis of the
Officer's findings of fact based on the time of the decision, these
guidelines and state and federal law.
§ 193-6 MERRIMACK CODE § 193-6
1:226
§ 193-7. Application process.
(5) In the case of a hearing to review a denial of assistance, the
decision is retroactive to the date of the action being appealed. If
an appellant fails to prevail at the hearing, any continued
assistance given pending the hearing shall be a debt owed by the
individual to the Town of Merrimack.
(6) None of the procedures specified herein shall limit any right of the
applicant or recipient to subsequent court action to review or
challenge the adverse decision.
(7) The Welfare Administrator shall keep all fair hearing decisions on
file in chronological order.
A. Right to apply.
(1) Any person or their authorized representative may apply for
general assistance by appearing in person and by completing and
signing an application form. If more than one adult resides in a
household, each may be required to appear at the Welfare Office to
apply for assistance, unless one is working or otherwise reasonably
unavailable. Unrelated adults in the applicant's residential unit
may be required to apply separately if they do not meet the
definition of "household" as defined in these guidelines. Each adult
in the household shall be required to sign release of information
forms.
(2) The Welfare Official shall not be required to accept an application
for general assistance from a recipient who is subject to a current
suspension for noncompliance per § 193-5C of these guidelines
(RSA 165:1-b, VI); provided that any applicant who contests a
determination of continuing noncompliance with the guidelines
may request a fair hearing as provided in § 193-5C(7); and provided
further that a recipient who has been suspended for at least six
months due to noncompliance may file a new application.
(3) The Welfare Official shall provide assistance to the applicant in
completing the application, if necessary (e.g., applicant is
physically or mentally unable, or has a language barrier, etc.).
B. Welfare Official's responsibilities at time of application. When
application is made for general assistance, the Welfare Administrator
shall inform the applicant of:
(1) The applicant's right to review the guidelines and receive a copy of
the guidelines free of charge;
(2) The requirement of submitting an application;
(3) Eligibility requirements, including a general description of the
guideline amounts and the eligibility formula;
§ 193-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-7
1:227
(4) The applicant's right to a fair hearing, and the manner in which a
review may be obtained;
(5) The applicant's responsibility for reporting all facts necessary to
determine eligibility, and for presenting records and documents as
requested and as reasonably available to support the application;
(6) The joint responsibility of the Welfare Official and applicant for
exploring facts concerning eligibility, needs and resources;
(7) The forms of verifications required;
(8) The requirement that an investigation shall be conducted in order
to verify facts and statements presented by the applicant;
(9) The applicant's responsibility to notify the Welfare Office within 72
hours of any change in circumstances that may affect eligibility;
(10) Other forms of public or private assistance for which the applicant
may be eligible;
(11) The requirement that the Town of Merrimack place a lien on any
real property owned by the recipient, or any civil judgments or
property settlements or property passing under the terms of a will
or by intestate succession, for any assistance given, except for good
cause;
(12) The requirement that responsible relatives according to RSA
165:19 may be contacted to determine recovery or the ability to
provide assistance;
(13) The requirement that reimbursement from the recipient shall be
sought if he/she becomes able to repay the amount of assistance
given;
(14) The applicant's responsibility not to voluntarily terminate
employment without good cause, as required by RSA 165:1-d: and,
(15) Any other responsibility the applicant has or will have, as provided
in § 193-7C and D.
C. Responsibility of each applicant.
(1) At the time of initial application, and at all times thereafter, the
applicant and each household member age 18 years or older have
the following responsibilities:
(a) To provide accurate, complete and current information
concerning needs and resources and the whereabouts and
circumstances of relatives who may be responsible under RSA
165:19;
(b) To notify the Welfare Office within 72 hours when there is a
change in needs, resources, address or household size;
§ 193-7 MERRIMACK CODE § 193-7
1:228
(c) To apply for immediately but no later than seven days from
initial application, and accept any benefits or resources, public
or private, that will reduce or eliminate the need for general
assistance (RSA 165:1-b, I(d));
(d) To keep all appointments as scheduled;
(e) To provide records and other pertinent information and access
to said records and information when requested;
(f) To provide a doctor's statement if claiming an inability to work
due to medical problems;
(g) Following a determination of eligibility for assistance, to
diligently search for employment and provide verification of
work search (the number of work search contacts to be
determined by the Welfare Official), to accept employment
when offered (except for documented reasons of good cause
[RSA 165:1-d]), and to maintain such employment [RSA
165:1-b, I(c)];
(h) Following a determination of eligibility for assistance, to
participate in the work program if physically and mentally
able; and
(i) To reimburse the Town of Merrimack for any assistance
provided if recipient returns to an income status and if such
reimbursement can be made without financial hardship (RSA
165:20-b).
(2) An applicant shall be denied assistance if he/she or any household
member above age 18 fails to fulfill any of these responsibilities
without reasonable justification.
(3) Any applicant may be denied general assistance, in accordance
with § 193-5, and/or may be prosecuted for a criminal offense, if he/
she, by means of intentionally false statements or intentional
misrepresentation, or by impersonation or other willfully
fraudulent act or device, obtains or attempts to obtain any
assistance to which he/she is not entitled.
D. Responsibility of each recipient.
(1) At all times the recipient and each household member above the
age 18 years or older have the following responsibilities:
(a) To provide accurate, complete and current information
concerning needs and resources and the whereabouts and
circumstances of relatives who may be responsible under RSA
165:19;
(b) To notify the Welfare Office within 72 hours when there is a
change in needs, resources, address or household size;
§ 193-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-7
1:229
(c) To apply immediately to other assistance, but no later than
seven days from date that the Welfare Official requires
assistance application and accept any benefits or resources,
public or private, that will reduce or eliminate the need for
general assistance [RSA 165:1-b, I (d)];
(d) To keep all appointments as scheduled;
(e) To provide records and other pertinent information and access
to said records and information when requested;
(f) To provide a doctor's statement if claiming an inability to work
due to medical problems;
(g) To diligently search for employment and provide verification of
work search (the number of work search contacts to be
determined by the Welfare Official), to accept employment
when offered (except for documented reasons of good cause
[RSA 165:1-d]), and to maintain such employment [RSA
165:1-b, I(c)];
(h) To participate in the work program if physically and mentally
able [RSA 165:1-b, I(b)]; and
(i) To reimburse the Town of Merrimack for any assistance
provided if the recipient returns to an income status and if
such reimbursement can be made without financial hardship
(RSA 165:20-b).
(2) A recipient's assistance may be terminated or suspended for failure
to fulfill any of these responsibilities without reasonable
justification, in accordance with § 193-5.
(3) Any recipient may be denied or terminated from general
assistance, in accordance with § 193-5 and/or may be prosecuted
for a criminal offense, if he/she, by means of intentionally false
statements or intentional misrepresentation, or by impersonation
or other willfully fraudulent act or device, obtains or attempts to
obtain any assistance to which he/she is not entitled.
E. Actions on applications.
(1) Decision. Unless an application is withdrawn, the Welfare Official
shall make a decision concerning the applicant's eligibility
immediately in the case of emergency, or within five working days
after submission of the application. A written notice of decision
shall be given in hand, delivered or mailed to the address on record
in the Welfare Office on the same day or next working day following
the rending of the decision. The notice of decision shall state that
assistance of a specific kind and amount has been given and the
time period of assistance, or that the application has been denied,
in whole or in part, with reasons for denial. The notice of decision
§ 193-7 MERRIMACK CODE § 193-7
1:230
shall contain a first notice of conditions for continued assistance
and shall notify the applicant of his/her right to a fair hearing if
dissatisfied with the Welfare Official's decision (RSA 165:1-b, II,
III).
(2) Pending decision. If an application is received, but additional
information is required from the applicant, a notice of decision
pending the receipt of such information may be given. The notice of
decision must specify the information required from the applicant
and the date required.
(3) Emergency assistance. If, at the time of initial contact, the
applicant demonstrates and verifies that the applicant may suffer
the loss of a needed basic need if assistance is withheld until a
decision is made within the usual limit specified in these guidelines
(e.g., loss of shelter, loss of needed heat, or lack of food or
medically necessary prescriptions), then temporary assistance to
fill such immediate need shall be given immediately, pending a
decision on the application. Such emergency assistance shall not
obligate the Welfare Official to provide further assistance after the
application process is completed, and may be required to be paid
back by the recipient to the Town of Merrimack if the application is
subsequently denied.
(4) Temporary assistance. In circumstances where required records
are not available, the Welfare Official may give temporary approval
of an application pending receipt of required documents.
Temporary status shall not extend beyond two weeks. The Welfare
Official shall not insist on documentary verification if after
investigation such records are totally unavailable and the required
information can be otherwise established by the applicant.
(5) Withdrawn applications. An application shall be considered
withdrawn if:
(a) The applicant has refused to complete and sign an application
or has refused to make a good faith effort to provide required
verifications and sufficient information for the completion of an
application. If an application is deemed withdrawn for these
reasons, the Welfare Official shall notify the applicant in a
written notice of decision;
(b) The applicant dies before assistance is rendered;
(c) The applicant avails him/herself of other resources to meet the
need in place of assistance;
(d) The applicant requests that the application be withdrawn
(preferably in writing); or
§ 193-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-7
1:231
§ 193-8. Nonresidents.
(e) The applicant does not contact the Welfare Official within
seven days after the initial interview after being requested to
do so.
F. Home visits. A home visit by the Welfare Official shall only be made if it
is impossible for the applicant or their representative to complete an
application to the Welfare Office by appointment, by mail or by fax. All
home visits shall be by appointment only, and shall take place between
the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on weekdays. The Welfare Official
reserves the right to be accompanied by another authorized Town
employee for any home visit if the Welfare Official deems safety or the
knowledge of any Town employee would be needed or helpful to the
application of assistance. The home visit shall be conducted in such a
manner as to preserve, to the greatest extent possible, the privacy and
dignity of the applicant. To this end, the person conducting the visit
shall not be in uniform or travel in a marked law enforcement vehicle,
shall be polite and courteous, and shall not knowingly discuss or
mention the application within the listening area of someone who is not
a member of the household.
A. Eligibility. Applicants who are temporarily in Town of Merrimack and
Merrimack is not their residence and who do not intend to make their
residence in Merrimack are nonetheless eligible to receive general
assistance, provided they are poor and unable to support themselves
(RSA 165:1-c). No applicant shall be refused assistance solely on the
basis of residence (RSA 165:1).
B. Standards. The application procedure, eligibility standards and
standard of need shall be the same for nonresidents as for residents.
C. Verification. Verification records shall not be considered unavailable,
nor the applicant's responsibility for providing such records relaxed,
solely because they are located in the applicant's municipality of
residence.
D. Temporary or emergency assistance. The standards for the fulfilling of
immediate or emergency needs of nonresidents and for temporary
assistance pending final decision shall be the same as for residents, as
set forth in § 193-7E.
E. Determination of residence.
(1) Determination of residence shall be made if the Welfare Official has
reason to believe the applicant is a resident of another New
Hampshire municipality from which recovery can be made under
RSA 165:20 or if the applicant requests return home transportation
(see § 193-8F below).
(a) Minors. The residence of a minor applicant shall be presumed
to be the residence of his/her custodial parent or guardian.
§ 193-7 MERRIMACK CODE § 193-8
1:232
§ 193-9. Verification of information.
Any determination or investigation of need or eligibility that is necessary
to determine eligibility or investigation of fraud within the scope of these
guidelines shall be conducted in a professional and reasonable manner.
(b) Adults. For competent adults, the standard for determining
residence shall be the overall intent of the applicant, as set
forth in the § 193-1 definition of "residence." The following
criteria shall assistance the Welfare Official in determining the
applicant's residence:
[1] Does the applicant have, or immediately intend to
establish, a dwelling with the Town of Merrimack?
[2] Does the applicant have property, an established dwelling
place or employment in any other municipality to which
he/she intends to return?
[3] Does the person have a present intent to leave the Town of
Merrimack at some specific future time?
[4] Has the person evidenced his/her domiciliary intent in
some manner, such as registering a vehicle, paying
residence tax, registering to vote, opening local bank
accounts, etc., or does he/she intend to do so in the
immediate future?
(2) None of above factors is conclusive. The statement of an applicant
over 18 as to his/her residence or intent to establish residence shall
be accepted in the absence of strongly inconsistent evidence or
behavior.
F. Return home transportation. At the request of a nonresident applicant,
any assistance, temporary or otherwise, to which he/she would be
otherwise entitled under the standards set forth in these guidelines,
may be used by the Welfare Official to return the applicant to his/her
municipality of residence (RSA 165:1-c).
G. Recovery. Any assistance given to a nonresident, including the costs of
return home transportation, may be recovered from his/her
municipality of residence using the procedures of § 193-17B.
A. Written consent of applicant.
(1) Before contact is made with any other source, the Welfare Official
shall obtain written consent of the applicant or recipient.
(2) When information is sought from such other sources, the Welfare
Official shall explain to the applicant or recipient what information
is desired, how it will be used, and the necessity of obtaining it in
order to establish eligibility.
§ 193-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-9
1:233
(3) In the case of suspected fraud, the Welfare Official shall carefully
record his/her reasons and actions.
B. Required verifications. Verification will normally be required of the
following:
(1) Applicant's address;
(2) Facts relevant to the applicant's residence, as set forth in
§§ 193-10B and 193-8;
(3) Names of persons in applicant's residential unit;
(4) Applicant's and household's income and assets;
(5) Applicant's and household's financial obligations;
(6) The physical and mental condition of household members, only
where relevant to their receipt of assistance, such as ability to
work, determination of needs, or referrals to other forms of
assistance;
(7) Any special circumstances claimed by applicant;
(8) Applicant's employment status and availability in the labor market;
(9) Names, addresses, and employment status of potentially liable
relatives;
(10) Utility costs;
(11) Housing costs;
(12) Prescription costs; and
(13) Any other costs that the applicant would like the Welfare Official to
consider as a basic need under the standards of § 193-10 of these
guidelines.
C. Verification records. Verification may be made through records
provided by the applicant (for example, birth and marriage certificates,
pay stubs, pay checks, rent receipts, bankbooks, etc.) as primary
sources. The failure of the applicant to bring such records does not
affect the Welfare Official's responsibility to process the application
promptly. The Welfare Official shall inform the applicant what records
are necessary, and the applicant is required to produce records
possessed as soon as possible. However, the Welfare Official shall not
insist on documentary verification if such records are not available, but
shall ask the applicant to suggest alternative means of verification.
D. Other sources of verification. Verification may also be made through
other sources, such as relatives, employers, former employers, banks,
school personnel, and social or government agencies. The cashier of a
national bank or a treasurer of a savings and trust company is
§ 193-9 MERRIMACK CODE § 193-9
1:234
§ 193-10. Determination of eligibility and amount.
authorized by law to furnish information regarding amounts deposited
to the credit of an applicant or recipient (RSA 165:4).
E. Legally liable relatives. The Welfare Official may seek statements and/
or financial affidavits from the applicant's legally liable relatives
regarding their ability to help support the applicant (RSA 165:19).
F. Refusal to verify information. If the applicant or recipient refuse
comment and/or indicate an unwillingness to have the Welfare Official
seek further information that is necessary, assistance may be denied for
lack of eligibility verification.
A. Eligibility formula. An applicant is eligible to receive assistance when:
(1) He/she meets the nonfinancial eligibility factors listed in § 193-10C
below; and
(2) The applicant's basic maintenance need, as determined under
§ 193-10E, exceeds his/her available income (§ 193-10F) plus
available liquid assets (§ 193-10D). If available income and
available liquid assets exceed the basic maintenance need, as
determined by the guideline amounts, the applicant is not eligible
for general assistance. If the need exceeds the available income/
assets, the amount of assistance granted to the applicant shall be
the difference between the two amounts, in the absence of
circumstances deemed by the Welfare Official to justify an
exception.
B. Legal standard and interpretation. "Whenever a person in any town is
poor and unable to support himself he shall be relieved and maintained
by the overseers of public welfare of such town, whether or not he has
residence there." RSA 165:1.
(1) An applicant cannot be denied assistance because he/she is not a
resident. See § 193-8.
(2) "Whenever" means at any or whatever time that person is poor and
unable to support him or herself.
(a) The Welfare Administrator, or any duly appointed Welfare
Officials, shall be available during normal business hours.
(b) The eligibility of any applicant for general assistance shall be
determined no later than five working days after the
application is submitted. If the applicant has an emergency
need, then assistance for such emergency need shall be
immediately provided in accordance with § 193-7E(1) and (3).
(c) Assistance shall begin as soon as the applicant is determined to
be eligible.
§ 193-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-10
1:235
(3) "Poor and unable to support" means that an individual lacks income
and available liquid assets to adequately provide for the basic
maintenance needs of him/herself or household as determined by
the guidelines.
(4) "Relieved" means an applicant shall be assisted to meet those basic
needs.
C. Nonfinancial eligibility factors.
(1) Age. General assistance shall not be denied any applicant because
of the applicant's age; age is not a factor in determining whether or
not an applicant may receive general assistance. However, age
does make certain applicants eligible for other state or federal
assistance. For example, over 65: Old Age Assistance (OAA), Social
Security; or under 18 years: Temporary Assistance Needy Families
(TANF), foster care, etc. Income from those types of assistance
does affect eligibility under the guidelines. Minor children are
deemed to be the responsibility of their parent(s) or legal
guardian(s), unless circumstances warrant otherwise.
(2) Support actions. No applicant or recipient shall be compelled, as a
condition of eligibility or continued receipt of assistance, to take
any legal action against any other person. The Town of Merrimack
may pursue recovery against legally liable persons or
governmental units. See § 193-17.
(3) Eligibility for other categorical assistance. Recipients who are, or
may be, eligible for any other form of public assistance shall apply
or make appropriate appointments for such assistance
immediately, but no later than seven days after being advised to do
so by the Welfare Official. Failure to do so may render the recipient
ineligible for assistance under these guidelines and subject to
action per § 193-5 of these guidelines.
(4) Employment.
(a) An applicant who is gainfully employed, but whose income and
assets are not sufficient to meet necessary household
expenses, may be eligible to receive general assistance.
(b) Recipients who, without good cause, refuse a job offer or
referral to suitable employment or participation in the work
program, or who voluntarily leave a job without good cause,
may be ineligible for general assistance.
(c) The Welfare Official shall first determine whether there is good
cause for such employment refusal, taking into account the
ability and physical and mental capacity of the applicant,
transportation problems, working conditions that might
involve risks to health or safety, lack of adequate child care, or
any other factors that might make refusing a job reasonable.
§ 193-10 MERRIMACK CODE § 193-10
1:236
These employment requirements shall extend to all adult
members of the household.
(d) A recipient or other adult household member who, without
good cause, voluntarily leaves a job may be ineligible for
general assistance in accordance with RSA 165:1-d. [Also see
§ 193-10C(9) of these guidelines.)
(5) Registration with the New Hampshire Department of Employment
Security (NHES) and work search requirements.
(a) All unemployed recipients and adult members of their
households shall, within seven days after having been granted
assistance, register with NHES to find work. In addition to any
other referrals or applications required by NHES, each
recipient and adult members shall conduct a reasonable,
verified job search as determined by the Welfare Official. Each
recipient and adult members shall apply for employment to
each employer to whom he/she is referred by the Welfare
Official.
(b) These work search requirements apply to each recipient and
each other adult member of the household unless such person
is:
[1] Already working and being compensated or receiving net
income for full time work;
[2] A dependent 18 years or under who is regularly attending
secondary school;
[3] Unable to work due to illness or mental or physical
disability of him/herself or another member of the
household, as verified by the Welfare Official; or
[4] Is solely responsible for the care of a child under the age of
five (RSA 165:31, III). A recipient responsible for the care
of a child aged five to 12 shall not be excused from work
search requirements, but shall be deemed to have good
cause to refuse a job requiring work during hours the child
is not usually in school, if there is no responsible person
available to provide care, and it is verified by the Welfare
Official that no other care is available.
(c) The Welfare Official shall give all necessary and reasonable
assistance to ensure compliance with registration and work
requirements, including the granting of allowances for
transportation and work clothes.
(d) Failure of a recipient to comply with these requirements
without good cause shall be reason for denial of, or cessation
of, assistance.
§ 193-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-10
1:237
(6) Adult students. General assistance applicants or recipients and
adult members of household who are not available for or refusing
to seek or accept full-time employment due to post secondary
education (after 12th grade) are not eligible for general assistance.
(7) Property transfers. No applicant who is otherwise eligible shall
receive such assistance if he/she has made an assignment, transfer,
or conveyance of property for the purpose of rendering him/herself
eligible for assistance within three years immediately preceding
his/her application (RSA 165:2-b).
(8) Employment of household members.
(a) The employment requirements of these guidelines and
participation in the Welfare Work Program shall be required
for all adults aged 18 years to 65 years residing in the same
household, except those adults who regularly attend secondary
school or employed on a full-time basis, who are:
[1] Members of the recipient's household;
[2] Related to the recipient or are legally liable to contribute
to the support of the recipient and/or children of the
household; and
[3] Not otherwise prevented from maintaining employment
and contributing to the support of the household by
reasons such as physical or mental disability, sole child
care responsibility for a child under five or other justifiable
cause as verified by the Welfare Official.
(b) The Welfare Official may waive this requirement where failure
of the other household members to comply is not the fault of
the recipient and the Welfare Official decides it would be
unreasonable for the recipient to establish a separate
household (RSA 165:32).
(9) Disqualification for voluntary termination of employment (RSA
165:1-d).
(a) An applicant shall be considered to have voluntarily terminated
employment if the applicant quits, or fails to report for work
without good cause. An applicant who is fired or resigns from a
job at the request of the employer due to applicant's inability to
maintain the employer's normal work productivity standard
shall not be considered to have voluntarily terminated
employment.
(b) Any applicant eligible for assistance that voluntarily
terminated employment shall be ineligible to receive
assistance for 90 days from the date of employment
termination provided the applicant:
§ 193-10 MERRIMACK CODE § 193-10
1:238
[1] Has received local welfare within the past 365 days and
has been given notice that voluntary termination of
employment without good cause could result in
disqualification.
[2] There are no children under 18 years old in the applicant's
household which the applicant is legally responsible for
supporting.
[3] Did not have a mental of physical impairment which
caused him/her to be unable to work.
[4] Terminated employment which consisted of at least 20
hours per week within the last 60 days prior to an
application for local welfare; and
[5] Did not have good cause for terminating the employment.
[a] Good cause for terminating employment shall include
any of the following:
[i] Discrimination;
[ii] Unreasonable work demands or conditions;
[iii] Retirement;
[iv] Employment which becomes unsuitable following
the applicant's acceptance;
[v] Leaving a job in order to accept a bona-fide job
offer as described in RSA 165:1-d, II(e);
[vi] Migrant farm labor, seasonal construction, or
similar seasonal/moving work;
[vii] Lack of transportation, household emergency, or
other circumstance beyond the control of the
applicant; and
[viii] Other good cause.
[b] The applicant would be responsible for demonstrating
good cause.
D. Available assets.
(1) Available liquid assets.
(a) Available liquid assets are cash on hand, bank deposits, credit
union, checking, savings and debit accounts, securities and
retirement plans (i.e., IRAs, deferred compensation, Keogh's,
etc). Insurance policies with a loan value, 401K availability and
nonessential personal property, may be considered as available
liquid assets when they have been converted into cash. The
§ 193-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-10
1:239
Welfare Official shall allow a reasonable time for such
conversion.
(b) Available liquid assets may not be tools of a trade, livestock
and farm equipment, and necessary and ordinary household
goods that are essential items of personal property.
(2) Automobile ownership. The ownership of one automobile by an
applicant/recipient or his/her dependent does not affect eligibility if
it is essential for transportation to seek or maintain employment, to
procure medical services or rehabilitation services, or if its use is
essential to the maintenance of the individual or the family.
(3) Insurance. The ownership of insurance policies does not affect
eligibility. However, when a policy has cash or loan value, the
recipient will be required to obtain and/or borrow all available
funds, which shall then be considered available liquid assets.
(4) Real estate. The type and amount of real estate owned by an
applicant does not affect eligibility, although rent or other such
income from property shall be considered as available liquid assets.
Applicants owning real estate property, other than that occupied as
their primary residence, shall make reasonable efforts to dispose of
it at fair market value in order to receive assistance. Applicants
shall be informed that a lien covering the amount of any general
assistance they receive shall be placed against any real estate they
own (RSA 165:28).
E. Standard of need. "The basic financial requirement for general
assistance is that an applicant be poor and unable to support him/
herself." (RSA 165:1-a). An applicant shall be considered poor when he/
she has insufficient available income/assets to purchase either for him/
herself or dependents any of the following.
(1) Shelter. The amount to be included as "need" for shelter is the
actual cost of rent or mortgage, provided such is reasonable, but in
no case more than is determined necessary to provide housing by
New Hampshire Housing Finance Authority (NHHFA) Fair Market
Rents for Hillsborough County. The Welfare Administrator will
review these rent levels annually and will update and modify the
levels when NHHFA determine market conditions have changed.
(a) Shelter arrearages. No shelter arrearages will be included in
the "need" formula; however, arrearages may be considered in
emergency situations where: negotiations fail and eviction or
foreclosure is imminent; no other assistance is available; or no
other affordable or alternative shelter exists. Also if the
amount of such mortgage or rental arrearage exceeds the cost
of alternative, available housing which complies with local
health and housing code standards, or if the payment of
arrears will not prevent eviction or foreclosure, the Welfare
Official may instead authorize payment of a new first month
§ 193-10 MERRIMACK CODE § 193-10
1:240
rent. Reasonable relocation expenses may be considered as
"need" for such alternative housing evictions or foreclosures.
Alternative housing may include transitional housing as an
option.
(b) Security deposits. Security deposits may be included in the
"need" formula if, and only if, the applicant is unable to secure
alternative shelter for which no security deposit is required or
is unable to secure funds, either him/herself or from
alternative sources, for payment of the deposit. Payments for
security deposits will only be made if the applicant/recipient is
unable to secure a security deposit under the Guaranteed
Security Deposit Program. If a security deposit is paid by the
Town of Merrimack under this general assistance program it
shall be returned to the Town of Merrimack and not the
recipient (RSA 540-A:7).
(c) Relative landlords. Whenever a relative of an applicant is also
the landlord for the applicant, the responsible relative shall
complete a financial affidavit providing information of income,
assets and expenses. The Welfare Official shall complete a
financial analysis to determine whether the relative is unable
to assist the applicant/recipient before any shelter assistance
is paid in accordance with RSA 165:19.
(d) Property taxes and home insurance. These expenses will be
considered "need" if charges are part of a monthly mortgage
bill and are required by the mortgage company to keep from
foreclosure and if principle, interest and escrows do not exceed
the NHHFA Fair Market Rents for Hillsborough County.
Otherwise, property taxes and homeowners insurance will be
considered in "need" when payment is due. Property taxes
needed to prevent tax deeding may be considered "need" and
the Welfare Official can pay the amount to prevent tax deeding
as "other" expense to the Tax Collector.
(e) Condo fees, home equity loans and second or third mortgages.
These expenses may only be considered "need" if the combined
total costs including their primary principal, interest and
escrows does not exceed the NHHFA Fair Market Rents for the
Hillsborough County.
(f) Other home ownership expenses. When an applicant/recipient
owns their home, other home expenses such as sewer, water
and essential repairs deemed necessary by the Welfare Official
to protect the health and safety of the applicant/recipient's
household may be included as "need." Payment for repairs
shall not be paid under general assistance.
(g) Emergency shelter. If the applicant/recipient is without
housing and is unable to afford shelter, the applicant/recipient
§ 193-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-10
1:241
must accept the least costly alternative for emergency housing
assistance that is deemed suitable by the Welfare Official for
his/her household. It is not the Welfare Official's responsibility
to locate housing acceptable to the household. If the applicant/
recipient refuses an appropriate referral for emergency or
temporary shelter or if the applicant/recipient does not abide
by the rules of the emergency or temporary shelter, the
Welfare Official may suspend the applicant by refusing to pay
for alternative emergency shelter or housing. The applicant/
recipient may not be suspended for other forms of assistance
to which he/she is eligible for.
(2) Utilities. When utility costs are not included in the shelter expense,
the most recent outstanding monthly utility bill excluding
arrearages and other charges will be included as part of "need" by
the Welfare Official. Utility accounts shall be in the applicant's
name in order to provide payment. The Welfare Official may
consider extenuating circumstances when the bill is not in the
applicant's name and it affects the health and safety of the
household members.
NOTE: Cable, satellite services and internet services are not
allowed as "need." No assistance for such services shall be
provided and applicants are required to make extended payment
arrangements with these types of companies if they want to keep
these services.
NOTE: The New Hampshire Public Utilities Commission (PUC)
has established comprehensive rules governing the provision of
some utility services. Generally speaking, the PUC governs electric,
telephone, water, and sewer; it does not govern any municipal
utilities, propane tanks, or fuel oil. With the exception of telephone,
the rules are consistent across utilities. These rules and regulations
cover the initiation of service, payment arrangements, termination
of service, the terms of restoration of service, the requirement of
deposits, municipal guarantees and guarantees from other third
parties. There are special rules as to winter termination. The
Welfare Official shall be familiar with these rules in order to ensure
that needs are properly met at the lowest available cost. The PUC
has a toll-free consumer assistance number: 1-800-852-3793.
(a) Arrearages.
[1] Arrearages will not be included in "need" except when
necessary to ensure the health and safety of the applicant
household or to prevent termination of utility service when
no other resources or referrals can be utilized.
[2] In accordance with the rules of the PUC relating to electric
utilities and natural gas, arrearages for electric service
and natural gas need not be paid if the Welfare Official
§ 193-10 MERRIMACK CODE § 193-10
1:242
notifies the electric company or natural gas company that
the Town of Merrimack guarantees payment of current
electric or gas bills as long as the recipient remains
eligible for general assistance.
(b) Restoration of service.
[1] When utility service has been terminated and the Welfare
Official has determined that alternative utility service is
not available and alternative shelter is not feasible,
arrearages will be included in "need" when restoration of
service is necessary to ensure the health and safety of the
applicant household. The Welfare Official may negotiate
with the utility for payment of less than the full amount of
the arrears and/or may attempt to arrange a repayment
plan to obtain restoration of service.
[2] When electric service has been terminated and restoration
is required, arrearages may either be included as set forth
in the above subsection, or may be paid in accordance with
a reasonable payment plan entered into by the applicant
and the electric company. The Welfare Official may hold
the recipient accountable for the payment arrangement as
noted on the notice of decision or verbally as noted in the
case plan.
(c) Deposits. Utility security deposits will be considered as "need"
if, and only if, the applicant is unable to secure funds for the
payment of the deposit and is unable to secure utility service
without a deposit. If the applicants/recipients do not have the
resources to make a deposit, the Welfare Official can make
payment under general assistance as "other expense" and such
deposits shall, however, be the property of the Town of
Merrimack.
(3) Food. The amount included as "need" for food purchases will be in
accordance with the most recent standard Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program (SNAP) allotment, as determined under the
SNAP Program administered by the New Hampshire Department of
Health and Human Services. An amount in excess of the standard
food allotment may be granted if one or more members of the
household need a special diet, as verified by the Welfare Official,
the documented cost of which is greater than can be purchased
with the family's allotment of SNAP. No amount for need shall be
included for alcohol, tobacco or pet food.
(4) Household maintenance allowance.
(a) The amount included as "need" for the purchase of personal
and household necessities will be the amount that the Welfare
Official will set as an allowance amount based on household
size is set as:
§ 193-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-10
1:243
[1] Single-person household: $11 per week or $47.30 a month.
[2] Additional persons in household: $4 per week or $17.20
per month.
(b) The Welfare Official may determine that an additional "need"
allowance for a basic need is required due to health and
sanitary needs that can be documented by receipts of expense.
(5) Telephone. The lowest available basic monthly rate for one
telephone per household will be included as "need" if there is a
verified telephone expense for one of the household members.
Basic monthly rate shall be for telephone voice only and not include
any other extra charges.
(a) Payments under general assistance will not be made for
telephone bills, unless there is verified exceptional
circumstances that the applicant/recipient's health or safety
are at risk and no other source of assistance is available, in
such case, a payment may be made to maintain basic voice
telephone service.
(6) Transportation. Expenses for one vehicle per household may be
allowed as in "need" when determining eligibility or amount of
assistance under general assistance. Payments, however, for these
expenses under general assistance will not be made.
(a) Vehicle payment. One reasonable vehicle monthly payment per
household shall be included as part of "need" when
determining eligibility or amount of assistance for general
assistance. Vehicle registration will be required to show
ownership of vehicle and loan or lease agreement will be
required to show payment amount.
(b) Vehicle gasoline.
[1] Gasoline for one vehicle per household shall be included as
part of "need." Ten gallons per week times the NH state
average of regular gasoline as determined by American
Automobile Association shall be included as part of "need"
when determining eligibility or amount of assistance for
general assistance.
[2] If the Welfare Official determines that work or verified
medical needs require more than 10 gallons per week, the
"need" allowance for gasoline can be increased by the
Welfare Official with documented receipts of actual
gasoline expenses.
[3] The gasoline allowance will be updated on an annual basis
by the Welfare Administrator.
§ 193-10 MERRIMACK CODE § 193-10
1:244
[4] A voucher of assistance may be issued by the Welfare
Official for minimum gallons required to return home,
apply for assistance or other necessary trip determined by
the Welfare Official.
(c) Other vehicle expenses. Vehicle inspection and registration
and repair determined by the Welfare Official as necessary and
reasonable and documented by receipt will be included as a
one-time "need" expense when determining eligibility or
amount of assistance for general assistance.
(7) Maintenance of medical insurance.
(a) Medical premium payments shall not be included in "need"
when determining eligibility or amount of assistance.
(b) In the event that the Welfare Official determines that the
maintenance of medical insurance is essential, an applicant
may include as "need" the reasonable cost of such premiums.
(8) Medical expenses.
(a) The Welfare Official shall not consider including amounts for
medical, dental or eye services in "need" unless the applicant
can verify that all other potential sources have been
investigated and that there is no source of assistance other
than local welfare. Other sources to be considered shall
include state and federal programs, local and area clinics, area
service organizations and area hospital indigent programs
designed for such needs.
(b) When an applicant requests assistance of medical service,
prescriptions, dental service or eye service and all other
potential sources and assistance and have been exhausted or
not available, the applicant/recipient will provide written
documentation from a doctor, dentist or person licensed to
practice optometry in the area, indicating that these services
are absolutely necessary and cannot be postponed without
creating a significant risk that the applicant/recipient's well
being will be placed in serious jeopardy. Generic medications
will be used unless a medical doctor provides otherwise.
(9) Legal expenses. Except for those specifically required by statute,
no legal expenses will be included in "need."
(10) Clothing. There is no allowance given for "need" of clothing. If the
applicant has an emergency clothing need which cannot be met in a
timely fashion by other community resources (i.e., Salvation Army,
Red Cross, church group), the expense of reasonably meeting that
emergency clothing need will be included.
§ 193-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-10
1:245
(11) Emergency needs not otherwise provided for in these guidelines. If
the Welfare Official determines that the strict application of the
standard of need criteria will result in unnecessary or undue
hardship (e.g., needed services are inaccessible to the applicant),
such Welfare Official may make minor adjustments in the criteria,
or may make allowances using the emergency need standards
stated in § 193-7E(3) of these guidelines. Any such determination,
and the reasons therefor, shall be stated in writing in the applicant/
recipient's case record.
(a) Credit card payments, rent-to-own and repayment of personal
loans are examples of nonbasic needs.
(12) Shared expenses. If the applicant/recipient household shares
shelter, utility, or other expenses with a nonapplicant/recipient (i.e.,
is part of a residential unit), the in "need" should be determined on
a prorated share, based on the total number of persons in the
residential unit (e.g., three adults in residential unit, but only one
applies for assistance-shelter need is 1/3 of shelter allowance for
household of three persons).
F. Income. Income/available liquid assets shall be compared to the
standard of need, as determined under § 193-10E in determining the
eligibility and amount of assistance. Computation of income and
expenses will be by the week or month. The following items will be
included in the computation:
(1) Earned income. Income in cash or in-kind earned by the applicant
or any member of the household through:
(a) Wages and other earnings (including but not limited to
bonuses, salary, tips, commissions, or profit), whether selfemployed
or as an employee, is to be included as income. When
income consists of wages and earnings, the amount computed
shall be that available after required medical and dental
insurance deductions, income taxes, social security and other
payroll deductions required by state, federal, or local law,
court-ordered support payments and child care costs, and
work-related clothing costs have been deducted. Health saving
account deductions will be excluded on initial application from
earning but future contributions must be stopped while
receiving assistance after the initial assistance. Flexible
spending accounts will be excluded from income until it is
legally able to be stopped after initial assistance.
(b) Self-employment total profit is arrived at by subtracting
business expenses from gross income in accordance with
standard accounting principles.
(2) Rental income and profits from items sold are considered earned
income.
§ 193-10 MERRIMACK CODE § 193-10
1:246
(3) Income that is trusteed, or income similarly unavailable to the
applicant or applicant's dependents, shall not be included.
(4) Income or support from other persons. Contributions from relatives
or nonapplicant household members shall be considered as income
only if actually available and received by the applicant or recipient.
(5) Income from other assistance or social insurance programs.
(a) State categorical cash assistance benefits [e.g., Temporary
Assistance of Needy Families (TANF), Old Age Assistance
(OAA), Family Assistance Program (FAP) and Aid to the
Permanently and Totally Disabled (APTD)], Social Security Old
Age, Survivor and Disability Insurance (OASDI) payments,
Social Security Income (SSI) Payments, Veteran Administration
(VA) benefits, unemployment insurance benefits, and payment
from other government sources shall be considered income.
(b) Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program Benefits (SNAP)
cannot be counted as income per federal law [7 USC
§ 2017(b)].
(c) Fuel assistance cannot be counted as income per federal law
[42 USC § 8624(f)(1)].
(6) Court-ordered support payments. Alimony and child support
payments shall be considered income only if actually received by
the applicant or recipient.
(7) Income from other sources. Payments from other sources such as
workers' compensation, work or re-vocational training stipends,
student loans (received as cash) pension, trust funds, and similar
programs shall be considered income.
(8) Earnings of a child. No inquiry shall be made into the earnings of a
child 14 years of age or less unless that child makes a regular and
substantial contribution to the family.
(9) Qualified State Assistance Reduction (QSAR) as deemed income.
The Welfare Official may deem as income all or any portion of any
qualified state assistance reduction (RSA 167:82, VIII). The
following criteria shall apply to any action to deem income under
this section (RSA 165:1-e).
(a) The authority to deem income under this section shall
terminate when the qualified state assistance reduction no
longer is in effect.
(b) Applicants for general assistance may be required to cooperate
in obtaining information from the Department of Health and
Human Services as to the existence and amount of any
qualified state assistance reduction. No applicant for general
assistance may be considered to be subject to a qualified state
§ 193-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-10
1:247
§ 193-11. Disbursements.
The Town of Merrimack Welfare Department uses a voucher system (RSA
165:1, III). Vouchers are payable directly to the vendors (utilities, landlords,
stores, etc.) involved.
assistance reduction unless the existence and amount has been
confirmed by the Department of Health and Human Services.
(c) The Welfare Official shall provide the applicant with a written
decision which sets forth the amount of any deemed income
used to determine eligibility for general assistance.
(d) Whenever necessary to prevent an immediate threat to the
health and safety of children in the household, the Welfare
Official shall waive that portion, if any, of the qualified state
assistance reduction as necessary.
G. Residents of shelters for victims of domestic violence. An applicant
residing in a shelter for victims of domestic violence and their children,
who has income, and owns resources jointly with the abusive member
of the applicant's household, shall be required to cooperate with the
normal procedures for purposes of verification. Such resources and
income may be excluded from eligibility determinations unless the
applicant has safe access to joint resources at the time of application.
The verification process may be completed through an authorized
representative of the shelter of residence. The normal procedures taken
in accordance with these guidelines to recover assistance granted shall
not delay such assistance.
A. Voucher use.
(1) When a voucher is issued to provide payment, a recipient shall be
required to sign the voucher and may be required to show
identification to insure proper usage. The amount shown on the
voucher is the maximum amount to be used for payment.
(2) In order for the vendor to be paid, the vendor must return the
signed voucher with the itemized bill or register tape to the Welfare
Office. If there is any unspent money, the voucher shall be returned
to the Town of Merrimack for payment of the actual amount listed
on an itemized bill or register tape.
(3) Vouchers shall be used by the void date. If the recipient uses the
voucher after the void date such an act will be considered misuse of
that voucher by the recipient and the vendor will not be paid.
B. Prohibited purchases. Tobacco products, prepared taxable foods,
alcoholic beverages, pet food or products, magazines, plants and toys
cannot be purchased with the food or maintenance vouchers. If the
recipient purchases any of these items such an act is considered misuse
§ 193-10 MERRIMACK CODE § 193-11
1:248
of that voucher by the recipient and the vendor will not be paid for the
prohibited items.
C. Voucher alteration, theft, loss or misuse.
(1) It is the responsibility of the recipient to safeguard from theft, loss
or misuse of any voucher he/she receives. Vouchers altered or
misused by the recipient or vendor will not be paid. It shall be
considered misuse of that voucher if a recipient causes, permits or
neglects to prevent the theft, alteration, misuse, or transfer of a
voucher. A misuse of voucher shall be considered a violation of
welfare guidelines for which benefits may be denied or suspended.
(2) No replacement vouchers shall be issued if the original is lost,
stolen, misplaced, or misused unless authorized by the Welfare
Official.
D. Rent requirements for voucher payment.
(1) Rent vouchers may only be made payable to the owner of the
property when the landlord or agent of the property has completed
a rental verification form including a tax identification number. The
rental verification form is considered a legal document upon which
the Welfare Official relies in determining eligibility. Forms which
misrepresent or inaccurately report information for the purposes of
obtaining assistance which otherwise may not be issued shall be
grounds for stopping payment. Legal action may also be taken [RSA
641:3.11 (a-c)].
(2) Where applicants are under eviction, the Welfare Official shall
verify if the landlord's acceptance of a voucher for payment will
stop the eviction proceedings. The Welfare Official may void the
voucher or deny assistance of rent if the landlord's failure to waive
the eviction proceedings may result in the applicant being evicted
from the rental unit that the voucher or assistance would have paid
rent for.
(3) The Welfare Official shall not pay charges that do not directly
represent an actual service or item (such as late charges, security
deposits, storage charges, key charges, damages, etc.) except
when there is no other alternative or as provided by law.
E. Vendor payment requirements and conditions.
(1) No check payment for a voucher shall be issued to a vendor until
the vendor provides a federal tax identification number by a rental
verification form (if required) and any other documentation
required by the Town's Finance Department and federal law. If the
vendor fails to provide required information and the applicant has
made reasonable efforts to obtain the information from the vendor,
an applicant or recipient will still be considered eligible and a
§ 193-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-11
1:249
§ 193-12. Deceased in Town of Merrimack.
voucher can be issued to cover assistance and be paid to the vendor
when the vendor complies.
(2) No check payment for a voucher shall be issued to a vendor if the
voucher was used after the void date.
(3) Vendors allowing the purchase of prohibited foods and
miscellaneous items that are listed on the voucher will not be
reimbursed for those prohibited items. All vendors receiving food,
maintenance, prescription or diaper vouchers shall attach the cash
register tape or other verification to the voucher in order to be
reimbursed.
(4) Only the amount actually used that does not exceed the amount on
the voucher shall be paid to the vendor.
(5) Each voucher authorization requires approval by the Welfare
Official. All voucher authorizations are one time only. The amount
of assistance provided shall be negotiated whenever possible. The
Welfare Official shall always attempt to provide what is necessary
for the least cost possible. If negotiation is not possible, the least
expensive appropriate alternative shall be sought.
F. No contractual agreement with landlord/property owner.
(1) The Town of Merrimack shall not enter into any contractual
agreement with a landlord/property owner to provide housing
assistance to applicants/recipients. The landlords/property owners
shall have no legal recourse against the Town if the Welfare Official
determines that the applicant/recipients are not eligible or no
longer eligible for benefits under the welfare guidelines.
(2) If the applicant continues to reside at the premises after general
assistance has been terminated or suspended, any and all rents due
to the landlord/property owner, including any past and/or future
rents will be the contractual obligations and responsibilities solely
of the tenant.
A. If eligible for assistance, payment for burial or cremation of persons
found in the Town of Merrimack at time of death (RSA 165:3, I) or in a
county nursing home and whom was a resident of the Town of
Merrimack prior to entering the county nursing home (RSA 165:3, II), is
limited to $1,000 (RSA 165:27-a).
B. An application shall be made before any burial or cremation expenses
are incurred. In such cases, assistance may be applied for on behalf of
the deceased person.
C. Total costs for burial or cremation cannot exceed $1,000 of expenses
(RSA 165:27-a) and the Town of Merrimack will assist with payment
§ 193-11 MERRIMACK CODE § 193-12
1:250
§ 193-13. Applications of rents paid by Town of Merrimack.
Whenever the owner of property rented to a person receiving general
assistance from the Town of Merrimack is in arrears in sewer or tax
payments to the Town of Merrimack or if the Welfare Administrator is
informed by the Merrimack Water Village District that the property owner
is in arrears for water, the Town of Merrimack may apply the assistance
which the property owner would have received in payment of rent on
behalf of such assisted person to the property owner's delinquent balances,
regardless of whether such delinquent balances relate to property currently
occupied by the assisted person (RSA 165:4-a).
§ 193-14. Maintenance of records.
only if relatives, other private persons, estate of deceased and/or the
Department of Health and Human Services, Social Security, Veterans
Benefits or other sources are unable to cover the entire maximum
amount of $1,000 for burial or cremation.
D. The expense may be recovered from the deceased person's municipality
of residence [RSA 165:20 and 165-20(a)], or from a liable relative (RSA
165:19).
E. If determined eligible for assistance, the burial or cremation remains
may be buried in the plots owned by the Town of Merrimack at The Last
Rest Cemetery. Veterans may be eligible for burials at Veteran
Cemeteries.
A. Payment arrears. A payment shall be considered in arrears if more than
30 days have elapsed since the mailing of the bill, or in the case of real
estate taxes, if interest has begun to accrue (RSA 76:13 and RSA
165:4-a).
B. Order of priority. Delinquent balances will be offset in order of the
following priority: 1) property taxes to the Town of Merrimack; 2) sewer
to the Town of Merrimack; and may offset 3) water to the Merrimack
Water Village District.
C. Procedure.
(1) The Welfare Official will issue a voucher on behalf of the tenant to
the landlord for the allowed amount of rent. The voucher will
indicate any amount to be applied to a delinquent balance owed by
the landlord, specifying which delinquency and referring to the
authority of RSA 165:4-a.
(2) The Welfare Administrator will issue a duplicate voucher to the
appropriate department (i.e., Tax Collector, Sewer Department,
Water District), which will forward the voucher to the treasurer or
finance director for payment. Upon receipt of payment, the Welfare
Administrator will issue a receipt of payment to the delinquent
landlord.
§ 193-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-14
1:251
A. Legal requirement.
(1) The Welfare Administrator shall be responsible for establishing and
accurately maintaining a complete paper and/or electronic record
concerning the number of applicants given assistance and the cost
for such support.
(2) Separate case records shall be established and maintained for each
individual or household applying for or receiving general
assistance.
(3) These records are required:
(a) To provide a complete history of an applicant's needs and
assistance that might aid the Welfare Official in ongoing case
management and in referring the applicant to appropriate
agencies;
(b) To support decisions concerning the applicant's eligibility;
(c) To provide the availability of information if the applicant or
recipient seeks administrative or judicial review of the Welfare
Official's decision;
(d) To provide the Welfare Administrator with accurate statistical
information; and
(e) To provide a valid basis of accounting for the expenditure of
the Town of Merrimack's funds (RSA 165:2-c), which requires
that an itemized account of all general assistance expenditures
(without recipient names) furnished to any taxpayer requesting
it.
B. Case records. The Welfare Official shall be responsible for assuring that
case records, in paper and/or electronic format, contain at a minimum
the following information:
(1) The complete application including any authorizations signed by
the applicant allowing the Welfare Official to obtain or verify any
pertinent information in the course of assisting the recipient, to
include a signed authorization to release information from the New
Hampshire Division of Health and Human Services. Signature
pages shall be kept as hard copies or scanned into electronic form.
(2) Written notices of decision which shall provide grounds for
approval or denial of an application.
(3) A narrative history recording:
(a) The need for assistance;
(b) The results of investigations of applicants' circumstances;
(c) Referrals;
§ 193-14 MERRIMACK CODE § 193-14
1:252
§ 193-15. Town of Merrimack work program.
(d) Changes in status, etc.
(4) A record of expenditures paid under general assistance, which has
complete data concerning the type, amount and dates of assistance
given, which may be kept on paper or electronically.
A. Participation.
(1) Any adult household recipients of general assistance will be
required to work under the Town of Merrimack-operated work
program at any available job assignment that is within his/her
capacity (RSA 165:31) for the purpose of reimbursement of benefits
received.
(2) Recipients will be required to complete an application, providing
references and authorizing a criminal background check that may
be done by the Town of Merrimack.
(3) Refusal or failing to participate in the application process or work
program will prompt the review of recipient's eligibility for general
assistance, and may result in a suspension or termination of
assistance. [See § 193-5C(2)(b).]
(4) Job assignments under the work program are of limited duration.
Participants in the work program are not considered employees of
the Town of Merrimack, and any work performed by work program
participants does not give rise to any employee-employer
relationship between the recipient/work program participant and
the Town of Merrimack or to any benefits.
B. Reimbursement rate. The work program participant shall be allotted
the prevailing municipal wage for work performed, but in no case less
than the minimum wage. No cash compensation shall be paid for work
program participation. The wage value of all hours worked shall be
used to reimburse the Town of Merrimack for assistance given.
C. Continuing financial liability.
(1) If, due to lack of available municipal work or other good cause, a
recipient does not work a sufficient number of hours to fully
reimburse the Town of Merrimack for the amount of his/her
assistance, the amount of assistance received less the value of work
program hours completed shall still be owed to the Town of
Merrimack.
(2) No work program participant shall be required to work more hours
than are necessary to reimburse assistance rendered.
D. Allowance for work search. The Town shall provide reasonable time
during normal assigned hours for a participant to conduct an adequate
job search to secure work in the labor market.
§ 193-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-15
1:253
E. Work program hours.
(1) Work program hours are subject to approval of the Welfare Official,
work program supervisor and the participant. Failure of the
participant to adhere to the agreed work program hours (except for
the reasons listed in Subsection F) will prompt review of the
recipient's eligibility for general assistance, and may result in a
suspension or termination of assistance. [See § 193-5C(2)(b).]
(2) The work program participant shall schedule appointments so as
not to conflict with the work program and must notify his/her work
program supervisor in advance of the appointment. The Welfare
Official or work program supervisor may require participants to
provide documentation of their attendance at an interview or
appointment, scheduled during assignment hours.
F. Work program attendance. With prior notice to the Welfare
Administrator or work program supervisor, a recipient may be excused
from work program participation if he/she:
(1) Has a conflicting job interview;
(2) Has a conflicting interview at a service or welfare agency;
(3) Has a medical appointment or illness. The Welfare Administrator or
work program supervisor may require documentation from a
physician for extended illness of three consecutive scheduled work
days or more;
(4) As a parent or person in loco parentis, must care for a child under
the age of five. A recipient responsible for a child age five but under
12 shall not be required to work during hours that the child is not in
school, if there is no responsible person available to provide care,
and no other care is available;
(5) Is unable to work due to mental or physical disability, as verified by
the Welfare Official;
(6) Must remain at home because of illness or disability to another
member of the household, as verified by the Welfare Official;
(7) Does not possess the materials or tools required to perform the
task and the Town of Merrimack fails to provide them;
(8) Works a full time job; or
(9) Does not meet the job criteria required for a work program
assignment.
G. Workers' compensation. The Town of Merrimack shall provide workers'
compensation coverage to participants in work program programs in
conformity with the New Hampshire Workers' Compensation Laws.
However, no monetary compensation from workman's compensation
§ 193-15 MERRIMACK CODE § 193-15
1:254
§ 193-16. Liens.
shall be paid since work program participants do not receive monetary
assistance from work program participation [RSA 281-A:2, VII(b)].
A. Real estate (RSA 165:28). The law requires the Town to place a lien for
welfare assistance received on any real estate owned by an assisted
person in all cases except for just cause.
(1) The Town Manager shall file with the assistance of the Welfare
Administrator a notice of lien with the County Registry of Deeds,
complete with the owner's name, map/parcel and a description of
the property sufficient to identify the property where the
recipient(s) owns real property in their name.
(2) Interest at the rate of 6% per year shall accrue on the amount of
money constituting the lien commencing one year after the date the
lien is filed, unless waived by the Town Council.
(3) The lien remains in effect until enforced or released or until the
amount of the lien is repaid to the Town of Merrimack. Upon full
repayment of a lien, the Town Manager with the assistance of the
Welfare Administrator shall file written notice of the discharge of
the lien with the County Registry of Deeds.
(4) The lien shall not be enforced so long as the real estate is occupied
as the sole residence of the assisted recipient, his/her surviving
spouse or his/her surviving children who are under age of 18 years
or blind or permanently and totally disabled. At such time as the
lien may become enforceable, the Welfare Administrator shall
contact the attorney handling the real estate or estate before
enforcing the lien to let them know that the Town is requiring
repayment of lien, interest and any associated costs.
(5) The register of deeds shall keep a suitable record or such notices
without charging any fee therefor, and he shall enter an
acknowledgment of satisfaction of the lien upon written request of
the Town without fee.
B. Civil judgments (RSA 165:28-a).
(1) The Town of Merrimack shall be entitled to a lien upon property
passing under the terms of a will or by intestate succession, a
property settlement, or a civil judgment for personal injuries
(except workers' compensation) awarded any person granted
assistance by the Town of Merrimack for the amount of assistance
granted to the recipient.
(2) The Town of Merrimack shall be entitled to the lien only if the
assistance was granted no more than six years before the receipt of
the inheritance or the award of the property settlement or civil
judgment. When the Welfare Official becomes aware of such a
§ 193-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 193-16
1:255
§ 193-17. Recovery of assistance.
The Welfare Administrator shall seek to recover money expended to assist
eligible applicants. There shall be no delay, refusal to assist, reduction or
termination of assistance while the Welfare Administrator is pursuing the
procedural or statutory avenues to secure reimbursement. Any legal action
to recover must be filed in a court within six years after the last expenditure
(RSA 165:25).
claim against an inheritance, award or civil judgment, he/she shall
send a letter to the attorney or agent representing the recipient
notifying him/her of the Town's lien on such.
(3) This lien shall take precedence over all other claims.
A. Recovery from responsible relatives (RSA 165:19).
(1) The amount of money spent by the Town of Merrimack to assist a
recipient who has a father, mother, stepfather, stepmother,
husband, wife or child (who is no longer a minor) of sufficient
ability to also support the recipient may be recovered from the
liable relative.
(2) Sufficient ability shall be deemed to exist when the relative's
weekly income is more than sufficient to provide a reasonable
subsistence compatible with decency and health.
(3) The Welfare Official may determine that "in kind" assistance or the
provision of products/services to the applicant/recipient is
acceptable as a relative's response to liability for support.
(4) The Welfare Official shall make reasonable efforts to give to the
liable relative written notice of money spent in support of a
recipient prior to the giving of assistance, but assistance to which
an applicant is entitled under these guidelines shall not be delayed
due to inability to contact possibly liable relatives.
B. Recovery from the municipality of residence (RSA 165:20).
(1) The Welfare Administrator shall seek to recover from the
municipality of residence the amount of money spent by the Town
of Merrimack to assist a recipient who has a residence in another
municipality.
(2) Written notice of money spent in support of a recipient shall be
given to the Welfare Administrator of the municipality of residence.
(3) In any civil action for recovery brought under RSA 165:20, the
court shall award costs to the prevailing party (RSA 165:19 and
20). (See RSA 165:20-a providing for arbitration of such disputes
between communities.)
§ 193-16 MERRIMACK CODE § 193-17
1:256
§ 193-18. Severability.
If any provision of these guidelines is held at law to be invalid or
inapplicable to any person or circumstances, the remaining provisions shall
continue in full force and effect.
Appendix
Chapter A197
CHARTER AND SECOND CHARTER
Chapter A198
C. Recovery from former recipient's income (RSA 165:20-b). A former
recipient who is returned to an income status after receiving assistance
may be required to reimburse the Town for the assistance provided, if
such reimbursement can be made without financial hardship.
D. Recovery from state and federal sources.
(1) The amount of money spent by the Town of Merrimack to support a
recipient who has made initial application for Social Security
Income (SSI) and has signed New Hampshire Department of Health
and Human Services (NHDHHS) FORM 151, "Authorization for
Reimbursement of Interim Assistance," shall be recovered through
the Social Security Administration (SSA) and the New Hampshire
Department of Health and Human Services (NHDHHS).
(2) Prescription expenses paid by the Town of Merrimack for
applicants who have applied for Medicaid can be recovered
through the New Hampshire Department of Health and Human
Services if, and when, the applicant is approved for medical
coverage.
E. Delayed state claims.
(1) For those recipients of general assistance deemed eligible for state
assistance [Aid to the Permanently and Totally Disabled (APTD) and
Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF) or Family
Assistance Program (FAP)], New Hampshire Department of Health
and Human Services (NHDHHS) shall reimburse a Town of
Merrimack the amount of general assistance as a result of delays in
processing within the federally mandated time periods (APTD, 90
days and TANF or FAP, 60 days).
(2) Any claims for reimbursement shall be held until the end of the
fiscal year and may be reimbursed on a pro-rata basis dependent
upon the total claims filed per year (RSA 165:20-c). A Form 340
"Request for State Reimbursement" may be obtained from the
NHDHHS for this purpose.
§ 193-17 CHARTER AND SECOND CHARTER § 193-18
A197:257
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
§ A198-1. Legal basis.
This Administrative Code is established in accordance with the provisions
of the Merrimack Town Charter.
§ A198-2. Administrative departments.
A. A department shall be a legal subdivision of the Town government
usually performing a variety of interrelated functions with multiple staff
positions.
B. A departmental division shall have a single primary function.
C. The administrative services of the Town shall consist of the following
departments. Departments may be divided into divisions as provided
herein or as provided by the Town Charter.
Department/Division Department/Division Head
1. General Government
Divisions:
Town Manager
Administration Town Manager
Human Resources Human Resources Coordinator
Information Technology Town Manager
2. Community Services
Divisions:
Town Manager
Cable Media Services Coordinator
Parks and Recreation Parks and Recreation Director
Welfare Welfare Administrator
3. Finance Department and
Town Clerk/Tax Collector
Divisions:
Finance Director
Assessing Office Manager/Chief Assessor
Finance Finance Director
Town Clerk/Tax Collector Town Clerk/Tax Collector
Treasury Treasurer
4. Community Development
Divisions:
Community Development
Director
Planning and Zoning Planning and Zoning
Administrator
Economic Development Community Development
Director
§ 193-18 MERRIMACK CODE § A198-2
A197:258
§ A198-3. Duties and responsibilities of chief adminstrative officer.
Department/Division Department/Division Head
Conservation Community Development
Director
5. Public Works Department
Divisions:
Public Works Director
Administration and Engineering Public Works Director
Buildings and Grounds Public Works Director
Equipment Maintenance Highway Operations Manager
Highway Maintenance Highway Operations Manager
Solid Waste Public Works Director
Wastewater Assistant Public Works Director/
Wastewater
6. Fire and Rescue Department
Divisions:
Fire Chief
Administration and Support
Services
Assistant Fire Chief - Support
Services
Emergency Management Fire Chief
Operations Assistant Fire Chief - Operations
Call Fire/Emergency Medical
Services, Training and Safety
Assistant Fire Chief - Support
Services
Fire Prevention/Fire Marshal Assistant Fire Chief - Support
Services
Building and Health Assistant Fire Chief - Support
Services
7. Police Department Divisions: Police Chief
Administrative and Support
Services
Administrative and Support
Services Captain
Communications Administrative and Support
Services Captain
Criminal Investigation Detective Lieutenant
Legal Deputy Chief
Patrol Operations Captain
8. Merrimack Library Library Trustees
A. The Town Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the Town
and shall perform all the duties and have all the responsibilities
prescribed by Article VII of the Town Charter, New Hampshire State
Law, ordinances and resolutions.
§ A198-2 CHARTER AND SECOND CHARTER § A198-3
A197:259
§ A198-4. Duties and responsibilities of department heads.
B. The Town Manager shall supervise the heads of all departments
established by the Town Charter and this code. The Town Manager shall
have the power to suspend and discipline, and to perform or delegate,
the duties and responsibilities of such department heads, except as may
otherwise be provided in the Town Charter and New Hampshire State
Law.
C. The Town Manager may prescribe such rules and regulations, not
inconsistent with the Town Charter, Town ordinances and New
Hampshire State Law, as he may deem necessary for the conduct of the
various departments, and he may investigate and inquire into the
affairs of any department at any time.
D. The Town Manager shall maintain their skills, education and
certifications and licenses, monitor trends and changes in their
professional, internal and external environments, and make reports and
recommendations of the impacts of the noted trends and changes on
their own initiative or at the request of the Town Council.
A. Department heads shall perform all the duties and exercise all the
duties and responsibilities conferred upon their office by applicable
laws, ordinances and resolutions. They shall be responsible for the
management of divisional functions within that department and the
orderly and efficient operation of their department.
B. Department heads may submit, for approval by the Manager,
recommended amendments to the Administrative Code establishing,
consolidating or eliminating such departmental divisions, bureaus or
other subunits as may be deemed desirable in the interest of economy
and efficiency and in accordance with sound administrative principles
and practices.
C. Department heads may submit, for approval by the Town Manager,
departmental rules and regulations not inconsistent with general laws,
the Town Charter, this Administrative Code, and the provisions of the
Personnel Plan for the administration of their various departments,
conduct of their employees, and the proper performance of the
department's business.
D. Department heads shall be responsible for ensuring that the employees
and operations of their department maintain effective working
relationships with other Town employees, the public, outside
contractors and agencies, and other political entities.
E. Department heads shall be responsible for satisfactory maintenance
and care of all Town property and buildings assigned to their
department.
§ A198-3 MERRIMACK CODE § A198-4
A197:260
§ A198-5. Selection, qualification, compensation and terms of office
of department heads and other personnel.
§ A198-6. Department staff.
§ A198-7. General government.
General government shall be under the supervision of the Town Manager.
The Town Manager shall manage the functions of the following divisions:
F. Department heads shall prepare and submit routine and special reports
on the operation of their department as may be required by the Town
Manager, Town Council, or any state or federal agency.
G. Department heads shall submit an itemized estimate of the operational
and capital expenditures for their department for use in preparation of
the proposed budget for the next fiscal year, at such time as may be
requested by the Town Manager.
H. Department heads shall be responsible for following the purchasing and
control system provisions of this Administrative Code and Town policy
with respect to expenditures, purchases and contracts for his/her
department.
I. Department heads shall maintain their skills, education, certifications
and licenses, monitor trends and changes in their professional and
department environment, and make reports and recommendations of
the impacts of the noted trends and changes on their own initiative or at
the request of the Town Manager or Town Council.
A. All department heads shall be appointed as provided by the Merrimack
Town Charter for indefinite terms on the basis of merit and fitness to
perform their duties and may be removed by the Manager as provided
by the Merrimack Town Charter, state law and the Personnel Plan.
B. The compensation of all department heads and nonrepresented
personnel shall be fixed in accordance with the Personnel Plan and
within the limits established by existing appropriations per Charter
§ 7-7C.
A. Department heads may recommend subordinate positions,
appointments and removals, as necessary, within the limitations of the
appropriations provided and subject to the provisions of the Town
Charter, approval of the Manager and the Personnel Plan.
B. All employees shall be under the supervision of their respective
department heads, and all employees in the Town's service shall be
compensated in accordance with the Personnel Plan and/or the
appropriate collective bargaining agreement.
A. Human Resources Division shall consist of a Human Resources
Coordinator appointed in accordance with § A198-6A and shall consist
§ A198-4 CHARTER AND SECOND CHARTER § A198-7
A197:261
of such other professionals and staff appointed in accordance with
§ A198-6, Department staff. The Coordinator shall perform the
following functions:
(1) New employee orientation.
(2) Assistance with collecting data and preparing for collective
bargaining negotiations.
(3) Management of workplace.
(4) Behavior issues, including absenteeism, harassment, substance
abuse.
(5) Compliance with state and federal workplace and employment
rules and regulations.
(6) Assistance with processing grievances.
(7) Management of individual personnel records, including:
(a) Wages and benefits.
(b) Personnel evaluations.
(c) Personnel actions.
(d) Required testing and certifications.
(8) Assistance with employee separation issues.
(9) Administer recruitment, selection and retention process.
(10) Assist with meeting mission critical training needs.
(11) Meeting safety and security compliance issues.
(12) Oversee medical/health coverage.
B. The Information Technology Division shall perform the following
functions:
(1) Plan for and implement the data processing needs of the Town.
(2) Assist division directors in assessing the divisions' data processing
needs.
(3) Develop and implement all data processing capabilities required.
(4) Care for and maintain all property and equipment assigned to the
Division.
(5) Provide for the training of all personnel using data processing
equipment.
§ A198-7 MERRIMACK CODE § A198-7
A197:262
§ A198-8. Community Services.
Community Services shall be under the supervision of the Town Manager.
The Town Manager shall manage the functions of the following divisions:
(6) Provide backup and security mechanisms for all data processing
systems.
(7) Perform all other related functions as required.
A. Cable Division. The Cable Division shall be under the supervision of the
Media Services Coordinator who is appointed in accordance with
§ A198-6A and shall consist of such other professionals and staff
appointed in accordance with § A198-6, Department staff. The Media
Services Coordinator shall perform the following functions:
(1) Oversee all cable-related services and relevant technologies for the
Town, including contract compliance issues and resolution of
subscriber complaints.
(2) Manage the Merrimack Community Television (MCTV) to maximize
the community's ability to produce public, education and
government television (PEG) access programming. This includes
assuring that all users are properly supervised and trained and that
policies for use are up to date and applied uniformly.
(3) Provide for the maintenance of the institutional network (I-Loop)
and coordinate its usage to ensure compatible endeavors.
(4) Prepare reports as required to keep the Town Manager apprised of
emerging technologies.
(5) Work cooperatively with the Town Departments, school district,
OVS (other video services), the Town's other agencies and cable
provider(s) to ensure the optimum use of available communications
resources.
(6) Perform all other related functions as required.
B. Parks and Recreation Division. The Parks and Recreation Division shall
be under the supervision of the Parks and Recreation Director
appointed in accordance with § A198-6A and shall consist of such other
professionals and staff in accordance with § A198-6, Department staff.
The Parks and Recreation Director shall perform the following
functions:
(1) Develop a general recreational program for the Town.
(2) Coordinate and oversee all the recreational activities on Town
parks, playgrounds, swimming pools, beaches, tennis courts, ski
areas and all other recreational facilities, including buildings.
§ A198-7 CHARTER AND SECOND CHARTER § A198-8
A197:263
§ A198-9. Finance Department, Town Clerk/Tax Collector and
Treasury.
(3) Prepare and maintain all records pertaining to the Recreation
Division.
(4) Coordinate and cooperate with private groups as well as with
public officials in the development and promotion of recreational
activities in the Town.
(5) Cooperate and coordinate with the School Superintendent and
Highway Division of the Public Works Department to develop,
maintain, and care for all municipal and recreational buildings,
parks, playgrounds, athletic fields and other recreational areas and
all other departments of the Town.
(6) Perform all other related functions as required.
C. Welfare Division. The Welfare Division shall be under the supervision of
the Welfare Administrator appointed in accordance with § A198-6A and
shall consist of such other professionals and staff in accordance with
§ A198-6, Department staff. The Welfare Administrator shall perform
the following functions:
(1) Plan, budget, report and control the Town's Welfare Program.
(2) Investigate all requests for relief and authorize such relief aid as
may be deemed necessary.
(3) Exercise all powers and perform all duties conferred or imposed by
law on overseers of the poor.
(4) Keep full and accurate records of persons fully supported, the
persons relieved and partially supported, and the travelers and
vagrants lodged at the expense of the Town, together with the
amount paid to them for such support and relief, and make such
reports to the State Department of Health and Human Services as
required by law.
(5) Perform all other related functions as required.
A. Finance Department shall be under the management of the Finance
Director/Assistant Town Manager in accordance with § A198-5A and
shall consist of such other professionals and staff in accordance with
§ A198-6, Department staff. The Finance Department shall consist of
the following divisions: Assessing; Finance; Treasury.
(1) Assessing Division.
(a) The Office Manager and/or Chief Assessor, under the
administrative supervision of the Finance Director/Assistant
Town Manager, shall perform the following functions:
§ A198-8 MERRIMACK CODE § A198-9
A197:264
[1] Carry out all the duties relative to taking inventories and
make recommendations to the Board of Assessors with
respect to the appraisal of property for taxation and the
assessment and abatement of taxes and issuing warrants
for collection of taxes as are now or may hereafter be
required by state statute of assessors of towns.
[2] Provide for the preparation of all resident taxes and
warrants to be issued by the Town Council/Assessors for
collection.
[3] Check all property transfers and maintain all property
records.
[4] Prepare and maintain all tax maps, assessment record
cards, filing systems and all other records of the
Department.
[5] Make regular and frequent checks of the Town to ensure
all taxable property is being accurately reported.
[6] Perform all other related functions as required.
(b) Functions of Board of Assessors. The Board of Assessors
consists of the Town Council and shall perform the following
functions:
[1] Review and execute all tax warrants to be committed to
the Tax Collector.
[2] Act as a Board of Tax Review on all tax abatement requests
and execute approvals or disapprovals on such forms as
are prescribed and take all other action as may be
required by state statute in the performance of its duties.
(2) Finance Division. The Finance Director/Assistant Town Manager
shall perform the following duties:
(a) Pre-audit all receipts and process all authorized claims against
the Town before authorizing payment thereof.
(b) Post-audit all receipts and disbursements.
(c) Maintain the general financial accounts of the Town and
exercise accounting control.
(d) Prepare financial reports as required by the Manager and
Town Council.
(e) Negotiate, upon the authorization of the Manager and Town
Council, all loans of whatever term.
(f) Maintain custody of all insurance policies of the Town.
§ A198-9 CHARTER AND SECOND CHARTER § A198-9
A197:265
(g) Supervise and control the operation of all financial data
processing functions and its records.
(h) Maintain all Town employees' earnings records, including
records of all deductions from earnings for retirement, social
security, savings plans, and any other related materials, and
maintain all Town employees' payroll action forms, vacation
and sick leave records.
(i) When assigned by the Town Manager, assumes the
responsibilities of the Town Manager when he/she is
temporarily unavailable and the Town Council has not
appointed an Acting Town Manager pursuant to § 7-5 of the
Charter of the Town of Merrimack.
(j) Perform all other related functions as required.
B. Town Clerk/Tax Collector Department. The Town Clerk/Tax Collector
Department shall be under the supervision of the Town Clerk/Tax
Collector, which is an elected position pursuant to Town Charter § 7-11,
the Laws of the State of New Hampshire, bonded as required by statute
and shall include such clerical staff appointed in accordance with
§ A198-6, Department staff. The Town Clerk/Tax Collector shall perform
the following functions:
(1) Serve as Keeper of the Records of the Town Council and maintain
the records of all proceedings of the Town Council and other
Boards and Committees as required by state law.
(2) Arrange for all elections and maintain all election records, and
have custody of all property used in connection therewith.
(3) Obtain and maintain all statistics on births, marriages and deaths,
as required by law.
(4) File and preserve, as required by state and federal law, all
contracts, bonds, oaths of office and other documents.
(5) Issue licenses and permits and collect all fees, as required by
statute and ordinance unless otherwise provided, and deposit these
collections through the Treasurer.
(6) Be custodian of the Official Town Seal.
(7) Keep on file the official copy of the Town Charter, all ordinances of
the Town and maintain a record of all corrections and amendments.
(8) Perform all duties and exercise all powers incumbent upon or
vested in Town Clerks by the laws of the State of New Hampshire.
(9) Perform all tax collection responsibilities as vested in tax collectors
by the laws of the State of New Hampshire and as outlined below:
(a) Mail all tax notices.
§ A198-9 MERRIMACK CODE § A198-9
A197:266
§ A198-10. Community Development.
Community Development shall be under the supervision of the Community
Development Director, appointed as specified by § A198-5A of this
Administrative Code and shall consist of such other professionals and staff
in accordance with § A198-6, Department Staff.
(b) Collect all taxes due the Town.
(c) Maintain proper records pertaining to collection functions.
(d) Turn over daily to the Treasurer a record and account for all
monies on the date received.
(e) Collect permit fees for the registration of motor vehicles,
required to be paid under the provisions of RSA 261:153, Fees
for Registration Permits, and amendments thereto.
(f) Report financial information to the Finance Director/Assistant
Town Manager as necessary.
(g) Perform all other related functions as required.
C. Treasury. The Town Treasurer shall be appointed pursuant to the Laws
of the State of New Hampshire and bonded as required by RSA 41:6 and
Charter § 8-12A. The Town Treasurer shall perform the functions in
accordance to Town Charter Article VIII.
A. The Community Development Department shall consist of the following
divisions:
(1) Planning and Zoning.
(2) Economic Development.
(3) Conservation.
B. Each division shall utilize the Community Development Department's
shared administrative and clerical staff as may be determined
appropriate by the Community Development Director and as approved
by the Town Manager.
C. The Community Development Director shall also be responsible for
carrying out the following duties/tasks:
(1) Apply for, receive and process all grants relating to community
development that the Town Council may endorse.
(2) Search, make application for and coordinate all grants relating to
the implementation and/or the functions of community
development, economic development, housing assistance, or other
programs which the Town has ongoing or which the Town may
receive in the future.
§ A198-9 CHARTER AND SECOND CHARTER § A198-10
A197:267
(3) Investigate, study and report on all matters relating to overall
community development matters of the Town.
(4) Perform all other related functions as required.
D. Planning and Zoning Division. The Planning and Zoning Division shall
be under the immediate supervision of the Planning and Zoning
Administrator, who shall oversee the day-to-day activities of the
division. The Planning and Zoning Division shall perform the following
functions:
(1) Act in the capacity of advisor to the Planning Board and Zoning
Board of Adjustment.
(2) Investigate, study, report and recommend on all matters relating to
land use, zoning, traffic, parking, highways, public facilities,
population, urban renewal, subdivisions, parks, playgrounds and
other related phases of Town planning.
(3) Revise the Zoning Map as changes are made therein by Town
ordinance.
(4) Prepare notice of appeals and provide administrative support to the
Planning Board and the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
(5) Perform all research work that might be assigned by the
Community Development Director, Town Manager, Town Council
and/or Planning Board.
(6) Develop and implement the various elements of any existing or
future general comprehensive plans being used or that may be
used as a guide for the orderly development of the Town.
(7) Investigate, study and report on all matters relating to the
construction of municipal structures.
(8) Develop the overall Capital Improvement Program pursuant to the
provisions of the Charter.
(9) Supervise the implementation, programming and management of
the Town's Geographic Information System.
(10) Coordinate the development of GIS mapping for use by other Town
departments to facilitate meeting the overall service delivery and
policy-making objectives of the Town and its various departments,
boards, and commissions.
(11) Perform all other related functions as required, and as directed by
the Community Development Director.
E. Economic Development Division. The Economic Development Division
shall be under the immediate supervision of the Community
Development Director and shall perform the following functions:
§ A198-10 MERRIMACK CODE § A198-10
A197:268
§ A198-11. Public Works Department.
The Public Works Department shall be under the supervision of the Public
Works Director, appointed as specified by § A198-5A of this Administrative
Code and shall consist of such other professionals and staff in accordance
with § A198-6, Department staff.
(1) Work to broaden Merrimack's economic base and achieve
economic stability through steady growth and quality development,
while providing a positive local business climate for innovative,
progressive companies;
(2) Provide assistance to new and/or relocating companies;
(3) Assist existing Merrimack businesses in their expansion efforts;
(4) Act in the capacity of advisor to the Economic Development
Citizens Advisory Committee and coordinate the economic
development activities of the Town with other regional and state
economic development organizations.
F. Conservation Division. The Conservation Division shall be under the
immediate supervision of the Community Development Director and
shall perform the following functions:
(1) Act in the capacity of advisor to the Conservation Commission and
coordinate conservation planning activities with the other divisions
of the Community Development Department;
(2) Maintain records and files on conservation properties and the
maintenance and preservation activities related thereto;
(3) Assist legal counsel and the Conservation Commission with
securing easements and deeds for conservation properties;
(4) Perform other related functions as required.
A. The Public Works Department shall consist of the following divisions:
(1) Administration and Engineering.
(2) Buildings and Grounds.
(3) Equipment Maintenance.
(4) Highway Maintenance.
(5) Solid Waste.
(6) Wastewater.
B. Administration and Engineering Division. The Administration Division,
under the control of the Public Works Director, shall perform the
following functions:
§ A198-10 CHARTER AND SECOND CHARTER § A198-11
A197:269
(1) Prepare and maintain all necessary records pertaining to the Public
Works Department.
(2) Maintain payroll, accounting and budget information and records.
(3) Ensure the proper processing of all purchases and expenditures.
(4) Prepare and monitor all applications and grants received from
federal and state agencies.
(5) Plan and carry out a training program of instruction for all
Department employees.
(6) Develop and maintain the Department Major Capital Improvement
Program.
(7) Design, lay out and map all municipal public works projects.
(8) Maintain all sewer location maps for the Town.
(9) Prepare and maintain all records pertaining to the Administration
Division as required.
(10) Care for and maintain all property and equipment assigned to the
Administration Division.
(11) Prepare, maintain and revise the street lighting maps of the Town's
lighting system and all necessary records pertaining to same.
(12) Investigate, study, report and recommend extensions or changes in
the street lighting system.
(13) Inspect all new sewers, sewer lines and appurtenances, as well as
inspection, on a regular basis, of roads under construction, etc., in
developments and throughout the Town.
(14) Perform all other related functions as required.
C. Buildings and Grounds Division. The Buildings and Grounds Division,
under the supervision of the Public Works Director, shall perform the
following functions:
(1) Maintain and care for all buildings and grounds not assigned to any
other department.
(2) Perform all other related functions as required.
D. Equipment Maintenance Division. The Equipment Maintenance
Division, under the supervision of the Highway Operations Manager,
shall perform the following functions:
(1) Prepare and maintain all the motorized Public Works equipment
and motorized equipment of other departments.
§ A198-11 MERRIMACK CODE § A198-11
A197:270
(2) Purchase stock and charge to the using department all necessary
parts and materials.
(3) Maintain and care for all property and equipment assigned to the
Equipment Maintenance (garage and stores) Division.
(4) Prepare and maintain all necessary records pertaining to the
Equipment Maintenance (garage and stores) Division.
(5) Perform all other related functions as required.
E. Highway Maintenance Division. The Highway Maintenance Division,
under the supervision of the Highway Operations Manager, shall
perform the following functions:
(1) Construct, maintain and repair all roads, streets, drains, bridges
and sidewalks, except where specific projects may be let to
contractors.
(2) Remove snow; distribute salt and sand on all highways, streets,
bridges, sidewalks, parking lots and other public ways.
(3) Plant, maintain and remove trees and brush on or affecting Town
property, either by Town forces or contractual services.
(4) Issue all permits as needed for the erection of highway-related
construction signs and for the blocking or excavation of sidewalks,
streets or other public ways.
(5) Maintain and care for all property and equipment assigned to the
Highway Maintenance Division.
(6) Prepare and maintain all necessary records pertaining to the
Highway Maintenance Division.
(7) Perform basic maintenance including mowing, trimming, tree and
shrub pruning, fertilizing, pest control and other functions needed
to maintain Town public parks, athletic fields, cemeteries and other
recreational areas.
(8) Perform all other related functions as required.
F. Parks Maintenance Division. This Division has been moved under the
Highway Division.
G. Solid Waste Division. The Solid Waste Division (refuse collection and
disposal), under the supervision of the Public Works Director, shall
perform the following functions:
(1) Collect, remove and dispose of all refuse as required.
(2) Prepare and maintain all necessary records pertaining to solid
waste disposal and landfill operations.
(3) Perform all other related functions as required.
§ A198-11 CHARTER AND SECOND CHARTER § A198-11
A197:271
§ A198-12. Fire and Rescue Department.
The Fire and Rescue Department shall be under the supervision of the Fire
Chief, appointed as specified by § A198-6A of this Administrative Code, and
shall consist of such personnel and forces as may be recommended by the
Fire Chief, in accordance with § A198-6, Department staff and approved by
the Manager.
H. Wastewater Division. The Wastewater Division (waste treatment;
composting), under the supervision of the Assistant Public Works
Director/Wastewater, shall perform the following functions:
(1) Construct, repair, maintain and operate the sewer system, except
where specific projects may be let to contract.
(2) Prepare and maintain all necessary records pertaining to the
Wastewater Division, including, but not limited to, an annual report
containing the following:
(a) Number of cubic feet/gallons of sewerage treated per year.
(b) Average annual cost to treat 100 cubic feet/1,000 gallons of
sewage.
(3) Operate and maintain all sewage disposal facilities, incineration
and composting projects, maintaining all necessary records
pertaining to same.
(4) Perform all other related functions as required.
A. The Fire and Rescue Department shall consist of the following divisions:
(1) Administration and Support Services.
(2) Call Fire/Emergency Medical Services, Training and Safety.
(3) Emergency Management.
(4) Fire Prevention/Fire Marshal.
(5) Operations.
(6) Building and Health.
B. The Fire Chief shall have all the powers designated to the fire chiefs as
defined by the State of New Hampshire in the New Hampshire Fire
Laws Annotated Chapter 154 (RSA 154), Chapter 153 (RSA 153) and
the New Hampshire Code of Administrative Rule SAF-C 6000 (the State
Fire Code). In addition, the Fire Chief shall have any and all authority
necessary to carry out the following responsibilities.
(1) Interpretation of all fire, building and health codes and ordinances
for state and local governments, answer questions from the public
§ A198-11 MERRIMACK CODE § A198-12
A197:272
concerning uses of these codes and investigate all complaints made
concerning all fire codes, ordinances and regulations.
(2) Enforce all fire, building and health codes, ordinances and
regulations as may be established by the Fire and Rescue
Department, the Town of Merrimack and the State of New
Hampshire.
(3) Manage and operate the Fire and Rescue Department by
developing budgets, goals, objectives and future planning.
(4) Establish, supervise and maintain the following divisions.
C. Administration and Support Services Division. The Administration and
Support Services Division, under the direction the Assistant Fire Chief,
Support Services, shall perform the following functions:
(1) Prepare and maintain all necessary records and documentation
pertaining to the Division.
(2) Maintain payroll, accounting, personnel records and information.
(3) Prepare and monitor all applications, grants and donations
received from federal, state and other agencies, groups or
individuals.
(4) Cooperate and establish agreements with surrounding
communities through mutual aid programs so that additional
resources are available when needed.
(5) Cooperate and establish procedures with the State of New
Hampshire for mutual aid agreements and task forces throughout
the state when needed.
(6) Establish automatic mutual aid agreements when needed to
provide better resource allocation to protect the communities and
its citizens.
(7) Work with Human Resources on all personnel related issues.
(8) Perform all other related functions as required.
D. Call Fire/Emergency Medical Services, Training and Safety Division.
The Call Fire/Emergency Medical Services, Training and Safety
Division, under the supervision of the Assistant Fire Chief, Support
Services, shall perform the following functions:
(1) Prepare and maintain all Division records, reports and
documentation as required.
(2) Recruit Call Firefighters/Emergency Medical Services personnel.
§ A198-12 CHARTER AND SECOND CHARTER § A198-12
A197:273
(3) Plan and carry out all needed training programs, practical and
classroom, to ensure all certifications are maintained for all
department personnel.
(4) Maintain a good relationship with the department's resource
hospital and ensure that all medical resource hospital agreements
and controlled substance agreements are reviewed and in the best
interest of the department and patients we treat.
(5) Coordinate the department's Continuous Quality Improvement
(CQI) Committee for emergency medical responses.
(6) Maintain, upgrade and train all users of the State of New
Hampshire TEMSIS Patient Care Reporting records and
documentation software program. Prepare reports and
documentation as required.
(7) Promote and encourage an awareness of personnel safety through
community service.
(8) Establish and chair the Fire and Rescue Department Safety
Committee.
(9) Strive for the highest levels of training and competency available.
(10) Administer collective bargaining agreements and process all
related grievances.
(11) Perform all other related functions as required.
E. Emergency Management Division. The Emergency Management
Division, under the direction of the Fire Chief (Emergency Management
Director) and the Assistant Emergency Management Directors,
appointed by the Fire Chief and approved by the Town Manager, shall
be responsible and perform the following functions:
(1) Make mutual aid agreements with other public and private
agencies.
(2) Render aid in accord with such mutual aid arrangements in times
of emergency.
(3) Accept outside aid, except federal aid which requires the consent of
the Governor per RSA 21-P:43.
(4) Develop and implement the various elements of any existing future
emergency operations plan.
(5) Enter into emergency contracts to combat such disaster, protect
the health and safety of persons and property and provide
emergency assistance to victims without regard to time-consuming
procedures and formalities described by law, excepting mandatory
constitutional requirements.
§ A198-12 MERRIMACK CODE § A198-12
A197:274
(6) Provide emergency preparedness education, emergency
management planning, and implementation of pandemic planning,
emergency shelters, and evacuation plans for the community.
Coordination of the Merrimack Local Emergency Planning
Committee (LEPC).
(7) Perform all other related functions as required by the state statute
and local ordinances.
F. Fire Prevention/Fire Marshal Division. The Fire Prevention/Fire
Marshal Division is under the supervision of the Assistant Fire Chief,
Support Services. The Fire Marshal shall perform the following
functions:
(1) Enforce all laws regarding the prevention/inspection for and
removal of fire hazards and prevention of fires.
(2) Prepare and maintain all Division records, reports and
documentation as required.
(3) Plan and carry out a regular inspection program throughout the
community.
(4) Review and approve all new and modification to existing site and
building plans for all development within the community for fire
code compliance.
(5) Review and approve all fire protection and safety system plans for
all new development and modifications to existing structures within
the community.
(6) Plan and carry out a regular inspection program for place of
assembly permits within the community.
(7) Investigate fires within the community to determine area of fire
origin and possible fire cause determination as required.
(8) Approve building and related permits and inspect for fire codes
during construction for compliance with local and state laws,
codes, rules and ordinances.
(9) Work with the Police Department to prosecute all violations of law
and codes within its jurisdiction as needed.
(10) Provide fire prevention, emergency preparedness education for the
community.
(11) Perform all other functions as required.
G. Operations Division. The Operations Division is under the supervision of
the Assistant Fire Chief Operations. The Shift Captains and Lieutenants
shall perform the following functions:
(1) Fire suppression, rescue and special operations.
§ A198-12 CHARTER AND SECOND CHARTER § A198-12
A197:275
(2) Extinguish fires and protect life and property against fires.
(3) Provide special rescue functions when needed.
(4) Provide response to mitigate hazardous materials situations.
(5) Care for and maintain all department communications equipment
and systems.
(6) Care for and maintain all property (buildings and grounds),
equipment (hand and power) and apparatus engines, ambulances,
cars, etc., assigned to and associated with the Fire and Rescue
Department.
(7) Prepare and maintain all Division records, reports and
documentation as required.
(8) Maintain, upgrade and train all users of the Firehouse records and
documentation software program. Prepare reports and
documentation as required.
(9) Issue associated fire-related permits as required.
(10) Provide professional emergency medical care in the Town of
Merrimack.
(11) Promote and encourage an awareness of fire safety and emergency
preparedness through community programs.
(12) Perform all practical testing and certification verification as
required for the Fire and Rescue Department.
(13) Perform all other related functions as required.
H. Building and Health Division. The Building and Health Division shall be
under the immediate supervision of Assistant Fire Chief, Support
Services.
(1) The Building and Health Official shall perform the following
functions:
(a) Be responsible for answering questions asked by the public
concerning uses in all building codes, and investigating all
complaints made concerning building and construction.
(b) Enforce all rules and regulations relating to building codes as
may be established by the Planning Board, the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, or other Town ordinance.
(c) Issue building and related permits and inspect construction for
compliance with local laws, zoning regulations and building
codes.
(d) Prepare and maintain records of all permits issued.
§ A198-12 MERRIMACK CODE § A198-12
A197:276
(e) Inspect new construction, remodeling and existing buildings to
related codes.
(f) Ensure compliance with the sign construction requirements
and issue all building and electrical permits for the erection of
signs as required.
(g) Work with the Police Department to prosecute all violations of
law and codes within the Division's jurisdiction.
(h) Investigate, study and report on all matters relating to the
construction of municipal structures.
(i) Perform and/or supervise all other functions relating to
building inspection, health inspection, and related code
enforcement as may be required by the Fire Chief and/or Town
ordinance.
(j) Work with Law Enforcement Officials to prosecute all
violations of law and codes within the Department's
jurisdiction.
(2) The Building and Health Official, Health Officer and/or Deputy
Health Officers as appointed pursuant to RSA 128:1 shall report to
the Assistant Fire Chief, Support Services. The Fire Chief shall
have direct supervisory authority over the Building and Health
Official, Health Officer and/or Deputy Health Officers in
consultation with the Commissioner of the Department of Health
and Human Services and the Board of Health. The Building and
Health Official, Health Officer and/or Deputy Health Officers shall
have the following functions:
(a) Investigate all health complaints that may be brought to his/
her attention.
(b) Act as Secretary and executive officer to the Board of Health,
reporting to the Fire Chief, serve all notices and orders issued
by the Board of Health and enforce all rules, regulations, and
local ordinances affecting the health and comfort of the public.
(c) Investigate and render assistance in reference to private water
supply and septic tanks.
(d) Investigate all communicable diseases or threats of
communicable diseases.
(e) Investigate all sanitary hazards, enforce all state and local
sanitary laws and ordinances, and further, recommend testing
of public swimming facilities for the determination of their
suitability for that purpose.
(f) Prepare and maintain all necessary records required by the
laws of the State of New Hampshire or the Town ordinances.
§ A198-12 CHARTER AND SECOND CHARTER § A198-12
A197:277
§ A198-13. Police Department.
The Police Department, under the supervision of the Police Chief, appointed
as specified by § A198-5A of this Administrative Code, shall consist of
such forces of permanent officers, special officers, civilian employees and
police volunteers as may be recommended by the Chief, in accordance with
§ A198-6, Department staff, and approved by the Manager.
(g) Inspect all restaurants, cafes, other eating places and vendors
of food as required by state regulations and/or Town
ordinances.
(h) Perform all other related functions as required by the state,
federal and local law, and such other duties as assigned by the
Fire Chief or designee.
(i) Participate in the Regional Coordinating Committee (RCC) for
health and emergency management planning and
implementation of pandemic planning, emergency shelters,
and evacuations.
A. The Police Department shall consist of the following divisions:
(1) Administrative and Support Services.
(2) Communications.
(3) Criminal Investigation.
(4) Legal.
(5) Patrol.
B. The Deputy Chief may assume responsibility for the operation of the
administration of the entire Department in the absence of the Chief of
Police.
C. Administrative and Support Services Division. The Administrative
Services Division shall be under the command of the Administrative and
Support Services Captain, responsible to the Deputy Chief, and shall
perform the following functions:
(1) Prepare and maintain all necessary records pertaining to the Police
Department.
(2) Maintain payroll, accounting and budget information and records.
(3) Ensure the proper processing of all purchases and expenditures.
(4) Prepare and monitor all applications and grants received from
federal and state agencies.
(5) Schedule and maintain training and training records for all
Department members.
§ A198-12 MERRIMACK CODE § A198-13
A197:278
(6) Perform all other related functions as required.
D. Communications Division. The Communications Division, under the
supervision of the Administrative and Support Services Captain,
responsible to the Deputy Chief, shall perform the following functions:
(1) Coordinate all communications at all times and particularly in
times of a declared emergency.
(2) Investigate, study, report and recommend improvements and/or
changes in the ongoing communications system.
(3) Maintain all call signs and numbers for all departments.
(4) Maintain and care for all property assigned to the Division.
(5) Prepare and maintain all necessary records pertaining to the
Division.
(6) Perform all other related functions as required.
E. Criminal Investigation Division. The Criminal Investigation Division,
under the supervision of a Detective Lieutenant within the
Administrative and Support Services Division, shall perform the
following functions:
(1) Investigate all crimes involving serious misdemeanors and felonies
and all other cases as may be assigned to it by the Chief of Police/
Deputy Chief.
(2) Be responsible for the prevention of crime and establishing
programs on a day-to-day basis for crime prevention.
(3) Prepare and maintain an effective juvenile division dealing with
juvenile crimes and the prevention of criminal activity in the
juvenile area.
(4) Protect and secure all evidence and confiscated property that
comes to its attention.
(5) Perform all other related functions as required.
F. Legal Division. The Legal Division, under the supervision of the Deputy
Chief, shall perform the following functions:
(1) Oversee the preparation and presentation of all Department cases
in the Merrimack District Court.
(2) Oversee the preparation and presentation of all cases for the grand
jury and/or Superior Court.
(3) Perform all other related functions as required.
§ A198-13 CHARTER AND SECOND CHARTER § A198-13
A197:279
§ A198-14. Merrimack Library.
Merrimack Library. The Merrimack Public Library is an independent
department under the fiscal guidance of the Merrimack Town Council in
conjunction with the Town Manager. The Library is governed by an elected
Board of Trustees in accordance with RSA 202A:11. The Board of Trustees'
duties are to adopt bylaws, approve prepared budgets, approve the
expenditure of appropriations and appoint the Library Director. Other
Library staff appointments will be recommended by the Library Director
and approved by the Board of Trustees who determines their compensation
and other terms of employment.
G. Patrol Division. The Patrol Division shall be under the supervision of the
Operations Captain, responsible to the Deputy Chief, and shall perform
the following functions:
(1) Enforce the laws and ordinances of the State of New Hampshire
and the Town of Merrimack that come under its jurisdiction.
(2) Protect life and property, which includes the prevention of
criminality.
(3) Maintain and care for all property assigned to the Police
Department.
(4) Reduce or suppress crime and apprehend offenders.
(5) Prevent crime and maintain peace and order.
(6) Protect lives and property from malicious damage and injury.
(7) Regulate traffic and perform miscellaneous calls for service.
(8) Maintain an Animal Control Unit that will be responsible for
attending to all complaints and other matters pertaining to dogs
and other animals.
(9) Perform all other related functions as required.
A. The Library consists of the following divisions:
(1) Administration.
(2) Adult Services.
(3) Youth Services.
(4) Technical Services.
(5) Circulation.
(6) Maintenance.
B. The Library shall provide the following services and functions:
§ A198-13 MERRIMACK CODE § A198-14
A197:280
(1) Select, purchase, catalog, process and maintain a collection of
books, magazines, newspapers, CDs, DVDs, and a variety of other
materials for use by residents/library card holders.
(2) Purchase and make available digital resources such as databases
and ebooks for use in the Library and via the Library's website for
residents/library card holders.
(3) Provide reference services including, reader's advisory, technology
assistance, and research for the public, in person or remotely.
(4) Through membership in Regional Consortium, provide Library
users with an online catalog of materials that can be used in the
Library and accessed remotely.
(5) Provide and maintain computers in the Library for public use as
well as wireless internet access for those who come to the Library
with their own devices.
(6) Offer a variety of events located both in the library and out in the
community for patrons of all ages, to promote life-long learning and
enrichment.
(7) Promote literacy for all ages.
(8) Maintain and care for all property assigned to the Library.
(9) Prepare and maintain all records pertaining to the Library.
(10) Perform all other related functions as required.
§ A198-14 CHARTER AND SECOND CHARTER § A198-14
A197:281


ZONING ORDINANCE & BUILDING CODE 
TOWN OF MERRIMACK [Revised October 27, 2016] 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 	Page 
Section 1 	Purpose and Definitions 1-1 
Section 2 	Establishment of Districts 2-1 
2.01.1 	Industrial District Metes & Bounds 2-1 
2.01.2 	Limited Commercial District 2-5 
2.01.3 	General Commercial District 2-5 
2.01.4 	Residential District 2-5 
2.01.5 	Wetlands Conservation District 2-6 
2.01.6 	Flood Hazard Conservation District 2-6 
2.01.7 	Elderly Zoning District 2-6 
2.01.8 	Planned Residential District 2-6 
2.01.9 	Aquifer Conservation District 2-6 
2.02 	Permitted Uses -All Districts 2-7 
2.02.1 	Residential -Permitted Uses 2-8 
2.02.2 	Limited Commercial -Permitted Uses 2-13 
2.02.3 	General Commercial -Permitted Uses 2-15 
2.02.4 	I-1 & I-2 Industrial District -Permitted Uses 2-20 
2.02.5 	I-3 Industrial District -Permitted Uses 2-31 
2.02.6 	Sexually Oriented Businesses 2-33 
2.02.7 	Wetlands Conservation District -Permitted Uses 2-36 Wetlands Soil Types 2-37 
2.02.8 	Flood Hazard Conservation District-Permitted Uses 2-40 
2.02.9 	Elderly Zoning District -Permitted Uses 2-51 
2.02.10 	Planned Residential District -Permitted Uses 2-53 
2.02.11 	Aquifer Conservation District 2-56 
2.02.12 	Shoreland Protection District 2-58 
2.02.13 	Town Center Overlay District 2-59 

Section  3 Lot and Yard Regulations 3-1 
3.02 Table of Lot and Yard Regulations 3-1 
3.02.1 Residential Land Use District 3-4 
3.02.2 Soil Types to Sanitary Facilities 3-5 
3.02.3 Boundaries 3-7 
3.02.4 Location of On-Site Disposal Fields 3-7 
3.02.5 Multiple Soil Districts Within Lots 3-7 
3.02.6 Soil District Boundary Designated by Slope 3-8 
3.02.7 Soils District Boundary Designated by Soil Classification 3-8 
3.03 Reserved 3-9 
3.04 Lot or Yard Size Reduction 3-9 
3.05 Nonconforming Lots 3-9 
3.06 Lots Without Public Sewerage 3-9 
3.07 Previously Approved Permits 3-9 
3.08 Cluster Residential Development 3-10 
3.09 Special Exceptions 3-15 
Section 4 Manufactured Housing, Units, Manufactured Housing 4-1 
Parks, and Manufactured Housing Subdivisions 

4.01 Manufactured Housing Units 4-1 
4.02 Manufactured Housing Parks 4-1 
4.03 Manufactured Housing Subdivisions 4-2 

Section 5 Junkyards 5-1 
5.01 Residential District 5-1 
5.02 Commercial and Industrial Districts 5-1 
5.03 Licensing 5-1 
5.04 Screening of Junk 5-2 
5.05 Timing 5-2 
5.06 Renewal of License 5-2 

Section 6 Building Inspector 6-1 
6.01 Appointments 6-1 
6.02 Enforcing Authority 6-1 
6.03 Building Permits 6-1 
6.04 Excavation 6-1 6.05 Scale Drawings -Plats 6-1 
6.06 Appearance 6-2 
6.07 Occupancy 6-2 
6.08 Certificate of Occupancy-New Construction 6-2 
6.09 Certificate of Occupancy-Vacant Land /Change of Use 6-2 
6.10 Records 6-2 
6.11 Reserved 6-2 
6.12 Antennas, Satellite Dishes 6-2 

Section 7 Planning & Zoning Administrator 7-1 
7.01 Appointment 7-1 
7.02 Duties 7-1 
7.03 Records 7-1 
Section 8 Zoning Board of Adjustment 8-1 
8.01 Appointment 8-1 
8.02 Meetings 8-1 
8.03 Appeal Procedures 8-1 
8.04 Variance/Special Exception Validity Period 8-2 
8.05 Conditions 8-2 
8.06 Statutory Criteria for Granting Variances 8-3 
8.07 Fees 8-3 

Section 9 Non-conforming Uses 9-1 
9.01 Continuance of Use 9-1 
9.02 Non-Conforming Use of Buildings or Structures 9-1 
9.03 Non-Conforming Use of Land 9-1 
9.04 Non-Conforming Other than Use 9-2 
Section 10 Penalties and Violations 10-1 

Section 11 Adoption of  Building Codes 11-1 
11.01 Enforcement of State Building Code 11-1 
11.02 Amendments to International Building Code 2000 11-1 
11.03 Adoption of International Residential Code 11-20 
11.04 Amendments to International Residential Code 2000 11-21 
11.05 Test Pits and Percolation Tests 11-22 
11.06 Sewerage 	11-23 
11.07 Dwelling Unit Area 	11-23 
11.08 Reconstruction of Buildings 	11-23 
11.09 Adoption of International Plumbing Code 2000 11-23 
11.10 Amendments to International Plumbing Code 2000 11-24 
11.11 Adoption of Life Safety Code 2000, NFPA 101 11-25 
11.12 Adoption of Fire Prevention Code 2000, NFPA 1 11-25 
11.13 Adoption of International Mechanical Code 2000 11-25 
11.14 Reserved 	11-26 
11.15 Adoption of National Electric Code 2002, NFPA 70 11-26 
11.16 Driveways 	11-27 
11.17 Street (House) Numbers 	11-27 
11.18 Sanitary Facilities at Public Swimming Pools 11-27 
Section 12 Validity 	12-1 
Section 13 Adoption and Amendments 	13-1 
13.01 Adoption 	13-1 
13.02 Authority to assign section numbers 	13-1 
Section 14 Local Regulation of Excavation 	14-1 
14.01 General 	14-1 
14.02 Regulations 	14-1 
14.03 Administration 	14-1 
14.04 Enforcement 	14-1 

Section 15 Planned Unit Development (PUD) 	15-1 
15.01 Purpose: Requirements 	15-1 
15.02 Procedures 	15-1 
15.03 	General Regulations 15-1 
15.04 	Residential Uses 15-4 
15.05 	Non-Residential Uses 15-4 
15.06 	Timing of Development Actions 15-5 Table I (Dwelling Unit Density) 15-5 Table II (Non Residential Gross Floor Density) 15-5 
Section 16 	Off-Site Improvements 16-1 Section 17 Signs 17-1 

17.01 Purpose 17-1 
17.02 Severability 17-1 
17.03 Governmental Signs and Signs Required By Law 17-1 
17.04 Permit Required 17-1 
17.05 Definitions 17-1 
17.06 Permit Not Required 17-4 
17.07 Prohibited Signs 17-5 
17.08 Temporary Signs 17-5 
17.09 Signs in Residential Zones 17-6 
17.10 Commercial & Industrial Districts 17-6 
17.11 Off-Premise Advertising Signs 17-11 
17.12 Site Plan Review 17-12 
17.13 Area & Dimensional Calculations 17-12 
17.14 Appendix 17-13 

Section 18 Parking Requirements 18-1 
Appendix A Reference Zoning Map A-1 Appendix-B Reference Aquifer Map B-2 

1.01 	Purposes 
This ordinance shall be known as the Zoning Ordinance and Building Code.  To promote the health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the Town of Merrimack and to make it an attractive place in which to live, the following ordinance and building code is hereby enacted by the voters of said Town of Merrimack. 

1.02 	Other Definitions Found at Other Locations in This Ordinance 
A. 	Certain terms and words are also defined at Section 2.02.8 Flood Hazard Conservation District, Page 28. 
B. 	Certain terms and words are also defined at Section 2.02.11 Aquifer Conservation District, page 42. 
C. 	Certain terms and words are also defined at Section 17.04 Signs, page 126. 
D. 	Certain terms and words are also defined at Section 2.02.12 Shoreland Protection District, page 49. 

1.03 -Definitions 
A. 	For the purposes of this ordinance, certain terms and words are hereby defined. 
1. 	
Abutter:   Any person whose property is located in New Hampshire and adjoins or is directly across the street or stream from the land under consideration by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment. 

2. 	
Accessory Dwelling Unit: A second dwelling which is contained within an existing or proposed single family detached dwelling unit that is clearly incidental and subordinate in extent, use and purpose to the principal dwelling. 

3. 	
Accessory Use: A subordinate use of land or building which is customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building or to the principal use of the land and which is located on the same lot with the principal building or use. 

4. 	
Airport/helicopter/aircraft: An area of land or water providing certain specified facilities and services for use in connection with air transportation which could be used as a site for landing and taking-off of aircraft.  Aircraft means any engine powered contrivance for air transportation. 


1-1 

Section 1.03 Definitions (cont): 
5. 	Alternative Treatment Center: An "alternative treatment center" as defined in RSA 126-X:l, I, namely, a not-for-profit entity registered under RSA 126-X:7 that acquires, possesses, cultivates, manufactures, delivers, transfers, transports, sells, supplies, and dispenses cannabis, and related supplies and educational materials, to qualifying patients and alternative treatment centers. 
a) 	Alternative Treatment Center (Cultivation Location Only): A “cultivation location" as defmed in RSA 126-X:l, IV, namely, a locked and enclosed site under the control of an alternative treatment center where cannabis is cultivated, secured with one or more locks or other security devices in accordance with RSA 126-X and the Department of Health and Human Service's administrative rules. 
b) 	Alternative Treatment Center (Non-Cultivation Location): An alternative treatment center operated in accordance with RSA 126-X and the Department of Health and Human Services administrative rules that has a separate location for the cultivation of cannabis. 
6. 	
Appeal: A process whereby any person, officer, department, board or bureau aggrieved by a decision of the Planning & Zoning Administrator or Building Official may appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment where such matter is within the board's power and shall file a Notice of Appeal specifying the grounds therefore, and shall include the process whereby any adverse decisions by the Zoning Board of Adjustment are further appealed to the Superior Court. 

7. 	
Aquifer:  Those areas designated as having high, medium, and low potential to yield water which appear on state-wide mapping prepared by the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) entitled "Availability of Groundwater in the lower Merrimack River Basin Southern N.H." by John E. Cotton, 1977, or as most recently published by USGS.. 

8. 	
Building Official: An appointed official whose primary responsibility is to enforce the Building Code of the Town of Merrimack. 

9. 	
Certificate of Occupancy: A statement signed by the Building Official setting forth that a building or structure or any portion thereof complies with the zoning and building ordinance; that a building, structure or parcel of land may lawfully be employed for specified uses; or both. 

10. 	
Certified Soil Scientist: a person who, by reason of special knowledge of pedological principles acquired professional education and practical experience, as specified in RSA 310-A:84, I & II, is qualified to identify, classify, and prepare soil maps according to the standards of the National Cooperative Soil Survey, or standards adopted by the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services, or standards adopted by the board, and who has been duly certified by the authorized state board of natural sciences. 


1-2 

Section 1.03 -Definitions (continued) 
11. 	
Certified Wetland Scientist: a person who, by reason of his or her special knowledge of hydric soils, hydrophytic vegetation, and wetland hydrology acquired by course work and experience, as specified in RSA 310-A:84, II-a & II-b, is qualified to delineate wetland boundaries and prepare wetland maps in accordance with standards for identification of wetlands adopted by the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services or the United States Army Corps of Engineers or its successor and who has been duly certified by the authorized state board of natural sciences. 

12. 	
Change of Use:  The change in the use of land and/or building(s) to another use. 

13. 	
Community Development Director: The chief administrator of the Community Development Department. 

14. 	
Conservation Commission: A seven member municipal body appointed by the Town Council for the proper utilization and protection of natural resources and for the protection of water-shed resources within the Town of Merrimack. 

15. 	
District, Overlay: A special district or zone which addresses special land use circumstances and/or environmental safeguards and is superimposed over the underlying existing zoning districts.  Permitted uses in the underlying zoning district shall continue subject to compliance with the regulations of the overlay zone or district. 

16. 	
District or Zone:  A geographical section or sections of the Town for which the regulations and provisions governing the use of buildings and land are uniform for each class of use permitted therein and where certain uses of land may be permitted, permitted or denied pursuant to municipal review or prohibited. 

17. 	
Dwelling Unit:  A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 

18. 	
Expansion/Alteration: As applied to a building or structure, means a change or rearrangement in the structural parts or in the means of egress; or an enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height; or the moving from one location or position to another. 

19. 	
Family: One or more persons related by blood or marriage, or a group of not more than five persons who need not be related by blood or marriage, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit. 


1-3 

Section 1.03 -Definitions (continued) 
20. 	
Family Day Care Home:  An occupied residence in which child day care is provided for less than 24 hours per day, except in emergencies, for up to 6 children from one or more unrelated families.  The 6 children shall include any foster children residing in the home and all children who are related to the caregiver except the children who are 10 years of age or older.  In addition to the 6 children, up to three children attending a full day school program may also be cared for up to five hours per day on school days and all day during school holidays. 

21. 	
Farms, Agriculture, Farming:  As defined in RSA 21:34-a and amendments thereto, the word "farm" shall mean any land or buildings or structures on or in which agriculture and farming operations are carried on and shall include the residence or residences of owners, occupants, or employees located on such land. The words "agriculture" and "farming" shall mean all operations of a farm such as the cultivation, conserving, and tillage of the soil, dairying, greenhouse operations, the production, cultivation, growing and harvesting of any agricultural, floricultural, sod or horticultural commodities, the raising of livestock, bees, fur-bearing animals, fresh water fish or poultry, or any practices on the farm as an incident to or in conjunction with such farming operations including, but not necessarily restricted to, the following: preparation for market, delivery to storage or to market, or to carriers for transportation to market, of any products or materials from the farm; the transportation to the farm of supplies and materials; the transportation of farm workers; forestry or lumbering operations; the marketing or selling at wholesale or retail or in any other manner any products from the farm and of other supplies that do not exceed in average yearly dollar volume the value of products from such farm. 

22. 	
Floor Area, Gross:  For the purpose of determining required parking spaces, the gross floor area is the total floor area within the perimeter of the outside walls of the building without deduction for hallways, stairs, closets, thickness of walls, columns and other similar features. 

23. 	
Floor Area, Net:  For the purpose of determining required parking spaces, the net floor area is total floor area within the perimeter of the inside walls of the building deducting for interior walls, hallways, stairs, closets, storage and similar features including other areas such a those for the preparation of food and drink, restrooms and waiting rooms. 

24. 	
Floor Area of Building:  The total number of square feet of floor area of all stories in a building, excluding cellars, unfinished attics, uncovered steps and uncovered porches.  All horizontal measurements shall be made between exterior faces of walls. 

25. 	
Frontage: The length of the lot line connecting the side lot lines which borders on a Class V or better highway (excepting the F.E. Everett Turnpike and other Limited Access Highways as defined in RSA 230:44 (as may be amended from time to time)), or a street on a subdivision plat approved by the Planning Board, or land designed to become a Class V or better highway. 


1-4 

Section 1.03 -Definitions (continued) 
26. 	
Hazardous or Toxic Materials or Liquids: Materials or liquids that pose a threat present or future to the environment, whether in use, storage or transit, including without exception hazardous waste identified and listed in accordance with Section 3001 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976. 

27. 	
Home Occupation:  A non-residential use carried on within a residence or its accessory buildings, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the principal use of the property as a residence and does not change the character thereof. 

28. 	
Home Owner: The owner of record of any land and residential and accessory structures located thereon. 

29. 	
Junk: Unregistered motor vehicles no longer intended or in condition for legal use on the public highways; used parts of motor vehicles or old iron, metal, glass, paper, cordage, or other waste or discarded or second-hand material which has been a part, or intended to be a part, of any motor vehicle; or any machinery, scrap metal or other worn out, cast off, or discarded articles or materials ready for destruction or collected or stored for salvage or conversion to same use.  Junk shall also include any worn out or discarded materials including but not necessarily limited to construction material, household wastes, including garbage, discarded appliances, and discarded consumer electronic devices. Any article or material which unaltered or unchanged and without further reconditioning can be used for its original purpose as readily as when new, shall not be considered junk. 

30. 	
Junk Yard:  Any space more than 200 square feet in area, whether inside or outside a building, used for storage, keeping, processing, salvaging or abandonment of junk. 

31. 	
Junk Yard, Commercial: Any junk yard which is operated for profit, whether said profit is derived from the storage, reconditioning, conversion, or sale of junk, or otherwise. 

32. 	
Lot Depth:  Lot depth shall be considered to be the distance between the midpoints of straight lines connecting the foremost points of the side lot lines in front and the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear. 

33. 	
Lot Frontage:  The front of a lot shall be construed to be the portion nearest the street. For the purpose of determining yard requirements for corner lots and double frontage lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage. 

34. 	
Lot Line, Rear: The lot line or lines generally opposite or parallel to the front lot line, except in a double frontage lot.  If the rear lot line is less than 10 feet long or the lot comes to a point at the rear, said rear lot line is assumed to be a line not less than 20 feet long, lying wholly within the lot, parallel to the front lot line, or in the case of a curved front lot line, parallel to the chord of the arc of said front lot line. 


1-5 

Section 1.03 – Definitions (continued) 
35. 	
Lot of Record: A lot held under separate ownership from the adjacent lots or a lot shown to be a separate and distinct numbered lot of record by a plan of lots which has been recorded. 

36. 	
Manufactured Housing: Any structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is 8 body feet or more in width and 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is 320 square feet or more, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to required utilities, which include plumbing, heating, and electrical heating systems contained therein.  The terms "mobile home" or "trailer", as these may appear in this ordinance, should be understood to mean "manufactured housing" as defined herein. 

37. 	
Manufactured Housing Park:  A parcel of land containing at least five acres, upon which one or more manufactured homes are parked or intended to be parked for living purposes. 

38. 	
Multiple (Multi) family dwelling:  A building containing three (3) or more dwelling units. 

39. 	
Non-Conforming Lot: A lot lawfully existing at the time this or any previous zoning ordinance became effective and which does not conform with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 

40. 	
Non-Conforming Use: A use of a building or of land lawfully existing at the time this or any previous zoning ordinance became effective and which does not conform with the use regulations of the district in which it is located.                              

41. 	
Nonprofit Organization: Nonprofit organization shall include, but not be limited to, a not for profit organization, corporation, community chest, fund or foundation organized and operated exclusively for religious, cultural, charitable, scientific, recreational, literary, agricultural, or educational purposes, or to foster amateur competition in a sport formally recognized by the National Collegiate Athletic Association, and an organization exempt from taxation under Section 501 (c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 organized or incorporated in this state or another state of having a principal place of business in this state or in another state. 

42. 	
Parking Space, Off-Street:  A rectangular area, not less than 9 X 18.5 feet forming a parking stall within or without a structure, not located in any public right-of-way. 

43. 	
Planning Board: A seven member legislative body charged with the duty to prepare and amend the Town of Merrimack Master Plan, prepare and amend a capital improvements program, the formulation of proposed amendments to the Merrimack Zoning Ordinance, and the review and approval of subdivision plans and site plans, and other duties as set forth in RSA 674:1.     


1-6 

Section 1.03 -Definitions (continued) 
44. 	
Planning & Zoning Administrator:  An appointed official whose responsibilities include administration and enforcement the zoning ordinance of the Town of Merrimack. 

45. 	
Public Hearing: A publicly advertised meeting of an official legislative or quasi-judicial body conducting Town business during which the public is allowed to give testimony concerning issues under consideration. 

46. 	
Public Land and Institutions:  All publicly owned land and facilities such as schools, parks and conservation land, museums, libraries, administration and maintenance building and grounds, police and fire stations, utility sites and utility rights-of-way and easements. 

47. 	
Restaurant: An establishment whose principal business is selling food and beverages in a ready-to-consume state whether said food and beverages are consumed on or off the premises. 


a) 	Restaurant, carry-out;  An establishment which sells food and beverages in a ready-to-consume state where no provisions are made for consumption on the premises. 
b) 	Restaurant, combination: An establishment which sells food and beverages in a ready-to-consume state which may be either consumed on or taken off of the premises. 
c) 	Restaurant, drive-in:  An establishment which sells food and beverages in a ready-to-consume state primarily for consumption on the premises by persons in parked motor vehicles. 
d) 	Restaurant, sit-down:  An establishment which sells food and beverages in a ready-to-consume state primarily to persons who are seated within the building or outside on the premises. 
48. 	Seasonal Building or Structure: A building or structure, usually but not always a dwelling unit, which was originally designed to be occupied only during the warm months of the year, not during winter; such a structure may not have been originally built with insulation or any permanent, central heating system; such a structure, when originally constructed, may not have had a septic system designed for year round use. 
(Reference 9.02.E) 
1-7 

Section 1.03 -Definitions (continued) 
49. 	
Self-Storage Facility: A building, group of buildings or other facility having compartments, rooms, spaces, containers or other type of units that are individually leased, rented, sold or otherwise contracted for, by customers for the storage of non­toxic, non-explosive personal or business goods or property, and where the facility owner/operator has limited access to the units. For purposes of this Ordinance, "self-storage facility" shall be considered synonymous with self-storage warehouse, self-service storage facility, mini-warehouse or mini-storage. 

50. 	
Setback, Front Yard:  Open space extending across the full width of lot between the front lot line and nearest line of the principal building or any enclosed portion thereof.  The depth of such yard shall be the shortest horizontal distance between the front lot line  and the nearest point of the building or any enclosed portion thereof. 

51. 	
Setback, Rear Yard:  Open space extending across the full  width of lot between the rear line of the lot and the nearest line of the building or any enclosed portion thereof. The depth of such yard is the shortest horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the nearest point of the building.  When the rear lot line is less than 10 feet long or if the lot comes to a point at the rear, the depth of the rear yard is measured to an assumed rear lot line not less than 20 feet long, lying wholly within the lot, parallel to the front lot line, or in the case of a curved front lot line, parallel to the chord of the arc of said front lot line. 

52. 	
Setback, Side Yard:  Open space between the side lot line, and the nearest line of the principal buildings, or any enclosed portion thereof, extending from the front yard to the rear yard, or, in the absence of either of such yards, to the front lot line and/or rear lot line.  The width of a side yard shall be the shortest distance between the side lot line and the nearest point of the principal building or any enclosed portion thereof. 

53. 	
Setback, Yard:  A required open space on a lot unoccupied and unobstructed by any principal structure or portion thereof, except for such projections into any required open space as are expressly permitted herein. 

54. 	
Special Exception: Uses authorized under the Zoning Ordinance subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards as set forth in the ordinance as may be approved by the Zoning Board of Adjustment.  Applicants for a special exception need not prove hardship but must comply with all other applicable zoning laws and any conditions for approval imposed by the Zoning Board. 

55. 	
Street: Class V Highway or better, as defined in RSA 229:5(VI). 

56. 	
Structural  Alterations: Any change in the supporting members of a building or structure, such as walls, columns, beams or girders. 


1-8 

Section 1.03 -Definitions (continued) 
57. 	
Structure:  Anything constructed or erected, the use of which demands its permanent location on the land, or anything attached to something permanently located on the land. 

58. 	
Travel Trailer:  A mobile home designed to be used for temporary occupancy for travel, recreational or vacation use; with the manufacturer's permanent identification "Travel Trailer" thereon; and when factory equipped for the road, being of any length provided its gross weight does not exceed forty-five hundred (4500) pounds, or being of any weight provided its overall length does not exceed twenty-eight (28) feet. 

59. 	
Variance:  A grant of permission by the Zoning Board of Adjustment that authorizes the recipient to do that which, according to the strict letter of the zoning laws, could not otherwise legally be done. 

60. 	
Wetlands:  “Wetlands” means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal conditions does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. 

61. 	
Zoning Board of Adjustment:  A quasi-judicial body which hears and decides matters relating to the application of the zoning ordinance and considers appeals from the decisions of the Planning & Zoning Administrator and Building Official and considers variance and special exception applications. 


Zosctn1 
1-9 

2.01 -The Town of Merrimack is hereby divided into twelve districts: 
R. Residential District 
C-1. Limited Commercial District 
C-2. General Commercial District 
I-1 Industrial District 
I-2. Industrial District 
I-3. Industrial District 

W. 	Wetland Conservation District 
F. 	Flood Hazard Conservation District 
E. Elderly Zoning District 
PRD. Planned Residential District 

A. Aquifer Conservation District 
SP. Shoreland Protection District 

The location and boundaries of districts are and shall be as shown on the Zoning Map, the Wetlands Conservation District Map, the Flood Hazard Conservation District Map, the Soils Limitation District Photo Maps, the Elderly Zoning District Map, and the Planned Residential District Map which are hereby declared to be a part of this ordinance. 
2.01.1 -Industrial District -Metes and Bounds, I-1, I-2, I-3 
A. 	From Souhegan River North to Bedford line from Merrimack River to 200 feet west of the railroad tracks and the extension of the industrial zone in the area of the B&M Railroad at the northerly side of the Souhegan River as mapped [including all of Tax Map Parcels 6D-1/75 except for that portion of the parcel south and west of the southwesterly property line of Tax Map Parcel 6D-1/76 and north and west of a line drawn from the southwestern corner of Tax Map Parcel 6D-1/76 to a point at a jog in the southwesterly boundary line of Tax Map Parcel 6D-1/75, said point being approximately 249 feet east of the Front Street Right-of-Way, and all of Tax Map Parcels 6D-1/76, 6E-2/60 and 6E-2/61 but excluding all of Tax Map Parcels 6D-1/69 and 75-4, 6E-1/5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 10-1, 11, 12, 13, 38, 37, 36, 35, 34, 33 and 6E-2/39. 
B. 	Beginning at a point at the intersection of the westerly right-of-way line of Camp Sargent Road and the southerly right-of-way line of Continental Boulevard; thence 
1. 
Westerly along the said southerly right-of-way line of Continental Boulevard, a 

distance of seven hundred ninety (790) feet, more or less, to a point at the most westerly corner of Lot 4D/54-4 and the most northerly corner of Lot 3D/3; thence 

2. 	
Southeasterly along the southwesterly line of said line of said Lot 4D/54-4 and Lot 4D/53 and the northeasterly line of said Lot 3D/3, a distance of three hundred sixty-nine 


(369) feet, more or less, to a point on the westerly line of Lot 3D/18; thence 


Section 2.01.1 -Industrial District -Metes and Bounds, I-1, I-2, I-3 (continued) 
3. 	
Southerly and southwesterly along the northwesterly lot lines of Lots 3D/18, 3D/16, 3D/14, 3D/13, 3D/12, 3D/10, 3D/9, 3D/8, 3D/7, 3D/6-1, 3D/6, 3C/102-2, 3C/102, 3C/102-1, 3C/101, and 3C/100, a distance of two thousand seven hundred ninety-eight (2798) feet, more or less, to a point on the easterly right-of-way line of said Continental Boulevard; thence 

4. 	
Southwesterly, crossing said Continental Boulevard, and through Lot 3C/85, a distance of two hundred twenty-one (221) feet, more or less, to a point at the southeasterly corner of Lot 3C/82-1 and the northeasterly corner of Lot 3C/82; thence 

5. 	
Northerly along the easterly line of said Lot 3C/82-1, a distance of thirty (30) feet, more or less, to a point at the northeasterly corner of said Lot 3C/82-1; thence 

6. 	
Westerly along the northerly line of said Lot 3C/82-1 and Lot 3C/80, a distance of two hundred eleven (211) feet, more or less, to a point at the northwesterly corner of said Lot 3C/80 and on the southeasterly line of Lot 3C/76; thence 

7. 	
Northeasterly along the southeasterly line of said Lot 3C/76 and Lot 3C/76-1, a distance of two thousand eight hundred forty-one (2841) feet, more or less, to a point at the center line of Naticook Brook; thence 

8. 	
Northeasterly along the said center line of Naticook Brook, a distance of nine hundred twenty-three (923) feet, more or less, to a point on the southerly right-of-way line of Amherst Road; thence 

9. 	
Easterly and southeasterly along the said southerly right-of-way line of Amherst Road, a distance of one thousand twenty-two (1022) feet, more or less, to the point of beginning. 


Shown on a plan entitled Town of Merrimack Official Zoning Map Amendment, Industrial District "C", Continental Boulevard, Merrimack, N.H., Scale 1" = 200' plus or minus, Adopted May, 1995. 
C. 	The premises bounded on the south by the northerly line of Pine Wood Acres, so-called, Reeds Ferry; on the east by the Merrimack River; on the north by the southerly line of the New England Power Company right of way, (which southerly line is located eighty-three and 5/10 [83.5] feet southerly of, and measured at a right angle with, the center line of the southerly line of transmission towers located in said right of way); and on the west by the center line of the Daniel Webster Highway.  Within said area, no building shall be constructed or used for industrial or commercial purposes if such building is 
situated within two hundred (200) feet of the boundary of an adjoining residential district, within which residences are constructed within two hundred (200) feet of the boundary line between such districts. 

Section 2.01.1 -Industrial District -Metes and Bounds, I-1, I-2, I-3 (continued) 
D. 	From Souhegan River south to easterly extension of the access road and underpass to the F.E. Everett Turnpike Toll Gate, from Merrimack River west to 200 feet east of Daniel Webster Highway; and from easterly extension of the access road and underpass to the F.E. Everett Turnpike Toll Gate south to Nashua line from Merrimack River west to F.E. Everett Turnpike thence northerly along turnpike to Toll Gate thence easterly to point of beginning. 
E. 	Certain parcels in the Congress Park subdivision fronting on Columbia Circle, west of D.W.Highway, including Tax Map Parcels 4D-3/7, 8, 10, 12, 13, 14, 16, 18, 19, 21, 22, 24, 25, & 
26. 
EXCEPTION:  The area bounded from Route 3 easterly along the center line of Wright Avenue to the B&M right-of-way, thence southerly along the B&M right-of-way to a point along the center line of Greeley Street to Route Three, thence northerly along the center line of Route Three to the center line of Wright Avenue. 
Industrial I-2 District 
F. 	The boundaries of the Industrial District I-2 are as follows: 
1. 	
Beginning at a point on the westerly side of the F.E. Everett Turnpike and 50' northerly of Thornton Road West, thence; westerly parallel to said Thornton Road West to land of Robert MacKay, thence; northwesterly 510' along land of MacKay to a corner, thence; westerly crossing land of MacKay to the northeasterly corner of land of Fred Mears, thence; westerly by land of Fred Mears to land of Joseph Demers, thence; northerly and westerly by land of Demers to land of Pennichuck Water Works, thence; westerly and northwesterly by land of Pennichuck Water Works to the easterly corner of Merrimack School District land, said point being approximately 2134' southeasterly from Camp Sargent Road, thence; northerly on a straight line by land of Meadowcrest Corporation to a corner, said corner meaning and intending to be 1500' easterly of Camp Sargent Road and 1000' southerly from the nearest corner of Sargent Acres subdivision, thence; southeasterly on a straight line along land of Meadowcrest Corporation to a corner, said corner meaning and intending to be 1500' easterly of Camp Sargent Road and 1000' southerly from the nearest corner of Sargent Acres subdivision, thence; southeasterly on a straight line along of Meadowcrest Corporation to a point on the westerly side of F.E. Everett Turnpike, said point being 4200' northerly from Thornton Road West, thence; southerly by the F.E. Everett Turnpike to the point of beginning. 

2. 	
The premises to the west the of western boundary of the F.E. Everett Turnpike right-of­way, north of the centerline of the Industrial Drive right-of way, east of the eastern boundary of the Camp Sargent Road right-of-way, south and east of the Sargent Acres Subdivision and south of the Public Service Company of New Hampshire Power Easement; including Tax Map Parcels 3C/191-1, 3D/28 and that portion of 3D/27 south of the Public Service Company of New Hampshire Power Line Easement. 



Section 2.01.1-Industrial District -Metes and Bounds, I-1, I-2, and I-3 (continued) 
(a)  Buffer Zone:  Beginning at a point on the easterly side of Camp Sargent Road, one hundred (100) feet southerly and westerly from the southwestern corner of Tax Map Parcel 3C/190; thence, easterly and southerly a distance of approximately eleven hundred twenty-five (1,125) feet, parallel to Spruce Street; thence, thirteen hundred seventy-five feet, more or less, northeasterly, to the peak elevation point of the unnamed hill west of Douglas Street (376 feet aMSL;) thence, northerly, a distance of one thousand twenty-five (1,025) feet, more or less, to a point at the southern boundary of the Public Service Company of New Hampshire Power Easement, one hundred (100) feet east of the northeastern corner of Tax Map Parcel 3C/109; thence, westerly to the northeastern corner of Tax Map Parcel 3C/109; thence, southerly along the rear lot lines of Tax Map Parcels 3C/109 and 110; thence westerly along the southern lot line of Tax Map Parcel 3C/111; thence, southeasterly along the rear lot lines of Tax Map Parcels 3C/129 through 132; thence, westerly along the southern lot line of Tax Map Parcel 3C/132 to the northeast corner of Tax Map Parcel 3C/133; thence, southerly along the rear lot lines of Tax Map Parcels 3C/133 and 134; thence, southerly to the northeastern corner of Tax Map Parcel 135; thence southerly and westerly along the rear lot lines of Tax Map Parcels 3C/135 through 140 to the northeastern corner of Tax Map Parcel 3C/141; thence, southerly along the eastern lot line of Tax Map Parcel 3C/141; thence, westerly along a line following the rear lot lines of Tax Map Parcels 3C/141, 142, 163, 164, 181, 182 and 190 to the easterly side of Camp Sargent Road; thence, southerly along the easterly side of Camp Sargent Road to the point of beginning. 
Industrial I-3 District 
G. 	The boundaries of the Industrial District I-3 are as follows: Beginning at a point on the northwesterly side of Continental Boulevard, said point being the southerly corner of a parcel of land belonging to the Town of Merrimack, New Hampshire, thence; 
1. 	
Southeasterly by a curve to the left having a radius of 1945.86', a distance of 184.99' to a stone bound set, thence; 

2. 	
S 36o 40' 34" W a distance of 1680.47' along the westerly side of said Continental Boulevard to a stone bound set, thence; 

3. 	
N 53o 19' 26" W a distance of 286.33' to an iron pin found at the land of the Merrimack Village District, thence; 

4. 	
N 00o 02' 26" E a distance of 111.36' to an iron pin found, thence; 

5. 	
N 10o 22' 09" W a distance of 118.47' to an iron pin found, thence; 

6. 	
N 43o 20' 22" W a distance of 144.39' to an iron pin found, thence; 

7. 	
N 25o 03' 04" W a distance of 179.67' to an iron pin found, thence;    

8. 	
N 01o 00' 22" W a distance of 322.73' to a concrete bound found on the southerly side of Greens Pond Road.  The proceeding five courses were all by land of Merrimack Village District, thence; 


Section I-3 -Industrial District -Metes and Bounds I-1, I-2, I-3 (continued) 
9. 	
N 11o 35' 48" W a distance of 50.00' across Greens Pond Road to a point, thence; 

10. 	
S 78o 24' 12" W a distance of 136.30' to the beginning to a curve to the left, thence 

11. 	
Westerly by said curve to the left having a radius of 422.77' a distance of 110.52' to a point, thence; 

12. 	
S 63o 25' 32" W a distance of 175.45' to the beginning of a curve to the right, thence; 

13. 	
Westerly and northwesterly by said curve to the right, having a radius of 185.06' a distance of 175.42' to a point, thence; 

14. 	
N 61o 21' 35" W a distance of 54.51' to a point, thence; 

15. 	
Generally northeasterly along land of Merrimack Village District and Naticook Brook, a distance 2776' to a point at the land of the Town of Merrimack Water District, thence; 

16. 	
S 11o 45' 24" E a distance of 980.69' to the northerly side of said Greens Pond Road, thence; 

17. 	
S 25o 30' 41" E a distance of 50.00' across said Greens Pond Road to a point, thence; 

18. 	
N 64o 29' 19" E a distance of 280.00' to a stone bound at the northwest corner of the land of the Town of Merrimack, thence; 

19. 	
S 10o 52' 44" E a distance of 139.30' to a point, thence; 

20. 	
S 47o 52' 36" E a distance of 150.00' to the point of beginning. 


This tract of land is shown as two lots on the Town of Merrimack Assessor's sheets and that portion of Greens Pond Road that lies between these two tracts.  (See Map Attached, or Official Zoning Map in Planning Department). 
2.01.2 -Limited Commercial District 
Boundaries as defined by the Zoning Map which is hereby incorporated by reference. 

2.01.3 -General Commercial District 
Boundaries as defined by the Zoning Map which is hereby incorporated by reference. 

2.01.4 -Residential District 
Balance of the Town including the area bounded from Route Three easterly along the center line of Wright Avenue to the B&M right-of-way, thence southerly along the B&M right-of-way to a point along the center line of Greeley Street to Route Three, thence northerly along the center line of Route Three to the center line of Wright Avenue with the exclusion of Tax Map Parcels 4D-4/50, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, and 4D-1/003. 

2.01.5 -Wetlands Conservation District 
As defined in Section 2.02.7. Hereafter no land shall be used or occupied and no building or structures shall be erected, altered, used or occupied except in conformity with the regulations herein established for the district in which such land, building or structure is located. 

2.01.6 -Flood Hazard  Conservation District 
Delineation: The Flood Hazard Conservation District is hereby determined to be the flood hazard areas designated by the Federal Insurance Administration, through on-site mapping of elevations in the flood hazard areas of the Town of Merrimack, dated September 25, 2009. The Flood Hazard Conservation District as herein defined is shown in the Flood Insurance Study and on a map designated as the Flood Insurance Rate Maps of the County of Hillsborough, New Hampshire. These maps are adopted by reference and declared a part of this section. 
In all cases where the Flood Hazard Conservation District is super-imposed over another zoning district in the Town of Merrimack, New Hampshire, that district whose regulations are the more restrictive shall apply. 

2.01.7 -Elderly Zoning District 
Boundaries:  Any development for the elderly shall be located within a one (1) mile radius from the intersection of the D.W. Highway and Baboosic Lake Road or within a two (2) mile radius of the intersection of the DW Highway and Baboosic Lake Road east of the turnpike. 

2.01.8 -Planned Residential District 
Boundaries: Boundaries are defined by the Zoning Map which is adopted as a part of this ordinance. 

2.01.9 -Aquifer Conservation District 
Location: The Aquifer Conservation District includes those areas shown on the Map entitled Town of Merrimack Aquifer Conservation District, dated December 1996 prepared by the Nashua Regional Planning Commission based upon the Department of Interior U.S. Geological Survey study entitled Hydrology of Stratified-Drift Aquifers and Water Quality in the Nashua Regional Planning Commission Area, South Central New Hampshire, 1987, and on the Map entitled Surficial Geology and Wellhead Protection Areas Delineated for Merrimack Village District Wells MVD-1 Through MVD-&, dated January 1996, prepared by Emory & Garrett Groundwater, Inc.  The Aquifer Conservation District is subdivided into two areas: 
Section 2.01.9 -Aquifer Conservation District (continued) 
1. 	
Wellhead Protection Areas. 

2. 	
Balance of the Aquifer District. 

3. 	
The Balance of the Watershed 


The Aquifer Conservation District maps are hereby declared to be a part of this ordinance and is incorporated by reference. 
2.02 -Permitted Uses -All Districts 
A. 	Permitted Uses -General: All uses set forth below are permitted in all zoning districts. 
1. 	
Streets, road and other access ways including foot, bicycle, horse paths and bridges and nature trials. 

2. 	
Farming, gardening, nursery, forestry, harvesting, grazing and other similar agricultural activities.  The change of land to one or more agricultural uses as defined herein or expansion of an existing agricultural use shall be subject to nonresidential site plan review by the Planning Board. 

3. 	
Wildlife refuges, nature study and conservation areas and other activities designed to conserve soil, water, plants and wildlife. 

4. 	
Water impoundments and wells, drainage ways, streams, creeks and other paths of water runoff including the maintenance and operation of water control and supply devices such as dams, weirs and splash boards. 

5. 	
Excavation of sand and gravel providing all activities are conducted in accordance with an approved Earth Removal Permit issued pursuant to Section 14 of this ordinance. 

6. 	
Public Lands and Institutions. 

7. 	
The use or operation of equipment, vehicles or aircraft, including aircraft take offs and landings, for the purpose of emergency response, medical necessity, public safety, emergency landing, media coverage, building construction, equipment installation or political campaigning. 

8. 	
The installation of solar, wind, or other renewable energy systems designed to provide energy primarily for on-site use, and the building of any structures necessary for the collection of renewable energy provided that all applicable health and life and safety codes and requirements are adhered to and subject to any applicable building setback or height restrictions. 





Section 2.02 -Permitted Uses -All Districts (continued) 
B. General Prohibitions: 
1. 	No use of any kind shall be permitted in any district, if it in any way would be injurious, noxious, or offensive by way of odor, fumes, smoke, dust, vibrations, noise, light, or other objectionable features or if it would be hazardous to the community on account of fire or explosion or any other cause.  The Planning Board shall adopt such standards and regulations as it may deem necessary in order to help ascertain conformance with the above regulations. 
2. 	The underground storage of petroleum, refined petroleum products and organic solvents except with suitable secondary barriers and automatic alarm systems approved by the Planning Board is prohibited in every district. For the purpose of this regulation, storage in basement or cellar spaces shall not be considered as underground storage. This regulation shall apply to all new and replacement storage facilities constructed after the date of its adoption. 
a) 	The underground storage of petroleum, refined petroleum products and organic solvents referred to in (2) above is not intended to include Liquified Petroleum Gas (LPG). 

Section 2.02.1 -District R, Residential -Permitted Uses 
A. 	Only the following uses are permitted in the residential district. 
1. 	
Residential uses and customary secondary accessory uses and structures. Note: aircraft takeoffs and landings on private land by the owner of such land or by a person who resides on such land are not valid and permitted accessory uses. 

2. 	
Home Occupations: Except as provided in 3 below, requests to conduct home occupations as set forth in this section must comply with the criteria listed below and receive permission from the Planning Board after a public hearing. 


a) 	No more than one person who is not a resident of the premises is employed therein; 
b) 	Off-street parking can be provided as specified in Section 18; 
c) 	There is no external evidence of the occupation or office other than a sign limited to two (2) square feet. 
d) 	No more than 25% of the inhabitable floor area of the dwelling is utilized by the occupation or office. 
e) 	Such use shall be personal to the owner of the premises or the occupant with the permission from the owner and shall not survive a transfer of title of the real estate or be transferable to a new occupant. 

Section 2.02.1 -District R -Permitted Uses (continued) 
f) 	Home Occupations shall be deemed to include professional offices, such as that of a doctor, dentist, lawyer, accountant, engineer, architect, and the business offices of a variety of similar occupations.  They shall also include occupations such as dressmaking, cooking limited to items for off-premise consumption, home crafts, hairdressing and barbering limited to one chair, and family day care homes in accordance with RSA 170-E:2 IV (a). 
g) 	Home occupations expressly do not include commercial kennels, the parking or storage of tractor trailers, auto repair or small engine repair or maintenance, welding, or other uses which involve the visible storage on the property of automobiles or the parts thereof. 
h) 	A contractor or other tradesman may store building materials or construction equipment on his premises only within existing structures. 
3. 	Home Occupations which meet all of the criteria listed below are not subject to site plan review and approval by the Planning Board. 
a) 	There is no external evidence of the occupation or office. 
b) 	There is no individual employed on the premises who is not a resident. 
c) 	The dwelling meets off-street parking requirements Section 18. 
d) 	There are no visitors, customers or solicitations for individuals to visit the premises to conduct business. 
e) 	There is no business sign of any type. 
f) 	No more than 25% of the inhabitable floor area of the dwelling is utilized by the occupation or office. 
g) 	Delivery of goods and materials is limited to step-vans and similar vehicles customarily associated with residential deliveries.  No more than two (2) deliveries are permitted daily. 
4. 	To increase housing alternatives while maintaining neighborhood aesthetics and quality, attached accessory dwelling units (ADU) are permitted on any property containing an owner-occupied single-family dwelling, provided that the applicant meets the criteria set forth below: 
a) 	A maximum of one (1) ADU per property is permitted. An ADU shall not be permitted on property where more than one primary dwelling unit (PDU) currently exists; 
b) 	The ADU is contained within or will be an addition to an existing or proposed single family detached dwelling; 

Section 2.02.1 -District R -Permitted Uses (continued) 
c) 	Exterior alterations, enlargements, or extensions of the PDU are permitted in order to accommodate the ADU. However, no such change is permitted which would alter the appearance of the PDU to look like a duplex or any other multi­family structure (i.e., the house should not look like it was designed to house more than one family). The construction of any exterior accessways which are required for access to the ADU shall be located to the side or rear of the building whenever possible.  The ADU shall also be designed to remain functionally dependent on the PDU and shall not have provisions for separate utilities, garages, driveways, and other similar amenities; 
d) 	The ADU shall contain no more than two bedrooms; 
e) 	The ADU shall not exceed 1,000 square feet in area; 
f) 	The ADU shall be connected internally to the PDU; 
g) 	The property owner must occupy one of the two dwelling units; 
h) 	One parking space for the ADU shall be provided in addition to any parking for the PDU; 
i) 	The PDU, ADU, and lot shall not be converted to a condominium or any other form of legal ownership distinct from the ownership of the single family dwelling. In order to assure compliance with this requirement, the property owners at the time the ADU is established shall be required to execute a restrictive covenant running in favor of the Town, which shall be recorded in the Hillsborough County Registry of Deeds and a copy provided to the Community Development Department and the Assessor prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy; and 
j) 	Where municipal sewer service is not provided, the septic system shall meet NH Water Supply and Pollution Control Division requirements for the combined system demand for total occupancy of the premises. 
5. 	Co-location of a new telecommunication antenna on Existing Towers, so long as the additional telecommunications antenna(s) is no more than 20 feet higher than the existing tower, is also disguised through the use of camouflage or the color of the antenna(s) blends with the existing structure or surroundings if camouflage was not required with the tower approval.  A building permit shall be required. 

Section 2.02.1 -District R -Permitted Uses (continued) 
B. 	Special Exceptions: The Zoning Board of Adjustment may grant a special exception for the following use of lands within the residential district: 
1. 	Churches, provided that it finds that all of the following conditions are met: a) The specific site is an appropriate location for such a use or uses in terms of overall community development. b) The use as developed will not adversely affect the neighborhood and shall 
produce no diminution of real estate values in the neighboring area. c) There will be no nuisance or serious hazard to vehicles or pedestrians. d) That an adequate parking area is provided for motor vehicles on the premises. e) A buffer shall be erected and maintained to screen existing residential uses. 
Buffers may be fence screens, dense plantings of suitable trees and shrubbery, or naturally occurring shrubs and trees. f) The use as developed will be restricted for church purposes only. No commercial use of a church within the residential zone will be allowed. 
2. 	Telecommunication Towers, provided that it finds that all of the following conditions are met: 
a) 	The applicant shall meet the approval criteria set forth in a-e of B.1 above. 
b) 	The applicant meets the criteria set forth in section 2.02.4.B.22.a (New Towers). 
c) 	Proposed towers shall be disguised through the use of camouflage technologies such as trees, flagpoles, steeples, etc. 
d) 	Written evidence demonstrating that no existing structure can accommodate the applicant’s proposed antenna if the applicant is proposing to build a new tower. This evidence can consist of an analysis of the location, height, strength, and potential interference which would make co-location impractical. 
3. 	Co-location on Existing Non-Tower Structures, provided that it finds that all of the following conditions are met: a) The applicant shall meet the approval criteria set forth in a-e of B.1 above. b) The applicant meets the criteria set forth in section 2.02.4.B.22.c. 
c) 	Proposed telecommunications antenna(s) shall be disguised through the use of camouflage technologies. 

Section 2.02.1 -District R -Permitted Uses (continued) 
C. 	Conditional Use Permits: 
1. 	
Pursuant to the authority provided in RSA 674:21, the Planning Board may grant a Conditional Use Permit for Detached Accessory Dwelling Units (ADU’s) in the R District. 

2. 	
The following criteria must be satisfied in order for the Planning Board to grant a Conditional Use Permit for a Detached ADU: 


a) 	A maximum of one (1) ADU per property is permitted. An ADU shall not be permitted on property where more than one primary dwelling unit (PDU) currently exists; 
b) 	The Detached ADU shall be located only in the side or rear yard of the property; 
c) 	The Detached ADU shall not exceed 50% of the size of the Principal Dwelling Unit (PDU) or 1,000 square feet in size, whichever is smaller; 
d) 	Lots seeking a Detached ADU shall be comprised of at least 125% of the minimum lot area as required by Section 3.02.A, Table 1; 
e) 	A Detached ADU shall not contain more than two bedrooms; 
f) 	The property owner must occupy one of the two dwelling units; 
g) 	One parking space for the ADU shall be provided in addition to any parking for the PDU; 
h) 	The PDU, ADU, and lot shall not be converted to a condominium or any other form of legal ownership distinct from the ownership of the single family dwelling. In order to assure compliance with this requirement, the property owners at the time the ADU is established shall be required to execute a restrictive covenant running in favor of the Town, which shall be recorded in the Hillsborough County Registry of Deeds and a copy provided to the Community Development Department and the Assessor prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy; 
i) 	Where municipal sewer service is not provided, the septic system shall meet NH Water Supply and Pollution Control Division requirements for the combined system demand for total occupancy of the premises. 

2.02.2-District C-1, Limited Commercial -Permitted Uses 
A. 	This district is intended to permit commercial uses in areas on streets with high traffic volumes which now have a mixture of residential and non-residential uses but where the trend has been conversion to commercial use. These areas are typified by small lots and are frequently abutted on the rear by attractive residential neighborhoods. 
The intent is to permit limited commercial use while buffering residential neighborhoods from disturbance and disruption. 
B. 	Only the following uses are permitted in the limited commercial district: 
1. 	
Stores for the sale of retail goods or performance of personal services except those specifically excluded below; 

2. 	
Business and professional offices; 

3. 	
Specifically excluded are the following: banks, automotive related uses of all kinds, hotels, and motels, and “big box”, single user retail stores greater than 75,000 square feet. 


C. 	Special  Exceptions: 
1. 	
The Zoning Board of Adjustment may grant a special exception for the following uses of lands within the limited commercial district C-1: a) Restaurants, b) Cafes, 

c) Residential (other than a Planned Unit Development), and d) Accessory uses as defined herein; 

2. 	
Provided that it finds that all of the following conditions are met: a) The specific site is an appropriate location for such a use or uses in terms of 


overall community development. b) The use as developed will not adversely affect the neighborhood. c) There will be no nuisance or serious hazard to vehicles or pedestrians. d) Adequate and appropriate facilities will be provided for the proper operation of 
the proposed use or uses. 

Section 2.02.2 -District C-1, Limited Commercial -Permitted Uses (continued) 
D. Conditional Use Permits: 
1. 	
Pursuant to the authority provided in RSA 674:21, the Planning Board may grant a Conditional Use Permit for Alternative Treatment Centers (Non-Cultivation Location) within the C-1 District. 

2. 	
Purpose & Intent: The purpose of this Section is to implement NH RSA 126-X, authorizing the use of therapeutic cannabis and to regulate the locations and operations of Alternative Treatment Center uses, so as to promote and protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents of Merrimack. The intent of this Section is to: 


a) 	Provide for the safe sale and distribution of therapeutic cannabis to patients who qualify to obtain, possess, and use cannabis for medical purposes under RSA 126-X and as managed by the New Hampshire Department of Health & Human Services; and 
b) 	Protect public health and safety through reasonable limitations on business operations as they relate to noise, air and water quality, food safety, building safety, neighborhood and patient safety, security for the business and its personnel and other health safety concerns. 
3. 	The following criteria must be satisfied in order for the Planning Board to grant a Conditional Use Permit for Alternative Treatment Centers (Non-Cultivation Location): 
a) 	An Alternative Treatment Center shall not be located within a pre-existing designated drug free school zone; and 
b) 	The Alternative Treatment Center shall be located in a permanent structure and may not be located in a trailer, manufactured home, cargo container, or any structure that has axles with wheels. Drive-Thru services at an Alternative Treatment Center are prohibited; and 
c) 	The Alternative Treatment Center shall provide for the proper disposal of cannabis remnants or byproducts, which remnants or byproducts shall not be placed in the facility’s exterior refuse containers; and 
d) 	The applicant shall provide a detailed narrative and floor plan, as well as any other relevant documentation, describing how the Alternative Treatment Center shall be secured. The security plan must take into account the measures that will be taken to ensure the safe delivery of any product to the facility (including permitted times for delivery), how the product will be secured on site, and how patient transactions will be facilitated in order to ensure safety. The security plan shall be reviewed and approved by the Merrimack Police Department; and 
e) 	The use of cannabis on the premises is prohibited; and 
f) 	The Alternative Treatment Center shall emit no cannabis related fumes, vapors or odors which can be smelled or otherwise perceived from beyond the lot lines of the property where the facility is located. 

Section 2.02.2 -District C-1, Limited Commercial -Permitted Uses (continued) 
E. 	A buffer shall be erected and maintained to screen between commercial and existing residential uses. Buffers may be fence screens, dense plantings of suitable trees and shrubbery, or naturally occurring shrubs and trees. 
2.02.3 -District C-2, General Commercial -Permitted Uses 
A. 	In recognition of the demand created by Merrimack's strategic location and continuing growth, commercial areas are hereby designated allowing for the establishment of retail businesses. 
A criterion in their location must be readily accessible to high traffic volume carrying facilities to allow not only for the stores and facilities themselves but also for parking, landscaping, and ancillary requirements as well.  The primary function of this district use would be to serve a regional and/or local shopping and service need. 
B. 	Only the following uses are permitted in the general commercial district.  Such uses shall be primarily conducted inside a building: 
1. 	
Stores for sale of goods at retail or performance of regional customary personal services, or services clearly incidental to retail sales including services and construction materials, but no fabrication or manufacturing except incidental to, and on the same premises with, such retail sales, provided such incidental fabrication is conducted entirely within a building and does not occupy more than 20% of the floor area used for business purposes. Specifically excluded are “big box”, single user retail stores greater than 75,000 square feet. 

2. 	
Business, professional, or banking offices. 

3. 	
Research and Development on lots of five (5) acres or more located in Commercial Parks of five or more lots. 

4. 	
Restaurant, cafe, or other place serving food or beverages. 

5. 	
Parking lot areas for transient motor vehicles, but not for storage of new or used motor vehicles for sale or hire. 

6. 	
Hotel/motel. 

7. 	
Churches. 

8. 	
Co-location on Existing Towers, so long as the additional telecommunications antenna(s) is no more than 20 feet higher than the existing tower and the color of the antenna(s) blends with the existing structure or surroundings.  A building permit shall be required. 




Section 2.02.3 -District C-2, General Commercial -Permitted Uses (continued) 
C. 	Special Exceptions: 
1. 	
The Zoning Board of Adjustment may grant a special exception for the following uses of lands within the general commercial district C-2: a) Accessory uses as defined herein, b) Residential (other than a Planned Unit Development), c) Public Facilities, d) Sale or storage of used and new cars, e) Commercial recreation and entertainment, and f) Gasoline and automobile service and repair stations; Provided that it finds that all of the following conditions are met: 1) The specific site is an appropriate location for such a use or uses in terms of overall community development, 2) The use as developed will not adversely affect the neighborhood, 3) There will be no nuisance or serious hazard to vehicles or pedestrians, and 

4) 	Adequate and appropriate facilities will be provided for the proper operation of the proposed use or uses. 

2. 	
The Zoning Board of Adjustment may grant a special exception for Telecommunication Towers within the general commercial district C-2. 


Provided that it finds that all of the following conditions are met: a) The applicant shall meet the conditions set forth in a-d of C.1 above. 

Section 2.02.3 -District C-2, General Commercial -Permitted Uses (continued) 
b) 	The applicant meets the following criteria: 
1) 	Towers shall be set back from the property line by a distance equal to the height of the tower.  The Planning Board may permit a lesser setback where alternative protections to abutting properties are provided by way of easement, covenant or other adequate deed restriction or where the proposed tower is designed in full compliance with all applicable building codes and building/construction plans submitted to the building inspector are certified and stamped by a 
licensed structural engineer prior to the issuance of a building permit. Prior to the issuance of a Building Permit, the tower design and plans shall be reviewed by a structural engineer designated by the Town. 
2) 	Accessory facilities must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements. 
3) 	Towers shall maintain a neutral, non-reflective color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
4) 	For security purposes, towers and ancillary facilities shall be enclosed by a minimum six (6) foot fence. 
5) 	All utility buildings and structures accessory to a tower shall be screened from view by suitable vegetation from any adjacent residentially zoned property or public roads. 
6) 	Any proposed communications tower shall be designed, structurally, electrically, and in all respects, to accommodate both the applicant’s antennas and comparable antennas for at least three (3) additional users if the tower is over 100 feet in height or for at least one (1) additional user if the tower is less than 100 feet in height.  Towers must be designed to allow for future rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and to accept antennas mounted at varying heights. 
7) 	Twice yearly inspections and bonding required: a) the structural integrity of all towers, whether in use, abandoned or unused, shall be inspected at least twice a year; b) copies of inspection reports shall be filed with the Community Development Department within thirty (30) days of the inspection; c) all owners of commercial wireless telecommunication towers shall obtain and maintain a bond to cover the cost of removal of abandoned, unused towers or portions of towers. d) the amount of said bond shall be reviewed by the Town every five (5) years to ensure the amount of security is adequate and may be increased if necessar; e) failure to file the required biannual inspection report with the Community Development Department within the specified time-frame shall constitute sufficient grounds to cause the bond to be called. 

Section 2.02.3 -District C-2, General Commercial -Permitted Uses (continued) 
8) 	Permit Required: a) building permits shall be obtained for all towers, accessory structures and antennae; b) the number of users and the total number of antennae on any individual tower shall not exceed that which is permitted under the site plan approved by the Merrimack Planning Board. 
c) 	Written evidence demonstrating that no existing structure can accommodate the applicant’s proposed antenna if the applicant is proposing to build a new tower. This evidence can consist of an analysis of the location, height, strength, potential interference, and co-location costs which would make co-location impractical. 
D. Conditional Use Permit: Pursuant to the authority provided in RSA 674:21, the Planning Board may grant a Conditional Use Permit for Alternative Treatment Centers (Non-Cultivation Location) and Self-Storage Facilities within the C 2 District. 
1. 	
Alternative Treatment Centers (Non-Cultivation Location):  Subject to the requirements of Section 2.02.2.D, Subsections 2 and 3. 

2. 	
Self Storage Facilities 


a) 	Purpose & Intent: Self-Storage Facilities have characteristics in common with both commercial uses and industrial uses. This subsection provides regulations to appropriately site Self-Storage Facilities in the C-2 District while maintaining the desired character and function of those zones. In general, Self-Storage Facilities generate low levels of vehicular and pedestrian activity and typically do not contribute to the vitality of a commercial area compared to other commercial uses. Historically self-storage facilities have visually resembled industrial facilities, but some trends in the industry have featured designs compatible with higher quality commercial development. If designed appropriately as stand-alone structures that emulate the exterior architecture of residential or multi-family residential or as components located within larger commercial/ office developments, Self-Storage Facilities may be located without adversely impacting the intent of the C-2 District or surrounding neighborhoods, provided the criteria below are satisfied. 
b) 	The following criteria must be satisfied in order for the Planning Board to grant a Conditional Use Permit for Self-Storage Facilities: 
1) Granting of the application would meet some public need or convenience; 
2) Granting of the application is in the public interest; 
3) The property in question is reasonably suited for the use requested; 
4) The use requested would not have a substantial adverse effect on the rights 

of the owners of surrounding properties; 
5) 	There must be appropriate provision for access facilities adequate for the estimated traffic from public streets and sidewalks, so as to assure public safety and to avoid traffic congestion; 

Section 2.02.3 -District C-2, General Commercial -Permitted Uses (continued) 
6) 	Electrical service to storage units shall be for lighting and climate control only. No electrical outlets are permitted inside individual storage units. Lighting fixtures and switches shall be of a secure design that will not allow tapping the fixtures for other purposes; 
7) 	If the facility abuts residentially zoned property, the facility loading bays, docks or doors shall not be visible from the residential property or from public rights-of-way; 
8) 	In order to promote visual compatibility with commercial development allowed in commercial zones, Self-Storage Facility buildings shall incorporate appropriate landscaping/screening and architectural and design features common to commercial and/or multifamily development. (Examples of such architectural and design features include: massing; proportion; facade modulation; exterior building materials and detailing; varied roofline; pedestrian scale; fenestration; repetition; etc.). 
E. General Requirements: 
Site Plan Review:  In each case where a building or use is proposed in this district other than a single-family residence, the Building Official shall refer the site plan of the proposal to the Planning Board for its review in accordance with its subdivision and/or site review regulations. Such Board shall determine that all requirements of this ordinance have been met, and buffer protection provided to adjacent residential uses and, after holding a public hearing on each application, shall approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove said site plan.  In modifying or disapproving any site plan, the Board shall enter its reasons for such actions in its records. 
2.02.4 -District I-1 & I-2, Industrial -Permitted Uses 
A. 	District Objectives 
These districts allow for the establishment of manufacturing employment opportunities in the community and takes into consideration truck access and the availability of utilities. Research and development and other high density activities should be concentrated in this area. Any permitted industrial or commercial use of which no land, building, structure, or equipment, or ancillary appendages shall be used for any purpose which would be injurious, noxious, or offensive by way of odor, fumes, smoke, dust, vibration, noise, light, or other objectionable features or hazardous to the community on account of fire or explosion or any other cause.  The Planning Board shall adopt such standards and regulations as it may deem necessary in order to help ascertain conformance with the above regulations. 
B. 	The following uses only are permitted in the Industrial District I-1:      
1. 	
Manufacturing Industries, 

2. 	
Warehouse and Wholesale Uses, 

3. 	
Office Uses Greater than 10,000 Square Feet, 

4. 	
Public Utilities, 

5. 	
Churches, 

6. 	
Gasoline Stations, 

7. 	
Enclosed Service and Repair, including Automotive Vehicles, 

8. 	
Machinery and Transportation Equipment, Sales, Service and Repair, 

9. 	
Freight and Trucking Terminals, Offices, and Brokers, 

10. 	
Contractors Yards, 

11. 	
Parking Garages, 

12. 	
Animal Hospital, Veterinary Clinics, provided at least 200 feet of side and rear yards are provided from any residential district, 

13. 	
Research & Testing Laboratory 

14. 	
Fuel Storage and Distribution (Bulk). 

15. 	
Printing Establishment, 

16. 	
Contract Cleaning Establishment, 

17. 	
Industrial Supply Establishment, 




Section 2.02.4 -District I-1 & I-2 -Permitted Uses (continued) 
18. 	
Support Uses to an Industrial District: 
a)  Restaurants, 
b)  Branch Banks, 
c)  Offices, 
d)  Hotel/Motel, 
e)  Daycare 


19. 	
Breweries and Bottling Facilities, 

20. 	
Athletic fields and indoor or outdoor skating facilities. 

21. 	
Self-Storage Facilities 

22. 	
Telecommunication Towers, Co-location on Existing Towers, and Co-location on Existing Non-Tower Structures, provided that the following criteria are satisfied: 


a. New Towers 
1) 	Towers shall be set back from the property line by a distance equal to the height of the tower. The Planning Board may permit a lesser setback where alternative protections to abutting properties are provided by way of easement, covenant or other adequate deed restriction or where the proposed tower is designed in full compliance with all applicable building codes and building/construction plans submitted to the building inspector are certified and stamped by a licensed structural engineer prior to the issuance of a building permit. Prior to the issuance of a Building Permit, the tower design and plans shall be reviewed by a structural engineer designated by the Town. 
2) 	Accessory facilities must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements. 
3) 	Towers shall maintain a neutral, non-reflective color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
4) 	For security purposes, towers and ancillary facilities shall be enclosed by a minimum six (6) foot fence. 
5) 	All utility buildings and structures accessory to a tower shall be screened from view by suitable vegetation from any adjacent residentially zoned  property or public roads. 

Section 2.02.4 -District I-1 & I-2 -Permitted Uses (continued) 
6) 	Any proposed communications tower shall be designed, structurally, electrically, and in all respects, to accommodate both the applicant’s antennas and comparable antennas for at least three (3) additional users if the tower is over 100 feet in height or for at least one (1) additional user if the tower is less than 100 feet in height. Towers must be designed to allow for future rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and to accept antennas mounted at varying heights. 
7) 	Twice yearly inspections and bonding required: a) the structural integrity of all towers, whether in use, abandoned or unused, shall be inspected at least twice a year; b) copies of inspection reports shall be filed with the Community Development Department within thirty (30) days of the inspection; c) all owners of commercial wireless telecommunication towers shall obtain and maintain a bond to cover the cost of removal of abandoned, unused towers or portions of towers; d) the amount of said bond shall be reviewed by the Town every five (5) years to ensure the amount of security is adequate and may be increased if necessary; e) failure to file the required biannual inspection report with the Community Development Department within the specified time-frame shall constitute sufficient grounds to cause the bond to be called. 
8) 	Permit Required: a) building permits shall be obtained for all towers, accessory structures and antennae; b) the number of users and the total number of antennae on any individual tower shall not exceed that which is permitted under the site plan approved by the Merrimack Planning Board. 
b. 	
Co-location on Existing Towers, so long as the additional telecommunications antenna(s) is no more than 20 feet higher than the existing tower and the color of the antenna(s) blends with the existing structure or surroundings. A building permit shall be required. 

c. 	
Co-location on Existing Non-Tower Structures, provided that the following criteria are satisfied: 


1) 	Installing an antenna(s) on an existing structure other than a tower, such as a building, water tank, light fixture, or utility pole, is permitted, without Planning Board review, so long as the additional antenna(s) is no more than 20 feet higher than the existing structure and the color of the antenna(s) blends with the existing structure or surroundings. 
2) 	Accessory facilities must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements of section 3.02. 

Section 2.02.4 -District I-1 & I-2, Industrial -Permitted Uses (continued) 
3) 	The antenna(s) and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment shall be a neutral color that is the same as the color as the supporting structure so as to make the antenna(s) and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
4) 	All utility buildings and structures accessory to the antenna(s) shall be screened from view by suitable vegetation from any adjacent residentially zoned property or public roads. 
C. 	Alternative Treatment Centers Permitted in the I-1 District by Conditional Use Permit 
1. 	Pursuant to the authority provided in RSA 674:21, the Planning Board may grant a Conditional Use Permit for Alternative Treatment Centers (both Cultivation and Non-Cultivation Locations) within the I-1 District, subject to the requirements of Section 2.02.2.D, Subsections 2 and 3. 
D. 	Mixed Use Developments Permitted in the I-1 District by Conditional Use Permit 
Pursuant to the authority provided in RSA 674:21, the Planning Board may grant a Conditional Use Permit  for mixed uses on parcels in the I-1 District consisting of a minimum of 50 acres provided there is compliance with the terms of this section. 
1. 	Purpose 
The purpose of this section is to permit mixed uses which allow the creative integration of industrial, commercial and residential housing developments based on a master site development plan that permits flexibility in the design and integration of the permitted uses contained therein.  The permitted mixed uses are intended to be complementary, so as to provide for the appropriate use of the land, fiscally beneficial development, the efficient provision of public services, and expanded opportunities for a diversity of residential development outside the traditional residential districts. 
Conditional Use Permits are limited to single consolidated tracts of land situated in the I-1 Industrial District that: 
a. 
Are a minimum of 50 acres in size; 

b. 
Are serviced by municipal sewer; 

c. 
Are serviced by the Merrimack Village District or Pennichuck Water Works; 

d. 
Have 500 (five hundred) feet of continuous frontage on the State maintained portions of Daniel Webster Highway located south of Star Drive to the Nashua City Line, or north of Bedford Road to the Bedford Town Line. 



Section 2.02.4 -District I-1 & I-2, Industrial -Permitted Uses (continued) 
2. Permitted Uses 
Uses which may be permitted by Conditional Use Permit, provided the provisions of this Section are satisfied, include only: 
a. 
Uses permitted within the (I-1) Industrial District (per Section 2.02.4.B); 

b. 
Uses permitted within the (C-2) General Commercial District (per Section 2.02.3.B 1 through 7), but with no restriction as to size; 

c. 
Uses permitted within the Elderly Zoning District 	(per Section 2.02.9) subject to the residential density calculation requirements of Section 15.04; 

d. 
Residential Uses as permitted within the Planned Unit Development District (per Section 15); 

e. 
Public and private open space and recreation, public facilities, and commercial recreation uses. 


Residential density calculations under C and D above shall be based upon that portion of the parcel being set aside for residential use, and shall not include land proposed for the uses referenced in A, B, or E. 
3. Master Site Development Plan Required 
The applicant shall prepare and submit, for review and possible approval by the Planning Board, a Master Site Development Plan for the mixed use development of the parcel.  The Master Site Development Plan shall include, at a minimum: 
a. 
The location, type, and amount of the uses proposed to be developed on the parcel, including the proposed area, percentage and intensity of each proposed use; 

b. 
The proposed provisions for utilities, access roads, parking, and public and private ways; 

c. 
Areas proposed to be permanently dedicated for public or private open space or other public purpose; 

d. 
Proposed buffers between uses and adjacent properties in accordance with the provisions of Section 2.02.4.C.5 of this Ordinance; 

e. 
Proposed phasing of the overall site development including the general sequence in which related public and private improvements will be accomplished; 

f. 
In the event the development site is not comprised of a single parcel, the master site development plan shall detail the manner in which multiple parcels will be consolidated into a single parcel and subsequently subdivided, if necessary, to facilitate the completion of the plan. 


4. Dimensional Requirements 
In general, the mixed use development shall be required to comply with the provisions of Section 3.02, provided however that: 
a. Proposed Industrial (I-1) uses and lots shall be controlled by the notes and dimensional requirements of Section 3.02; 

Section 2.02.4 -District I-1 & I-2, Industrial -Permitted Uses (continued) 
b. 
Proposed General Commercial (C-2) uses and lots shall be controlled by the notes and dimensional requirements of Section 3.02; 

c. 
Proposed Elderly Housing uses and lots shall be controlled by the dimensional requirements of Section 2.02.9; 

d. 
Proposed Planned Unit Development uses and lots shall be controlled by the requirements of Section 15; 

e. 
The Planning Board may in its sole discretion require more or less stringent dimensional requirements than those referenced above to facilitate the integration and connections between mixed use areas being developed, and to provide reasonable buffering and separation between proposed residential, commercial and industrial uses. 


5. Criteria for Granting a Conditional Use Permit 
In order to obtain a Conditional Use Permit from the Planning Board, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning Board that the following criteria are met by the proposed development: 
a. 
The property in question is reasonably suited for the proposed use(s) and will not create undue hazard or excessive expenditure of public funds to insure that public health and safety are maintained throughout and following the development of the parcel; 

b. 
The applicant shall demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Board, that the development will generate a net positive fiscal impact for the Town.  The Planning Board may require preparation and review of a fiscal impact assessment to demonstrate compliance with this requirement; 

c. 
The proposed development shall include provisions, satisfactory to the Planning Board, to insure that current and future municipal service capacity for police, fire, public works, general government, recreation, and school services and facilities within the community will not be adversely affected by the development.  The Planning Board may require preparation and review of a municipal service capacity impact assessment to demonstrate compliance with this requirement; 

d. 
The proposed mixed use development shall not create an undue hazard or nuisance for vehicular or pedestrian traffic; shall include adequate provisions for safe and efficient traffic access, circulation and parking; and shall promote pedestrian and public transportation linkages within and between sites to the maximum practical extent.  The Planning Board may require preparation and review of a traffic impact assessment to demonstrate compliance with this requirement; 



Section 2.02.4 -District I-1 & I-2, Industrial -Permitted Uses (continued) 
e. 
Adequate and appropriate public infrastructure shall be provided to ensure the proper operation of the proposed mixed uses.  The Planning Board may require that portions of the project be designed so as to complete any street or utility systems in the vicinity of the subject parcels consistent with projected town plans for such improvements; 

f. 
The proposed development must comply with all applicable federal, state, and local environmental laws, including all appropriate sections of the Town’s zoning ordinance and subdivision regulations; 

g. 
Adequate buffers, satisfactory to the Planning Board, shall be provided along the development parcel’s perimeter boundaries, and along proposed boundaries of parcels interior to the mixed use development.  Buffers and landscaping shall reflect the need for appropriate separation and transitions between adjoining industrial, commercial and residential uses; 

h. 
The proposed development plan shall provide for a continuity of open space throughout development.  Open space and other recreational areas within the development shall be related to projected town plans for such improvements, and should not be limited to trails and paths, although these are desirable features of the design; 

i. 
The proposed development must demonstrate compliance with the architectural design criteria contained in Section 12.04.3 of the Merrimack Subdivision Regulations pertaining to “Transitional Districts”, provided that the Planning Board may permit the Applicant to utilize Merrimack Subdivision Regulations Section 

12.04.2 “Industrial Design District” criteria for exclusively industrial facilities within the development; 

j. 
The proposed development will not result in unreasonable impacts to adjoining properties or uses, by way of light, noise, pollution, visual blight, odor, vibration or other nuisance.  The Planning Board may require preparation and review of such studies or assessments as it may deem necessary to demonstrate compliance with this requirement; 

k. 
The proposed development addresses, to the satisfaction of the Planning Board, the general design criteria of Section 15.03.D.3 a) through g). 


6. General Requirements 
a. Any applicant proposing to develop land under this Section shall first apply to the Planning Board for a Conditional Use Permit approval, pursuant to the terms of this Section.  The applicant may be assessed reasonable fees to cover the costs of special investigative studies and/or review of documents required to facilitate the Board’s determination(s) regarding the criteria to be met, and to cover the costs of review by the Board’s legal counsel and/or any third party consultants; 

Section 2.02.4 -District I-1 & I-2, Industrial -Permitted Uses (continued) 
b. 
Following the conclusion of its review of the proposal the Planning Board may approve, approve with modification, or disapprove the application for Conditional Use Permit; 

c. 
The Planning Board shall require, as a condition of its approval of any Conditional Use Permit, the execution of a Development Agreement or other similar instrument specifying: the phasing, timing and sequence of the improvements contained within the development; the performance guarantees relating thereto; and any other such development-related information the Board deems necessary to insure the successful completion of the development as proposed and approved; 

d. 
In each case where a Conditional Use Permit has been granted, the applicant must subsequently obtain subdivision approval for the platting of individual lot(s) and/or site plan approval(s) for buildings or sites within the mixed use development in accordance with the Town of Merrimack Subdivision and Site Plan Review Regulations; 

e. 
The Planning Board shall adopt such standards and regulations as it may deem necessary in order to implement this Section of the Zoning Ordinance, and such regulations and standards shall be adopted prior to the Board taking action on any application under this Section. 


7. Conditional Use Permit – Validity Period 
If, after a conditional use permit has been approved by the Planning Board, such approval is not acted upon within a period of two (2) years from the date of the approval, then such approval shall be null and void.  Actions sufficient to vest an approval for a conditional use permit include Planning Board site plan or subdivision approval, issuance of a building permit, or a Certificate of Occupancy issued by the Community Development Department where no Planning Board approval or building permit is required. 
However, should any site plan or subdivision approval or building permit expire unused after the conclusion of the two-year validity period provided for herein, any conditional use permit granted as a precondition to said site plan or subdivision approval or permit shall become void as well. 
Any application to extend the two-year validity period shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning Board that it was impossible or impractical to receive the necessary approvals to move forward in reliance on the permit granted within two years. 
Any renewal/extension application shall be filed with the Planning Board no sooner than 90 days, nor later than 30 days, prior to the conditional use permit expiration. 
The Planning Board may, in its sole discretion, grant such extension of the above validity period as it deems warranted. 

Section 2.02.4 -District I-1 & I-2, Industrial -Permitted Uses (continued) 
D. 	The following uses only are permitted in the Industrial District I-2: 
1. 	
Light Manufacturing Industries, 

2. 	
Warehouse and Wholesale Uses, 

3. 	
Office Uses Greater than 10,000 Square Feet, 

4. 	
Churches, 

5. 	
Parking Garages, 

6. 	
Printing Establishment, 

7. 	
Support Uses to an Industrial District: 
a)  Restaurants, 
b)  Branch Banks, 
c)  Offices, 
d)  Hotel/Motel 


8. 	
Telecommunication Towers, Co-location on Existing Towers, and Co-location on Existing Non-Tower Structures, provided that the following criteria are satisfied: 


a) 	New Towers, provided the applicant meets the criteria set forth in section 
2.02.4.B.21.A (New Towers). 
b) 	Co-location on Existing Towers, so long as the additional telecommunications antenna(s) is no more than 20 feet higher than the existing tower and the color of the antenna(s) blends with the existing structure or surroundings. A building permit shall be required. 
c) 	Co-location on Existing Non-Tower Structures, provided the applicant meets the criteria set forth in section 2.02.4.B.21.C (Co-location on Existing Non-Tower Structures).  A building permit shall be required. 
9. 	Outlet Village Shops permitted by Conditional Use Permit. 
a) 	Outlet Village Shops shall be defined as a collection of buildings arranged in a configuration consisting of multiple adjacent buildings having a center courtyard and connecting walkways in which no single building exceeds 120,000 square feet of gross floor area and no single shop shall exceed 40,000 square feet of gross floor area, and in which are located clothing, appliance, housewares, electronics, hardware and furniture outlet or similar shops, together with accessory and supporting restaurants, which restaurant total gross floor area shall not exceed 15% of the total gross floor area of the Outlet Village Shops. The total gross floor area of the Outlet Village Shops may not exceed 650,000 square feet within the I-2 District in total. 

Section 2.02.4 -District I-1 & I-2, Industrial -Permitted Uses (continued) 
b) 	As provided in RSA 674:21, Innovative Land Use Controls, this section of the Zoning Ordinance provides for the granting of conditional use permits, by the Planning Board, as follows: 1) The Planning Board shall vote either to approve a conditional use 
permit as presented, approve it with conditions or deny it. 
2) 	The applicant shall be required to apply for and obtain a site plan approval, in accordance with the site plan regulations of the Town of Merrimack. 
3) 	The applicant shall be required to submit a financial surety in accordance with the subdivision regulations and site plan regulations of the Town of Merrimack prior to commencing construction of any building. 
4) 	The applicant may be assessed reasonable fees to cover the costs of special investigation studies and/or review of documents required by particular applications, reviews by Town’s legal counsel and any third party consultant, as may be required by the Planning Board pursuant to the site plan regulations of the Town of Merrimack. 
5) 	The applicant shall be required to submit an economic or fiscal impact analysis reflecting the impact of the proposed use upon the Town’s infrastructure, facilities, support services and taxes. 
6) 	The following criteria must be satisfied in order for the Planning Board to grant a conditional use permit hereunder: 
(i) 	
the proposed location for the Outlet Village Shops must be readily accessible to high traffic volume carrying facilities, and sited to allow not only for the stores and facilities themselves but also for parking, landscaping, and ancillary requirements. The primary function of this district use would be to serve a regional and/or local shopping and service need; 

(ii) 	
the proposed use is consistent with the objectives of Section 


2.02.3.B.1 and the second paragraph of Section 2.02.4 of the Town of Merrimack Zoning Ordinance. Specifically excluded are “big box” single user retail stores greater than 75,000 square feet; 
(iii) 	the property in question is reasonably suited for the use requested, and does not create a hazard to surface or underground water resources; 
(iv) 	
the property in question shall be specifically located for readily available access to the F. E. Everett Turnpike; 

(v) 	
the proposed use will not result in unreasonable impacts by way of increased noise, visual blight, odor or other nuisance to other uses within the zoning district or adjoining land uses; 

(vi) 	
granting the permit is in accord with the general purpose of the Zoning Ordinance as set forth in Section 1.01; 



Section 2.02.4 -District I-1 & I-2, Industrial -Permitted Uses (continued) 
(vii) 	the proposed use will have a high tax value and will contribute significantly to the tax base of the Town of Merrimack as contemplated by the Economic Development and Future Land Use and Recommendations Chapters of the Master Plan Update, 2002; 
(viii) 	The proposed use shall demonstrate a significant economic and fiscal benefit to the Town in the judgment of the Board. 
7) 	The Outlet Village Shops shall have the following density, dimensional and parking requirements: 
(i) 	
minimum lot area -100 acres; 

(ii) 	
minimum landscaped buffer, consisting of dense plantings of suitable trees and shrubbery or naturally occurring trees and shrubbery supplemented by additional plantings as may be required by the Planning Board from a residential district -100 feet; 


(iii) 	minimum building setback from a residential use -300 feet; 
(iv) 	
minimum percentage of open space -30%; 

(v) 	
minimum parking ratio -5.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross leasable area; 

(vi) 	
buffer zone -no construction or improvements shall be made within the Buffer Zone within the I-2 District as defined in Section 2.01.1.F.2(a) of the Zoning Ordinance. 


8) 	The Outlet Village Shops shall have a comprehensive sign program including ground mounted pylon signs, directional signs and building mounted signs. Notwithstanding the terms and provisions regarding signs incorporated elsewhere within the Zoning Ordinance, the sign program shall be of a nature and magnitude as may be determined by the Planning Board in its sole discretion to be reasonably necessary and appropriate given the location and setting of the proposed use to be approved at the time of the approval of the site plan for the proposed use. 
9)    Whenever the provisions of this subsection conflict with any other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, the provisions of this subsection shall apply. 
10)  The Board shall adopt such standards and regulations as it may deem necessary in order to implement this section of the Zoning Ordinance, and such regulations and standards shall be adopted prior to the Board taking action on any application under this section of the Zoning Ordinance. 

Section 2.02.4 -District I-1 & I-2, Industrial -Permitted Uses (continued) 
E. 	Special Exceptions 
The Zoning Board of Adjustment may grant a special exception for the following uses of lands within the Industrial Districts I-1 & I-2:        
1. 	
Accessory uses as defined herein. 

2. 	
Other industrial uses except waste disposal sites and dumps, upon the approval by the Board of Adjustment such uses are of the same general character as those permitted and which will not be detrimental to the other uses within the district or to the adjoining land uses, shall be permitted. This may include the conversion of existing residential uses to commercial or industrial uses as are allowed and provided for in paragraph B. of this section. 

3. 	
On-site caretakers lodges or residences. 

4. 	
For the purpose of determining whether an applicant shall be granted a special exception as provided in this section, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall use the special exception criteria set forth in a-d only, subsection B.1, Special Exceptions, Section 2.02.1 District R, Residential Zone. 


F. 	Alternative Treatment Centers Permitted in the I-2 District by Conditional Use Permit 
1. 	Pursuant to the authority provided in RSA 674:21, the Planning Board may grant a Conditional Use Permit for Alternative Treatment Centers (both Cultivation and Non-Cultivation Locations) within the I-2 District, subject to the requirements of Section 2.02.2.D, Subsections 2 and 3. 
G. 	General Requirements 
Site Plan Review: In each case where a building or use is proposed in these districts other than a single-family residence, the Building Official shall refer the site plan of the proposal to the Planning Board for its review in accordance with Subdivision Regulations.  The Planning Board shall determine that all requirements of this Ordinance have been met, including appropriate conditions and safeguards with respect to the adequacy of traffic access, circulation and parking, landscaping and screening. After holding a public hearing on each application, the Planning Board shall approve, approve with modification, or disapprove said site plan. In modifying or disapproving any site plan, the Board shall enter its reasons for such action in its records. 
2.02.5 -District I-3, Industrial -Permitted Uses 
A. 	District Objectives 
This district shall allow for establishment of manufacturing  employment opportunities in the community and take into consideration the proximity of the town water supply wells and established residential uses adjacent to this district. 
Section 2.02.5 -District I-3, Industrial -Permitted Uses (continued) 
Development in this district shall take cognizance of the need to protect the quality of the Merrimack Village District wells by assuring that the well areas are not deprived of natural replenishment and that foreign materials (salts, oils, etc.) are not introduced into the ground water. 
With respect to any permitted industrial or commercial use, no land, building, structure, or equipment shall be used for any purpose which would be injurious, noxious, or offensive by way of odor, fumes, smoke, dust, vibration, noise, or other objectionable features or hazardous to the community on account of fire or explosion or any other cause. The Planning Board shall adopt such standards and regulations as it may deem necessary in order to make proper evaluation, according to the above criteria, of any proposed use. 
B. 	General Requirements 
Site Plan Review: In each case where a building or use is proposed in this district other than a single-family residence the Building Official shall refer the site plan of the proposal to the Planning Board for its review in accordance with its Subdivision Regulations.  The Planning Board shall determine that all requirements of this ordinance have been met, including appropriate conditions and safe-guards with respect to the adequacy of traffic access, circulation, parking, landscaping and screening. 
After holding a public hearing on each application, the Planning Board shall approve, approve with modification, or disapprove said site plan. In modifying or disapproving any site plan, the Board shall enter its reasons for such action in its records. 
C. 	The following uses only are permitted in the Industrial District I-3: 
1. 	
Light manufacturing industries (i.e. electronics, light mechanical assembly, etc.) 

2. 	
Research and Development. 

3. 	
Offices. 

4. 	
Telecommunication Towers, Co-location on Existing Towers, and Co-location on Existing Non-Tower Structures, provided that the following criteria are satisfied: 


a) 	New Towers, provided the applicant meets the criteria set forth in section 
2.02.4.B.21.A (New towers). 
b) 	Co-location on Existing Towers, so long as the additional telecommunications antenna(s) is no more than 20 feet higher than the existing tower and the color of the antenna(s) blends with the existing structure or surroundings. A building permit shall be required. 
c) 	Co-location on Existing Non-Tower Structures, provided the applicant meets the criteria set forth in section 2.02.4.B.21.C (Co-location on Existing Non-Tower Structures).  A building permit shall be required. 
Section 2.02.5 -District I-3, Industrial -Permitted Uses (continued) 
D. 	Special Exceptions 
1. 	
Accessory uses as defined herein. 

2. 	
Other industrial uses upon the approval by the Board of Adjustment upon finding that such uses are of the same general character as those permitted and which will not be detrimental to the other uses within the district or to the adjoining land uses shall be permitted. 

3. 	
For the purpose of determining whether an applicant shall be granted a special exception as provided in this section, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall use the special exception criteria set forth in a-d only, subsection B.1 Special  Exceptions, Section 2.02.1, District R, Residential Zone. 



2.02.6 – Sexually Oriented Businesses 
A. Purpose and intent. It is the purpose of this section to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the inappropriate location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the Town of Merrimack.  It is the intent to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the Town of Merrimack.  It is the intent of this section that the regulations be utilized to prevent problems of blight and deterioration which accompany and are brought about by the inappropriate location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses. The provisions of this amendment have neither the purpose nor the effect of imposing limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials.  It is not the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. It is not the intent nor effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
B. 	Definition. A sexually oriented business is any place of business at which any of the following activities is conducted: 
1. 	Adult bookstore or adult video store.  A business that devotes more than fifteen (15) percent of the total display, shelf, rack, table, stand or floor area, utilized for the display and sale of the following: 
a) 	Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, tapes, records, CD-ROMS or other forms of visual or audio representations which meet the definition of “harmful to minors” and/or “sexual conduct” as set forth in RSA 571-B:1; or, 
b) 	Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with “sexual conduct” as defined in RSA 571-B:1, other than birth control devices. 
An adult bookstore or adult video store does not include an establishment that sells books or periodicals as an incidental or accessory part of its principal stock and trade and does not devote more than fifteen (15) percent of the total floor area of the establishment to the sale of books and periodicals. 
Section 2.02.6 – Sexually Oriented Businesses (continued) 
2. 	
Adult motion picture theater.  An establishment with the capacity of five (5) or more persons, where for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown, and in which a substantial portion of the total presentation time is devoted to the showing of material which meets the definition of “harmful to minors” and/or “sexual conduct” as set forth in RSA 571­B:1, for observation by patrons.  For purposes of this section, substantial portion of the total portion of the total presentation time shall mean the presentation of films or shows described above for viewing on more than seven (7) days within any fifty-six (56) consecutive day period. 

3. 	
Adult motion picture arcade.  Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one time, in which a substantial portion of the total presentation time of the images so displayed is devoted to the showing of material which meets the definition of “harmful to minors” and/or “sexual conduct” as set forth in RSA 571-B:1. 

4. 	
Adult drive-in theater.  An open lot or part thereof, with appurtenant facilities, devoted primarily to the presentation of motion pictures, films, theatrical productions and other forms of visual productions for any form of consideration to persons in motor vehicles or on outdoor seats, in which a substantial portion of the total presentation time of the images being presented for observation by patrons is devoted to the showing of material which meets the definition of “harmful to minors” and/or “sexual conduct” as set forth in RSA 571-B:1. 

5. 	
Adult cabaret. A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar establishment which during a substantial portion of the total presentation time features live performances which meet the definition of “harmful to minors” and/or “sexual conduct” as set forth in RSA 571­B:1, and/or feature films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions, a substantial portion of the total presentation time of which is devoted to showing of material which meets the definition of “harmful to minors” and/or “sexual conduct” as set forth in RSA 571-B:1. 

6. 	
Adult motel. A motel or similar establishment offering public accommodations for any form of consideration which provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions, a substantial portion of the total presentation time of which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of materials which meet the definition of “harmful to minors” and/or “sexual conduct” as set forth in RSA 571­

B:1. 

7. 	
Adult theater. A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar establishment either indoor or outdoor in nature, which for any form of consideration, regularly features live performances, a substantial portion of the total presentation time of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on activities which meet the definition of “harmful to minors” and/or “sexual conduct” as set forth in RSA 571-B:1. 


Section 2.02.6 – Sexually Oriented Businesses (continued) 
8. 	
Nude model studio. A place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays male genitals in a state of sexual arousal and/or the vulva or more intimate parts of the female genitals and is observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration of such display is characterized by an emphasis on activities which meets the definition of “harmful to minors” and/or “sexual conduct” as set forth in RSA 571-B:1. 

9. 	
Sexual encounter center.  A business or commercial enterprise that as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: (a) physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or (b) activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more persons is in the state of nudity; or where the activities in (a) or (b) is characterized by an emphasis on activities which meets the definition of “harmful to minors” and/or “sexual conduct” as set forth in RSA 571-B:1. 


C. 	Prohibited locations. In addition to any use, restriction or prohibition contained in section 2.02.1 through 2.02.5 of this ordinance, no sexually oriented businesses, as defined above, shall be permitted: 
1. 	
Within 1000 feet of another sexually oriented business which is either existing at the time of the effective date of this amendment or one for which a building permit has been applied for, and no sexually oriented business shall be permitted within a building, premise, structure or other facility that contains another sexually oriented business; 

2. 	
Within 1000 feet of a Residential zoning district boundary line (Note: Planned Residential District is considered a residential district); 

3. 	
Within 1000 feet of a Church, place of worship, parish house, convent, library, public, parochial or private school, kindergarten, licensed day care and/or day nursery, State approved day care center, public sports/recreation park, or recreational facility where minors may congregate such as, but not limited to, the YMCA; 

4. 	
Within 1000 feet of a Town boundary line. 


D. 	Measure of distance. The distancing requirements above shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the property line of any site above (unless otherwise specified) to the closest exterior wall of the sexually oriented business. 
E. 	Additional reasonable regulations.  The Planning Board is empowered to review and approve permit applications for sexually oriented businesses, and to impose reasonable restrictions for buffering, outdoor lighting, parking, adequate ingress and egress from the site off of and on to public roads, pedestrian movement, and to provide for appropriate landscaping and building aesthetics consistently with the “Town of Merrimack Subdivision Regulations”, and to avoid site development layout which may result in negative environmental impacts and to insure that any signage and any displays of merchandise visible to the general public are in conformity with RSA 571-B. 
Section 2.02.6 – Sexually Oriented Businesses (continued) 
F. 	Severability.  The invalidity of any section or provision of this section shall not invalidate of any other section or provision thereof. 

2.02.7 -District W, Wetlands Conservation District -Permitted Uses 
A. 	No Construction permitted except as noted below under Permitted Uses. 
1. The Wetlands Conservation District : in the Town of Merrimack is hereby determined to consist of three areas: (1) Wetland Soils – Those areas meeting the definition of wetland soils as defined in section 2.02.7.A.1(a) below; (2) Wetlands -Those areas meeting the definition of a wetland(s) as defined in Section 2.02.7.A.1(b), below; (3) and Buffer Areas -All buffer areas established under Section 2.02.7.A.7 of this Ordinance. 
a) 	Wetland Soils – The wetland soils in the Town of Merrimack are those areas delineated as poorly drained or very poorly drained soils identified by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, through field mapping surveys completed in 1971 and shown on its field mapping photographic sheets for the Town of Merrimack, New Hampshire. The soil types which the Soil Conservation Service has determined in its field mapping surveys to be poorly drained or very poorly drained soils shall include the following (a detailed explanation of soil types is included in the Hillsborough County Soil Handbook which is on file with the Planning Board and in the office of the Soil Conservation Service, Milford, N.H.): 


Section 2.02.7 -District W, Wetlands Conservation District -Permitted Uses (continued) 
Published  Old  Published Soil Name  
Soil  Soil  
Symbol  Symbol  

Rp 5, 5-A-1, 5G Rippowam fine sandy loam Sm 6, 6-A-1, 6G Saco Variant silt loam Rp 7, 7-A-1 Rippowam fine sandy loam So 15, 15-A-1 Scarboro mucky loamy sand Sr 48 Scarboro stony mucky loamy sand BoA 95, 195-A-1 Borohemist, nearly level Sn 116, 116-A Saugatuck loamy sand Gw 195 Greenwood mucky peat BpA 197 Borohemist, ponded PiA 214A, 214-A-1 Pipestone loamy sand, 0-3% slopes Gw 295 Greenwood mucky peat Cu 395 Chocorua mucky peat Cu 495 Chocorua mucky peat PiA 514, 514-A, 514-A-1 Pipestone loamy sand, 0-3% slopes Bg 533, 533-A Binghamville silt loam LtA 546, 546-A-1 Leicester-Walpole complex, 0-3% slopes LvA 547, 547-A-1 Leicester-Walpole complex, 0-3% slopes Sr 549, 549-A-1 Scarboro stony mucky loamy sand PiB 214B, 214-B-1 Pipestone loamy sand, 3-8% slopes LtB 546B Leicester-Walpole Complex stony, 3-8% slopes LvB 547-B, 547-B-1 Leicester-Walpole Complex stony, 3-8% slopes ReB 647B Ridgebury loam, 3-8% slopes 
b) 	Wetlands : areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency or duration sufficient to support, and that under natural conditions, does support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Three technical criteria: hydric soils, hydrophytic vegetation and wetland hydrology under natural conditions are required for the positive identification of a wetland. Wetlands generally include, but are not limited to, swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. Where on-site delineation is required wetlands shall be delineated on the basis of hydrophytic vegetation, hydric soils, and wetland hydrology, in accordance with the techniques outlined in the Corps of Engineers, Wetlands Delineation Manual (Technical Report Y-87-1, January 1987) and field indicators for identifying Hydric Soils in New England (Version 2) NEIWPCC July 1998 (as these may be amended from time to time). Where differences arise between the SCS mapped soils and the on-site wetlands delineation of soils based on the above manual, the procedures of Section 2.02.7.A.5, below shall be followed. 

Section 2.02.7 -District W, Wetlands Conservation District -Permitted Uses (continued) 
c) 	Buffer Areas: are those areas immediately adjacent to Wetlands as defined in 
2.02.7.A.7 of this Ordinance. 
2. 	Purpose: In the interest of public health, convenience, safety and welfare, the regulations of this District are intended to guide the use of areas of land with extended periods of high water tables: 
a) 	To prevent the development of structures and other land uses on or adjacent to wetlands that would contribute to pollution of surface and ground water. 
b) 	To prevent the destruction and degradation of natural wetlands that provide flood protection. 
c) 	To prevent unnecessary or excessive expenses to the Town to provide and maintain essential service and utilities which arise because of inharmonious use of wetlands and adjacent upland areas. 
d) 	To encourage those uses that can be appropriately and safely located in and around wetland areas. 
3. 	Permitted Uses: Any use that does not result in the erection of any structure or alter the surface configuration by the addition of fill or by dredging and that is otherwise permitted by the zoning ordinance. 
a) Forestry-tree farming; 
b) Agriculture; 
c) Water impoundments and well supplies; 
d) Drainage ways, streams, creeks, or other paths of normal runoff water; 
e) Wildlife refuge; 
f) Parks and such recreation uses as are consistent with the purpose and intentions 

of Section 2.02.7(A)(2); g) Conservation areas and nature trails; h) Open space as permitted by subdivision regulations and other sections of this 
ordinance. i) Streets, roads, and other access ways if essential to the productive use of land not so zoned; 

Section 2.02.7 -District W, Wetlands Conservation District -Permitted Uses (continued) 
j) 	Utility rights of way easements including power lines and pipe lines. 
4. 	
Special Exceptions: Special exceptions for the undertaking of a use not otherwise permitted in the Wetland Conservation District, which may include the erection of a structure; dredging, filling, draining, or otherwise altering the surface configuration of the land, may be granted by the Board of Adjustment, if it can be shown that such proposed use will not conflict with the purpose and intentions of Section 2.02.7(A)(2). 

Proper evidence to this effect shall be submitted in writing to the Board of Adjustment and shall be accompanied by the findings of a review by a Certified Wetland Scientist of the environmental effects of such proposed use upon the wetlands in question. 

5. 	
Incorrectly Designated Soils: 


a) 	In the event an area is incorrectly designated as being poorly drained or very poorly drained soils on the Town of Merrimack Wetland Conservation District Map, the Planning Board shall adjust such boundary or area upon submission of the following: 
1) 	A detailed topographic layout of the subdivision and/or area prepared by a registered land surveyor. 
2) 	A revised soils map of the subdivision and/or area prepared by the Soils Conservation Service and/or evidence submitted by a soils scientist qualified in soils classification including a written report of his on-site inspection. 
3) 	The soil boundary as shown on the photo map shall be overlaid on the plat as outlined in Section 4.04 of the subdivision regulations and the newly proposed boundary location shall be indicated on the same plat by a broken line. 
b) 	The Planning Board shall reserve the right to withhold action on such plat pending the results of an on-site and/or other investigation by that Board or its appointed agent and shall act to approve or disapprove the final plat within 90 days of submission or such further time as deemed necessary, but not to exceed an additional 90 days. 
c) 	The final boundary location shall be confirmed and/or determined by the Planning Board. 
d) 	Reference is made to the Soils Redefinition procedure policy statement which may be obtained from the Planning Department. 
6. 	Building Setbacks: all buildings or structures for which building permits are required shall be setback a distance of not less than forty (40) feet from any wetland area as defined in this ordinance. 

Section 2.02.7 -District W, Wetlands Conservation District -Permitted Uses (continued) 
7. 	Buffer Requirements: 
a) 	Buffer: a naturally vegetated upland area adjacent to a wetland, more specifically defined as the area within a specified distance from the edge of a wetland. 
b) 	Applicability: all residential and nonresidential development proposals submitted to the Planning Board for subdivision or nonresidential site plan approval after the effective date of this section (March, 2000) shall provide for a buffer of not less than twenty-five (25) feet from all applicable wetland areas.  Applicable wetland areas include all naturally occurring jurisdictional wetlands, as defined herein, with a contiguous area of 3,000 square feet or more, and all jurisdictional wetlands adjacent to any surface water body, river, or stream listed in Section 2.02.12(C) (Shoreland Protection District) of this Ordinance.  Upon designation of a wetland buffer area on any plat or plan approved by the Planning Board, said buffer area shall thereafter become a part of the Wetlands Conservation District as defined and described in Section 2.02.7(A).(1) of this ordinance. 
c) 	Exceptions: the buffer requirement noted above shall not apply to minor lot line adjustments, consolidation plans or voluntary mergers of nonconforming lots not intended for development purposes or for waivers from nonresidential site plan review applications related to changes, alterations or modifications of previously approved, developed sites. 

Section 2.02.8 -Flood Hazard Conservation District -F, Permitted Uses 
A. 	Boundaries 
The Flood Hazard Conservation (F) District includes all Special Flood Hazard Areas designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), in its “Flood Insurance Study for the County of Hillsborough, New Hampshire”; with an effective date of September 25, 2009, together with the associated Flood Insurance Rate Maps dated September 25, 2009. Pursuant to RSA 674:56, by resolution of the Merrimack Town Council these documents are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of the Merrimack Zoning Ordinance and Building Code and are hereby incorporated by reference. In all cases where the Flood Hazard Conservation District is super-imposed over another zoning district in the Town of Merrimack, New Hampshire, that district whose regulations are the more restrictive shall apply. 
B. 	Definitions 
The following definitions shall apply only to this Floodplain Development Ordinance and shall not be affected by the provisions of any other ordinance of the Town of Merrimack. 
1. 	A Zone: (see “Base Flood” and “Area of Special Flood Hazard”) 

Section 2.02.8 -Flood Hazard Conservation District -F. Permitted Uses (continued) 
2. 	
Area of Special Flood Hazard: Land in the flood plain within the Town of Merrimack subject to a 1 percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area is designated as Zones A and AE on the Flood Insurance Rate Map. 

3. 	
Base Flood (100-year Flood): The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 

4. 	
Basement: Any area of a Building having its floor subgrade on all sides. 

5. 	
Building:  (see Structure.) 

6. 	
Development: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to Buildings or other Structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 

7. 	
FEMA: The Federal Emergency Management Agency. 

8. 	
Flood Elevation Study: An examination, evaluation, and determination of flood hazards and if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination and determination of mudslide or flood-related erosion hazards. 

9. 	
Flood or Flooding:  means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 

a) the overflow of inland waters. 
b) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 


10. 	
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): An official map incorporated with this Ordinance, upon which FEMA has delineated both the Special Flood Hazard Areas and the risk premium zones. 

11. 	
Flood Insurance Study:  (see "Flood Elevation study".) 

12. 	
Flood Plain or Flood-prone area:  means a land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "Flood" or "Flooding"). 

13. 	
Floodproofing: Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to Structures which reduce or eliminate potential flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and contents. 

14. 	
Floodway: (see "Regulatory Floodway"). 

15. 	
Highest Adjacent Grade: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a Structure. 



Section 2.02.8 -Flood Hazard Conservation District -F, Permitted Uses (continued) 
16. 	Historic Structure: Any structure that is: 
a) 	Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
b) 	Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary  of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district  preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
c) 	Individually listed on a state inventory of historic plain states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
d) 	Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
1) 	By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
2) 	Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
17. 	
Lowest Floor: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such an enclosure is not built so as to render the Structure in violation of applicable non-elevation design requirements of this Ordinance. 

18. 	
Manufactured Housing/Manufactured Home: Pursuant to RSA 674:31, any Structure, transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode, is 8 body feet or more in width and 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is 320 square feet or more, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a Dwelling Unit with or without a permanent foundation when connected to required utilities, which include plumbing, heating, and electrical heating systems contained therein. The terms "mobile home" or "trailer", as these may appear in this Floodplain Ordinance, should be understood to mean "manufactured housing" as defined under RSA 21:46. For floodplain management purposes, the term “Manufactured Home” includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on site for greater than 180 consecutive days. This includes Manufactured Homes located in a Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision, which is a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more Manufactured Home lots for rent or sale. 



Section 2.02.8 -Flood Hazard Conservation District -F, Permitted Uses (continued) 
19. 	
Mean Sea Level: The National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which Base Flood elevations shown on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 

20. 	
New Construction: For the purposes of determining flood insurance rates, Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM, or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such Structures. For floodplain management purposes, new construction means Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by the Town of Merrimack and includes any subsequent improvements to such Structures. 

21. 	
Person: Includes any individual or group of individuals, corporations, partnership, association, or any other organized group of Persons, including State and local governments and agencies thereof. 

22. 	
Recreational Vehicle/Travel Trailer: A vehicle which is: (a) built on a single chassis; (b) 400 square feet or less, when measured at the largest horizontal projection; (c) designed to be selfpropelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 

23. 	
Regulatory Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the Base Flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 

24. 	
Shaded Zone X: Areas of 0.2 percent annual chance of flood; areas of 1 percent annual chance of flood with average depths of less than 1 foot or with drainage areas less than 1 square mile; and areas protected by levees from 1 percent annual chance of flood. 

25. 	
Special flood hazard area: (See "Area of Special Flood Hazard"). 


27. 	
Structure: for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed Building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a Manufactured Home. 

28. 	
Substantial Damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a Structure whereby the cost of restoring the Structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the Structure before the damage occurred. 

29. 	
Substantial Improvement: Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a Structure in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the Structure. The market value of the Structure should equal: (a) the appraised value prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (b) in the case of damage, the value of the Structure prior to the damage occurring. For the purposes of this definition, "Substantial Improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the Building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. This term includes 



Section 2.02.8 -Flood Hazard Conservation District -F, Permitted Uses (continued) 
Structures which have incurred Substantial Damage, regardless of actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a Structure required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions or any alteration of a "Historic Structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "Historic Structure". 
30. 	
Violation: For floodplain management purposes, the word Violation means the failure of a Structure or other Development to be fully compliant with the Town of Merrimack’s Flood Hazard Conservation (F) District Ordinance. A Structure or other Development without an elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44CFR §60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in Violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 

31. 	
Water surface elevation: The height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains. 


Part 1 -100 Year Flood Hazard Area (A Zones) 
A. 	Purpose: 
1. 	
To prevent unwise use of lands susceptible to flooding within Special Flood Hazard Areas (100 Year Flood Hazard Areas/A Zones) and to promote sound orderly Development of the Town's resources, and to reduce future flood damage, financial loss, suffering and loss of life. 

2. 	
To prevent the Development of residential, commercial and industrial Buildings, and other land uses in Special Flood Hazard Areas which would impede the natural water flow or result in an increase in flood levels during flood periods. 

3. 	
To prevent the destruction and inappropriate use of flood-prone land. 

4. 	
To prevent unnecessary or excessive expenses on the part of the Town to provide and maintain essential services and utilities which arise because of inharmonious use of lands within Special Flood Hazard Area. 

5. 	
To prevent culverting, damming, dredging or obstructing such as to impede or obstruct natural water flow during its maximum flood level. 

6. 	
To prevent the building of public facilities such as schools, hospitals, fire, police departments or other similarly related agencies except those necessary for the public health, safety, and welfare, whereupon such uses shall otherwise remain in full conformance with applicable Federal requirements. 



Section 2.02.8 -Flood Hazard Conservation District -F, Permitted Uses (continued) 
B. 	Restrictions:  100 YEAR FLOOD HAZARD AREA ("A ZONES") 
1. 	
To prohibit New Construction, and to prohibit the use of fill or encroachments within the designated Floodway that would cause any increase in the Base Flood level, except where the effect of flood heights is fully offset by stream improvements. 

2. 	
To control filling of those Special Flood Hazard Areas except to prevent additional erosion by use of a suitable material to minimize reoccurrence. 

3. 	
To prohibit the removal of soil and other natural objects within Special Flood Hazard Areas or Floodway, except as otherwise permitted in, Paragraph .C. Permitted Use: 100 Year Flood Hazard Area (“A Zones”) and Paragraph D. Certification. 

4. 	
Existing nonconforming uses in the Floodway shall not be expanded, but may be modified, altered, or repaired to incorporate Flood-Proofing measure, provided such measures do not raise the Base Flood elevation. 

5. 	
All industrial chemicals or materials hazardous to public health, welfare, or safety during flood conditions shall be stored in flood proof Structures or above the Base Flood elevation. 


C. 	PERMITTED USES:  100 Year Flood Hazard Area ("A Zones") 
Any use that does not result in the erection of any new permanent principle Structure or alter the surface configuration by the removal of soil or addition of fill or dredging and is otherwise permitted by this Zoning Ordinance such as but not limited to: 
1. 	
Forestry -Tree Farming; 

2. 	
Agriculture; 

3. 	
Water impoundments and well supplies; 

4. 	
Drainage Ways -streams, creeks, or other paths of normal run-off water; 

5. 	
Wildlife Refuge; 

6. 	
Parks and such recreation uses as are consistent with the Purpose of this Section; 

7. 	
Conservation Areas and nature trails; 

8. 	
Open space as permitted by this ordinance; 

9. 	
Streets, roads, and other access ways if essential to the productive use of land not so zoned, constructed utilizing methods and practices that minimize or prevent flood damage. Adequate drainage shall be provided to eliminate exposure to flood hazards. Methods employed shall be adequate to withstand flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces; 



Section 2.02.8 -Flood Hazard Conservation District -F, Permitted Uses (continued) 
10. 	
Utility right of way easements, including power lines and pipe lines, if essential to the productive use of land not so zoned, which shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. Flood Proofing methods employed shall be adequate to withstand flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces. 

11. 	
Along watercourses with a designated Regulatory Floodway no encroachments, including fill, new construction, Substantial Improvements, and other Development are allowed within the Floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practices that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the Base Flood discharge. 

12. 	
Until a Regulatory Floodway is designated along watercourses, no new construction, Substantial Improvements, or other Development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zone AE on the FIRM, unless it is demonstrated by the applicant that the cumulative effect of the proposed Development, when combined with all existing and anticipated Development, will not increase the Water Surface Elevation of the Base Flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 

13. 	
In Zone A the Building Official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any Floodway data available from Federal, State, or other sources as criteria for requiring that all Development meet the following Floodway requirement: 


"No encroachments, including fill, New Construction, Substantial Improvements, and other Development are allowed within the Floodway that would result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the Base Flood discharge." 
D. 	CERTIFICATION: 
Certification, documented evidence and plans shall be provided by a Licensed Professional Engineer that the proposed encroachments permitted in Paragraphs C.9 and C.10 above shall not result in any increase in flood levels, during occurrence of the Base Flood. Such records and plans shall indicate the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) at which such permitted uses have been designed and Flood Proofed. Such records shall be maintained with the office of the Building Official. 
E. 	BUILDING PERMITS -100 YEAR FLOOD HAZARD AREA ("A ZONES") 
1. 	All proposed Development in any Special Flood Hazard Area shall require a Permit. Building Permit applications for proposed construction or other Substantial Improvements shall be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator and the Building Official, or their designated representatives, prior to the issuance of such a Permit to assure that: a) Proposed repair, uses of construction materials and utility equipment are resistant 
to flood damage and uses, construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damages, and that all Substantial Improvements constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designated and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions or flooding. 

Section 2.02.8 -Flood Hazard Conservation District -F, Permitted Uses (continued) 
b) 	The applicant(s) shall certify to the Building Official that all necessary permits have been obtained from those government agencies from which approval is required by federal or State Law. 
c) 	New and replacement water supply and/or sanitary sewage systems are designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the systems into flood waters. On-site waste disposal systems must be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
d) 	Certification is provided by a Licensed Professional Engineer, assuring that the flood carrying capacity of an altered or relocated watercourse can and will be maintained. 
e) 	Proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from Flooding. If a proposed Building site is in a location that has a flood hazard, any proposed New Construction or Substantial Improvement (including prefabricated and mobile homes) must be designed (or modified ) and anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure, and, if in the A Zone, Manufactured Homes must be anchored and elevated on a permanent foundation. 
f) 	In special flood hazard areas the Building Official shall determine the 100-year flood elevation in the following order of precedence according to the data available: 
1) 	In Zone AE, refer to the elevation data provided in the community's Flood Insurance Study and accompanying FIRM. 
2) 	In Zone A the Building Official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any 100-year flood elevation data available from any federal, state or other source including data submitted for development proposals submitted to the community (i.e. subdivisions, site approvals). 
g) 	The Building Official's 100-year flood elevation determination will be used as criteria for requiring in Zones A and AE that: 
1) 	All new construction or substantial improvement of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the 100­year flood elevation. 
2) 	That all new construction or substantial improvements of non-residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the 100-year flood level; or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall: 
a) 	be floodproofed so that below the 100-year flood elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 

Section 2.02.8 -Flood Hazard Conservation District -F, Permitted Uses (continued) 
b) 	have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy; and 
c) 	be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this section. 
3) 	All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within special flood hazard areas shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood level; and be securely anchored to resist floatation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. 
4) 	All recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A and AE shall either: 
a) 	be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
b) 	be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or 
c) 	meet all standards of Section 60.3 (b) (1) of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in Paragraph (c) (6) of Section 60.3. 
5) 	For all new construction or substantial improvements, fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding are permitted provided they meet the following requirements: 
a) 	the enclosed area is unfinished or flood resistant, usable solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage; 
b) 	the area is not a basement; 
c) 	shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 

Section 2.02.8 -Flood Hazard Conservation District -F. Permitted Uses (continued) 
2. 	
Sanctions: 

Any Person, firm, or corporation violating the provision of this Floodplain Ordinance shall be subject to the provisions of Section 10 Penalties & Violations of the Merrimack Zoning Ordinance and Building Code, and each day's neglect to obtain such a Permit shall constitute a separate offense. 

3. 	
The Building Official shall: 


Obtain and maintain a record for the determination of applicable flood insurance risk premium rates within all areas having flood hazard identified within the "A Zones" of the Flood Insurance Rate Map, any certificates of Flood-Proofing, and information on the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the level of lowest floor (including basement), of all new or substantially improved Structures, and include whether or not such Structures contain a basement, and if the Structure has been Flood Proofed, including also the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the Structure was Flood Proofed. This information shall be furnished by the applicant. In riverine situations, prior to the alteration or relocation of a watercourse, the applicant for such authorization shall notify the Wetlands Bureau of the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services and submit copies of such notification to the Building Official, in addition to the copies required by RSA 482-A:3. Further, the applicant shall be required to submit copies of said notification to those adjacent communities as determined by the Building Official, including notice of all scheduled hearings before the Wetlands Bureau. 

PART 2 – 500 YEAR FLOOD HAZARD AREA (Shaded ZONE X") 
A. 	Purpose: 
To prevent unwise use of lands susceptible to flooding within Shaded Zone X areas; to promote sound and orderly Development of the Town's land resources; and to reduce future flood damage, financial loss, and undue suffering. 
B. 	Restrictions: 
1. 	
To restrict and regulate the Development of residential, commercial and industrial Buildings, and other land uses in Shaded Zone X areas which could impede the flow of water during flood periods. 

2. 	
To prevent the destruction and inappropriate use of flood -prone land within Shaded Zone X areas. 

3. 	
To prevent unnecessary or excessive public expenditures to provide and maintain essential services and utilities which arise because of inharmonious use of land within these areas. 

4. 	
To control the removal of soil and other natural objects in Shaded Zone X areas, except those which are incidental to and in connection with the construction of a Building. 


Section 2.02.8 -Flood Hazard Conservation District -F. Permitted Uses (continued) 
5. 	
To prevent culverting, damming or obstructing so as to impede or obstruct water flow, or result in an increase in flood elevation during flood periods. 

6. 	
To control filling of those Flood Hazard Areas, except to prevent additional erosion by use of a suitable material to minimize reoccurrence. 

7. 	
To control filling or encroachments within designated Shaded Zone X areas that would impair their ability to carry and discharge the water, except where the effect of flood elevations are fully offset by stream improvements; incidental to, and in connection with, the construction of a Building or other Development of land. 

8. 	
All industrial chemicals or materials hazardous to public health, welfare, or safety during flood conditions shall be stored in flood proof Structures or at elevations higher than the 500 year flood elevation shown in the flood profiles of the Flood Insurance Study. 


C. 	Permitted Uses – (Shaded Zone X) Any use, which is otherwise permitted in conformance with this Ordinance, which does not result in altering the surface configuration by the addition of fill or dredging, except as may be otherwise permitted in this Section. 
1. 	All subdivision proposals and other proposed new Developments within Shaded Zone X areas shall be reviewed by the Planning Board and shall conform to the provisions of this Ordinance and the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Merrimack to assure: 
a) 	All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. Include with such proposals Base Flood Elevation Data. 
b) 	All plans for public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, or water systems are located or elevated and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
c) 	Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
d) 	New or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewer systems shall be designated to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharges from the system into the flood waters.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be so located so as to avoid impairment of them or contamination from them during flooding. 
e) 	Residential, commercial and industrial Structures so located within Shaded Zone X areas, shall be constructed of such that the lowest floor (including basement) must be Flood Proofed with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and capable of resisting hydrostatic loads, or shall not be located below the maximum elevation of the flood level. 
f) 	Streets, roads and other access ways shall be constructed utilizing methods and practices adequate to withstand flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces. 

Section 2.02.8 -Flood Hazard Conservation District -F. Permitted Uses (continued) 
g) 	Down stream improvements: When a proposed use is determined to adversely impact or affect down stream lands, facilities, or Structures either public or private, the Planning Board shall exercise the right to require that down stream improvements shall be made and/or require that all necessary deeded easements be secured. 
D. 	Certification: 
The Planning Board shall require written certification supported by sufficient data by a Licensed Professional Engineer that the uses permitted in Shaded Zone X areas are in conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance and to insure that no adverse impacts downstream shall occur. 
Part 3 -Variances 
A. 	Variances for undertaking of uses not otherwise permitted within Special Flood Hazard Areas (A Zones) may be granted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment if each of the following can be demonstrated: 
1. 	
Meet those general variance criteria ; set forth in Section 8.09 

2. 	
The granting of the Variance will not result in increased flood elevations, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, nuisance, cause fraud upon or victimization of the public, or conflict with other local Laws and Ordinances. 


B. 	Variances shall not be issued within a Special Flood Hazard Area if an increase in flood elevations will result during the Base Flood. 
C. 	Variances may be issued for New Construction and Substantial Improvements on an existing lot of ½ acre or less in area contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing Structures constructed below the Base Flood Elevation, in conformance with procedures outlined with this Section. 
D. 	Variances shall be issued only upon a determination by the Zoning Board of Adjustment, that the Variance requested is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
E. 	That the requirements of RSA 674:33 shall be fulfilled. 
F. 	The Chairman of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, in any instance where a Variance of the Ordinance may be granted shall, on behalf of the community, notify the applicant in writing that issuance of the Variance to construct a Structure below the Base Flood elevation may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance; and such construction may cause risk to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all Variance actions. 
2.02.9 -Elderly Zoning District -E, Permitted Uses, Standards 
A. 	Purpose: The regulations in this section have been established for the purpose of encouraging the construction of housing suitable for the occupancy by elderly persons including congregate care, nursing home and other assisted living facilities, while ensuring compliance with local planning standards, land use policies, good building design and the requirements for the health, safety and 

2.02.9 -Elderly Zoning District -E, Permitted Uses, Standards (continued) 
general welfare of the inhabitants of the Town. 
B. 	General Standards: Except as otherwise provided for in this section, all housing for the elderly shall conform to the following standards: 
1. 	
Dwelling units shall require public sewage and public water. 

2. 	
Dwelling unit density shall not be greater than 8 dwelling units per actual acre (43,560 square feet). 

3. 	
Each dwelling unit shall have no more than two bedrooms, and shall be specifically designed for occupancy by the elderly providing for such things as emergency lighting, exits, fire safety equipment, and adequate structural design features to permit handicapped accessibility such as handicap ramps, etc. 

4. 	
Housing developments for the elderly shall be exempt from the provisions of Section 

3.02.  Table of Lot and Yard Regulations. 

5. 
The occupancy of units within the development shall be limited to family units in which the head of household or spouse is at least 55 years old. 

6. 
The minimum tract area shall be three (3) acres and the tract shall have at least 100 feet of frontage on a public road. 

7. 
The design and site layout of the development shall maximize the privacy of the dwelling units, preserve the natural character of land where feasible, provide for the appropriate separation of parking and living areas as determined by the specific use, and consider such factors as orientation, energy usage, view, etc. 

8. 
The development shall, where possible, make provision for on or off-site pedestrian access to the various community facilities in the Town Center. 

9. 
Housing for the elderly shall be exempted from the minimum floor area requirement found in Section 11.06 of the Zoning Ordinance.  The minimum floor area requirement for housing for the elderly shall be 400 square feet. 

10. 
The development shall be landscaped so as to enhance its compatibility with the Town with emphasis given to the use of existing natural features where possible. 

11. 
Emergency vehicle access shall be provided to all structures within the elderly zoning district. 

12. 	
Nursing home and other assisted living facilities that do not provide for separate individual dwelling units are exempt from the density requirements of subsection 2, above. 

13. 	
Nursing home and other assisted living facilities may be occupied by sick, injured, disabled or terminally ill individuals. 



2.02.9 -Elderly Zoning District -E, Permitted Uses, Standards (continued) 
C. 	Procedure and Criteria: 
The procedure and criteria for reviewing application for housing developments for the elderly shall follow the provisions of the Town of Merrimack Subdivision Regulations Section 4.06 Final Plat. 
1. 	
The Planning Board shall review all applications for housing developments for the elderly according to the above procedures and approve or disapprove such applications and require such covenants or legal restrictions they deem necessary to insure the intent of the ordinance. 

2. 	
Submission of the proposal along with abutting property owners' names and addresses shall be in accordance with the Town of Merrimack Subdivision Regulations in order to provide for timely notification to abutters of public hearing to review said proposal. 

3. 	
A Performance Bond and other legal data shall be submitted as required by the Planning Board to insure the completion of streets, buffers, and amenities in accordance with the accepted plans and the subdivision regulations of the Town of Merrimack as adopted or hereafter amended. 


D. 	Definitions 
1. 	
Assisted Living Facility: residential facilities that provide communal life-care support facilities and services that may include housekeeping, medical services, recreation, social activities, social services, transportation and other similar support services and facilities. 

2. 	
Congregate Care Facility: a residential facility for occupancy by elderly couples or individuals that provides for individual dwelling units with facilities and services that may include housekeeping, meals, limited medical/nursing care, recreation, social activities and other similar services. 

3. 	
Nursing Home: a residential health-care facility that provides nursing, medical and custodial care for individuals who for reasons of advanced age, chronic illness, injury or disability are unable to care for themselves. 



2.02.10 -Planned Residential District -PRD, -Permitted Uses 
A. 	Planned Residential Development is intended to provide an opportunity for higher density residential development in areas served by public water and public sewer and with good highway access. Planned residential development may include compatible non-residential development. 
B. 	This district is established to encourage the establishment of Planning Unit Developments (PUD) on lots meeting the requirements established in Section 15 of this ordinance. 
C. 	Where lot size is not sufficient to meet the requirements for Planning Unit Development the land may be developed in accordance with the underlying zone shown on the Zoning Map. 
D. 	See Section 15 of this ordinance for further information regarding permitted uses and standards. 

2.02.11 -Aquifer Conservation District -A 
A. 	Purpose: The Aquifer Conservation District is created to protect, preserve and maintain the existing potential groundwater supply and recharge areas within known aquifer and wellhead areas from adverse impacts that may result from inappropriate development or land use practices. 
B. 	Location: The Aquifer Conservation District includes those areas shown on the Map entitled Town of Merrimack Aquifer Conservation District, dated December 1996 prepared by the Nashua Regional Planning Commission based upon the Department of Interior U.S. Geological Survey study entitled Hydrology of Stratified-Drift Aquifers and Water Quality in the Nashua Regional Planning Commission Area, South Central New Hampshire, 1987, and on the Map entitled Surficial Geology and Wellhead Protection Areas Delineated for Merrimack Village District Wells MVD-1 Through MVD-7, dated January 1996, prepared by Emery & Garrett Groundwater, Inc.  The Aquifer Conservation District is subdivided into two areas: 
1. 	
Wellhead Protection Areas. 

2. 	
Balance of the Aquifer District. 


The Aquifer Conservation District maps are hereby declared to be a part of this ordinance and are incorporated by reference. 
C. 	Definitions: 
1. 	
Aquifer: Areas of permeable deposits of rock or sand and gravel containing significant amounts of potentially recoverable water whereby a combination of transmissivity, saturated thickness and specific capacity the area can be expected to yield at least 200 gallons per minute to a large diameter well. 

2. 	
Hazardous Waste: Shall be as defined in the N.H. Code of Administrative Rules Chapter He-p 1901.03 (v). 

3. 	
Impervious: The quality of any material or structure which substantially restricts the penetration of surface water or rainfall into the soil. 

4. 	
Leachable Wastes: Waste materials including without limitation solids, sewage sludge and agricultural residue which may release water-borne contaminants to the surrounding environment. 

5. 	
Mining of Land: The removal or relocation of geological materials for the purpose of extracting topsoil, sand or gravel, metallic ores or bedrock. 

6. 	
Process Waters:  Liquids used in cooling or in the manufacturing process which contact raw materials, products, wastes or machinery and which because of that contact contain toxic of hazardous substances or do not meet State and Federal drinking water standards. 

7. 	
Radioactive Material: Any of the materials which have a concentration which exceeds the limits set forth in Appendix B, Table II or 10 CFR Part 20 (Standards for Protection Against Radiation). 

8. 	
Recharge Area:  Areas of the permeable deposits which are hydraulically connected to 




Section 2.02.11 -Aquifer Conservation District -A (continued) 
and up gradient of aquifer areas. 
9. 	
Solid Waste: Useless, unwanted, or discarded material with insufficient liquid content to be free flowing, including, without limitation, rubbish, garbage, scrap materials, junk, refuse, inert fill material and landscape refuse. 

10. 	
Toxic or Hazardous Materials: Shall be defined in the N.H. Code of Administrative Rules Chapter He-p 1901.03 (v). 


D. 	Permitted Uses: 
The uses permitted in the Aquifer Conservation District shall in all cases be subject to the zoning regulations of the Town of Merrimack as defined in Sections 1 through 18 of this ordinance.  In cases of conflict between permitted uses of this district and permitted defined elsewhere in this ordinance, the more restrictive use shall apply. 
1. 	Permitted Uses, All Areas: 
a) 	All uses permitted in the underlying zoning district except as specifically restricted or prohibited herein. 
b) 	Farming, commercial gardening, nursery, forestry, harvesting and grazing in accordance with all applicable chapters of RSA title XL and best management practices developed, administered and enforced by the New Hampshire Department of Agriculture, Markets and Food. 
2. 	Prohibited Uses, Wellhead Protection Areas: The following uses shall not be permitted in Wellhead Protection Areas: 
a) 	Disposal of solid waste. 
b) 	Subsurface storage of petroleum and other refined petroleum products within one thousand feet (1000') of an existing municipal well, however,  subsurface storage of petroleum and other refined petroleum products is permitted in locations more than one thousand feet (1000') from an existing municipal well provided that such storage is in containment with suitable secondary barriers and with automatic alarm systems. 
c) 	Disposal of liquid or leachable wastes except one or two family residential subsurface disposal systems or equivalent domestic waste water disposal system. 
d) 	Industrial uses which discharge contact type process waters on site. Non-contact cooling water is permitted. 
e) 	Use of outside un-enclosed storage of road salt. 
f) 	Dumping of snow containing deicing chemicals brought from outside the Wellhead Protection Areas. 

Section 2.02.11 -Aquifer Conservation District -A (continued) 
g) Commercial animal feedlots. 
h) Mining of land except incidental to a permitted use. 
i) On site disposal or processing for recycling of hazardous or toxic materials. 
j) Junk and salvage yards. 
k) Bulk storage of toxic material for resale or distribution. 
l) The siting or operation of a wastewater or septage lagoon. 
m) Gasoline and automobile service stations, including auto body repair. 
n) Sale, storage, lease, or rental of used and new cars or other motorized vehicles. 

3. 	Regulated Uses, All Aquifer Areas: The following uses shall be permitted in Aquifer Areas only in accordance with the Standards for Development in the Aquifer Conservation District adopted by the Merrimack Planning Board in accordance with 
N.H.R.S.A.674:35 through 674:44 and 675:6 through 676:9 which pertains to the Planning Board’s authority and responsibilities. a) Storage of petroleum and other refined petroleum products and regulated substances in reportable quantities. b) Heliports and airports, including aircraft fueling, deicing and maintenance. c) Recharge of surface runoff water into the aquifer. d) Dumping of snow containing deicing chemicals brought from outside the Aquifer area. e) Commercial animal feedlots. f) Mining of land other than incidental to a permitted uses. g) Automotive service and repair shops, junk and salvage yards. h) Bulk storage of toxic materials for resale or distribution. i) Underground brush and stump dumps. j) Trucking and bus terminals. k) Car Washes. 
l) 	Metalworking shops including but not limited to machine shops, metal plating, heat treating, smelting and jewelry making shops. 

Section 2.02.11 -Aquifer Conservation District -A (continued) 
m) 	Siting or operation of wastewater septage lagoon. 
E. 	Administration: 
All subdivision proposals, site plan applications, or any change of use, alterations or expansion of an existing use, uses and changes in use within the Aquifer Conservation District shall be reviewed by the Planning Board and shall conform to the provisions of this ordinance and other applicable regulations of the Town of Merrimack and further shall assure that: 
1. 	
All such proposals are consistent with the need to protect the groundwater of the Town of Merrimack and adjacent communities. 

2. 	
All sanitary sewer systems are designed to minimize or eliminate leakage or discharges from the system into the groundwater. 

3. 	
On site waste disposal systems are located so as to avoid or minimize groundwater contamination. 

4. 	
Streets, roads, and parking areas are constructed so that direct application of road salt is not required for winter safety, and so that runoff from such uses is channeled to avoid or minimize groundwater contamination. 

5. 	
Written approval of the State of New Hampshire Water Supply and Pollution Control Commission has been obtained where applicable. 


F. 	Conservation Commission Review: The Conservation Commission shall review, within a reasonable time, each plan for development in the Aquifer Conservation District relative to the potential impact of such development plans on the Town’s groundwater resources in accordance with the Town’s Standards for Development in the Aquifer Conservation District and may make a recommendation to the Planning Board to approve, approve with conditions and/or recommendations, or disapprove the plan, with reasons for disapproval. 
G. 	Merrimack Village District Review: The Merrimack Village District, its agent or designee shall review, within a reasonable time, each plan for development within the Wellhead Protection Areas of the Aquifer Conservation District relative to the potential impact of such development plans on the Town’s public water supply in accordance with the Town’s Standards for Development in the Aquifer Conservation District and may make a recommendation to the Planning Board to approve, approve with conditions and/or recommendations, or disapprove the plan, with reasons for disapproval. 
H. 	Incorrectly Designated Zones: When the actual boundary of the Aquifer Conservation District is in dispute by any owner or abutter actually affected by said boundary, the Planning Board, at the owner/abutter's expense and request, may engage a professional geologist or hydrologist to determine more accurately the precise boundary of said Aquifer Conservation District, and shall submit to the Planning Board his findings, including: 
1. 	A detailed topographic layout of the subdivision and/or area to be developed prepared by a registered land surveyor. 

Section 2.02.11 -Aquifer Conservation District -A (continued) 
2. 	
A revised soils map of the subdivision and/or area prepared by a soils scientist qualified in hydrologic studies including a written report of his on-site field inspection and test boring data. 

3. 	
The aquifer boundary as shown on the Town of Merrimack Aquifer Conservation District Map shall be overlaid on the plat as outlined in Section 4.04 of the subdivision regulations and the newly proposed boundary location shall be indicated on the same plat by a broken line. 


The Planning Board may adjust the boundary or area designation based thereon. 
The precise boundary of said Aquifer Conservation District shall be as determined by the Planning Board. 
2.02.12 -Shoreland Protection District -SP 
The Town of Merrimack hereby declares that it will enforce the New Hampshire Minimum Shoreland Protection Standards as defined by RSA 483-B:9. 
A. 	Authority 
This ordinance is adopted pursuant to RSA 674:16 and in accordance with RSA 483­
B:8 (Shoreland Protection Act). 
B. 	Purpose 
The conservation of shorelands adjacent to public waters within the town of Merrimack, and other surface waters as specified herein, is essential for the protection of town's drinking water supply, wildlife habitats, recreational resources and the natural and scenic beauty of the town.  This ordinance is intended to establish minimum standards for the use, subdivision and development of shorelands adjacent to such surface waters for the purpose of minimizing or eliminating potential threats to these water resources due to non-point pollutant sources, erosion and sedimentation, flooding and inappropriate development or redevelopment. 
C. 	Location 
The Shoreland Protection District is an overlay district that includes all land located within two-hundred and fifty (250) feet of the reference line of the following surface waters and water ways and all areas within the one-hundred (100) year floodplain adjacent to said surface waters and water ways. The terms “surface waters” and “waterways” as used herein are those surface waters and waterways as identified by New Hampshire Administrative Rule ENV-Wq 1401.02 (a)-(e) and include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following: 
1. 	
Baboosic Brook 

2. 	
Baboosic Lake 

3. 	
Bowers Pond 



2.02.12 -Shoreland Protection District -SP (Continued) 
4. 	
Greens Pond 

5. 	
Harris Pond 

6. 	
Holts Pond 

7. 	
Horseshoe Pond 

8. 	
Merrimack River 

9. 	
Naticook Lake 

10. 	
Pennichuck Brook 

11. 	
Pennichuck Pond 

12. 	
Retention Pond B 

13. 	
Souhegan River 

14. 	
Stump Pond 

15. 	
Supply Pond 


The above list of applicable water bodies and watercourses is provided for illustrative purposes only.  If there is a conflict between the list contained herein and the jurisdictional waters and waterways defined by the above-referenced Administrative Rule, the above-referenced Administrative Rule shall control. 
D. 	NH DES Approval Required 
Any Subdivision or Site Plan, which takes place wholly or partially in the Shoreland Protection District, shall obtain approval from the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services (NH DES) in accordance with NH RSA 483-B.  This approval shall be obtained prior to final approval of the subdivision or site plan by the Planning Board. Prior to making application to the NH DES for a permit, applicants are encouraged to hold a Pre-Submission Hearing with the Planning Board. 
Section 2.02.13 -TOWN CENTER OVERLAY DISTRICT 
A. 	Purpose: To create a Town Center Overlay Zoning District intended to implement the overall goals of the Town Center Plan by encouraging an appropriate mixture of land uses, transportation corridor, and forms of development. 
B. 	Boundaries: The Boundaries of the Town Center Overlay District are defined on the Zoning Map which is hereby incorporated by reference. 
C. 	Permitted Uses: All uses permitted in any underlying zone except as specifically provided for or prohibited herein. 
1. 	Notwithstanding any contrary use provisions in any underlying zoning district, residential uses are permitted anywhere within the Town Center Overlay District. 
D. 	Special Exceptions: 
1. 	Notwithstanding any contrary provisions in any underlying zoning district, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may grant a special exception for the following uses of land anywhere within the Town Center Overlay District: 
Section 2.02.13 – Town Center Overlay District (continued) 
a) 	preschools, nursery schools, kindergarten, primary or secondary schools, technical or trade schools and institutions of higher learning; 
b) 	day care centers; 
c) 	professional offices including medical, dental, legal, architectural, engineering real estate, accounting, insurance services and related services or facilities; 
d) 	churches, temples, synagogues, mosques and other houses of worship and related facilities and services, and 
e) 	meeting halls or lodges and related accessory facilities for private membership clubs, fraternal organizations, unions, professional associations and other similar organizations. 
Provided that the following conditions are met: 
a) 	the site is an appropriate location for the proposed use in accordance with the Town Center Plan; 
b) 	the proposed use would not result in significantly increased hazards to vehicles or pedestrians by way of traffic congestion, ingress or egress; 
c) 	the proposed use would not result in unreasonable impacts to abutting properties by way of increased noise, odor, visual blight or other nuisance, and 
d) 	the proposed use is designed in harmony with the overall goals of the Town Center Plan with respect to building, transportation corridor, and site design and arrangement. 
Note: 	The granting of a special exception based upon the above noted conditions does not negate, supersede or substitute for any necessary approvals or applicable regulations required under the Planning Board’s Subdivisions and Nonresidential Site Plan Review Regulations. 
2. 	A special exception from the Zoning Board of Adjustment is required for the following uses of land within the Town Center Overlay District in accordance with the criteria outlined in Section 2.02.13 D, above, provided that the proposed use is a permitted use in the underlying zoning district: 
a) automotive service and repair facilities; 
b) gas stations; 
c) drive-through food service establishments; 
d) new or used vehicle dealerships; 
e) freight & trucking terminals; 

TOWN OF MERRIMACK ZONING ORDINANCE & BUILDING CODE 
Section 2.02.13 – Town Center Overlay District (continued) f) contractors yards; g) fuel storage and distribution (bulk). 
E. 	Dimensional Requirements: Notwithstanding the dimensional requirements contained in Section 
3.02 of the zoning ordinance, the following dimensional requirements shall apply to buildings for any use or combination of uses permitted in the Town Center Overlay District. 
1. 	
Minimum Lot Area -Existing Lots: any existing lot of record may be used for any use or combination of uses permitted within the Town Center Overlay District provided that all other applicable requirements are adhered to. 

2. 	
Minimum Lot Area -New Lots: 20,000 square feet. 

3. 	
Frontage: 125 feet. 

4. 	
Setbacks -Buildings: 
a) Front Yard -30 feet. 
b) Side Yard -15 feet. 
c) Rear Yard -40 feet. 
d) Lot Depth -125 feet. 


5. 	
Setbacks -Other:   


a) 	no site improvements, except for access ways, parking areas, fencing, ground signs, utility lines, landscaping and lighting fixtures may be located within required front yard setbacks as established under E, 4 (a) above; 
b) 	ground signs shall be setback not less than 10 feet from the front property line. 
6. 	Special Exceptions: The Zoning Board of Adjustment may grant a special exception for additions, alterations or improvements to existing buildings or sites that do not conform to the minimum dimensional requirements set forth in this section where it can be shown that the proposed additions, alterations or improvements: 
a) 	would serve to promote the reuse, restoration, rehabilitation or otherwise enhance an historic building or structure or any other potentially historic building or structure identified in the Historic Resources Inventory component of the Town Center Plan; 
b) 	are for a use currently permitted within the Town Center Overlay District; 
c) 	would not result in significantly increased hazards to vehicles or pedestrians or impair or impede emergency vehicle access or the provision of emergency 
Section 2.02.13 – Town Center Overlay District (continued) 
services or the planned improvements to the transportation corridor; 
d) 	would not result in unreasonable impacts to abutting properties by way of increased noise, odor, visual blight or other nuisance; 
e) 	would serve to enhance the overall goals of the Town Center Plan, and 
f) 	adequate provisions for parking and other necessary support facilities are provided. 
Note: 	The granting of a special exception based upon the above noted conditions does not negate, supersede or substitute for any necessary approvals or applicable regulations required under the Planning Board’s Subdivisions and Nonresidential Site Plan Review Regulations. 
F. 	Residential Density Calculations 
1. 	Where residential development is proposed in accordance with the requirements of Sections 3.02, 3.08 or 15 of the Zoning Ordinance, the following types of land may be used to satisfy minimum density or open space requirements: 
a) 	on-site open space, recreation or conservation land; 
b) 	lot yard areas or common areas, including private streets or ways and parking areas, and 
c) 	off-site conservation/recreation land, subject to Planning Board approval, within parcels specifically proposed to be dedicated to conservation and/or recreational use in the Town Center Plan. 
Zosctn2 
SECTION 3 -LOT AND YARD REGULATIONS [revised 5/14/15] 
3.01 	The Regulations pertaining to minimum lot sizes, minimum frontages, minimum depths, minimum front yard setbacks, minimum side yard setbacks, and minimum rear yard setbacks shall be as set forth in the Table of Lot and Yard regulations, subject to the further provisions of this ordinance. 
3.02 	Section 3.02 -Table of Lot and Yard Regulations -Minimum Required Yard Setback to Building Line. 
A. 	Regarding all lots on which a septic system is to be constructed to accommodate residential wastes, the severe, moderate, or slight non-wetland soils area must be contiguous, not a number of variously-sized pockets whose total area meets the 100,000 square foot, 80,000 square foot, or 40,000 square foot requirement.  All principal residential buildings and septic systems, if any, shall be located within a minimum contiguous non-wetland area. Lots with public water and sewerage shall contain not less than 20,000 square feet of contiguous non-wetland soils. Wetland swales, less than three (3) feet in width, passing between adjacent non-wetland parcels, while not being counted as non-wetland soils, shall not be considered as interruptions to contiguous parcels for the purpose of this regulation. 
Area      Frontage  Depth    Front   Side  Rear District (See Note 1)  Sq Ft.         Ft.                Ft.         Ft.      Ft.        Ft. 
(See 3.02.5 for modification of zoning when multiple soils occur within lot.) 
R-1 Residential District, Severe Soils Limitations and all areas defined by the Zoning Map which is hereby incorporated by reference. 
Single Family Residence 100,000 250 300 50 30 60 
Two Family Residence               Not permitted 
Multiple Family Residence Not permitted 
Excludes wetland and flood hazard soils governed by other provisions in this ordinance. 
R-2 Moderate Soils Limitations Residential District 
Single Family Residence  80,000  200  200  50  30  60  
Two Family Residence  Not permitted  
Multiple Family Residence  Not permitted  

Excludes wetland and flood hazard soils governed by other provisions in this ordinance. 
3-1 
Section 3.02 -Table of Lot and Yard Regulations -Minimum Required Yard Setback to Building Line (continued) 
Area    Frontage  Depth  Front   Side  Rear District (See Note 1)  Sq Ft.      Ft.              Ft.        Ft.       Ft.         Ft. 
R-3 Slight Soils Limitations Residential District 
Single Family Residence 40,000 150 150 30 20 60 Two Family Residence 80,000 200 200 50 20 60 Multiple Family Residence Not permitted 
(See Note 2) Excludes wetland and flood hazard soils governed by other provisions in this ordinance. R-4  Residential District with public  water & public sewerage (See Note 4) Single Family Residence 40,000 150 150 30 20 60 Two Family Residence 80,000 200 200 50 20 60 Multiple Family Residence 40,000 200 200 50 50 60 (See Note 2) Per family 
dwelling unit. 
Note:  Private swimming pools and their appurtenances shall not be located less than twelve (12) feet from any rear or side property line or within the front yard setback required for buildings. 
C-1 and C-2 -Limited and  20,000  125  125  30  20  40  
General Commercial  
(See Note 6)  
C-1 and C-2 -Residential Uses  (See requirements under District R)  
(See Note 6)  
I-1  -Industrial Building  
(See Notes 3 & 8)  - - - 50  20  30  
I-1 -Commercial Building  (See requirements under Districts C-1 & C-2)  
I-1 -Residential uses  (See requirements under District R  
Minimum setback of 50' (feet) from Route 3 (Daniel Webster  
Highway).  

3-2 
Section 3.02 -Table of Lot & Yard Regulations -Minimum Required Yard Setback to Building Line (continued.) 
District (See Note 1) Area       Frontage  Depth                         Sq Ft.         Ft.           Ft.     Front         Ft.     Side          Ft. Rear        Ft.  
I-2  Industrial District (See Notes 5 & 9)  
I-3  Industrial District  1,000,000  1,000  500  200  200  200  

(See Note 7) 
Note 1: 	District R -Residential; District C -Commercial; District I -Industrial (See Section 2.01) 
Note 2: 	Must have public water and public sewerage and be limited to those areas of the Town of Merrimack east of the F.E. Everett Turnpike. 
Note 3: 	All yard setbacks to building line shall be a minimum of 75 feet from the Camp Sargent Road and the Amherst Road, 75 feet from the property line along the F.E. Everett Turnpike, and 100 feet from the Daniel Webster Highway; 50 feet of this 100 feet along the Daniel Webster Highway shall be a minimum setback for all parking area, signs and other site improvements except landscaping and access ways, such 50' minimum setback to provide for a landscaped buffer zone. This setback to apply to that section of the Industrial zone from easterly extension of the access road and underpass to the F.E. Everett Turnpike Toll Gate south to Nashua line, from Merrimack River west to F.E. Everett Turnpike thence northerly along turnpike to Toll Gate thence easterly to point of beginning. 
Note 4: 	The criteria of Residential Districts R-1, R-2, and or R-3 shall not apply when R-4 provisions are met, except for that portion of the R-1 District shown on the Zoning Map. 
Note 5: 	All development within the Industrial District I-2 shall be serviced by public water and public sewerage.  The only industrial access to the Industrial District I-2 except from or across the F.E.Everett Turnpike shall be from Continental Boulevard extended and such entrance shall be within an area beginning 1000 feet south of the intersection of Spruce Street and Camp Sargent Road and extending southerly to a point no closer than 1000 feet northerly from the intersection of Ingham Road and Camp Sargent Road. 
Note 6: 	Minimum setback of 50 feet from Route 3/D.W. Highway 20 feet of this setback shall be a minimum setback for all parking area, signs, and other site improvements except landscaping and access ways, such 20 feet minimum setbacks to provide a buffer zone. 
3-3 
Section 3.02 -Table of Lot & Yard Regulations -Minimum Required Yard Setback to Building Line (continued) 
Note 7: 	In this district all yard setbacks to building lines, parking areas or other site improvements, except landscaping and access ways, shall be a minimum of 100 feet. Yard setbacks to building lines shall be a minimum of 200 feet from Camp Sargent Road and Tallant Road.  One hundred (100) feet of this 200 feet shall be a minimum setback for all parking areas, and other site improvements except landscaping, entrance signs and access ways.  The 100 feet setback shall be landscaped and regraded to provide a buffer zone completely around the perimeter of the district. All development within Industrial District I-3 shall be serviced by public water and public sewerage. 
Note 8: 	Within that portion of the Industrial District I-1, as described in Section 2.01.1(c), no building shall be constructed or used for industrial or commercial purposes if such building is situated within two-hundred (200) feet of the boundary of an adjoining residential district, within which residences are constructed within two hundred (200) feet of the boundary line between such districts. 
Note 9: 	Within that portion of the Industrial I-2 District described in Section 2.01.1-F.2, no building shall be constructed or used for commercial or industrial purposes within two-hundred (200) feet of an adjoining Residential District.  No parking areas, signs or other site improvements, except for landscaping, access ways and utilities, shall be located within one-hundred (100) feet of any adjoining Residential District or within the area of the buffer zone described in Section 2.01.1-F.2(a). 




3.02.1 -Residential Land Use District 
A. 	Purpose: The regulations of the residential land use, soils limitation districts are intended to guide the uses of those areas or tracts of land for residential purposes relative to their capabilities and limitations and to discourage such uses which would: 
1. 	
Contribute to pollution of aquifers, surface and ground water, and their recharge through the introduction of sewage or other contaminants. 

2. 	
Cause the misuse of sensitive lands within the community. 

3. 	
Give cause for unnecessary or excessive expenses to the Town to provide and/or maintain essential services and utilities which arise from inharmonious use of such lands. 


B. 	To provide for a method of correction by the Planning Board whenever soils or their boundaries appear to be inaccurately classified and to encourage those uses which can be appropriately and safely located within those districts. 
3-4 

3.02.1 -Residential Land Use District (continued) 
C. 	Soils limitation districts are based on soil characteristics relative to sanitary systems. For further description of individual soils refer to "SOIL SURVEY OF HILLSBOROUGH COUNTY NEW HAMPSHIRE, EASTERN PART, (TABLE 10); Published by the United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service in cooperation with The New Hampshire Agricultural Experiment Station, Issued October 1981; also refer to the Soil Limitation District Photo Maps, on file in the Planning and Building Department. 
3.02.2 -Soil Types To Sanitary Facilities 
A.  Slight limitations:  
Published Soil Symbol  Old Soil Symbol  Published Soil Name  
CaB  42-B-2  Canton fine sandy loam, 0-8% slopes  
B.  Moderate limitations:  
Published Soil Symbol  Old Soil Symbol  Published Soil Name  
CaC CmB CmC  42-C-2 43B, 43-B-1, 63B, 63-B-1 43C, 43-C-1, 43B, 43-B-1, 63B, 63C, 63-C-1  Canton fine sandy loam, 8-15% slopes Canton stony fine sandy loam, 3-8% slopes Canton stony fine sandy loam, 8-15% slopes  
C.  Severe limitations:  
Published Soil Symbol  Old Soil Symbol  Published Soil Name  
HsA HsB HsC AgA AgB WdA WdB WdC  12-A, 12-A-1 12-B-2 12-C-2 24A 24-B-2 26A, 26-A-1 26-B-2 24-C-2, 26-C-2-2  Hinckley loamy sand, 0-3% slopes Hinckley loamy sand, 3-8% slopes Hinckley loamy sand, 8-15% slopes Agawam fine sandy loam, 0-3% slopes Agawam fine sandy loam, 3-8% slopes Windsor loamy sand, 0-3% slopes Windsor loamy sand, 3-8% slopes Windsor loamy sand, 8-15% slopes  

3-5 
Section 3.02.2 -Soil Types To Sanitary Facilities (continued) 
WdD  26-D-2  Windsor loamy sand, 15-35% slopes  
WoB  29-B-2  Woodbridge loam, 3-8% slopes  
CpB  40-B-2  Chatfield-Hollis-Canton complex, 3-8%  
slopes  
CpC  40-C-2, 60-C-2  Chatfield-Hollis-Canton complex, 8-15%  
slopes  
CsB  41B, 41-B-1  Chatfield-Hollis complex, 3-8% slopes  
CsC  41C, 41-C-1,  Chatfield-Hollis complex, 8-15% slopes  
41RC, 41-R-C-1,  
61C, 61-C-1  
CtD  41D, 41-D-1,  Chatfield-Hollis-Rock outcrop complex,  
61D-61-D-1, 61E,  15-35% slopes  
61-E-1, 61RD,  
61-R-D-1, 61RE,  
61-R-E-1  
CaD  42-D-2  Canton fine sandy loam, 15-25% slopes  
CmD  43D, 43-D-1, 63D,  Canton stony fine sandy loam, 15-25%  
63-D-1  slopes  
CmE  43E, 43-E-1  Canton stony fine sandy loam, 25-35%  
slopes  
CnC  43RC, 43-R-C-1,  Canton very stony fine sandy loam, 8-15%  
63RC  slopes  
CnD  43,43-R-D-1  Canton very stony fine sandy loam, 15-35%  
slopes  
MoB  44-B-2  Montauk fine sandy loam 3-8% slopes  
SsA  46A, 46-A-1  Scituate fine sandy loam, 0-3% slopes  
SsB  46-B-2  Scituate fine sandy loam, 3-8% slopes  
StA  47A, 47-A-1  Scituate stony fine sandy loam, 0-3% slopes  
StB  47B, 47-B-1, 69B  Scituate stony fine sandy loam, 3-8% slopes  
StC  47C, 47-C-1  Scituate stony fine sandy loam 8-15% slopes  
PbB  66-B-2  Paxton fine sandy loam, 3-8% slopes  
PbC  66-C-2  Paxton fine sandy loam, 8-15% slopes  
PfB  67B, 67-B-1  Paxton stony fine sandy loam, 3-8% slopes  
PfC  67C, 67-C-1  Paxton stony fine sandy loam, 8-15% slopes  
PfD  67D, 67-D-1  Paxton stony fine sandy loam, 15-25%  
slopes  
WvB  129A, 129-A-1,  Woodbridge stony loam, 3-8% slopes  
129B, 129-B-1  
DeA  313A, 313-A-1  Deerfield loamy fine sand, 0-3% slopes  
PeB  313B, 313-B-1  Deerfield loamy fine sand, 3-8% slopes  
PhB  460-B-2  Pennichuck channery fine sandy loam, 3-8%  
slopes  
PhC  460-C-2  Pennichuck channery fine sandy loam,  
8-15% slopes  

3-6 
Section 3.02.2 -Soil Types To Sanitary Facilities (continued) 
PhD NnA BaA BaB HsD  460-D-2 513A, 513-A-1 532 532B 612-D-2  Pennichuck channery fine sandy loam, 15-25% slopes Ninigret very fine sandy loam, 0-3% slopes Belgrade silt loam, 0-3% slopes Belgrade silt loam, 3-8% slopes Hinckley loamy sand, 15-35% slopes  
D.  Ungraded soils  

Map symbols Uda (299)-Udipsanments, nearly level, Pr(G.P.)-Pits, Gravel, Ur(no old symbol)-Urban land, and Pr(sand pit)-Pits, gravel shall be subject to review by the Planning Board for appropriate grading upon presentation of evidence or a plan of a restored site suitable for development; such proposed site shall also be accompanied by compaction test data. 

3.02.3 -Boundaries 
For the purposes of this ordinance, soil boundaries shall be determined by the scale distance from the nearest visible prominent town road as shown on the aerial photo maps, to the nearest 1/32 inch (31 ft.). 

3.02.4 -Location of On-Site Disposal Fields 
An on-site disposal field shall not be located less than 20' from any property line.  All on-site disposal systems in every zoning district shall be placed in the least severe soil on the lot, or as determined by the Building Official.  Existing septic systems which have failed or need to be replaced which do not meet the existing 20' setback requirement may be replaced in the current location provided the septic system is not enlarged nor encroaches further into the setback requirement and is approved by the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services. 

3.02.5 -Multiple Soil Districts Within Lots 
Whenever two or more soils types shall be present on an individual lot within a subdivision proposed to the Planning Board for approval, the following criteria shall govern: 
R-2 District regulations are permitted when 45,000 or more contiguous square feet shall be moderate and/or slight soils within the lot area. 
R-3 District regulations are permitted when 25,000 or more contiguous square feet shall be slight soils within the lot area. 
Wetland conservation district soils shall not be used in calculating the total lot areas in R-1, 
3-7 

3.02.5 -Multiple Soil Districts Within Lots (continued) 
R-2, and R-3 Districts.  Lots in the R-4 District shall contain not less than 20,000 square feet of contiguous non-wetland soils. 

3.02.6 -Soil District Boundary Designated By Slope 
A. 	Whenever a plat is submitted showing a soil district boundary as designated by slope conditions and such boundary is different from the boundary designated on the photo map, the Planning Board shall adjust such boundary upon submission of the following: 
1. 	
A detailed topographic layout of the subdivision and the proposed lots prepared by a registered land surveyor, and accompanied with a written statement of his findings. 

2. 	
Such layout shall conform to the requirements of Section 4.05 of the subdivision regulations for preliminary plats and Section 4.06 for final plats. 

3. 	
The soil boundary as shown on the photo map shall be overlayed on the plat as proposed in Section 4.04 of the subdivision regulations, and the newly proposed boundary location shall be indicated on the same plat by a broken line along the nearest contour line determining the beginning of the slope. 


B. 	The Planning Board shall reserve the right to withhold action on such plat pending the results of an on-site and/or other investigation by that Board or its appointed agent and shall act to approve or disapprove the final plat within 90 days of submission. 
C. 	The final boundary location shall be confirmed and/or determined by the Planning Board. 

3.02.7 -Soils District Boundary Designated By Soil Classification 
A. 	Whenever a plat is submitted showing a soil district boundary that is designated by soil classification and such boundary differs from the boundary designated on the photo map, the Planning Board shall adjust such boundary upon submission of the following: 
1. 	
A detailed topographic layout of the subdivision and the proposed lots prepared by a registered land surveyor. 

2. 	
A revised soils map of the Town of Merrimack prepared by the Soils Conservation Service and/or evidence submitted by a soils scientist qualified in soils classification including a written report of his on-site field inspection. 

3. 	
The soil boundary as shown on the photo map shall be overlayed on the plat as proposed in Section 4.04 of the subdivision regulations, and the newly proposed boundary location shall be indicated on the same plat by a broken line. 


B. The Planning Board shall reserve the right to withhold action on such plat pending the results 
3-8 

3.02.7 -Soils District Boundary Designated By Soil Classification (continued) 
of an on-site and/or other investigation by that Board or its appointed agent and shall act to approve or disapprove the final plat within 90 days of submission. 
C. 	The final boundary location shall be confirmed and/or determined by the Planning Board. 
3.03 -Reserved 
3.04 -Lot or Yard Size Reduction 
No conforming lot or open space on the lot (yard setback) shall be reduced in size or separated in ownership if by such action it shall become nonconforming nor shall any nonconforming lot be reduced in size or otherwise altered if by such action it shall become less conforming. 

3.05 -Nonconforming Lots 
Notwithstanding the minimum lot area, frontage and depth requirement set forth in Section 
3.02 of this ordinance, a single-family residence may be constructed on a lot which does not comply with the said requirements, provided: 
1. 	It shall meet the following yard setback requirements: front -30 feet, side -15 feet, and rear -40 feet 

3.06 -Lots Without Public Sewerage 
Notwithstanding compliance of any lot with the requirements set forth in Section 3.02 or Section 3.05, no residence shall be constructed on any lot which is not served by public sewerage facilities unless private sewage disposal system absorption area requirements can be and are met to the satisfaction of the Building Official, said area requirements to be determined by the Building Official in accordance with the provisions contained in NH Administrative Code WS1000. 

3.07 -Previously Approved Permits 
Any structure or portion thereof for which a valid building permit was obtained and which was legally occupied before November 1, 1977, shall be considered to be in compliance with the minimum yard setback requirements of Section 3.02.  Any additions or other construction which have taken place after November 1, 1977, must comply with all requirements of Section 3.02 and are therefore not exempted by this subsection. 
3-9 

3.08 -Cluster Residential Development 
Single family, two-family, or four-unit townhouse development in a cluster concept shall be exempt from the provisions of Section 3.02 Table of Lot & Yard Regulations -Minimum Required, but subject to the following conditions: 
1. 	The purpose of cluster development, and to which purposes any such development must adhere, are the following: 
a) 	To promote the conservation of the natural environment, and the development of community uses in harmony with the natural features of the land. 
b) 	To establish living areas within the Town that provide for a balance of community needs, such as a diversity of housing opportunities, adequate recreation and open space areas, easy accessibility to these and other community facilities, and pedestrian and vehicular safety. 
c) 	To provide for an efficient use of land, streets, and utility systems. 
d) 	To stimulate new approaches to land and community development. 
2. 	
Cluster development shall be permitted in any district in which conventional residential development is permitted, except for that portion of the R-1 District shown on the Zoning Map. 

3. 	
The tract of single or consolidated ownership at the time of application shall be at least 15 acres in size and shall be subject to approval by the Planning Board under the Planning Enabling Legislation-Regulation of Subdivisions of land whether or not land is to be subdivided. 

4. 
The maximum number of dwelling units permitted in any cluster open space development shall be determined by utilizing a density of 40,000 square feet of land area per dwelling unit. For the purpose of this section, the maximum buildable area to be used in determining the maximum number of dwelling units permitted shall exclude all wetland soils and 100 year flood plain areas as defined elsewhere in this ordinance and all land with slopes greater than 25 percent and land encumbered with overhead electric power line easements. 


3-10 
Section 3.08-Cluster Residential Development (continued) 
5. 	
The residential net density within the developed area shall not exceed 8 dwelling units per acre. 

6. 	
Cluster developments shall not be required to conform to the minimum frontage, setback, and lot sizes required in the zoning ordinance, but shall be so designed and constructed as to achieve the purposes of cluster development set forth in 3.08.l. Single family cluster developments shall have a minimum building setback from any property line of five (5) feet. 

7. 	
The following uses shall be permitted: one-family, two-family, four-unit townhouse dwellings, membership club for exclusive use of the residents of the cluster open space. 

8. 	
The development shall be served by public water (Merrimack Village District and/or Pennichuck Water Works) and public sewer (Town of Merrimack and/or City of Nashua Waste Water Treatment facilities). 

9. 	
A cluster development shall have a 100' landscaped buffer to provide an adequate division of transition from abutting land uses. 

10. 	
All parking within the cluster development shall be provided in paved off-street locations at a ratio of not less than 2 spaces per dwelling unit. 

11. 	
Emergency vehicle access shall be provided to all structures within the cluster development. 

12. 	
At least 50 percent of the total tract area exclusive of public rights-of-way shall be set aside as common land covenanted to be maintained as permanent "open space" in private, public, or cooperative nonprofit ownership, as shall be designed by the cluster development applicant.  Any public dedication of common land shall be on a voluntary basis and in no event may be imposed upon an applicant. Any proposal for public dedication of common land in a cluster development shall be subject to acceptance by the Town of Merrimack. 

13. 	
Open space within a cluster development shall be protected by recreation and conservation easements and shall be conveyed to the property owners to be maintained as permanent open space or shall be permanently protected in other suitable ways so as to guarantee the following: 


a) 	The continued use of such land for the intended purposes; 
b) 	Continuity of proper maintenance for those portions of the open space land requiring maintenance; 
3-11 
Section 3.08-Cluster Residential Development (continued) 
c) 	The availability of funds required for such maintenance; 
d) 	Recovery for loss sustained as a result of casualty, condemnation or otherwise; 
e) 	A homeowners' association of tenancy-in-common or similar form of ownership, that the membership and obligation of the residents of the cluster development be automatic upon conveyance of title or lease to individual dwelling units. Homeowners association, tenancy-in-common or similar form of ownership shall include lien provisions and shall be subject to review and approval by the Planning Board. 
f) 	Current Use Limitation: For purposes of this cluster residential development option, the common land areas, open space areas and natural areas in an approved development are considered to be part of the residential use of such development and shall not be considered to be "open space land", "farmland", "forest and", "wetlands", "recreation land", "floodplain", or "wild land" within the meaning of RSA 79-A except where such consists of actively operated farmland classified as "prime" or "of statewide importance" by the Hillsborough County Conservation District.  
The Planning Board shall require, as a condition for approval of a cluster residential development, that all deeds transferring any interest in the real property included in said development specify that the common and natural areas in said development are acknowledged to be part of the residential use and do not qualify for "current use" real estate tax appraisal and assessment under Chapter 79-A. 
14. 	
Such common land shall be restricted to open space recreational uses such as tot lot, park, swimming pool, tennis court, playground, playfield, golf course, or conservation area. 

15. 	
Such common land shall have suitable access to a street. 

16. 
The cluster development plan shall show the layout of all roads and shall differentiate between collector roads which move traffic into and/or through the development, and local roads which provide access to the individual dwelling units. All collector roads shall be built to the town subdivision requirements for new public roads, and shall be offered to the town for public acceptance.  Town road requirements may be modified by the Planning Board for local roads where deemed applicable. Private roads shall be built as hard-surfaced roads to standards approved by the Planning Board and Road Commissioners, and may remain in private ownership. 


3-12 
Section 3.08-Cluster Residential Development (continued) 
17. 	
A site plan for the entire tract at a scale of 1"=100' and the developed portion at 1"= 50' shall be prepared by either a professional land planner, registered architect, registered professional engineer or registered land surveyor.  In all cases the site plan must bear the seal of a registered professional engineer and registered land surveyor. The site plan shall be submitted in accordance with the subdivision regulations for the Town of Merrimack and the location of parks and open space shall be shown on the plan. 

18. 	
An integral part of the Cluster Residential Development submission requires the preparation and presentation to the Planning Board, by the developer, of the proposed articles of association or incorporation which establishes the Homeowners Association as well as the Condominium Declaration.  Said documents must be approved, in writing, by the Planning Board prior to the granting of approval, but only after legal review by Town Counsel.  The cost of such legal review shall be born by the developer.  Any proposed changes in such Articles of Association or the Condominium Declaration shall require the prior written approval of the Planning Board. 

19. 	
An interest in the Common Area shall be allocated to each unit in Cluster Residential Development; each unit owner shall assume, and be obligated for, annual real estate taxes assessed by the Town on said fee simple unit ownership as well as the interest of each unit in the Common Area.  

The Common Area shall be allocated as an appurtenance to each unit and shall be taxable only as such by relevant taxing authority, and shall not be deemed to be separate property of the Association for the purpose of taxation. 

20. 	
The review of any cluster development conducted by the Planning Board under these regulations shall ascertain that adequate provisions have been made by the owner or his authorized agent for the following: 


a) 	Traffic circulation and access including adequacy of adjacent streets, entrances and exits, traffic flow, sight distances, curb cuts, turning lanes, and existing or recommended traffic signalization. 
b) 	Pedestrian safety and access. 
c) 	Off-Street parking and loading. 
d) 	Emergency vehicle access. 
e) 	Storm water drainage based upon a minimum of a 25-year storm frequency, utilizing on-site absorption and/or positive outfall. 
3-13 
Section 3.08-Cluster Residential Development (continued) 
f) 	Recreation facilities. 
g) 	Water Supply and wastewater disposal. 
h) 	Environmental factors such as protection against pollution, noise, odor, and the protection of natural land features. 
i) 	Landscaping in keeping with the general character of the surrounding areas. 
j) 	Signing and exterior lighting. 
k) 	Submission of proposal along with abutting property owners'  names and addresses shall be in accordance with the Town of Merrimack, Subdivision Regulations in order to provide for timely notification to abutters of public hearing to review said proposal. 
l) 	In addition, the Planning Board shall review the plan to assure compliance with the provisions of the standards set forth in these regulations, and other town regulations and ordinances.  The Planning Board shall also ascertain that the plan minimizes the encroachment of the cluster development upon neighboring land uses. 
21. 	
A performance bond and other legal document shall be submitted as required by the Planning Board to insure the completion of streets, buffers, and amenities in accordance with the accepted plans and the subdivision regulations of the Town of Merrimack as adopted or hereafter amended. 

22. 	
Amendments to an approved plan.  The owner, his agent or his successors or assigns will make no alterations or additions to or deletions from the approved Cluster Development Plan except as approved in advance by the Planning Board.  All requests for changes to the approved plan shall be made in writing to the Board and shall be accompanied by such documents as the Planning Board shall deem necessary to explain the requested change.  The Board shall determine if the requested change is minor or major in nature. 


a) 	Minor Change: A minor change shall be one which respects the approved plan's basic land allocations in terms of use and intensity, the type and variety of facilities and dwelling units being provided, and/or the timing for providing these facilities, but shall not include any increase in the overall density of the development. The Board may hold a public hearing on the proposed change with proper notification to all abutters, including those of the original proposed development as well as any additional ones which may have been created by development activity within the development itself. The Board shall then act to approve or disapprove with written notification 
3-14 
Section 3.08-Cluster Residential Development (continued) 
to the owner of its action. Any approved changes involving changes in any lot boundaries shall be recorded as a subdivision change in the Registry of Deeds. 
b) 	Major Change: Any requested change which the Board determines does not qualify as minor change shall be required to be submitted as a separate cluster development plan in accordance with these regulations and procedures. 
23. 	
The Planning Board shall adopt such procedures as part of the subdivision regulations as it may deem necessary in order to insure sufficient public review of any cluster proposal and to insure compliance with these and other Town ordinances and regulations. 

24. 	
Sanitary Facilities At Public Swimming Pools 


Any multi-family residential development, including Planned Unit Developments (PUD) or cluster residential developments as described in this ordinance, wherein dwelling units are served by a swimming pool, the pool area shall be equipped with customary lavatory facilities; i.e., toilets, showers. 

3.09 -Special Exceptions 
The Zoning Board of Adjustment may grant a special exception for additions, alterations or improvements to buildings or structures built before June 29, 1953 that do not conform to the minimum setback requirements set forth in this section or for any building or structure built after June 29, 1953 that was in compliance with applicable setback requirements at the time of construction, but that has been rendered nonconforming due to a subsequent change in the Zoning Ordinance where it can be shown that the proposed additions, alterations or improvements satisfy all of the following: 
1) 	are for a use currently permitted within the Zoning district; 
2) 	are ordinarily and customarily associated with the existing building and/or use; 
3) 	would serve to promote the reuse, restoration, rehabilitation or otherwise enhance an existing building or structure, especially an historic or potentially historic building or structure; 
4) 	would not result in increased hazards to vehicles or pedestrians; impair or impede emergency vehicle access or the provision of emergency services, or encroach on planned right of way corridors.  
3-15 

3.09 -Special Exceptions (continued) 
5) 	would not result in unreasonable impacts to abutting properties by way of increased noise, visual blight, odor or other nuisance; 
6) 	adequate parking and other necessary support facilities would be provided for the existing building or structure as well as for the proposed addition, alteration or improvement; 
7) 	the proposed improvement would have been allowed by right prior to adoption of the zoning ordinance provision at issue;  and 
8) 	the proposed improvement cannot reasonably be constructed in a differing way or in a differing portion of the property so as to comply with existing setback requirements. 
End3 
3-16 
SECTION 4 – MANUFACTURED HOUSING UNITS, MANFACTURED HOUSING PARKS, AND MANUFACTURED HOUSING SUBDIVISIONS 
4.01 – Manufactured Housing Units 
After the effective date of this section, no manufactured housing units shall be located otherwise than in a manufactured housing park or manufactured housing subdivision except as specifically provided in this section. A manufactured housing unit lawfully existing on the effective date of this section on land out of a manufactured housing park or  manufactured housing subdivision, or a replacement hereof if such manufactured housing unit is destroyed by fire or casualty and its replacement is located on the land within 180 days after such fire or casualty may be maintained as a non-conforming use, provided that when such use shall have been discontinued by the removal of such manufactured housing unit or its replacement from the land, the use of such land shall thereafter conform to the provisions of this ordinance. An unoccupied travel trailer registered for use on the highways of this state may be parked on land owned by the owner of the travel trailer, provided that the location or condition of such travel trailer is not detrimental to the neighborhood or to property in the vicinity. 

4.02 – Manufactured Housing Parks 
A. 	No manufactured housing park shall be established or operated without approval from the Planning Board of a plan which clearly defines the area of the proposed park, as well as all manufactured housing unit sites, all utilities, and such other requirements as shall be required by the subdivision regulations of the Town of Merrimack as may be adopted from time to time. 
1. 	
Manufactured housing parks shall consist of a minimum of six (6) lots and are permitted in any residential zone provided that all requirements pertain to single family houses are  met. 

2. 	
Each lot must contain not less than 30,000 square feet and shall have a depth of a least 150 feet and a frontage of at least 100 feet on a public or private street having a width of at least 50 feet, with town water and town sewerage. 

3. 	
No lot shall contain more than one manufactured housing unit.  No manufactured housing unit shall be placed closer than 150 feet to an existing residence. 

4. 	
Each lot shall be clearly marked. 

5. 	
Front yard setbacks shall be at least 20 feet.  Rear yard setbacks shall be at least 10 feet.  Side yard setbacks shall be at least 10 feet. 

6. 	
No principal building shall be located in a manufactured housing park except manufactured housing units  and laundry, recreation, or other buildings maintained in connection with the operation of the  manufactured housing park or subdivision. 


4-1 
Section 4.02 – Manufactured Housing Parks (continued) 
7. 	
Ordinary and customary accessory structures and additions including sheds, porches, decks and car ports, are permitted provided that all applicable setback and building code requirements are met. 

8. 	
The proposed manufactured housing park will be effectively screened by the use of the existing natural features of the landscape and/or added landscaping. 



4.03 – Manufactured Housing Subdivisions 
A. 	Manufactured housing subdivisions, consisting of a minimum of six (6) lots, are permitted in any residential zone provided that all requirements, which pertain to single-family houses, are met.  Cluster Development provisions may be applied to manufactured housing subdivisions. 
B. 	If a plat is submitted with a request for approval for a manufactured housing subdivision and such plat is approved, the plat shall bear the legend that it is "approved for manufactured housing units". 
C. 	The manufactured housing subdivision will be effectively screened by the use of the existing natural features of the landscape and/or added landscaping. 
Zosctn4 
4-2 
SECTION 5 -JUNKYARDS [revised 5/14/15] 
5.01 -Residential District 
No junk other than junk located in a commercial junk yard licensed in accordance with Section 5.03 shall be placed or maintained in a residential district except in compliance with Section 5.04 and in accordance with the following conditions: 
1. 	
The aggregate area of any lot occupied by junk shall not exceed 200 square feet. 

2. 	
No junk shall be located within 150 feet of any highway or within 150 feet of any dwelling on abutting property. 



5.02 -Commercial and Industrial Districts 
No junk shall be placed or maintained in a commercial or industrial district except in compliance with Section 5.04 and in accordance with the following conditions: 
1. 	
No junk shall be located within 30 feet of any highway. 

2. 	
No junkyard shall be permitted unless licensed by the Town Council after first having received a recommendation from the Planning Board, and provision is made for monitoring wells of surface and subsurface groundwater at suitable locations for the purpose of testing for contamination by hazardous and toxic substances, and provision is made for authority for the Town to enter upon junkyard sites with proper notification for the purpose of obtaining surface and subsurface groundwater samples. 



5.03 -Licensing 
Commercial Junk Yards lawfully existing on the effective date of this Section in a residential district may, upon application therefore, be licensed by the Town Council; provided, that such license shall be subject to the following conditions: 
1. 	
No junk shall be maintained within 30 feet of any highway. 

2. 	
The area occupied by junk at any time shall not exceed by more than 10% the area occupied by junk on the effective date of this Section. 

3. 	
The provisions of Section 5.04 are complied with. 

4. 	
Provision is made for monitoring wells of surface and subsurface groundwater at suitable locations for the purpose of  testing for contamination by hazardous and toxic substances,  and 


5-1 
Section 5 -Junkyards (continued) 
5. 	
Provision is made for authority for the Town to enter upon junkyard sites with proper notification for the purpose of obtaining surface and subsurface groundwater samples. 

6. 	
Certification of compliance with best management practices established by the NH Department of Environmental Services in accordance with RSA 236:115. 



5.04 -Screening of Junk 
Any junk permitted by Sections 5.01, 5.02, 5.03 to be maintained on any lot shall be effectively screened from view from any highway and from abutting premises by a solid wall or fence. 

5.05 -Timing 
A period of six months from the date of adoption of this Section shall be provided for junk existing on said date either to be removed or to be brought into compliance with the provisions hereof; except that this Section shall not be deemed to affect the junk yard licensing requirements of Section 5.02, and 5.03 (Adopted November 10, 1964). 

5.06 -Renewal of License 
Pursuant to RSA 236:121, junkyard licenses shall expire on June 30th of each year. Junkyard licenses shall be renewed thereafter upon payment of an annual license fee to the Town of Merrimack in the amount of One Hundred Twenty-Five Dollars ($125.00). Junkyard licenses shall be renewed without a hearing if all provisions of this ordinance and RSA 236:111 et seq. have been complied with during the license period.  At the discretion of the Town of Merrimack, appropriate investigations of each licensee may be conducted prior to the issuance of a renewed junkyard license including, but not limited to, the testing of surface and subsurface waters for contamination by hazardous or toxic substances. 
Zosctn5 
5-2 
6.01 	Appointment 
For the purposes of this ordinance, the Town Building Official shall be appointed in accordance with the procedures outlined in the Town’s Personnel Policy (as most recently adopted by the Town), and shall perform the duties of his/her office as designed in the various provisions of this ordinance and shall make inspections of all buildings in process of building or reconstruction and report all violations to the appropriate Town Staff, Boards/Commissions, and Town Council as applicable. 

6.02 	Enforcing Authority 
A. 	The duty of administering and enforcing the provisions of Section 11 of this Ordinance is hereby conferred upon the Town Building Official or his/her duly authorized agent. 
B. 	The duty of enforcing the provisions of this ordinance is hereby conferred upon the Planning & Zoning Administrator and the Town Building Official, or their duly authorized agents, as appropriate to their jurisdictions.  The Building Inspector is authorized to issue cease and desist orders whenever he/she becomes aware of violations of this ordinance. 

6.03 	Building Permits 
Any person before commencing work on the erection or alteration of any building or structure must first obtain a permit duly granted for such erection or alteration by the Building Inspector.  Before a permit shall be issued by the Town Building Official, he/she shall determine whether the proposed construction or alterations conforms to all the conditions of this ordinance. 

6.04 	Excavation 
No excavation for foundation nor the erection, construction or structural alteration of any structure or part of any structure shall be undertaken until a permit shall have been issued by the Town Building Official.  No such permit shall be issued before application has been made for a certificate of occupancy. 

6.05 	Scale Drawings -Plats 
All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a plat in duplicate drawn to scale showing the actual dimensions of each lot to be built upon. The size and location of each building to be erected upon each lot and such other information as may be necessary to enable the Town Building Official to determine the proposed structure and use of land will conform to the provisions of this ordinance. 
6-1 
Section 6 -Building Inspector (continued) 

6.06 Appearance 
No permit, shall be issued unless the proposed structure will present a reasonable appearance and will be in keeping with the neighborhood and unless the building is to be finished on the exterior in a permanent manner. 

6.07 Occupancy 
No vacant land shall be occupied or used and no structure hereafter erected, structurally altered or changed in use until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the Building Inspector. 

6.08 Certificate of Occupancy-New Construction Buildings 
A certificate of occupancy either for the whole or a part of a new building or for alteration of an existing building shall be applied for coincident with the application for a building permit and shall be issued within ten days after the erection or alteration of such building or part shall have been completed in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. 

6.09 Certificate of Occupancy-Vacant Land & Changes in Use 
A certificate of occupancy for the use or occupancy of vacant land or for a change in the use of the land or for a change in the use of an existing building shall be applied for and issued before any such land shall be occupied or used or such land or building changed in use and such certificate shall be issued with ten days after application has been made providing such proposed use is in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. 

6.10 Records 
A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the office of the Building Inspector and a copy shall be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land affected. 

6.11 Reserved 
6.12 Antennas, Satellite Dishes 
The erection of antennas and/or satellite receiving dishes having a height of over 8 feet (including supporting pedestal or tower) shall be subject to the provisions of Section 6.03 and shall not be located within the building setbacks set out in Section 3.02 Table of Lot and Yard Regulations -Minimum Required Yard Setback to Building Line. 
Zosctn6 
6-2 
7.01 -Appointment 
For the purpose of this ordinance, the Planning & Zoning Administrator shall be appointed in accordance with the procedures outlined in the Town’s Personnel Policy (as most recently adopted by the Town), who shall perform the duties of his/her office as designed in the various provisions of this ordinance and report all violations to the appropriate Town Staff, Boards/Commissions, and Town Council as applicable. 

7.02 -Duties 
The duty of administering and interpreting the provisions of this ordinance is hereby conferred upon the Planning & Zoning Administrator or his/her duly authorized agent. 

7.03 -Record 
A record shall be kept of all interpretations of this ordinance made by the Planning & Zoning Administrator; this record shall be a public document to insure consistency in the application of this ordinance. 
Note:  Refer to 6.02(B) for Planning & Zoning Administrator as enforcing provisions of Zoning Ordinance. 
zosctn7 
7-1 

SECTION 8 -ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT [revised 5/14/15] 
8.01 -Appointment 
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be composed of five (5) members who shall be appointed as follows: Upon passage and approval of this ordinance, one (1) member shall be appointed to serve for a term of five years, one (1) member for four years, and one (1) member for three years, one 
(1) member for two years and one (1) member for one year.  Thereafter each member shall be appointed for a term ending five years from the date of expiration of the term of his predecessor and a person appointed to fill a vacancy shall be appointed for the unexpired term. Each member of the Board shall hold office until a successor is appointed and qualified unless sooner removed.  The members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be appointed by the Town Council. 

8.02 -Meetings 
Meetings of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be held upon the call of the Chairman. All meetings shall be opened to the public and the Board shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall keep a record of its proceedings showing the vote, indicating such fact and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions.  Every rule or regulation, every amendment or repeal thereof and every order, requirement, decision or determination of the Board shall immediately be filed in the Community Development Department and become a matter of public record. 

8.03 -Appeal Procedures 
A. Appeals from the decision of the Planning & Zoning Administrator or Building Inspector can be made to the Zoning Board of Adjustment by any person aggrieved or by an officer, department, board, or bureau of the municipality affected by any decision of the Planning & Zoning Administrator or Building Inspector.  The appellant shall file with the Planning & Zoning Administrator or Building Inspector and with the Zoning Board of Adjustment a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof.  Such appeal should be taken within a reasonable time as provided by the rules of the Board. The Planning & Zoning Administrator or Building Inspector shall transmit forthwith to the Board all the papers constituting the records upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
B. The Board shall hear and decide appeals de novo and review on appeal any order, requirements, decision or determination made by the Building Inspector in the enforcement or application of this ordinance and upon such appeal may in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance reverse or affirm, wholly or partly or may modify any such order, requirements, decision or determination. The concurring vote of three (3) members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse or modify any order, requirement, decision or determination of the administrative officer or to decide in favor of the appellant on any matter upon which it is required to pass or to effect any variance from the strict applications of the provisions of this ordinance. 
8-1 

C. The Board shall hear and decide appeals for variances, equitable waivers of dimensional requirements, and special exceptions and review on appeal any order, decision and determination made by the Building Inspector in the enforcement or application of this ordinance and upon such appeal made in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, reverse or affirm wholly or partly or may modify any such order, decision or determination. The concurring vote of three (3) members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse or modify any order, decision or determination of the Building Inspector or to decide in favor of the appellant on any matter upon which it is required to pass or to effect any variance from the strict applications of the provisions of this ordinance. 
D. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal taken with the time specified by its rules and before any hearing is given either on an appeal or an application for variance, equitable waiver of dimensional requirements, or special exceptions in the Zoning Ordinance, notice shall be given to all the abutting property owners and also notice shall be given publication in a newspaper published with circulation in the Town of Merrimack in accordance with the requirements of RSA 676:7.  The costs of notice shall be paid by the appellant or applicant to the Community Development Department.  Said costs shall be paid before the notices can be sent and placed in the paper and action taken by the Board on any appeal or application for variance, equitable waiver of dimensional requirements, or special exceptions. 

8.04 -Variance -Special Exception Validity Period 
In accordance with RSA 674:33(I-a) and RSA 674:33(IV), variances and special exceptions shall be valid if exercised within 2 years from the date of final approval, or as further extended by the Board for good cause, provided that no such variance or special exception shall expire within 6 months after the resolution of a planning application filed in reliance upon the variance or special exception. Actions sufficient to vest an approval for a variance or special exception include Planning Board site plan or subdivision approval, issuance of a building permit, or occupancy of the subject property as evidenced by a Certificate of Occupancy issued by the Community Development Department where no Planning Board approval or building permit is required.  However, should any site plan or subdivision approval or building permit expire unused after the conclusion of the two-year validity period provided for herein, any variance or special exception granted as a precondition to said site plan or subdivision approval or permit shall become void as well.  Any application to extend the two-year validity period shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Zoning Board of Adjustment that it was impossible or impractical to receive the necessary approvals to move forward in reliance on the permit granted within two years.  Any renewal/extension application shall be filed no sooner than 90 days prior to the date of expiration, and no later than 30 days prior to the variance or special exception expiration. 

8.05 -Conditions 
In granting variances, the Board, if it deems it proper to the carrying out of the intent and purpose of this ordinance, may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will in its judgment better fulfill the purpose of this ordinance. 
8-2 


8.06 – Statutory Criteria for Granting of Variances 
The requirements of RSA 674:33(I)(b), as most recently adopted by the State of New Hampshire, must be determined to be satisfied by the Board in order to grant any variance. 

8.07 -Fees 
The Zoning Board of Adjustment may establish a schedule of fees which are reasonably necessary to cover the expense of public notification, administrative processing of applications, technical and staff support, and other reasonable costs which are incurred by the Zoning Board in the exercise of its duties. Prior to the adoption of a schedule of fees or any amendments thereto, the Zoning Board shall cause to be published a notice of public hearing and hold a public hearing consistent with RSA 675:7 and any amendments thereto. 
Zosctn8 
8-3 

SECTION 9 -NON-CONFORMING USES [revised 5/14/15] 
9.01 -Continuance of Use 
The lawful use of land, buildings or structures existing at the time of the adoption of this ordinance or of the amendment thereto, although such use does not conform to the provisions hereof, may be continued. 

9.02 -Non-Conforming Use of Buildings or Structures 
A. 	A building or structure, the use of which does not conform to the use regulations for the district in which it is situated, shall not be enlarged or extended unless the use therein is changed to a conforming use. 
B. 	Such building or structure shall not be structurally altered or reconstructed, unless such alterations are required by an authorized public officer for health or safety reasons. However, such maintenance and repair work as required to keep the building or structure in safe condition shall be permitted. 
C. 	A non-conforming use of a building or structure may be changed to another non-conforming use of the same classification providing that such new use would not be more objectionable or result in a substantial change in the use's affect on adjacent properties. 
D. 	If any non-conforming use of a building or structure ceases for any reason for a continuous period of more than one year, or is changed to a conforming use, or if the building or structure in which such use is conducted or maintained is moved for any distance whatsoever for any reason, then any future use of such building or structure and the land on which it is located shall be in conformity with all provisions of this ordinance for the district in which it is located. 
E. 	Nothing contained in this Section shall authorize the conversion, extension, or enlargement of an existing seasonal building or structure for year round use. (See 1.03.46) 

9.03 -Non-Conforming Use of Land 
Where no structure is involved, the non-conforming use of land may be continued provided that: 
A. 	Such non-conforming use shall not be enlarged or  increased, nor shall it be extended to occupy a greater area of land than that occupied by such use at the time of the adoption of this ordinance. 
B. 	Such non-conforming use shall not be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel of land occupied by such non-conforming use. 
9-1 
Section 9.03 -Non-Conforming Uses -Non-conforming Use of Land (continued) 
C. 	No non-conforming use of land shall be changed to another non-conforming use. 
D. 	If any non-conforming use of land, or any portion thereof, ceases for any reason whatsoever for a continuous period of more than one year, or is changed to a conforming use, any future use of such land shall be in conformity with all provisions of this ordinance. 
E. 	Nothing in this Section is intended to negate the provisions of Sections 2.01.5, 2.01.6, 2.02.6, 3.05, and 14. 
9.04 -Non-Conformity Other than Use 
A building or structure which is conforming in use, but does not conform to the height, yard, building coverage, parking or similar dimensional requirements of this ordinance, shall not be considered to be non-conforming within the meaning of Section 9.01 of this ordinance.  However, no permit shall be issued nor shall any changes be made on such building or structure that will result in the increase or expansion of any such non-conformity. 
Zosctn9 
9-2 
10.01 -Violations 
Upon information that the provisions of this Ordinance are being violated, the Building Inspector  or other local official with the authority to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance shall take immediate steps to enforce the provisions of this ordinance as provided in Chapter 
676:17 of the Revised Statutes Annotated of the State of New Hampshire. 
10.02 -Penalty for Violation 
Any person, who violates any of the provisions of the Town of Merrimack Zoning Ordinance, Building Code, Non-Residential Site Plan Review Regulations, Subdivision Regulations, or any provision or specification of any application, plat or plan approved by, or any requirement or condition of a permit or decision issued by, any local administrator or land use board acting under the authority thereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural person, or guilty of a felony if any other person; and shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $275 for the first offense and $550 for subsequent offenses for each day that such violation  is found  to continue after the conviction date or after the date on which the violator received written notice from the Town of Merrimack that the violator  is in violation, whichever date is earlier. 
Zosctn10 
10-1 

TOWN OF MERRIMACK ZONING ORDINANCE AND BUILDING CODE 










SECTION 11 -ADOPTION OF CODES 
11.01 Enforcement of State Building Code. 
Pursuant to RSA 674:51 (I), the Town of Merrimack hereby declares it will enforce the New Hampshire State Building Code.  For structures other than one and two family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories in height, the Town of Merrimack will enforce the current provisions of the State Building Code as promulgated pursuant to RSA 155-A:1, as may be amended from time to time. 

11.02 	Additions, Insertions, Deletions and Changes to the International Building Code, First Edition, 2000 
11.02.1 Amend Section 101.1 Title. 
Insert “Town of Merrimack, NH” 

11.02.2 Delete Section 103.1 and replace with the following: 
Section 103.1  Enforcement Agency: 
The Code Enforcement Division of the Community Development Department shall enforce the provisions of this code. 

11.02.3 Add new Section 105.2.4 as follows: 
Permits are not required for "ordinary" repairs, as determined by the Building Official. 

11.02.4 Amend Section 108.2  Schedule of Permit Fees 
A Schedule of Permit Fees shall be established by the Building Official.  A public hearing shall be held not less than thirty (30) days prior to the implementation of any new fee schedule or any amendment thereto. 

11.02.5 Add Section 110.1.1 as follows: 
New multiple family structures and residential condominium structures: 
No new multiple family residential structures nor residential condominium units shall be occupied until the owner thereof shall have received an occupancy permit for: 
1. 	
the building in which such multiple family dwellings are located, and/or 

2. 	
individual units of a residential condominium structure, or a multiple family structure, or a structure containing residential condominium units provided: a) all walls and partitions are covered with sheetrock,  or other approved 


finishing material; b) all floors shall be in condition ready for finished flooring c) all plumbing and electrical wiring shall be complete, except for the 
TOWN OF MERRIMACK ZONING ORDINANCE AND BUILDING CODE 

installation of finished fixtures 
All fire protection requirements shall be complete, tested and accepted by 
Merrimack Fire Department. 

11.02.6 	Appeals:   Delete Section 112.1 in entirety and replace with the following: 
Section 112.1  Appeals: 
The Zoning Board of Adjustment of the Town of Merrimack shall act as the Board of Appeals according to the regulations and procedures set forth in the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Merrimack. 
11.02.6.1 	Section 112.1.1  Court Review: 
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, or any officer, department, board or bureau of the municipality may appeal to the Hillsborough County Superior Court within such time and under such conditions as are set forth by the New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated. 
11.02.7 	Delete Section 113.4  Violation Penalties and substitute in lieu thereof the following: 
Section 113.4  Violation Penalties: 
Any person who shall violate a provision of this Code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation of a certificate issued under the provision of the Code, shall be subject to the criminal and civil fines and penalties pursuant to Section 10 of the Town of Merrimack Zoning Ordinance and Building Code. 
11.02.8 	Delete Section 114.3  Unlawful Continuance and substitute in lieu thereof the following: 
Section 114.3  Unlawful Continuance: 
Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a Stop Work Order, except such work as he is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to the criminal and civil fines and penalties pursuant to Section 10 of the Town of Merrimack Zoning Ordinance and Building Code. 


11.02.9 	Add Section  415.7.3.3.3.1 Placement: 
All outside liquefied petroleum gas storage containers for commercial or industrial use of 500 gallons or more liquid full water capacity shall be located on: a reinforced concrete pad of a minimum thickness of six inches; or located on masonry non-combustible structure supports (lintels) with 4" to 6" of crushed 
TOWN OF MERRIMACK ZONING ORDINANCE AND BUILDING CODE 

stone spread over polyethylene ground sheeting; or other suitable material approved by the Building Official and extending a minimum of twelve inches beyond the dimensions of each container. 
11.02.9.1 Add Section 415.7.3.3.3.2 Tank Protection: 
Each such container shall be enclosed with a chain link fence at a minimum height of seventy-two inches and secured by a gate or such other type suitable device, which may be approved by the Building Official to protect the container and its contents from all safety and health hazards, 


11.02.10 Add New Section 708.10 
Multiple single family dwelling units containing superimposed occupancies shall be separated by a continuous two-hour fire resistant wall assembly so that no more than 12 units are between wall assemblies.  Such assemblies shall extend vertically from the basement floor to the underside of the roof sheathing and horizontally to the interior of the exterior sheathing. 

11.02.11 Add New Section 903.2.16 
Where required: Approved Automatic Sprinkler Systems in new buildings and structures shall be provided in the locations described below: 
1. 
In locations indicated in Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.15, 

2. 
In all buildings and structures of use groups R1, R2, and R3 

3. 
Where required by this code 


3.1 	In all new buildings or structures 
3.2 	In all existing structures undergoing expansion to multi-family dwelling 
3.3	  In all existing multi-family dwelling units undergoing alterations, renovations, or reconstruction valued at 75% or more as determined by the equalized assessed valuation of the structure. 
The sprinkler design and installation shall comply with the provisions of the current edition of N.F.P.A. (National Fire Protection Association) Codes No.13, "Standard for the installation of sprinkler systems", and No.13D, "Sprinkler systems -one and two family dwellings” or No.13R respectively, as may be amended from time to time, and receive certification from the Merrimack Fire Department for compliance with this section prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit for any dwelling unit situated within any building hereunder.  
Add Exception:   Detached single family and duplex dwellings of Use Group R­3 and R-4. 

11.02.12 Add New Section 903.6 Domestic Residential Systems: 
Use of sprinkler systems in residential, business, mercantile and assembly 
TOWN OF MERRIMACK ZONING ORDINANCE AND BUILDING CODE 

occupancies 
1. 	
This section applies to multi family residential, business, mercantile and assembly occupancies.  (Multi family residential is defined as three or more dwelling units). 

2. 	
In buildings or structures as described in Section 903, a combination fire protection sprinkler system shall be a minimum requirement (a combination fire protection system for the purposes of this section means that the sprinkler system and the domestic water system utilize the same (common) service water supply pipe to the premises). 

3. 	
Requirements of Use Groups: 


a) 	Multi-family -New multi-family buildings or structures regardless of the form of ownership (i.e., rental, condominium, etc.) and fire wall separation (may not be classified independently) that are not required elsewhere in this code to have a commercial or industrial type fire sprinkler suppression system in accordance with the most recent edition of N.F.P.A. (National Fire Protection Association) No.13-"Standards for the installation of sprinkler systems", or existing structures undergoing major alterations or expansion such that it increases the number of individual residential units to three or more, or existing structures undergoing substantial rehabilitation, alteration or expansion which exceeds fifty (50) percent of the gross floor area.  Installation of the combination fire protection sprinkler system shall be in accordance with Section 4, "System design and installation requirements". 
b) 	Business assembly and Mercantile -new business, assembly and/or mercantile buildings or structures (classified as light and ordinary hazards group 1 & 2 structures by N.F.P.A., National Fire Protection Association, No. 13) regardless of the form of ownership (i.e.,. rental, condominium, etc.) and fire wall separation (may not be classified independently) that are not required elsewhere in this code to have a commercial or industrial type fire suppression system in accordance with the most recent edition of 
N.F.P.A (National Fire Protection Association, No.13), "Standards for the installation of Sprinkler Systems" or existing structures undergoing substantial rehabilitation, alteration or expansion which exceeds fifty (50) percent of the gross floor area.  Installation of the combination fire protection sprinkler system shall be in accordance with Section 4, "system design and installation requirements". 
4. 	System Design and Installation Requirements: 
a) 	All sprinklers shall be Underwriters Laboratories listed residential fast response for residential use and Underwriters Laboratories listed residential-commercial fast response for business, mercantile and assembly. 
TOWN OF MERRIMACK ZONING ORDINANCE AND BUILDING CODE 

b) 	Only listed and approved Factory Mutual or Underwriters Laboratories materials shall be used in sprinkler systems 
Exception:  Listing may be waived for tanks, pumps, hangers, water low detection devices, flow water valves, check valve and gauges. 
c) 	All systems shall be tested for leakage as follows: 
(1.1) Hydrostatically tested prior to sprinkler head and dry wall installation in accordance with N.F.P.A. 13, “Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems,” if Fire Department connection required. 
(2.2) Tested for leakage at normal operating water pressure prior to dry wall installation if not required to be hydrostatically tested. 
(3.3) Tested for leakage at normal operating water pressure after 
sprinkler head installation. 

d) 	Water Supply 
(1.1) General provisions.  Every automatic sprinkler system shall have at 
least one automatic water supply.  When stored water is used as the sole 
source of supply for residential applications only,  the minimum quantity 
shall equal the water demand rate times 10 minutes. All other 
applications (light and ordinary hazard) shall require at least 30 minutes 
of water quantity. 

(2.2) Multipurpose piping system.  
A piping system serving both sprinkler and domestic needs shall be 
acceptable  when: 

(aa)  Residential Use:  In common water supply connections serving more than one dwelling unit, five gallons per minute is added to the sprinkler demand in addition to any domestic demand so as to determine the size of common piping and the size of the total water supply requirements. 
(bb) Business, Mercantile and Assembly:  Common water supply connections serving the structure shall be calculated in accordance with the domestic demand in addition to the sprinkler demand. 
(3.3) Valves and Drains.  
Each system shall have the components as per Figure 1, a single control 
valve arranged to shut off both the domestic and sprinkler systems, and a 
separate shut off valve for the domestic system only. 

Exception:  The sprinkler system piping may have a separate control valve where supervised by one of the following methods: 
TOWN OF MERRIMACK ZONING ORDINANCE AND BUILDING CODE 

(aa)  Central station, proprietary, or remote station alarm service. 
(bb) Local alarm service which will cause the sounding of an audible signal at a constantly attended point, or 
(cc) Locking the valves open. 
(4.4) Piping.  Pipe or tube and fittings used in sprinkler systems shall be of materials listed for such applications by Factory Mutual and/or Underwriters Laboratories.  The chemical properties, physical properties and dimensions of the materials shall be designed to withstand  a working pressure of not less than 175 psi. 
Joints for the connection of copper tube shall be brazed. 
Exception:  Soldered joints (95-5 only) may be used for wet-pipe copper tube systems only. 
(5.5) Piping Support Piping shall be supported from structural members. This code contemplates support methods comparable to those used in accordance with the most recent edition of the International Plumbing Code.  Piping laid on open joists or rafters shall be secured to minimize lateral movement. 
(6.6) Sprinklers.  Residential:  Listed residential sprinklers shall be used.  The sprinklers shall be fusing temperatures not less than 35 degrees F above maximum expected ambient temperature. 
Mercantile, business and assembly:  Listed residential or fast response commercial type sprinklers with a wall spray pattern shall be used.  The sprinklers shall have fusing temperatures not less than 35 degrees F above maximum expected ambient temperature. Operated or damaged sprinklers shall be replaced with sprinkler having the same performance characteristics as original equipment. 
(7.7) Painting and Ornamental Finishes: Sprinkler frames may be factory painted or enameled as ornamental finish in accordance with the requirements of 3.4.4.8.  Otherwise, sprinklers shall not be painted and any sprinklers which have been painted, except for factory applied coatings, shall replaced with new listed sprinklers. 
(8.8) Ornamental finishes shall not be applied to sprinkler by anyone other than the sprinkler manufacturer and only sprinklers listed with such finishes shall be used. 
TOWN OF MERRIMACK ZONING ORDINANCE AND BUILDING CODE 

(9.9)1.Alarms: 
Local water flow alarms shall be provided on all sprinkler systems.  An 
accepted water flow switch, bell and/or horn-strobe combination shall be 
installed.  Equipment shall be in accordance with Figure (1). 

e) System Design 
(1.1) Design Discharge:  The system shall provide a discharge of not less than 18 gallons per minute to any single operating sprinkler and not less than 13 gallons per minute to the number of design sprinklers. If the design discharge area is to be increased, the discharge per sprinkler shall meet the criteria as outlined in each manufacturers specification sheet. 
(2.2) Number of Design Sprinklers:  The number of design sprinklers shall include all sprinklers within a compartment, to a maximum of four sprinklers.  Calculations must be provided to show the following: 
Sprinkler flow at highest elevation, most hydraulically remote sprinkler from water supply within the building. 
(aa)  For rooms or areas with no more than 1 and 2 sprinklers, 
calculate to flow 1 and 2 sprinklers. 
(bb) For rooms or areas with 3 sprinklers, calculate to flow 3 
sprinklers. 
(cc)  For rooms or areas with 4 or more sprinkler calculate to flow 4 sprinklers. 
(dd) Single family, two family and town house condominiums with separate individual sprinkler systems shall follow the design criteria of Item 1.1 above. 
The definition of compartment for use in determining the number of design sprinklers is ‘space completely enclosed by walls and a ceiling’.  The compartment enclosure may have openings to an adjoining space if the openings have a minimum lintel depth of 8 inches from the ceiling. 
(3.3) Water Demand:  The water demand for the system shall be determined by multiplying the design discharge by the number of design sprinklers. 
(4.4) Sprinkler Coverage: 
(aa)  Residential sprinklers shall be spaced so that the maximum area protected by a single sprinkler does not exceed 144 square feet or in accordance with the  manufacturers design criteria. 
TOWN OF MERRIMACK ZONING ORDINANCE AND BUILDING CODE 

The maximum distance between sprinklers shall not exceed 12 feet on or between pipelines and the maximum distance to a  wall or partition shall not exceed 6 feet.  The minimum distance between sprinklers within a compartment shall be 8 feet.  Greater coverage may be achieved if Underwriters Laboratories listed as such. 
The minimum operating pressure of any sprinkler shall be in accordance with the listing information of the sprinkler, and shall provide the minimum flow rates as specified previously. 
Application rates, design areas, areas of coverage, and minimum design pressures other than those specified may be used with special sprinklers which have been listed for such specific residential installation conditions. 
(bb) Mercantile, assembly and business shall comply with above or with the listing requirements for fast response commercial sprinkler heads. 
f) Position of Sprinklers 
(1.1) Pendent sprinklers shall be positioned so that the deflectors are within 1 to 4 inches from the ceiling. 
Exception:  Special residential and fast response sprinklers shall be installed in accordance with the listing limitations. 
(2.2) Sidewall sprinklers shall be positioned in accordance with the listing limitations. 
Dropped escutcheons shall be used if sprinkler is obstructed by light fixtures or beams.  The installer may use additional sprinklers for areas where obstructions block spray pattern. 
When ceiling fans are used, sprinklers shall be located so that the fan blade does not interfere with the spray pattern.  Relocation of sprinkler shall still conform to spacing requirements.  Rooms exceeding 9x9 feet with ceiling fans shall have a minimum of 2 sprinklers. 
g) System Types 
(1.1) Wet-pipe systems.  A wet pipe system shall be used when all piping is installed in areas not subject to freezing.  No anti-freeze solution or any other type of additive shall be allowed in any combination sprinkler system. 
(2.2) Dry-pipe systems.  Where system piping is located in unheated areas subject to freezing, a dry-pipe system shall be used.  Only copper tubing with brazed fittings and steel tubing shall be used in dry-pipe 
TOWN OF MERRIMACK ZONING ORDINANCE AND BUILDING CODE 

systems. 
h) Pipe Sizing 
(1.1) Piping shall be designed in accordance with (e)(1.)  and (e)(2.). If more than one design discharge is required, the pipe sizing procedure shall be repeated for each design discharge. 
Exception:  When piping is sized hydraulically, calculations shall be made in accordance with the methods described in N.F.P.A. 13, Standard for the installation of sprinkler systems. 
(2.2) Minimum pipe size shall be 3/4" for copper, blazemaster, and polybutelene, and 1" for steel. 
(3.3) To size piping for systems connected to a city water supply, the following approximate method is acceptable: 
(aa)  Establish system flow rate in accordance (e). 
(bb) Determine water pressure in the street. 
(cc)  Select pipe sizes. 
(dd) Deduct meter pressure losses if any. 
(ee)  Deduct pressure loss for elevation. (Building height above 
street in feet x .434 psi). 
(ff)  Deduct pressure losses from city main to control valve (manifold assembly including backflow prevention) by the total lengths of pipe in feet. 
(gg)  Deduct pressure losses for piping within building by the total length in feet of each size of pipe between the control valve (manifold assembly) and the farthest sprinkler. 
(hh) Deduct valve and fitting pressure losses.  Count the valves and fittings from the control valve to the highest-hydraulically most remote point.  Determine the equivalent length for each valve and fitting and add these values to obtain the total equivalent length for each pipe size. Multiply the equivalent length for each size by the factors for the pipe used and total these values. 
(ii)  In multi-level buildings, steps A thru G shall be repeated to size piping for each floor. 
(jj)  If the remaining pressure is less than the operating pressure 
TOWN OF MERRIMACK ZONING ORDINANCE AND BUILDING CODE 

established by the testing laboratory for the sprinkler being used, a redesign is necessary.  If this pressure is higher than required, smaller piping may be used when justified by calculations. 
(kk) The remaining piping shall be sized the same as the piping to the farthest sprinkler unless smaller sizes are justified by calculations. 
(4.4) To size piping for systems with an elevated tank, pump or pump tank combination, determine the pressure at the water supply outlet and proceed through steps (c), (g), (h), (i), (j), (k), of 3. 
(5.5) Piping configurations.  Piping configurations may be looped, gridded, straight run or combinations thereof. 
(6.6) When a dead-end system is used, the sprinkler system shall be isolated from the domestic water system by not less than a dual action spring loaded check valve or equivalent that conforms to ASSE Standard 1024, and provides the flow requirement of the system without exceeding the allowable pressure drop of the standard or the system, whichever is less.  The system components as indicated previously shall be a mandatory requirement and all parts thereof shall be acceptable to the Administrative Authority.  The mandatory pressure reducing valve (as part of the system components) shall be regulated at 125 psi.  A Watts 
W.T.S. 530C50 or equivalent, reseating pressure relief valve shall be used on all domestic sprinkler systems.  Backflow prevention devices used shall be State of N.H. W.S. and P.C. approved devices and be testable. 
Exceptions: 
1. 
One check valve may be omitted when a back flow (dual 
check valve assembly) is required by the local water 
jurisdiction. 


2. 
A back flow (dual check valve assembly) shall be 
required in all instances where a fire department connection 
is installed.  (Note:  Where the structure would normally not 
require a back flow preventer but a fire department 
connection is required, the dual check valves may be 
omitted where the back flow preventor is installed in place 
thereof). 


3. 
In low pressure areas only, where residual pressure or 
flow GPM's do not meet minimum requirements, one head 
must flow minimum 18 GPM with a 41 PSI residual; two 
heads must flow minimum 30 GPM's with a 30 PSI 
residual, unless otherwise Underwriters Laboratories listed. 



A circulating system may be used.  The terminal end of the 
TOWN OF MERRIMACK ZONING ORDINANCE AND BUILDING CODE 

sprinkler supply shall be tied directly into the supply to a 
regularly used water closet or other approved fixture.  
Branch lines shall not exceed 25 feet on any circulating 
system. The dual check valves (two in series) requirement is 
waived on such systems. 

(7.7) If the sprinkler system is designed for more than one living unit, all shut-off's in the system shall be secured with lock and key in the open position. A sign on the valves should read "Fire Department should be notified when valves are turned off and when turned back on."  All shut off's shall be readily accessible at all times. 
(8.8) If the sprinkler system is designed for mercantile, assembly or business, then the requirement of 7. shall also apply. 
(9.9) If the sprinkler system is designed for more than one unit, and separate electric service is used for each unit, the alarm switch with bell (horn-strobe) shall be on the "house electric meter."  Where Townhouse type condominiums are constructed, a fire resistive construction of at least one hour shall be utilized between each living unit with a separate riser, flow switch (system components) and outside bell (horn-strobe) installed. 
Exception:  A single system-riser may be utilized where:  No.1. Access is provided to all control valves for fire services and, No.2. All system piping, sprinkler heads, valves and components are controlled under the authority of the condominium association and is included as such with the Article Covenants.  A copy of the Article Covenants shall be forwarded containing this information to the Merrimack Fire Department. 
(10.10) A supply line to the sprinkler system shall be tapped  off the water service line at a point that would be downstream (customer side of meter) of any back flow preventor the water purveyor might subsequently require in the service line to contain the domestic system from the public mains. 
(11.11) All mechanical rooms (furnace, water heater, etc.) shall have 200 to 212 degree standard sprinklers. 
(12.12) All spacing of sprinklers, in relation to obstruction such as fireplaces and heaters, shall be to the sprinkler manufacturer's requirements. 
(13.13) All sprinkler piping in unheated areas shall be protected from freezing. Where attached garages are unheated, a dry pendent type commercial sprinkler head shall be used where the sprinkler piping is to remain wet at all times. 
TOWN OF MERRIMACK ZONING ORDINANCE AND BUILDING CODE 

(14.14) All commercial (assembly, mercantile and business) structures shall be required to have an acceptable 1 ½ inch fire department connection in an easily accessible location.  All residential structures with 20 or more sprinkler heads on a single type system shall be required to have an acceptable 1 ½ inch fire department connection in an easily accessible location. 
i) 	Location of Sprinklers:  Sprinklers shall be installed in all areas. 
Exceptions: 
1. 
Sprinklers may be omitted from bathrooms not exceeding 55 square feet with non combustible plumbing fixtures. 

2. 
Sprinklers may be omitted from small closets where the least dimension does not exceed 3 feet and the area does not exceed 24 square feet and the walls and ceiling are surfaced with noncombustible materials. 

3. 
Sprinklers may be omitted from open attached porches, carports and similar structures. 

4. 
Sprinklers may be omitted from attics and crawl spaces, which are not used or intended for living purposes or storage. 

5. 
Sprinklers may be omitted from entrance foyers, which are not the only means of egress. 


j) 	All condominiums shall have the following wording in the recorded Declaration of Covenants and a copy of the document shall be provided to the Merrimack Fire Department. 
"Sprinkler System.  In the event that any unit should be equipped with a sprinkler system, nothing shall be hung from the sprinkler comprising a part of the system, nor shall any such sprinklers, wiring, or components be painted, covered, or otherwise changed, tampered with or altered." 
"Prior to any alteration, amendment, modification or change thereof, he/they will submit such alteration, amendment, modification or change to the 
TOWN OF MERRIMACK ZONING ORDINANCE AND BUILDING CODE 

Merrimack Fire Department for approval and agrees to comply with all domestic sprinkler requirements of said Fire Prevention office". 
k) 	The installer of domestic sprinkler systems shall attend a familiarization seminar presented by the Merrimack Fire Department.  This seminar is mandatory for all prospective domestic sprinkler installers.  Prior to the installation of any sprinkler system within the Town of Merrimack a set of detailed plans shall be forwarded to the Fire Prevention office prior to the issuance of a permit. 
l) 	The sprinkler installer shall certify the flow and PSI requirement at the highest elevation condition farthest from sprinkler water supply in the building.  Certification of flow and leakage tests shall be acceptable to the Merrimack Fire Department. 
m) Prior to the occupancy of any structure utilizing a domestic-residential sprinkler system, a certificate of occupancy must be issued by the Building Inspection department with a sign off from the Merrimack Fire Department. 
5. 	Levels of Protection 
a) 	The responsibility for properly maintaining a sprinkler system is the obligation of the owner or manager who shall understand the sprinkler system operation. 
(1.1) Any sprinkler heads located in areas subject to damage shall be protected with a cage or other acceptable device. 
(2.2) Refer to Appendix A for additional information. 
b) 	When a tank is used for domestic and fire protection purposes, a low water alarm actuated when the water level falls below 110 percent of the minimum quantity as required per the discharge design and domestic usage requirements. 
c) 	Decorative painting of a residential sprinkler is not to be confused with the temperature identification colors as referenced in 3-16.6 of NFPA 13-1983, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems. 
d) 	Alarms connected to the water flow devices shall be of sufficient intensity to be clearly audible in all bedrooms over background noise levels with all intervening doors closed.  The test of audibility level shall be conducted with all household equipment which may be in operation at night in full operation.  Examples of such equipment are window air 
TOWN OF MERRIMACK ZONING ORDINANCE AND BUILDING CODE 

conditioners and room humidifiers. 
e) 	The following table shall provide guidance for location of sprinklers near ceiling obstructions.  Where beams, light fixtures, sloped ceilings and other obstructions occur, additional sprinklers may be necessary to achieve proper response and distribution.  Guidance may be obtained from the manufacturer. 


Maximum Distance from Sprinkler Deflector to Bottom of Ceiling Obstruction 
Distance from sprinkler to      Maximum Distance from 
Side of Ceiling Obstruction Sprinkler to Bottom of 
Ceiling Obstruction 

6 in. or less Not permitted 
6 in. to less than 1 ft.    0 in. 
1 ft. to less than 2 ft.             1 in. 
2 ft. to less than 2 ft. 6 in.  2 in. 
2 ft. 6 in. to less than 3 ft.  3 in. 
3 ft. to less than 3 ft. 6 in.  4 in. 
3 ft. 6 in. to less than 4 ft.  6 in. 
4 ft. to less than 4 ft. 6 in.  7 in. 
4 ft. 6 in. to less than 5 ft.  9 in. 
5 ft. to less than 5 ft. 6 in.  11 in. 
5 ft. 6 in. to less than 6 ft.   14 in. 

f) 	Definition -As indicated throughout this Section, light and ordinary hazard structures shall follow the criteria as defined in the current 
N.F.P.A. 13, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems. 
g) 	When approved plastic piping is used in domestic sprinkler systems, all threaded fittings used for testing purposes shall be of CPVC, PVC or Copper.  (No black iron nipples shall be used on plastic female fittings for testing purposes). 
h) 	All sprinkler head threads are to receive either a coating of Teflon liquid dope (acceptable to the plastic being utilized) or a second wrapping of Teflon tape prior to installation. 
i) 	All domestic sprinkler systems may be installed by certified personnel (certified by Merrimack Fire Dept.) without special licensing, (i.e.,. licensed plumber, licensed sprinkler installer). However, the final connection to the water supply shall be completed by licensed master plumber who has also been certified by the New Hampshire Bureau of Fire Prevention. 
j) 	At least three spare sprinklers of each type utilized, temperature rating and orifice size used the system shall be kept on the premises.  When 
TOWN OF MERRIMACK ZONING ORDINANCE AND BUILDING CODE 

fused sprinklers are replaced by the owner, fire department or others, care shall be taken to assure that the replacement sprinkler has the same operating characteristics. 
k) Items required on drawing for domestic sprinklers: 
(1.1) Sprinkled under Merrimack Fire Department sprinkler 
requirements. 

(2.2) Layout indicating head location, pipe layout, location of cut off, tie in, switch, bell; location of commode if used for circulating; location of bleeder valve and line;  1 ½" fire department connection. 
(3.3) Description notes:  Fill out blanks and attach A through T to all drawings. 
(aa) Type of head: ( ) pendent ( ) sidewall ( ) both  ( ) Other _____________________ (bb) Type of  pipe: ( ) Copper ( ) _________________ 
(cc)
 Type of fastening of pipe: ____________________ 
(dd) Type of back flow prevention used:____________________ 
(ee) Size of main line from street: _________________ 
(ff) Size of main sprinkler line: ___________________ 
(gg) Size of Branch line: _________________________ 
(hh) Type & degree of heads in mechanical room: __________ 


(ii)
 Note:  No branch lines are to exceed 25' on circulating system. 
(jj) Flow test of sprinkler system to be certified before dry wall. 
(kk) Copy of hydraulic calculations to be provided. 
(ll) Calculations to be based on GPM flow test highest elevation 
worst condition. 
(mm) If separate calculations for each group of buildings, note on 
drawings and calculations. 
(nn) Pipe in attic shall be laid as close as possible to ceiling. 
(oo) Escutcheons shall be used when heads are near light fixtures or 
beams so that spray pattern is not obstructed or 2 heads shall be 
used. 
(pp) Any changes in these drawings or in the event any unfinished 



TOWN OF MERRIMACK ZONING ORDINANCE AND BUILDING CODE 

rooms are contemplated, all changes shall be submitted for 
approval. 
(qq) Mechanical rooms to have 200 to 212 degrees F. commercial 
type sprinkler heads. 
(rr) No exposed piping to sprinkled areas. 
(ss) Piping to be protected from freezing. 
(tt) All sprinkler drops are to be screwed in place with no nails 
utilized. 

l) Required items for valves and manifold assembly. 
KEY (Figure 1) (1.) Incoming water supply from street line or other. (2.) Gate valve, meter assembly, back flow preventer, as required by local water 
purveyor. 
(3.) Pipe "T" (tee). 
(4.) Domestic supply. 
(5.) Union with Iron Pipe standard. 
(6.) One quarter turn full port gate valve. (Iron pipe standard). 
(7.) Watts 601 (Iron pipe standard) testable check valve or equivalent. Note: a 

double valve assembly (back flow preventer) will be required where a fire 
department connection is utilized. 
(8.) McConnell & Miller PS4-3F series flow switch or equivalent. 
(9.) Drains to be piped outside structure. 
(10.) Pressure relief valve to be Watts 530C50 with ½ inch fittings or equivalent. 
(11.) Cross connection. 
(12.) Pressure gauge to be rated at least 25 P.S.I. over static pressure. 
(13.) Manifold assembly. 
(14.) Century 1 ½ inch swivel fire department connection or  equivalent.  (Iron Pipe 

TOWN OF MERRIMACK ZONING ORDINANCE AND BUILDING CODE 

Thread) 
(15.) To sprinkler system piping and sprinkler heads. 
(16.) Nipple length to extend five pipe diameters. 

TOWN OF MERRIMACK ZONING ORDINANCE AND BUILDING CODE 


FIGURE 1 

TOWN OF MERRIMACK ZONING ORDINANCE AND BUILDING CODE 

The specific requirements of this code may be modified by the Merrimack Fire Department to allow alternative arrangements that will secure as nearly equivalent safety to life from fire as practical, but in no case shall the modification afford less safety to life than  compliance with the provisions as set forth in this Section. 
APPENDIX A 
A minimum monthly maintenance program should include the following: 
(1.1) Visually inspect all sprinklers to ensure against obstruction of spray. 
(2.2) Inspect all valves to assure that they are open. 
(3.3) Test all water flow devices. 
(4.4) The alarm system, if installed, should be tested. 
(5.5)  Pumps, where employed, should be operated. 
(6.6) The pressure of air used with dry systems should be checked. 
(7.7) Water level in tanks should be checked. 
(8.8) Care should be taken to see that sprinklers are not painted either at the time of installation or during subsequent redecoration.  When painting sprinkler piping or painting in areas next to sprinklers, the sprinklers may be protected by covering with a bag which should be removed immediately after painting has been finished. 
11.02.13 Add new Section 1004.2.1 Exit Door Requirements: 
Multi family structures and row houses shall have not less than two independent exit doors serving each dwelling unit.  Multiple family dwellings with superimposed units shall have not less than two independent exit doors serving each story. Where mixed designs occur, exit doorways shall be approved by the Building Official 

11.02.14 Add Section 2702.4  Materials: 
No aluminum or copper-clad aluminum conductors shall be used within the Town of Merrimack. 
a) Exception: Aluminum conductors are permitted for service entrance and between main disconnect and sub-panel only. 
Add Section 2703.1.1 Fees: 
Fees for electrical permits shall be established by the Building Official.  Not less 

TOWN OF MERRIMACK ZONING ORDINANCE AND BUILDING CODE 

than thirty (30) days prior to the implementation of any fee schedule or any subsequent amendment to the fee schedule under this section, the Building Official shall publish notice of same and shall conduct a public hearing. 

11.02.15 Add Section 2903:  Plumbing Systems: 
The design and installation of plumbing systems, including sanitary and storm drainage, sanitary facilities, water supplies and storm water and sewage disposal in buildings shall comply with the plumbing code adopted by the Town of Merrimack except sections that may be at variance with the Town Sewer Ordinance and the State of New Hampshire Plumbing Code. 
Delete Section 3102 and replace with the following: 

11.02.16 Section 3102 Bonds And Liability Insurance 
Section 3102 Filing:  A person shall not erect, install, remove, rehang or maintain over public property any sign for which a permit is required under the provision of this code until an approved bond shall have been filed in the sum of $150,000 per person and $500,000 per occurrence as herein required or until an insurance policy shall have been filed for public liability in the amount of $150,000 per person and $500,000 per occurrence. 
Section 3102.2 Conditions: Such bond or insurance policy shall protect and save the jurisdiction harmless from any and all claims or demands for damages by reason of any negligence of the sign hanger, contractor or agents, or by any reasons of defects in the construction, or damages resulting from the collapse, failure or combustion of the sign or parts thereof. 
Section 3102.3 Notice of Cancellation: The obligation herein specified shall remain in force and effect during the life of every sign and shall not be canceled by the principal or surety until after a 30-day notice to the building official. 
Delete Section 1301.1 and insert the following: 

11.02.17 Section 1301.1 Other Standards: 
Buildings shall be designed and constructed in compliance with the energy code listed in Chapter 35 and the New Hampshire Energy Code (“New Hampshire RSA Chapter 155-D”). 


11.03 Adoption of International Residential Code  (IRC) 
That a certain document, one copy of which is one file with the Town Clerk and not less than 1 copy is one file in the Community Development Department of the Town of Merrimack, New Hampshire, being marked and designated as the 2000 International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings, including Appendix Chapters A, B, C, E, F, G, H, J, and L, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the 
TOWN OF MERRIMACK ZONING ORDINANCE AND BUILDING CODE 

Residential Building Code for the Town of Merrimack, New Hampshire, for regulating and governing the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, location, removal and demolition of detached one and two family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories in height with separate means of egress as herein provided;  and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Residential Building Code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this ordinance, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Section 11.04 of this ordinance. 

11.04 Amendments to the International Residential Code (IRC) 2000 
11.04.1 R101.1 Insert ‘Town of Merrimack, New Hampshire’ 
11.4.2 Amend R105.2 (Item #1, under “Building”) to read as follow: 
1. One-story detached accessory structures, provided the floor area does not exceed 160 square feet. (14.86 m2).” 

11.04.3 Amend R103.1 as follows: 
Enforcement Agency:  The Code Enforcement Division of the Community Development Department shall enforce the provisions of this code. 

11.04.4 Section 112.1 Appeals 
The Zoning Board of Adjustment of the Town of Merrimack shall act as the Board of Appeals according to the regulations and procedures set forth in the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Merrimack. 

11.04.5 Court Review: 
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, or any officer, department, board or bureau of the municipality may appeal to the Hillsborough County Superior Court within such time and under such conditions as are set forth by the New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated 

11.04.6 Amend IRC Section R311.1 Exit Door Required: 
Not less than two exit doors conforming to this chapter shall be provided 
from each dwelling unit.  The required exit doors shall provide for direct access 
from the habitable portions of the dwelling to the exterior without requiring 
travel through a garage. 
Add Exception:  An accessory dwelling unit shall have one independent exit in conjunction with an interior connection to the main dwelling unit. 

11.04.7 Amend Section R314.2 Stairs to read as follows: 
In occupancies in Use Group R-3, within dwelling units in occupancies in Use 
TOWN OF MERRIMACK ZONING ORDINANCE AND BUILDING CODE 

Group R-2 and in occupancies in Use Group U which are an accessory to an occupancy in Use Group R-3, the maximum riser height shall be 8 1/4 inches (210 mm) and the minimum tread depth shall be 9 inches (229 mm).  A nosing not less than 3/4 inches (19 mm) but not more than 1 1/4 inches (32 mm) shall be provided on stairways with solid risers where the tread depth is less than 11 inches (279 mm). 

11.04.8 	Add New Section M1804 
Connectors serving wood-burning appliances shall not be connected to chimneys serving other appliances 

11.04.9 	Add new Section M2001.3"Firestopping" 
"The area over all furnaces, boilers and solid fuel burning equipment shall be protected either by: 
1. 	
One half inch drywall extending at least 3 feet beyond the footprint of the unit with all joints sealed.  Any combustible wall within said perimeter shall also be fireproofed with ½ inch drywall and all joints sealed 

2. 	
An automatic upright sprinkler head over the specified equipment, connected to the domestic water supply 

3. 	
Equivalent protection as approved by the Building Official 



11.04.10 	Add Section 3501.2 Materials 
No aluminum or copper-clad aluminum conductors shall be used within the 
Town of Merrimack. 
Exception:	  Aluminum conductors are permitted for service entrance and 
between main disconnect and sub-panel only. 


11.05 Test Pits and Percolation Test 
11.05.1 	A percolation test supervised by the Building Official, to ascertain proper drainage on all new construction and minimum of a 1000 gallon septic tank shall be required.  In all instances  of on-site waste disposal, test pits shall be dug and each such pit shall be witnessed by the Building Official or his/her agent; an area of at least 4,000 sq ft including the test pit location shall be designated on a plan and the test pit data attached. 
11.05.2 	For purposes of the percolation test, the time required for water of fall one inch shall not exceed 30 minutes; and the leach bed bottom shall be no less than 4' above the seasonal high water table. 
TOWN OF MERRIMACK ZONING ORDINANCE AND BUILDING CODE 

11.06 Sewerage 
11.06.1  All dwellings and all public buildings shall be equipped with a minimum 1000 gallon septic tank, sanitary chemical closet or approved vault.  
11.06.2  Septic designs shall address drainage on lots so that the systems will not be adversely affected and so that adjacent lots will not be adversely affected.  


Dwelling Unit Area 
Single family and two family dwellings shall have a minimum of 600 square feet of gross living area for the main floor of each dwelling unit.  For purposes of this section a manufactured housing shall not be considered a dwelling. 
11.07.1.2 	Multi-family dwellings:  Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum gross living area of 600 square feet for single story dwelling units or 1,040 square feet of gross living area for two-story dwelling units. 
11.07.1.3 	Gross living area is defined as that floor area within the perimeter of the outside walls or corridor walls and centerline of party/tenant separation walls 

11.08 – Reconstruction of Buildings 
a. 	
Any structure damaged or destroyed by fire, explosion, or by any other means including flood, storm, earthquake or other act of God may be repaired or reconstructed, however, if a nonconforming structure is destroyed or damaged to a degree equal to or greater than 75 percent of its equalized assessed valuation, when rebuilt it shall thereafter conform to the provisions of this ordinance. 

b. 	
Any structure, the use of which is non-conforming, that is damaged or destroyed by fire, explosion, or by any other means including flood, storm, earthquake or other act of God may be repaired or reconstructed within one year of the date the damage occurred, however, if the structure is destroyed or damaged to a degree equal to or greater than 75 percent of its equalized assessed valuation, when rebuilt it shall thereafter conform to the provisions of this ordinance. 

c. 	
Every owner, whether individual, partnership, corporation or other entity shall cause to be repaired any damaged structure that poses a threat to the public health or safety as determined by the Building Official and/or to remove all debris, ruins, and other waste material within one (1) year following the date on which the structure was damaged or destroyed.  Owners involved in legal proceedings resulting from the loss or damage to said structure(s), shall comply with the terms of this part within one (1) year following the date of settlement of any such legal proceedings. 



11.09 Adoption of Plumbing Codes 
That a certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the Town Clerk, one copy of which is kept in the Office of Community Development being marked and 
TOWN OF MERRIMACK ZONING ORDINANCE AND BUILDING CODE 

designated as “The International Plumbing Code 2000" thereto as published by the International Code Council be and is hereby adopted as the Plumbing Code in the Town of Merrimack in the State of New Hampshire; for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of The International Plumbing Code 2000,, are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Section  11.10 of this ordinance.            
11.10 Amendments to the International Plumbing Code 2000 
11.10.1  Title  Insert ‘Town of Merrimack, New Hampshire”  
11.10.2  Add Section 106.6.2  Fee Schedule:  
The Building Official shall establish the fees for plumbing permits and inspections.  Not less than thirty (30) days prior to the implementation of any fee schedule or any subsequent amendment to the fee schedule under this section, the Building Official shall publish notice of same and shall conduct a public hearing.  
11.10.3  Delete Section 108.4 in entirety and insert the following: Section 108.4  Penalties:  Any person who shall violate a provision of this  

code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall install plumbing work in violation of an approved plan or directive of the plumbing official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code, shall be subject to the criminal and civil fines and penalties pursuant to Section 10 of the Town of Merrimack Zoning Ordinance and Building Code. 
11.10.4 Delete Section 108.5 and insert the following: 
Section 108.5  Unlawful Continuance:  Any person who shall continue any plumbing work in or about the structure after having been served with a Stop Work Order, except such work as he is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to the criminal and civil fines and penalties pursuant to Section 10 of the Town of Merrimack Zoning Ordinance and Building Code. 

11.10.5 Delete Section 109 in entirety and replace with the following: 
Section 109.1  The Board of Adjustment of the Town of Merrimack shall act as the Board of Appeals according to the regulations and procedures set forth in the zoning ordinance of the Town of Merrimack.  

11.10.6 Delete Section 109.7 Court Review in its entirety. 
11.10.7 Add Section 301.7  Public Systems Available 
A public water supply system and/or public sewer system shall be deemed 
available to dwellings used for human occupancy if such dwellings or existing 
TOWN OF MERRIMACK ZONING ORDINANCE AND BUILDING CODE 

on-site sewerage disposal system are within 200 feet, (measured directly through the dwelling lot perpendicularly from a street, alley, or easement) of the public water supply or sewer system, and a connection conforming with the standards set forth in this code may be made thereto. 
11.10.8 	Add to Table 608.17.1  "Distance from Sources of Contamination to Private Water Supplies and Pump Suction Lines": 
Under `Source of Contamination’ column, the category "public right-of-way" and under `Distance (feet), column correspondingly the words "shall not be located within the front yard setback". 

11.10.9 	Add Section 716  Individual Sewage Disposal Systems 
11.10.10 	Add Section 716.1  General Approval Requirements: Any private sewage disposal system proposed shall have written approval from Department of Environmental Services, Water Supply & Pollution Control Division and the Building Official, prior to making application for a building and/or plumbing permit. 
11.10.11 	Add Section 716.2 Septic Tanks:  Discontinued use of private sewage disposal systems as required in the Town Sewer Ordinance shall govern this section. 
Drain pipe connections to abandoned holding tanks for individual on-site sewage disposal systems shall be plugged with cast iron, masonry, or other suitable watertight stop at points of tie-in with new drains to sewers.  All holding tanks other than those constructed of concrete, for individual on-site disposal systems, that are abandoned shall be drained and filled with gravel or clean fill. 


11.11 -Adoption of Life Safety Code, NFPA-101, 2000 
That a certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the Town Clerk, in the office of the Building Official, and in the office of the Fire Chief being marked and designated as the "Life Safety Code, NFPA-101, 2000" is hereby adopted as the Life Safety Code of the Town of Merrimack. 

11.12 -Adoption of Fire Prevention Code, NFPA-1, 2000 
That a certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the Town Clerk, in the office of the Building Official, and in the office of the Fire Chief being marked and designated as the "Fire Prevention Code NFPA-1, 2000" as the Fire Prevention Code of the Town of Merrimack. 

11.13 -Adoption of International Mechanical Code 2000 
That a certain document, one copy of which is on file with the Town Clerk, one copy of 
TOWN OF MERRIMACK ZONING ORDINANCE AND BUILDING CODE 

which is kept in the Office of Community Development, being marked and designated as "The International Mechanical Code 2000" as published by International Code Council be and is hereby adopted as the Mechanical Code of the Town of Merrimack in the State of New Hampshire for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided, and each and all of the regulations; provisions, conditions and terms of the International Mechanical Code, 1996, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this ordinance, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, described in Section 
11.13 of this ordinance. 
11.13.1  Section 101.1 Insert "Town of Merrimack".  
11.13.2  Delete Sections 106.5.2 and 106.5.3 as written:  
11.13.3  Add Section 106.5.2  Fee Schedule:  "Fee Schedule for Building Construction in the Town of Merrimack."  
11.13.4  Delete Section 108.4 as it now reads and replace with the following:  
Section 108.4 Penalties:  Any person who shall violate a provision of this  

Code or shall fail to comply with any other requirements thereof, or who shall erect, 
construct, alter or repair mechanical equipment or systems in violation of any approved 
plan or directive of the building official, or of any permit or certificate issued under the 
provisions of this Code, shall be subject to the criminal and civil fines and penalties 
pursuant to Section 10 of the Town of Merrimack Zoning Ordinance and Building 
Code. 
11.13.5 Delete Section 108.5 in its entirety and insert the following: 
Section 108.5 Unlawful Continuance:  Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been  served with a Stop Work Order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to the criminal and civil fines and penalties pursuant to Section 10 of the Town of Merrimack Zoning Ordinance and Building Code. 


11.14 -Reserved 
11.15 -Adoption of NFPA 70, National Electric Code 2002 edition 
That a certain document, one copy of which shall be on file in the office of the Town Clerk, and one copy of which shall be located in the office of Community Development of the Town of Merrimack, being marked and designated as "NATIONAL ELECTRIC CODE 2002" a.k.a. NFPA 70 and is hereby adopted as the Electric Code of the Town of Merrimack in the State of New Hampshire. 
TOWN OF MERRIMACK ZONING ORDINANCE AND BUILDING CODE 


11.16 -Driveways 
Permits are required for construction or reconstruction of all driveways.  Plan and profile plus site distance shall be submitted to the Department of Public Works for approval.  Permit must be issued prior to the issuance of a building permit. 

11.17 -Street (House) Numbers 
All buildings requiring a certificate of occupancy shall, before said certificate can be issued, display the house number as designated by the House Numbering Committee, if said number has been assigned. 

11.18 -Sanitary Facilities at Public Swimming Pools 
Any multi-family residential development, including Planned Unit Developments (PUD) or cluster residential developments as  described in this ordinance, wherein dwelling units are served by a swimming pool, the pool area shall be equipped with customary lavatory facilities; i.e., toilets, showers. 
zosctn11 
SECTION 12 -VALIDITY 

12.01 -Validity 
If any section, clause, provision or portion of this ordinance shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect or impair any other section, clause, provision or portion of this ordinance. 
Zosctn12      
12-1 
SECTION 13 -ADOPTION & AMENDMENTS 
13.01 -Adoption 
The provisions of this ordinance may be amended or changed per the provisions of the Merrimack Town Charter, as most recently amended. 
Approved June 29, 1953 Amended May 13, 1986 Amended March 9, 1954 Amended May 12, 1987 Amended March 12, 1957 Amended May 10, 1988 Amended March 14, 1961 Amended May 9, 1989 Amended October 16, 1961 Amended May 8, 1990 Amended November 10, 1964 Amended May 14, 1991 Amended September 13, 1966 Amended May 12, 1992 Amended March 12, 1968 Amended May 10, 1994 Amended March 9, 1971 Amended May 9, 1995 Amended November 7, 1972 Amended May 14, 1996 Amended March 6, 1973 Amended April 8, 1997 Amended March 5, 1974 Amended March 10, 1998 Amended November 5, 1974 Amended March 9, 1999 Amended March 4, 1975 Amended March 14, 2000 Amended November 25, 1975 Amended April 10, 2001 Amended March 12, 1976 Amended April 9, 2002 Amended March 8, 1977 Amended April 8, 2003 Amended March 14, 1978 Amended April 13, 2004 Amended March 13, 1979 Amended April 12, 2005 Amended May 13, 1980 Amended April 11, 2006 Amended May 12, 1981 Amended November 6, 2008 Amended May 11, 1982 Amended August 27, 2009 Amended November 2, 1982 Amended February 11, 2010 Amended March 22, 1983 Amended September 11, 2014 Amended May 10, 1983 Amended May 14, 2015 Amended May 8, 1984 Amended September 10, 2015 Amended May 14, 1985 Amended October 27, 2016 

13.02 -Authority to assign section numbers 
The Planning Board has the authority to assign such section numbers to the Zoning Ordinance and Building Code as it may deem appropriate provided that no substantive change to the ordinance shall occur as a result of this renumbering. 
Zosctn13 
13-1 
SECTION 14 -LOCAL REGULATION OF EXCAVATION [revised 5/14/15] 
14.01 -General 
A. 	This ordinance is enacted pursuant to the authority granted the Town of Merrimack to 
regulate earth moving activities within its boundaries under the provisions of Chapter 155-E: Sections 1-11 inclusive, of the N.H. Revised Statutes Annotated. 
B. 	The Planning Board of the Town of Merrimack is designated the "Regulator" as provided in RSA 155-E: 1, III, and shall have all powers and duties granted thereto by RSA 155-E: 1-11, inclusive. 

14.02 -Regulations 
Pursuant to its responsibility as the regulator, and in accordance with the provisions of RSA 155-E: 11, the Planning Board is hereby authorized to adopt and from time to time amend regulations governing earth moving activities within the Town of Merrimack to ensure that said activities are conducted in a safe manner in accordance with sound environmental practice and to further provide proper assurances that suitable restoration of affected areas are obtained. 

14.03 -Administration 
A. 	No person, firm or corporation shall within the Town of Merrimack undertake any clearing, grading, removal, excavation or other disturbance of land without first obtaining a permit from the Planning Board. 
B. 	Said permit shall be granted pursuant to the provisions of RSA 155-E: 1-11, as well as any additional regulations the Planning Board may have adopted for such purpose. 
C. 	The Planning Board may adopt, and from time to time amend, a permit fee schedule so as to recover all reasonable costs of administration of this Section 14, as well as all inspections. 

14.04 -Enforcement 
A. 	The Planning Board may appoint an Enforcement Officer to  enforce the provisions of any permit issued hereunder.  Said  enforcement officer shall have the powers and duties prescribed in RSA 155-E:10. 
B. 	Any owner of an existing earth excavation operation lawfully in existence prior to the effective date of this ordinance and which is subject to the provisions thereof may continue such existing operation with permit as previously granted by the Town Council 
14-1 
Section 14.04 -Local Regulation of Excavation -Enforcement (continued) 
provided such operation is not substantially altered or enlarged except in conformance with this ordinance or any regulations adopted pursuant thereto and further provided that the owner shall suitably restore said area of operation within one-year period following the intended cessation of the excavation or any completed section thereof so as to secure the area against any unsafe or hazardous conditions which may endanger the health and safety of the general public. 
Zosctn14 
14-2 
15.01 -Purpose: Requirements 
The purpose of these provisions relating to Planned Unit Developments (PUD) is to promote efficient use of land and utilities by providing an optional pattern of site development different from one in which there is a division into lots for each structure.  The exercise of the option is subject to the regulations within this Section.  These regulations are intended to allow site plans that will preserve open space; which will provide varied land uses; variety of housing types; which will establish varied forms of land ownership and home ownership; which will lead to private and public economies in the development of land and the construction of housing, which will provide for supporting facilities on a tract of land and which will have a positive economic impact on the Town. 
Planned Unit Developments proposed under this Section are, for the purposes of this ordinance, deemed to be subdivisions as defined in Chapter 672:14, Definitions, of the New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated, inasmuch as such PUD's are construed to constitute a division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more sites.  PUD's under this Section will be subject to approval by the Planning Board under the general authority given it in accordance with Chapter 674:35-42, Revised Statutes Annotated. 

15.02 -Procedures 
Applications for approval of a Planned Unit Development (PUD) shall be made to the Planning Board and shall contain the elements and information as described in this Section. The application shall consist of a request in writing from the owner, owners, or agents for the owners, of the tract, lot or parcel of land in question and shall include all necessary site plans and documents. The deadline for submittal, hearing notices and for consideration of a PUD application shall be as required under Chapter 674:35-42, Revised Statutes Annotated. 
Once an application for approval of a Planned Unit Development has been submitted, no building permit for anything but ordinary maintenance and repair of any structure previously existing on the tract, lot or parcel of land for which an application is submitted shall be issued unless there is a PUD site plan approved by the Planning Board, and no building permits for new construction shall be issued unless there is a PUD site plan approved by the Planning Board. 

15.03 -General Regulations 
In addition to other requirements, a PUD shall conform to the Subdivision Regulations and the Non-Residential Site review regulations of the Town of Merrimack and the following: 
15-1 

Section 15.03 -General Regulations (continued) 
A. 	Minimum Size 
A PUD will be considered for undivided tracts, lots or parcels of land having a minimum size of twelve (12) acres and said tract, lot or parcel must be serviced by municipal water (Merrimack Village District and/or Pennichuck Water Works) and sewer (Town of Merrimack and/or City of Nashua Waste Water Treatment Facilities).  Said tract, lot or parcel must be in the Planned Residential District. 
B. 	In evaluating and approving the general design and layout of a PUD, the Planning Board may require that portions of the PUD be so designed as to complete any street or utility systems that abut the tract, lot or parcel of a PUD.  The Board may also require a design or layout of a PUD to be consistent with any prior approved subdivisions that exist on the tract, lot or parcel of a PUD or consistent with prior approved subdivisions on abutting properties. 
C. 	The applicant shall submit a statement of projected environmental impact substantiated with data and/or professionally certified information including the following elements: 
1. 	
Adequacy of proposed parking for the use intended in accordance with Section 18. 

2. 	
Statement of effect on pedestrians and vehicular traffic on abutting streets. 

3. 	
Statement of adequacy of utility systems for the provision of water service, fire protection, sewer service, and storm drainage in accordance with the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Merrimack. 

4. 	
Statement of suitability of the proposed drainage system and effect on abutters. 

5. 	
Statement of noise, smoke, odor, vibration, lighting, control methods and procedures. 

6. 	
Statement certifying ownership of the land upon which the development is proposed. 

7. 	
Statement of effect on the public school system. 

8. 	
Statement of adequacy of the open space and recreation provisions of the design in meeting the needs of the residents of the PUD. 

9. 	
Statement of economic impact to Town and School District facilities and services. 


D. 	Planned Unit Development (PUD) shall be subject to approval by the Planning Board and shall be subject to the following design guidelines: 
1. 	In the design review process for a Planned Unit Development the applicant(s) and the Planning Board shall recognize the special nature of this form of development.  
15-2 15-3 
Section 15.03 -General Regulations (continued) 
Because of the nature of the areas in which Planned Unit Developments may be built, the development should: 1) be integrated into the surrounding neighborhood in such a way that overall visual qualities between old and new are complimentary; and 2) provide adequate open space as an integrated element of the design. 
2. 	
In the preparation of the site plan for a PUD, while it is not mandatory, it is recommended that the applicant secure the services of a professional landscape architect, architect, or land planner to assist in development of the plan.  The Planning Board may secure at its discretion, similar consulting services to advise the board in its evaluation of PUD proposals in accordance with the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Merrimack.  It is to the advantage of both the applicant(s) and the Town of Merrimack that a proposed PUD plan represent the highest quality at the time of its submission. 

3. 	
In evaluating the data submitted under this Section, the Planning Board shall follow these general design guidelines in so far as is practical: 


a) 	The scale and size of building proposed to be placed along existing street frontages shall be related to, and harmonize with, existing buildings in the immediate street vicinity of the tract proposed for PUD. 
b) 	The design of the PUD shall be directed toward establishing a sense of place. Inward oriented placement of buildings, streets, open space and recreational facilities is desired. 
c) 	The applicant shall submit the external architectural design of the PUD to ensure that it complies with the goals of harmonious existence with the neighborhood and the environment.  Materials, colors, and buildings should be compatible with the existing landscape of the tract and with surrounding buildings. 
d) 	Prominent landscape features should be respected in the plan. A topographic map shall be prepared and existing landscape features noted. 
e) 	The plan for a PUD shall provide a continuity of open space throughout the tract. Open space and other recreation within the PUD shall be related to projected overall Town plans for such improvements to ensure that the continuity of open space should not be limited to trails and paths, although these are desirable features of the design. 
f) 	Streets within the PUD should be related to projected overall town plans for vehicular circulation improvements. 
15-4 
Section 15.03 -General Regulations (continued) 
g) 	While not mandatory, it is suggested that the applicant confer with the Planning Board early in the design process to facilitate an understanding of the PUD on the part of both parties. 
E. 	Sanitary Facilities at Public Swimming Pools 
Any multi-family residential development, including Planned Unit Development (PUD) or cluster residential developments as described in this ordinance wherein dwelling units are served by a swimming pool, the pool area shall be equipped with customary lavatory facilities; i.e., toilets, showers. 

15.04 -Residential Uses 
Provisions regulating residential uses in a PUD are provided in the following section. 
A. 	Residential uses in a PUD may include single family detached dwellings on separate sites or individual lots, attached dwellings, which may be two family dwellings or townhouses, and multi-family dwellings. 
B. 	Total residential densities in a PUD shall be in accordance with Table I. For the purposes of this section the maximum land area to be used in determining the maximum number of dwelling units permitted shall exclude all wetland soils and 100 year flood plain areas as defined elsewhere in this ordinance, and all land with slopes greater than 25 percent and land encumbered with overhead electric power line easements. 
C. 	The PUD shall not exceed a total of four hundred (400) dwelling units. No dwelling unit, or other structure, shall be placed closer than fifty (50) feet to the PUD property line. Whenever the PUD abuts an existing single family dwelling, or lot within a prior approved subdivision, attached dwellings shall be placed no closer than seventy-five (75) feet to the PUD property line, and multi-family dwellings shall be placed no closer than one hundred (100) feet to the PUD property line. The buffer strips created in conformity with this section shall be landscaped and shall contain no more than twenty-five (25) percent of all required parking space. 

15.05 -Non-Residential Uses 
Certain non-residential uses shall be established with a PUD. 
In considering the non-residential uses, the Planning Board may require submittal of information and evidence to the effect that such planned uses are needed. 
15-5 
Section 15.05 -Non-Residential Uses (continued) 
A. 	For a PUD, permitted non-residential uses shall include the following: 
1. 	
Indoor or outdoor recreation facilities or open space of sufficient size and character to be suitable for use for recreation by the residents of the PUD. These facilities shall be functionally and attractively related to structures, permanently related to the structures by deed or otherwise, and owned and maintained in such a way as not to become a burden to the Town. 

2. 	
Sales office for the sale or rental of property in the PUD. 

3. 	
Commercial uses including retail, office and personal and professional services. 


B. 	Space allocated for non-residential uses, other than recreational facilities limited to the use of residents, shall be limited in  size in accordance with the number of dwelling units.  For each dwelling unit in the PUD there may be permitted the construction of gross floor area of non-residential space as specified herein in accordance with Table II. 

15.06 -Timing of Development Actions 
In submitting a plan for the development of a PUD, the developer shall submit on a plan the phasing of the development. 
Table I 
Dwelling Unit Density 

Type of Unit No. Dwelling Units/ Gross Acre (43,560 sq. ft.) 
1 Bedroom Housing for the Elderly  8  
1 Bedroom  7  
2 Bedroom  6  
3,4, or 5 Bedroom  3  
Table II  
Non-Residential Gross Floor Area  

75 sq. ft./Dwelling Unit Additional square footage at the discretion of the Planning Board Zosctn15 
15-6 
SECTION 16 -OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS 
A. 	Purpose 
This ordinance is enacted pursuant to RSA 674:16 and 674:21, and in order to promote public health, safety, convenience, welfare, and prosperity; ensure that adequate and appropriate facilities are available to individuals who may come to be located in the Town of Merrimack; prevent scattered or premature development of land as would involve danger or injury to health, safety, or prosperity by reason of the lack of water supply, drainage, transportation, schools, fire protection, or other public services, or necessitate the excessive expenditure of public funds for the supply of such services; provide for the harmonious development of the municipality and its environs; ensure the proper arrangement and coordination of streets; and, ensure streets of sufficient width to accommodate existing and prospective traffic. 
B. 	Off-Site Improvement Defined 
Off-Site Improvement: Within the meaning of this section, an off-site improvement is any improvement to water treatment and distribution facilities; wastewater treatment and disposal facilities; sanitary sewers; storm water, drainage and flood control facilities, public road systems and rights-of-way that are directly attributable to and necessitated by any development, including subdivision, building construction or other land use change. 
C. 	Off-site Improvements 
The Planning Board may, as a condition of approval of any subdivision or site plan require an applicant to complete any off-site improvements, as defined above, that are directly related to and necessitated by a proposed development. 
Off-site improvements required under this section shall be completed by the applicant prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy unless the Planning Board determines that any such improvements must be completed prior to the issuance of a building permit in the interest of public health or safety.  The Planning Board may accept bonds, letters of credit, liens, or other suitable measures of security in lieu of actual construction. 
D. 	Administration 
1) Accounting: In accord with RSA 673:16, II and RSA 674:21, V(c), any fees accepted under Section C above in lieu of construction shall be accounted for separately, shall be segregated from the Town’s general fund, and shall be used solely for the capital improvements for which they were collected. 
2) 	Refund: Any portion of any fee collected in lieu of construction which has not become encumbered or otherwise legally bound to be spent for the purpose for which it was collected, shall be refunded, with any accrued interest, to the assessed party or successor in interest: 
16-1 
SECTION 16 -OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS (continued) 
a) 	When the subdivision or site plan approval expires under the respective rules of the Planning Board, or under the terms of the decision, without having become vested under RSA 674:39, and without any extension being granted by the Planning Board; OR 
b) 	When such approval is revoked under RSA 676:4-a; OR 
c) 	Six years after its collection, or, if any extension of approval is granted by the Planning Board, six years after such extension is granted; OR 
d) 	Six years after its collection whenever the improvement for which the fee was collected has not been completed. 
E. 	Applicability 
Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the existing authority of the Planning Board to disapprove proposed development which is scattered or premature, or which would require an excessive expenditure of public funds, or which would otherwise violate applicable ordinances and regulations.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the Planning Board’s authority to require off-site work to be performed by the applicant, in lieu of paying a fee or the board’s authority to impose other types of conditions of approval.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect types of fees governed by other statutes, town ordinances or regulations. 
Zosctn16 
16-2 
SECTION 17 -SIGNS [revised 10/27/16] 
17.01 -Purpose 
The purpose of this article is to encourage the effective use of signage to direct movement, advertise, and inform the public while protecting public safety, preserving neighborhood character and minimizing visual clutter. 

17.02 -Severability 
If any part of this section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase is for any reason held to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Ordinance. The Town Council hereby declares that it would have adopted the Ordinance in each section, subsection, sentence, or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared invalid.0 

17.03 -Governmental Signs, Signs Required By Law and Flags 
Nothing in this section shall prevent the erection, location or construction of signs on private property where such erection, construction or location is required by any law or ordinance enacted by the local, state or federal governments, nor shall any village district or municipally operated utility be prohibited from erecting signs on private property when otherwise permitted. This ordinance does not regulate flags of National, State, Local or historical significance. 

17.04 -Permit Required 
No sign shall be erected or affixed to any building exterior or placed freestanding on any parcel or altered or moved, without a permit issued by the Building Official and approved by Planning/Zoning Administrator except as otherwise exempted in this ordinance. Signs containing noncommercial speech are permitted anywhere that advertising or business signs are permitted, subject to the same regulations applicable to such signs. 

17.05 -Definitions 
The following definitions shall apply throughout these regulations. 
1. 	
Awning: a removable shelter of canvas, plastic, metal or some other material, extending over a doorway or window and providing shelter from rain or sun. 

2. 	
Awning Sign: a sign affixed to the surface of an awning but not extending above below or beyond the awning surface. 

3. 	
Banner Sign: a temporary sign of lightweight material (paper, plastic or fabric) hung either with or without frames.  Flags and insignias containing only markings of any government, corporation or business are not considered to be banners. 


17-1 
Section 17.05 -Definitions (continued) 
4. 	
Building Face or Wall: all window and wall area of a building in one plane or elevation. 

5. 	
Changeable Copy Sign: a sign on which message copy can be changed through use of attachable letters and numerals excluding electronic switching of lamps or illuminated tubes to form words and numerals. Changeable copy sign includes a sign which has automatic switching, limited to time and temperature. 

6. 	
Construction or Project Sign: a sign erected on a project site prior to or during a construction project. 

7. 	
Directional Sign:  a sign identifying site locations, entrances, exits, parking areas, loading areas, or other messages necessary to direct vehicles or pedestrians to, through or within a site. 

8. 	
Directory Sign: a sign which identifies or locates the occupants of a building or site. 

9. 	
Electrical Sign: a sign containing or attached to electrical wiring. 

10. 	
Flashing: a pattern of changing light illumination where the sign illumination alternates between illuminated and non-illuminated. 

11. 	
Flashing Sign: a sign containing an intermittent flashing light by means of animation or an externally mounted intermittent light source. 

12. 	
Ground Sign:  a sign erected on a freestanding frame, mast or pole that is not attached to any building. 

13. 	
Illuminated Sign: a sign lit with either an internal or external artificial light source. 

14. 	
LED: a Light-Emitting Diode is a semiconductor diode that emits light when a voltage is applied to it. 

15. 	
Marquee:   a permanent roof-like shelter extending from part or all of a building face over a public-right-of-way, and constructed of some durable material such as metal, glass or plastic. 

16. 	
Mobile Signs: a sign mounted on wheels or a wheeled trailer primarily situated and decorated to display an advertising message. 

17. 	
Nameplate: a non-electric sign identifying only the name and occupation or profession of the occupant of parcel on which the sign is located.  If any parcel includes more than one occupant, nameplate means all names and occupations or professions as well as the name of the building and directional information. 


17-2 
Section 17.05 -Definitions (continued) 
18. 	
Nit: a unit of visible-light intensity that is used to describe the brightness of a display; one nit is equal to one candela per square meter (cd/m2).  For an LED display it is calculated as the following:  nit = candela per pixel times pixels per square meter. 

19. 	
Non-commercial Speech: Any form of speech conducted for personal use or enjoyment without the intent of realizing a profit or recovering costs through the sale of goods or services. 

20. 	
Off-Premise Sign: a sign visible from a public right of way identifying or advertising a business, person, activity, goods, products or services not located on the parcel where the sign is installed and maintained. 

21. 	
On-Premise Sign: a sign visible from a public right of way identifying or advertising a business, person, activity, goods, products or services located on the parcel where the sign is installed and maintained. 

22. 	
Premise:  a lot or number of lots on which are situated a building, or group of buildings designed as a unit, or on which a building or a group of buildings are to be constructed. 

23. 	
Projecting Sign:  a sign, other than a wall sign, which is attached to, and projects more than eighteen inches from a building face or wall. 

24. 	
Real Estate Directional Signs: real estate signs advertising an open house and located off premises. 

25. 	
Real Estate Sign: a sign advertising exclusively the sale, rental, or lease of the premises, or a portion thereof, upon which the sign is located. Such sign must be removed within fifteen days after the closing of sale, rental or lease. 

26. 	
Roof Sign:  a sign erected upon, against or directly above a roof, or on the top of or above the parapet of a building. 

27. 	
Rotating Sign: a sign, or portion of a sign, which moves in a revolving manner. 

28. 	
Scrolling Graphics: a mode of message transition on an electronic message display sign where the message appears to move across the display surface. 

29. 	
Sign: a permanent or temporary structure, device, two or three dimensional object or any combination of words, letters, figures, lights, designs, pictures, insignias, emblems, logos, banners, pennants or flags visible to the public from the outside of a building that conveys a message to the public in order to advertise, inform, identify, direct, invite or draw attention to any business, goods, products, facilities, services, activities or events that are available, provided or conducted on or off the premises. "Sign" includes any permanently installed and prominently displayed merchandise and for the purpose of removal also includes the sign structure. 


17-3 
Section 17.05 -Definitions (continued) 
30. 	Sign, Electronic Message Display: an electronic changeable sign capable of displaying text, symbols, figures or graphics, which can be electronically or mechanically changed by remote or automatic means, and incorporates both Electronic Changeable Copy and/or Electronic Graphic Display signs. 
a. 	
Sign, Electronic Changeable Copy: a sign or portion thereof that displays electronically non-pictorial, text information in which each alphanumeric character or symbol is defined by some number of matrix elements using different combinations of light emitting diodes (LED’s), fiber optics, light bulbs or other illumination devices within the display area. Electronic Changeable Copy includes computer programmable, microprocessor controlled electronic displays. Electronic changeable copy does not include time and temperature signs. 

b. 	
Sign, Electronic Graphic Display: a sign or portion thereof that displays electronic static images, static graphics, or static pictures, with or without text information, defined by some number of matrix elements using different combinations of light emitting diodes (LED’s), fiber optics, light bulbs or other illumination devices within the display area where the message change sequence is accomplished immediately or by means of fade, re-pixelization or dissolve modes. Electronic Graphic Display Signs include computer programmable, microprocessor controlled electronic displays. 


31. 	
Sign Structure: a structure which supports or is capable of supporting a sign, including decorative cover. A sign structure may be a single pole and may or may not be an integral part of a building or structure. 

32. 
Temporary/Portable Sign: a sign which is not permanently installed or affixed to any sign structure or building. 

33. 	
Transition: a visual effect used on an electronic message display to change from one message to another. 

34. 	
Wall Sign: a sign attached to, painted on or erected against any wall of a building or structure so that the exposed face of the sign is on a plane parallel to the plane of the wall. "Wall sign" also includes any sign erected against, installed on or painted on a penthouse above the roof of a building as long as the wall of the penthouse is on a plane parallel to the wall of the building, and a sign attached to, painted on or erected against a false wall or false roof that does not vary more than thirty degrees from the plane of the adjoining elevation. 



17.06 -Permit Not Required 
The following signs may be erected without a permit and are not included in the maximum sign area allowed unless otherwise indicated, but must comply with all other requirements of this ordinance: 
17-4 

17.06 -Permit Not Required (continued) 
1. 	In all districts, one (1) sign shall be allowed on a residential property for each residence. Each sign shall have a maximum area of four (4) square feet, shall be a maximum of six (6) feet high and may not be located within ten (10) feet of an abutter or public right-of-way. Additional signage may be permitted per Section 
17.09.2. 
2. 	
Wall plaques or markers on properties where a structure has been identified as historic by a local, state or federal agency. 

3. 	
In order to maintain public safety, directional or directory signs, no greater than four 

(4) square feet, which are located outside of setback areas and are not visible from the public right-of-way or abutting properties.  Other directional or directory signs are governed by section 17.10. 

4. 	
Signs affixed to the interior side of a window so as to be visible from the exterior. 

5. 	
In order to maintain public safety, utility signs which identify the location of utility lines, cables, or pipes. 

6. 	
Lettering, logos or graphics affixed to products or packaging. 

7. 	
In order to maintain public safety, nameplate signs, not to exceed two (2) square feet, showing street addresses, property numbers, names of occupants of the premises, or other identification. 

8. 	
Signs installed by governmental bodies. 

9. 	
Signs for public safety and/or information, including Electronic Changing Signs (Message Centers). 



17.07 -Prohibited Signs in All Districts 
1. 	
Rotating and Revolving Signs 

2. 	
Flashing Signs 

3. 	
Billboards 

4. 	
Any changes made to the display of any sign which occurs more often than once in a twenty (20) minute period, with the exception of a time/temperature display. 



17.08 -Temporary Signs 
In all districts, one (1) temporary sign shall be allowed on each property in accordance with the following standards. For properties that are currently for sale, rent or lease, one additional temporary sign is permitted for the duration that the property maintains that status. 
17-5 

17.08 -Temporary Signs (continued) 
Temporary signs that comply with the following standards do not require a permit. All signs that do not follow these standards shall be permitted in accordance with Section 17.04. 
1. 	
set back not less than ten (10) feet from any public right-of-way; 

2. 	
set back not less than twenty (20) feet from any intersection; 

3. 	
maintained for a period no longer than thirty (30) days in any consecutive ninety (90) day period whatsoever, and 

4. 	
no larger than thirty-two (32) square feet in area. 



17.09 -Signs in Residential Zones 
Except as provided in subsection 17.06, only the following signs shall be permitted in residential zones: 
1. 	
For public safety, Permanent Subdivision Identification Signs: One (1) single or double-faced ground sign per entrance into a development with a maximum of two per development, non-illuminated, in areas set back from vehicle or pedestrian traffic.  The signs shall not exceed a total area of 32 square feet per sign, and shall be set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet from any intersection and shall be located on common land or land covered by appropriate easements and maintained by a homeowners association. 

2. 	
Home Occupation Signs:  One (1) home occupation sign, not to exceed two (2) square feet, in accordance with Section 2.02.1.A.2 of the Zoning Ordinance. 

3. 	
Nonresidential Signs:  One single or double face sign identifying any nonresidential use permitted in a residential zone.  Area may not exceed six (6) square feet and such signs shall not be illuminated, rotate, or flash. 



17.10 -Commercial and Industrial Districts 
Except as provided for in Section 17.06, only the following signs are permitted in commercial and industrial zones; and no more than two major sign types (ground, roof, wall and projecting) are permitted per parcel.  
1. 	
Residential Signs: Residential signs within these zones are subject to the regulations of Section 17.06 and 17.09. 

2. 	
Temporary Signs:  In addition to signs permitted under Section 17.06, temporary signs for nonresidential uses are permitted, in accordance with the requirements of Section 17.08. 


17-6 

17.10 -Commercial and Industrial Districts (continued) 
3. 	Ground Sign:  One (1) ground sign is permitted for each site with three-hundred 
(300) feet of contiguous frontage or less.  Where a parcel has more than three-hundred (300) feet of contiguous frontage along the same right-of-way, it may have two ground signs, or the occupant may elect to combine the allowable area of two ground signs into one ground sign with a maximum allowable area of 64, 96, 96 or 150 square feet (corresponding to Table 17-1, below.) All ground signs shall display the property address number. Numbers shall be a minimum of 6 inches in height. 
TABLE 17-1 
Traffic Speed Allowed  No. of Traffic Lanes  Maximum Area in Sq. Ft.  
0-35  2  32  
40-50  2  48  
0-35  4 or more  48  
40-50  4 or more  100  

a) 	For corner or double frontage lots, one additional ground sign is permitted for each additional street or road from which frontage and access to the site is provided, however, the area of such additional signs shall not exceed fifty (50%) percent of the maximum sign area allowed for the site's principal ground sign(s) and such additional signs may not be located within fifty (50) feet of any intersection. 
b) 	Ground signs must be set back at least 20 feet from the edge of any public right-of-way except as in such instance as the zoning ordinance shall require a greater setback. The maximum permitted area of any ground sign shall not exceed the figures shown in Table 17-1 for each face of a multi-face sign or for the sole face of a single face ground sign: 
c) 	No ground sign may exceed in height the distance of any portion of the sign to the center of the adjoining public right-of-way, and the maximum height of any portion of any ground sign or sign structure shall be 40 feet from street grade regardless of location. (See figure 5, Appendix to this section.) 
d) 	Two or more owners of adjacent separate parcels zoned for commercial use may combine their street or highway frontages and erect one ground sign. No other ground signs shall be permitted on either of the adjacent parcel if the owners make such an election, and the ground sign may not exceed in area or height the maximum allowable by all other provisions of this subchapter. 
17-7 

17.10 -Commercial and Industrial Districts (continued) 
e) 	Where parcels zoned for commercial or industrial use are within one-hundred 
(100) feet on the same public right-of-way of any parcel zoned for single-family use, ground signs erected and maintained on the commercial or industrial property may not exceed 20 feet in height above the ground at the base of the sign structure or the base of the building, and ground signs must be set back from the public right-of-way the same distance as is required for residential structures on the adjacent residentially zoned property.  This provision affects only signs on commercial or industrial property on the same block and on the same right-of-way as the residential property. 
4. 	Wall Signs: 
a) 	If there is no ground or projecting sign, the maximum area shall be two times the length of the side of the building on which the sign is to be located in square feet. (See figure 6, Appendix to this section.) 
b) 	If there is a ground sign or projecting sign, the maximum area shall be one times the length of the side of the building on which the sign is to be located in square feet. (See figure 7, Appendix to this section.) 
c) 	If there is a projecting but no ground sign, the maximum area shall be one times the length of the side of the building on which the sign is to be located in square feet. (See figure 8, Appendix to this section.) 
d) 	Wall signs consisting of non-illuminated letters up to but not exceeding three inches high are not restricted provided that they are in compliance with the total area designations as outlined in (a), (b) and (c) above. 
e) 	Any building with an actual or false roof varying not more than 30 degrees from a vertical plane, or any building with a portion or all of a wall built not more than 30 degrees from a vertical plane, shall have such a mansard-type wall or roof considered wall space for the purpose of determining allowable sign placement. 
f) 	Wall signs may not project more than three feet above the top of a parapet wall or the roof line at the wall, whichever is higher. 
g) 	For a parcel with or proposing more than one business establishment, each discrete business establishment within the parcel shall be entitled to one wall sign.  The maximum area of each shall be two times the length of that portion of the total building length occupied by the individual business on which the sign is to be located in square feet. If a discrete business establishment also has a ground sign the maximum area of their wall sign shall be one times the length of that portion of the total building length occupied by the individual business per Section 17.10.4(b) above. 
17-8 

17.10 -Commercial and Industrial Districts (continued) 
h) 	Businesses having more than one exterior wall shall be entitled to one wall sign per wall sized according to the formula in 4(a), (b) and (c) above.  
i) 	The total sign area of a wall sign or awning sign or any combination of a wall sign and awning sign shall not exceed the total wall sign area permitted herein. 
5. 	
Directional Signs:  One directional sign may be placed on either side of each driveway entrance.  The area of each sign may not exceed four square feet. 

6. 	
Changeable Copy Signs:  Any of the types of signs permitted by this section may be permitted as changeable copy signs. 

7. 	
Roof Signs:  Roof signs may be used instead of, but not in addition to, wall signs.  


Roof signs are subject to the following restrictions: 
a) 	Roof signs may not project over a public right-of-way or public property. 
b) 	All roof signs shall be set back a distance of at least three feet from the outside of the building on or over which they are located. 
c) 	Roof signage may have the same maximum allowable areas as Section 
17.10.4. 
d) 	Height of roof signs: 
TABLE 17-2 
Building Height 	Maximum sign height (including any space required under the sign for clearance) above top of roof or parapet wall, whichever is higher. 
0-15' 6' 
16-20' 7' 
21-25' 8' 
26-30' 9' 
31-35' 10' 
36-40' 11' 
41-45' 12' 
46-50' 13' 

e) 	Roof signs shall be limited to identification of a business or industrial concern only. 
17-9 

17.10 -Commercial and Industrial Districts (continued) 
8. 	Projecting Signs: 
a) 	The two types of projecting signs, a vertical projecting sign, where the vertical dimension is greater than the horizontal dimension, and a horizontal projecting sign, where the horizontal dimension exceeds the vertical dimension, are permitted instead of, but not in addition to, ground signs. Any one parcel is permitted to have one projecting sign along any one public right-of-way. The projecting sign may be used instead of, but not in addition to, a ground sign.  Where a parcel is allowed two ground signs, the occupant may elect to substitute a projecting sign for one of the ground signs.   
b) 	The maximum allowable area for a projecting sign shall be: 
TABLE 17-3 
Traffic Speed  Number of  Area Each  
Allowed  Traffic Lanes  Face (Sq. Ft.)  
0-35  2  20  
40-50  2  48  
0-35  4 or more  32  
40-50  4 or more  75  

c) 	Projecting signs must have a minimum clearance between the bottom of the sign and the ground of 10 feet, except signs which project no more than thirty inches, which must have a minimum clearance of eight feet six inches. 
d) 	Where a sign projects above a traffic area, such as a driveway, the minimum clearance between the bottom of the sign and the ground may be no less than 14 feet. 
e) 	Projecting signs may not extend more than three feet above the roof line at the wall or the top of a parapet wall, whichever is higher. 
f) 	Permanent copy of each face of a projecting sign in commercial and industrial zones may include only the name of the occupant and the principal activities, goods, products or services located on the premises. 
9. 	Marquee Signs: 
a) 	Marquee signs are allowed to be on, under or part of a permanent marquee, but always attached thereto.  Only theaters, gymnasiums, auditoriums, athletic facilities, motels, conference centers, and similar uses for which a marquee is a common part of said use are permitted. 
b) 	A marquee sign may not project more than ten inches beyond the marquee, and never closer than two feet to a curb. 
17-10 

17.10 -Commercial and Industrial Districts (continued) 
c) 	Marquee signs must have a minimum clearance between the bottom of the sign and the ground of not less than eight feet six inches. 
d) 	Where the sign is attached above or below or to the face of the marquee, the same maximum allowable area for projecting signs on the same parcel is allowed.  The marquee itself shall not contain animation or flashing lights. 
e) 	Permanent copy on each face of a marquee sign in commercial and industrial zones may include only the name of the occupant and the principal activities, goods, products or services located on the premises. 
10.  Sign, Electronic Message Display: Signs permitted in section 17.10.3 & 17.10.4 shall be permitted as electronic message display subject to the following: 
a) 	Electronic Message Displays shall display static messages for a period of a minimum of 20 minutes; 
b) 	Transitions from one static message to the next static message may include the use of frame effects, so long as such effects do not utilize flashing, scrolling or in any manner imitate movement; 
c) 	Electronic Message Displays shall have automatic dimming technology which automatically adjusts the sign’s brightness levels as specified in Section 11.10 Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Merrimack; and 
d) 	The owner/installer of Electronic Message Displays shall certify as part of the application that signs will not exceed the brightness levels specified in Section 11.10 Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Merrimack. 
11. 	Signage Requirements for Alternative Treatment Centers 
a) 	In addition to the requirements of Section 17.10, Alternative Treatment Centers that have received a Conditional Use Permit and Site Plan approval from the Planning Board shall be subject to the applicable requirements of the NH Health & Human Services Department (DHHS) Administrative Rules (He-C 400, as most recently published or amended by DHHS) pertaining to Advertising Restrictions. 

17.11 -Off-Premise Signs 
Off premise signs may be erected on parcels of real estate only within the Commercial and Industrial zones.  Off premise signs shall be limited to Ground Signs conforming to the regulations provided in Section 17.10.3. A parcel may contain either an On-Premise sign or an Off-Premise sign, but not both, unless it has enough frontage to display two signs (as described in 17.10.3) in which case one sign may be devoted to on-premise advertising and one sign devoted to off-premise advertising. 
17-11 

17.12 -Site Plan Review 
A building permit for any ground sign at a nonresidential or multi-family site shall be issued only after approval by the Planning Board in accordance with the Site Plan Review regulations of the Town of Merrimack.  

17.13 -Area and Dimensional Calculations 
1. 	
Area:  The area of a sign is considered to be the area, on the largest single face of a sign, within a perimeter which forms the outside shape of a sign.  If the sign consists of more than one module (i.e. Section) the total area of all modules shall constitute the sign area. The area of a sign having no such perimeter or border shall be computed by enclosing the entire copy area within the outline of either a parallelogram, triangle, circle or any other easily recognized geometric shape and then computing the area.  Where a sign is of a three-dimensional, round or irregular shape, the largest cross section shall be used in a flat projection for the purpose of computing sign area (figures 1-4, Appendix to this title).  If a sign is lettered on both sides back to back only one side shall be counted as the total sign area. All appendages or riders are calculated within the area of the sign to which they are appended. 

2. 	
Height:  The height of a sign is the vertical distance measured from the adjacent undisturbed grade of the sign to the highest point of the sign. 


Appendix to Section 17 follows. 
17-12 
17.14 -Appendix 

17-13 
17.14 Appendix (continued) 

17-14 
17.14 Appendix (continued) 

17-15 
SECTION 18 -PARKING REQUIREMENTS 
18.01 -Off-Street Parking 
Off-street parking shall be provided for all uses and developments proposed as required by the Planning Board in accordance with RSA 674:43. 
18-1 
Cir 
n 
Chocurua
Kinsman
Ln 
Ln 
We
Galloway
Rd 

Scituate
Pl 
I
j 
Granite
Cir 

Kimberly
Dr 

Zoning
State Route
Residential
Local Road
Residential 1
Private Road
General Commercial
Class VIRoad
Limited Commercial
Lot Lines
Industrial 1
Open Water
Industrial 2Wetlands
Industrial 3Streams 
Overlay Districts
Elderly Zoning District
Planned ResidentialDistrict
Town Center District 
Path: J:\GIS\Standard Maps\merrimack_zoning_poster.mxd
THE TOWN OF
MERRIMACK
NEW HAMPSHIRE
Blossom
Chestnut
Cir 
CricketLn
Aspen
HillLn AndreaDr Boulder
Way Rober ta
Ke ndallDr Ct 
Rocky
Ledge
Rd 

o
MapleMt.LawnyRidge Dr Way
u
Te nnis
Ct 

Dumpling
Wa y 

Liberty
Ln Run Deer
C
Barbie
Ct

Hamilton
Audubon
y 
Ct Cir 
LilacCt McClure
KenneyLnB
WindingBrook
Ln
o
wS
t
LincolnFisher
Ct 
Savage
Ln 

Ln 
LnLavenderSmall
Nichols
Ln
LovejoyCt Ln 
Ln 
Gage
Ln

Pratt
Cardinal
Dutton
RidgewoodCt 
Partridge
Ln 

Ln Owls
Ct 
BarnesQuails
LnTa na gerDr
yHeather
a
Ln Way Ct 
Cir 
Wren
BarlowGrouseMockingbird
Ln SheddLn Ct EXIT 12 
Ln Goldstone
rb
Cir Ct
Oriole
Ct 

Bean 
Glen
Forest
Dr 

3 
7 
Little
John
Ct

Rd 
8 
6 14 D
n 
3 5 
9 
4 10
Bowman
Ct 

1
11 
13
12 8-Webster Ct
2 9-Templeton Ct10-Clinton Ct
1 
11-Harwich Ct12-Usher Ln1-Coventry Ct
13-Underwood Ln2-Essex Green
14-Blanchard Ln 
Fairview
Be
a
v
er

mTe r 3-London Ct
Po
n
d
s 

Farrar
Ln 4-Kingston Ct5-Blackstone Ct
n 
6-Dalton Ct7-Ipswich Ct 
Gladys
Dr 

Killian
Ct 

Hwy 
rrier 
estio
Chelsea
Dr

D
r
u
Webster 
Village
Falls

Appletree
Village Ln

Wa y
Highland
Green 

Pine
Haven Dr 

Daniel 
Brentwood
Dr 

g
1-Echo Shore Ln2-Gray Hawk Rd3-Clearwater LnCascade
Cir 
e
2 
3 
1 
Steep
St 

l
l
2
1 
3 
Ho
r
s
e
s
h
o
e
Po
n
d 

I
j
1-Burberry Ct2-Rollins Ct3-Wellington Cir 
Whitewood
Ln 1-Colonial Dr2-Concord Rd
1
3-Arlington St4-Everett Ln
Sco tchpine
Ln 

L 
Sycamore
Ln 

2 
3 
e
4 
utivet 
Willow
Lny
Rd
Whitney
St

H
EXIT 11 
1 
2 
r
Button­3 4 
woodLn 
t
1-Turnbuckle Ln2-Flintlock LnBriarwood
CranstonDr 3-Gunstock Rdg
Cir 
Danville
4-Axle TreeRd Cir 
Wh
ite

Pi
n
e

Sw
am
p 

Find lay
Wa y

o
Englewood
Dr

i
G
r
een
s
Po
n
d 

EXIT 10 
Aldrich
Cir 

Natic
o
o
k

La
k
e 
High Noon
Ave
Du
c
k

Po
n
d 

d 
n
d
Thomas
More
Cir Ruby
Wa y
Bow
ers
Po
n
d 

er
W
a
r
re
nL
n
Holt
s

Po
n
d 

Hanna
Cir 
Augustus
Cir 
Jonathan
Cir Esquire
Ln Swift
Ë 

Ln
Connecticut
Ln 
ck 
0 	0.125 0.25 0.5 0.75 1Miles 
0 500 1,000 2,000 3,000 4,000 5,000Feet 
Maps preparedby the Nashua Regional PlanningCommission are forplanningpurposesonly. 
NRPC usesdata gatheredfrom multiplesourcesatvarious scales of accuracy.No warranties, 
NASHUA REGIONAL
expressedor implied,are provided for the data herein,itsuse, oritsinterpretation. 
PLANNING COMMISSION
9 Executive Park Dr.	ContactNRPCwithanycorrections oradditionstostreets,streetnames, zoningboundaries,and lot lines. 
Suite 201 
Merrimack, NH 03054
Phone: 603-424-2240

Ha
rr
is
 P
o
nd 

www.nashuarpc.org 	Date Saved: 4/29/2016 10:38:10 AM 
ZONING

Powers
Cir 

s
Arnold Rd 
Shore
Dr Ext 

B
a
b
oosic

Lak
e 

ore
ScenicVista Way 
Hunter Ln
e

Dra
w
D
r
L
n
n
Cs
C
a
r
o
nt
f
C
oi
e
n
t

al
St
u
m
p
Po
n
d 

Fax: 603-424-2230

TOWN OF MERRIMACK  
SUBDIVISION REGULATION  
June 2014  
INDEX  
Page  Section  
1-1  1  AUTHORITY  
2-1  2  DEFINITIONS  
3-1  3  APPLICATION PROCEDURE  
3.01  Pre-Submission Hearing  
3.02  Preliminary Layout  
3-2  3.03  Application-Final Plat  
3-4  3.04  Post Approval Procedures  
3-5  3.05  Reserved  
3.06  Reserved  
3.07  Official Map  
3.08  Acceptance of Streets and Open Space  
4-1  4  PLAN REQUIREMENTS  
4.01  Compliance with Regulations  
4.02  (Authorization to Enter the Property)  
4.03  Preservation of Existing Features  
4.04  Soils Data  
4-2  4.05  Preliminary Layout  
4-4  4.06  (Final Plat Requirements)  
4.06.1  Final Plat  
Private Street Statement  
4-6  4.06.2  Road Plan and Profile  
4-7  4.06.3  Topographic Plan  
4.06.4  Assessors Plat  
4-8  4.07  Minor Subdivisions  
4.08  Filing Fees  
4.08.A  Subdivision Plan  
4.08.B  Site Plan  
4-9  4.08.C  Engineering Analysis Cost  
4.09  Legal Data Required  
4-10  4.10  Open Space  
4.11  Trees and Planting  

Page  Section  
4-10  4.12  
4-12  4.12.1  
4.13  
4-13  4.13.1  
4.14  
4-14  4.15  
4.16  
4-15  4.16.3(c)  
4.16.1  
4-16  4.16.2  
4-17  4.16.3  
4-18  4.17  
4.18  
4-20  4.19  
4.20  
4-22  
4.21  
5-1  5  
5.01  
5-2  5.01.1  
5-3  5.02  
6-1  6  
7-1  7  
7.01  
7.02  
7-2  7.03  
7-13  7.04  
7-14  7.05  
7-20  7.06  
7-21  7.07  

ROADWAY & UTILITY STANDARDS 
Street Design 
Provision for future widening or upgrading of streets 
Street Arrangement 
Driveways 
Easements 
Underground Utilities 
Storm Drainage System 
No Adverse Effect of Run Off Statement 
Closed Drainage Systems 
Open Drainage Systems 
Underdrains 
Lot Size and Arrangement 
Right of Way Work 
Street Signs 
Pedestrian Ways and Sidewalks 
Street Categories: Major Arterials Minor Arterial Streets Collector Streets 
Street Lights 
BUILDING PERMIT Performance Bond or Construction Release of Performance Bond and Maintenance Bond Construction Requirements-Building Permits 
OCCUPANCY PERMITS 
NON-RESIDENTIAL SITE REVIEW Purpose General Standards Parking Submission Procedure Submission Requirements Post Approval Procedures Separability 
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT  
Page  Section  
8-1  8.01  Modifications  
8.02  Acceptance of Streets  
8.03  Other Regulations  
8.04  Enforcement  
8.05  Penalties  
8.06  Appeals  
8.07  Validity  
8-2  8.08  Effective Date  
9-1  9  TYPICAL CROSS SECTIONS, PLANS, BERMS, AND  
PROFILES  
9-2  Figure 1-Open Drainage Roadway Cross Section  
9-3  Figure 2-Closed Drainage Roadway Cross Section  
9-4  Figure 3-Typical Intersection Plan  
9-5  Figure 4-Typical Driveway Cross Section, Closed Drainage  
9-5  Figure 5-Typical Cape Cod Berm  
9-6  Figure 6-Typical Driveway Cross Section, Open Drainage  
9-7  Figure 7-Residential Driveway Profiles, In Cut and In Fill  
10-1  10  LANDSCAPING STANDARDS  
10.01  Non-Residential Site Plans  
10-8  10.02  Residential Subdivisions  
10-9  10.03  Plant Specifications and Definitions  
11-1  11  OUTDOOR LIGHTING STANDARDS  
11.01  Purpose  
11.02  Applicability  
11.03  Terms and Definitions  
11-5  11.04  Non-Residential Site Plans -General Requirements  
Prohibited Lighting  
Lighting Plans  
11-6  Luminaire Designs  
11-7  General Exceptions  
11.05  Parking Lot Lighting  
11.06  Lighting of Gasoline Station/Convenience Store Aprons/Canopies  
11-8  11.07  Lighting of Exterior Sales/Display Areas  
11.08  Security Lighting  
11-9  11.09  Illumination of Building Facades and Landscaping  
11-10  11.10  Illuminated Signs  
11-12  11.11  Sports Lighting  
11-13  11.12  References  

Page  Section  
12-1  12  BUILDING DESIGN  
12.01  Purpose  
12.02  Applicability  
12.03  Design Districts  
12-2  12.04  Design Standards  
12-7  12.05  Submittal Requirements  
13  Conditional Use Permit Rules and Regulations ­ 
Outlet Village Shops in I-2 Industrial District  
End Index  

TOWN OF MERRIMACK 
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
March 2010 
SECTION 1 -AUTHORITY 
Pursuant to the authority vested in the Merrimack Town Planning Board by the voters of 
the Town of Merrimack and in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 674:35-44 and 

676:1 through 4-a, N.H. Revised Statutes Annotated, 1955, as amended, The Merrimack Town Planning Board adopts the following regulations governing the subdivision of land in the Town of Merrimack, New Hampshire. 
End 1 
1-1 

SECTION 2 – DEFINITIONS [Amended 11/16/10] 
2.01 	Abutter: Shall mean any person whose property is located in New Hampshire and adjoins or is directly across the street or stream from the land under consideration by the Planning Board. For purposes of receiving testimony only, and not for purposes of notification, the term abutter shall include any person who is able to demonstrate that his land will be directly affected by the proposal under consideration. For the purpose of receipt of notification by a municipality of a local land use board hearing, in the case of an abutting property being under a condominium or other collective form of ownership, the term “abutter” means the officers of the collective or association, as defined in RSA 356-B:3, XXIII. For the purposes of receipt of notification by a municipality of a local land use board hearing, in the case of an abutting property being under a manufactured housing park form of ownership as defined in RSA 205-A:1,II, the term “abutter” includes the manufacturing housing park owner and the tenants who own manufactured housing which adjoins or is directly across the street or stream from the land under consideration by the local land use board. 
2.02 	Approval: Shall mean that recognition by the Planning Board, certified by written endorsement on the plat, that the final plat submission and/or phasing plan meets the requirements of these regulations. 
2.03 	Approval, Conditional: Shall mean an expression by the Planning Board that the preliminary layout appears to satisfy all requirements established herein for the preliminary layout submission phase. Conditional Approval does not constitute, nor should it be constructed as, approval, either implied or granted, of the final plat, nor does it bind the Planning Board to approval of the final plat. 
2.04 	Board: Shall mean the Planning Board of the Town of Merrimack. 
2.05 	Easement: Shall mean an acquired privilege or right of use acquired in the land of another and is used to create facilities for access, space for emplacement of public utilities and right-of-way, both in favor of the municipality and/or in favor of its residents. It shall include, without limitation, streets and roads, electronic and telephone utilities, vehicular and pedestrian traffic, sidewalks, water, storm drainage, and sanitary sewer utilities, pipelines, street lighting, slopes, ingress and egress, construction and conservation easements. 
2.06 	Final Plat: The final drawing or drawings on which the subdivider's plan of subdivision is indicated, prepared as required under the provisions of Section 4.06 hereof. 
2.07 	Lot Line Adjustment: Adjustment(s) to the boundary between adjoining properties where no new lots are created. 
2-1 

2.08 	Master Plan: Shall mean the comprehensive plan or plan of development for the community as adopted by the Planning Board. 
2.09 	National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES): Shall mean the name of the surface water quality program authorized by Congress as part of the 1987 Clean Water Act. This is the Environmental Protection Agency’s program to control the discharge of pollutants into surface waters of the United States. 
2.10 	Official Map: Shall mean the adopted street or base map of the municipality as defined in RSA 674:9-11. 
2.11 	Official Minutes of the Board: Preliminary minutes of the Board shall be available within 144 hours from the date/time of the meeting or hearing, or as required by RSA 91-A:2 as amended. Preliminary minutes shall become the Official Minutes of the Board when approved for adoption by a majority of the Board at a regularly scheduled meeting of the Board. 
2.12 	Preliminary Layout: Shall mean a plan prepared as required in Section 4.05 and submitted to the Board for concurrence prior to preparing the final plat. 
2.13 	Pre-Submission Hearing: A hearing to ensure complete knowledge of applicable rules and regulations, to save time in the preparation of plans, and to ensure that an adequate plan is submitted. 
2.14 	Resubdivision: Shall mean any change in a map of any approved or recorded subdivision plan, if any change affects any street layout shown on such map or reserved thereon for public use, or any lot line, or if it affects any map or plan legally reached prior to the adoption of any regulation controlling subdivisions, such parcel shall be considered for approval by the Planning Board by the current procedure, rules and regulations as for a subdivision. 
2.15 	Right-of-way: Shall mean a right of passage over the land of another and may be in the form of an easement, a license or an estate in fee. It shall include, without limitation, streets and roads, water conduits and mains, sanitary sewer utilities, rights of ingress and egress. Rights-of-way shall be specifically defined and shall be separate and distinct from the lots and parcels adjoining it and shall not be included within the dimensions or areas of such other lots or parcels. 
2.16 	Street: Shall mean, relate to, and include street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, alley, viaduct, highway, freeway, expressway, as defined in RSA 230. 
2.17 	Street Frontage: Shall mean frontage on Class II-III-IV and V highways, and shall include new streets within a proposed subdivision. 
2.18 	Streets, Access: Shall mean minor ways designed or required to provide vehicular access to off street loading or off street parking facilities. 
2-2 

2.19 	Streets, Collector: Shall mean streets designed or required to collect traffic from residential streets and distribute traffic to major streets as defined in RSA 230:4 Class V highways. 
2.20 	Streets, Commercial: Shall mean streets designed or required to serve industrial or mercantile concentrations and to carry traffic from these concentrations to major streets. 
2.21 	Streets, Expressway: Shall mean limited access highway designed to carry large volumes of high speed interstate and inter-city traffic as defined in RSA 230:4 Class II highways. 
2.22 	Streets, Major: Shall mean streets designed or required to carry large volumes of traffic to, from or through the central part of the Town. 
2.23 	Streets, Residential: Shall mean streets designed or required to provide vehicular access to abutting residential properties. 
2.24 	Streets, Service: Shall mean streets designed or required to provide vehicular access to abutting commercial properties. 
2.25 	Subdivider: The owner of record of the land to be subdivided, including any subsequent owner of record making any subdivision of such land or any part thereof, or the agent of any such owner. 
2.26 	Subdivision: Means the division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into 2 or more lots, plats, sites, or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, rent, lease, condominium conveyance or building development. It includes resubdivision and when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or territory subdivided. The division of a parcel of land held in common and subsequently divided into parts among the several owners shall be deemed a subdivision under this chapter. 
If no new streets are involved, the following divisions are excluded from the operation of these regulations: Divisions of Property by testamentary or intestate provisions, or divisions of property upon court order. 
2.27 	Subdivision Construction: Shall mean and include but shall not be limited to the clearing and/or grubbing of building sites and roadways; excavation, dredging, and/or filling for roadways, and utilities, installation of utilities, backfill operation, site development of every nature, grading and paving in any subdivision. 
2.28 	Subdivision, Minor: A minor subdivision is: a subdivision on an existing approved street or road with no possibility of future subdivision (i.e. no remaining 
2-3 

frontage and/or acreage abutting or included in parcel by same owner); a subdivision which creates not more than three lots for building development purposes; or a proposal which does not involve creation of lots for building development purposes. Such lots may not be subdivided again as minor subdivisions. 
2.29 	Submission Date: Date of submission to the Board of the preliminary or final plat in accordance with, and meeting the requirements of Sections 4.01 thru 4.06, is the date of the public meeting at which the Planning Board determines that the application is sufficiently complete for Acceptance for review and consideration by the Board. 
End 2 
2-4 

SECTION 3 – APPLICATION  PROCEDURE 


3.01 Pre-Submission Hearing: 
a.  
Any applicant in writing may request a pre-submission hearing before the Board. This preliminary consultation shall be directed at a review of the basic concept of the proposal and suggestions which might be of assistance in resolving problems with meeting requirements during final consideration.  The purpose of this hearing is to ensure complete knowledge of applicable rules and regulations, to save time in the preparation of plans, to ensure that an adequate plan is submitted and to acquaint the Board with the intentions of the applicant. 

b.
 Pre-submission hearing documents may consist of a rough conceptual plan, sketch or layout not meeting any of the requirements for a preliminary or final plat but should be in sufficient detail to be informative to the Board. 

c.  
The Board and the applicant may discuss proposals in conceptual form only and in general terms such as desirability of types of development and proposals under the master plan if any. Such discussion may occur without the necessity of giving formal public notice as required under Section 3.03(d), but such discussions may occur only at formal meetings of the Board. Preliminary consultation and review beyond such conceptual and general discussion may proceed only after identification of, and notice to, abutters and the general public as required by Section 3.03(d). 

d. 
Request for a pre-submission hearing shall be submitted not less than 15 days prior to a regular meeting of the Board and shall be properly posted as part of the Board's agenda as required by applicable State statutes.  Pre-submission consultation and hearing shall be separate and apart from formal consideration of the completed application under Section 3.03 and the time limits for acting under Section 3.03(b) shall not apply until formal submission of a completed application under Section 3.03(a). 

e.  
The Board shall act in an advisory capacity in accordance with the zoning ordinance of the Town of Merrimack and may request additional information.  The actions of the Board resultant from a pre-submission hearing shall not be deemed to forfeit its rights to make major modifications, or disapprove a preliminary or final plat. 



3.02 Preliminary Layout 
a.  Application for conditional approval of a preliminary layout may be submitted to the Secretary of the Board by the subdivider or his authorized agent utilizing a form provided by the Board.  The application shall be accompanied by all information described in Section 4.05, and by evidence of approval of plans by any state or 
3-1 

regional agency whose review is required by law.  Such application shall be submitted not less than 15 days prior to a regular meeting of the Board.  The Board shall give conditional approval or disapproval of the preliminary layout as originally submitted or modified.  The Board shall give conditional approval with modifications only to authorize the preparation of the final plat, or shall disapprove such preliminary layout.  The Board shall state in its records any modifications, which it will require in the preliminary layout, or any reasons for disapproval. A copy of this record shall be sent to the applicant. 
b. 
Any plat submitted to the Planning Board shall bear the name and address of the applicant and all abutters to the land described in the plat and a hearing shall be held thereon.  The applicant or his authorized agent in writing shall certify to the Board that the abutters to the land described are current and complete as shown on the plat.   Consideration of said application may proceed only after identification of and notice to, abutters and the general public as required by Section 3.03(a).  As noted in that section, all costs of notice, whether mailed, posted or published, shall be paid in advance by the applicant. 

c.  
If the applicant intends to submit a final plat on only a portion of the total land to be subdivided, the preliminary layout submission shall cover the entire tract, and shall indicate the approximate outline and sequence of those portions of the tract for which subsequent final plats will be submitted. 

d. 
Conditional approval of a preliminary layout shall be separate and apart from formal consideration of a completed application under Section 3.03 and the time limits for acting under Section 3.03(b) shall not apply until a completed application is submitted under Section 3.03(a), all in accordance with RSA 676:3 and 4 (as amended). 

e.  
Conditional approval does not constitute, nor should it be construed as approval, either implied or granted, of the final plat, nor does it bind the Planning Board to approval of the final plat. 



3.03 Application -Final Plat 
The following procedures apply to subdivision approvals and will be followed by the Planning Board when considering or acting upon a plat or application submitted to it for final approval: 
a.  A completed application (as defined below) sufficient to invoke jurisdiction of the Board shall be submitted to and accepted by the Board only at a public meeting of the Board with notice as provided in Section 3.03 (d).  The applicant shall file the application with the Board or its agents at least 15 days prior to the meeting at which the application will be accepted.  The application shall include the names and addresses of the applicant and all abutters as indicated in town records not more than 5 days before the day of filing; all holders of conservation, preservation, or 
3-2 

agricultural preservation restrictions on the subject property; and every engineer, architect, land surveyor, or soil scientist whose professional seal appears on any plat submitted.  Abutters shall also be identified on any plat submitted to the Board. 
A completed application, sufficient to invoke the jurisdiction of the Board, shall consist of all data required in Section 4.05 (Preliminary Layout); Section 4.06.1 (Final Plat); Section 4.06.2 (Road Plan and Profile); Section 4.06.3 (Topographic Plan); Section 4.09 (Legal Data) and Section 4.06.4 (Assessor's Plat.) Said application must contain sufficient information to allow the Board to proceed with consideration and to make an informed decision. 
b. 
The Board shall, at the next regular meeting or within 30 days following the delivery of the application, determine if a submitted application is complete according to the Board’s regulations and shall vote upon its acceptance.  Upon determination by the Board that a submitted application is complete according to the Board’s regulations, the Board shall begin formal consideration and shall act to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove within 65 days, subject to extension or waiver as provided in Section 3.03(c). In the event the Board fails to take timely action on the application as provided in this section then the applicant may then proceed as provided in RSA 676:4(I)(c)(1) and (2). 

c.  
The Planning Board may apply to the Selectmen for an extension not to exceed an additional 90 days before acting to approve or disapprove an application.  The applicant may waive the requirement for Planning Board action within the time periods specified in Section 3.03. (b) and consent to such extension as may be mutually agreeable. 

d. 
Notice to the applicant, abutters and the public shall be given as follows: The Planning Board shall notify the abutters and the applicant by certified mail of the date upon which the application will be formally submitted to the Board.  Notice shall be mailed at least 10 days prior to submission.  Notice to the general public shall also be given at the same time by posting a copy of the application in a public place within the time.  The notice shall include a general description of the proposal that is the subject of the application and shall identify the applicant and the location of the proposal.  For any public hearing on the application, the same notice as required for notice of submission of the application shall be given.  If notice of public hearing has been included in the notice of submission or any prior notice, additional notice of that public hearing is not required nor shall additional notice be required of an adjourned session of a hearing with proper notice if the date, time and place of the adjourned session was made known at the prior hearing.  All costs of notice, whether mailed, posted or published, shall be paid in advance by the applicant.  Failure to pay such costs shall constitute valid grounds for the Planning Board to terminate further consideration and to disapprove the plat without a public hearing. 

e.  
Except as provided in this section, no application may be denied or approved 


3-3 

without a public hearing on the application.  At the hearing, the applicant, any abutter or person with a direct interest in the matter may testify in person or in writing.  Other persons may testify as permitted by the Board at each hearing. Public hearings shall not be required when the Board is considering or acting upon: 
1. 
minor lot line adjustments or boundary agreements which do not create buildable lots, except that notice to abutters shall be given prior to approval of the application in accordance with Section 3.03. (d) and any abutter may be heard on the application upon request; or 

2. 
disapprovals of applications based upon: failure of the applicant to supply information required by the regulations, including abutters' identification; or failure to meet reasonable deadlines established by the Board; or failure to pay costs of notice or other fees required by the Board. 


f.  The determination of reasonable fees in addition to fees for notice under Section 
3.03 (d) to be imposed by the Board to cover its administrative expenses and costs of special investigative studies, review of documents and other matters which may be required by particular applications. The Board may, with the input and recommendation of the Director of Public Works and/or the Director of Community Development, require fees to be escrowed with the Town to cover the costs and expenses to the Town associated with any engineering or legal reviews, investigative studies, or inspections, which the Board may deem necessary with respect to  the particular application as further defined in these regulations. 
g. 
In case of disapproval of any application submitted to the Planning Board, the ground for such disapproval shall be adequately stated upon the records of the Planning Board. 

h.
 If the completed application is approved, said approval shall be certified by written endorsement on the plat along with any conditions of such approval endorsed by the Chairman and Secretary of the Planning Board and recorded with the Registry of Deeds by the Planning Board.  Costs shall be paid by the applicant. 



3.04 Post Approval Procedures 
a.  Recording of Final Plat 
Upon a vote by a majority of the Planning Board to approve a subdivision, the application shall be deemed to have final approval and the plan shall be signed by the Chairman and the Secretary of the Board. The signed plan shall be recorded in the Hillsborough County Registry of Deeds (HCRD) within thirty days of the signing of the plan. The Planning Board, by vote, may extend the filing period for good cause. 
b. Conditions of Approval 
3-4 

All terms of a conditional approval, as determined by the Planning Board in its affirmative vote on the motion for conditional approval, shall be completed to the satisfaction of the Chairman and Secretary prior to signing of the plan by the Chairman and Secretary and within six months of the Planning Board’s affirmative vote of conditional approval. Plans, which have not satisfied the conditions of approval within this time period, shall be null and void. 
In addition to local approvals, the applicant shall be responsible for showing evidence of having obtained such State and Federal permits as may be applicable.  Permits may include a Federal storm water management permit or other permits as required by the Federal NPDES program, NH Alteration of Terrain Permit, State and/or Federal wetlands permits, NH Department of Environmental Services (DES) Subdivision approvals, and the NH Department of Transportation Highway Access Permit. 
c.  Expiration of Approved Plans 
In accordance with RSA 674:39, plan approvals become vested from subsequent changes to the Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision Regulations for a period of four years from the date of Planning Board Approval. 
d. Revocation of Approved Subdivision Plans 
In accordance with RSA 676:4-a, Revocation of Recorded Approval, a subdivision, plat, street plat, site plan or other approval which has been filed with the appropriate recording official, under RSA 674:37, Recording of Plats, may not be revoked by the Planning Board in whole or in part except as detailed in the statute. . 

3.05 Reserved. 
3.06 Reserved. 
3.07 Official Map 
If there exists an official map of the Town, the recording of plats which have been approved as provided herein shall without further action modify the official map in accordance herewith.  Recording of an approved subdivision plat shall not constitute acceptance by the Town of any street, easement, open space, improvement within a right-of-way or storm drainage system shown thereon. 

3.08 Acceptance of Streets and Open Space 
No street or open space will be accepted by the Town until such time as all improvements have been carried out as shown on the final plat, in accord with the requirements of these regulations, and subject to any conditions established by the 
3-5 

Planning Board at the time of final plat approval. End 3 
3-6 

SECTION 4 -PLAN REQUIREMENTS [Amended 11/16/10] 

4.01 Compliance with Regulations 

No subdivision of land shall be made, and no land in any subdivision shall be sold or offered for sale or lease, and no street or utility construction shall be started until a final plat, prepared in accordance with the requirements of these regulations, has been approved by the Board, and other required permits have been issued. 
The Board shall evaluate the plat to provide against such scattered or premature subdivision of land as would involve danger or injury to health, safety or prosperity by reason of lack of water supply, transportation, schools, fire department, or other public services, or necessitate an excessive expenditure of public funds for the supply of such services. 
The subdivider may avail himself of the assistance of the Board before preparation of applications or plans in accordance with Section 3.01.1. 
4.02 	Any applicant submitting a plat to the Planning Board shall execute an authorization granting permission to the members of the Planning Board, the Town Engineer, and such agents or employees of the Town as the Planning Board may determine, to enter upon the property which is the subject of the application for approval, at all reasonable times, for the purpose of such examinations, surveys, tests and inspections as may be necessary and appropriate to enable the Planning Board to fully consider the application before it. Such authorization to enter upon the property which is the subject of the application for approval shall continue in force until approval of as-built plans by the Planning Board. 
4.03 	Preservation of Existing Features Consideration shall be given to the preservation and protection of existing features, trees, scenic points, brooks, streams, rock outcroppings, water bodies, other natural resources, and historic landmarks, including Class III and Class VI highways or other roads of previous years which may be used as recreational roads or riding paths. 
Whenever any of the existing features are present on the land, such features shall be identified on the preliminary and final plats and the Board shall make a determination of the historic, scenic or recreational value of such features after the hearing on such plat. 

4.04 	Soils Data 
A. Where private individual sewage disposal systems are proposed, the final plat shall have been reviewed and approved by the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services. Water percolation test at specific locations on the final plat shall have been performed and certified under the supervision of the Building 
4-1 

Inspector or his appointed representative. The Building Inspector in accordance with Section 11 of the “Merrimack Zoning Ordinance and Building Code” shall establish a reasonable fee for the accomplishment of such test. The developer shall be responsible for all cost or expenses incurred in the accomplishment of such percolation test. No buildable lot for which approval is requested shall be located more than 200 feet from one of the above-mentioned percolation test sites. 
B. Soil types as explained in the Hillsborough County Soil Handbook shall be delineated and named on the preliminary layout or final plat. The soil types shall then be verified and certified by a NH licensed soil scientist. 
4.05 	Preliminary Layout The preliminary layout may be drawn in pencil, and shall be submitted in four (4) paper print copies. Dimensions may be approximate; the data may be tentative, but shall be sufficiently clear to illustrate all conditions and establish the basis and clarify the design requirements for the subdivision plat. Maps shall be at a scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch. 
The preliminary layout shall contain or be accompanied by the following information: 
a. 
Names of municipality and subdivision, name and address of the subdivider and designer, and name and address of owner of record if different from that of developer; 

b. 
Boundaries and area of the entire parcel, whether or not all land therein is to be subdivided; north point, bar scale, date and dates of any revisions; 

c. 
Where the preliminary layout submitted covers only a portion of the subdividers entire holding, a sketch shall be furnished showing the proposed street system for the unsubmitted portion; 

d. 
Names and addresses of abutting property owners, subdivisions, and buildings within 200 feet of the boundaries of the parcel to be subdivided and intersecting roads and driveways within 300 feet of the subdivision frontage on existing roads; 

e. 
Location of all existing buildings; 

f. 
Existing and proposed street right-of-way lines, widths of streets, proposed names of new streets, existing and proposed lot lines and location and width of proposed sidewalks or pedestrian ways; 

g. 
Location of existing and proposed easements, deed restrictions, building setback lines, parks and other open space, water courses, large trees, foliage lines and significant natural and man-made features, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm water drainage lines, drainage structures and drainage ways; 

h. 
Location of stump dumps and/or material disposal areas; all such dumps and/or material disposal areas must be permitted by the State in accordance with 


4-2 

N.H.R.S.A. 
149-M:10; 

i. 
Existing and proposed plans for telephone, electricity and gas utilities; 

j. 
Boundaries of Zoning Districts lying within the subdivision, municipal boundary if any, land use designations from master plan. 


1) 	For subdivisions and site plans that involve land designated as "Special Flood Hazard Areas" (SFHA) by the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP): 
a) 	The Planning Board shall review the proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by Federal or State law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. 
b) 	The Planning Board shall require that all proposals for development greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is the lesser, include Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data within such proposals (i.e. floodplain boundary and 100-year flood elevation). 
c) 	The Planning Board shall require the applicant to submit sufficient evidence (construction drawings, grading and land treatment plans) so as to allow a determination that: 
(i) 	
all such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 

(ii) 	
all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and, 


(iii) 	adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
k. 
A general site location map at the scale of the official or municipal base map, locating exactly the subdivision boundary and proposed streets in relation to at least two existing intersecting streets or other features shown on the official map; 

l. 
Existing subdivision, if any, in and adjacent to the subject subdivision; 

m. 
A statement and contours in sufficient detail to indicate clearly the method of storm water drainage on and off the subdivision, methods of sanitary sewage disposal and water supply; soils data (See Section 4.04 B); 

n. 	
Watershed areas and drainage computations; 

o. 
Preliminary road profiles, including typical cross sections; 

p. 
Approval, as prescribed by law, from any other municipal, state, or federal agency that may have jurisdiction; 

q. 
Copies of statements outlining the conditions under which any land is to be reserved for public use. 


4-3 

4.06 	The final submission shall consist of all data required for preliminary layout submission plus (1) The Final Plat, (2) Road Plan and Profile, (3) Final Topographic Plan, (4) Legal Data as required by the Planning Board in Section 4.09, and (5) Assessors Plat. 
4.06.1 Final Plat The scale of the final plat shall be no smaller than 50 feet to one inch except that large subdivisions may be drawn to a scale of up to100 feet to one inch. 
The final plat shall be in permanent black ink, on a permanent reproducible polyester film or linen. It shall be submitted on two (2) originals (one wash-off and one mylar) and seven (7) blue (black) line prints on paper. One original and seven (7) copies shall be retained by the Board. 
Sheet sizes shall be in accordance with requirements of the Registry of Deeds, but is limited to any of the following dimensions: 
a.81/2"x11" c.17"x22" 
b.11"x17" d.22"x34" 
In no case shall the sheets be larger than 22" x 34". Space shall be reserved on the plat for endorsement by all agencies. The subdivision plat shall be consistent with the approved preliminary layout. 
The final plat shall show the following: 
a. 
Final disposition of land into lots, streets, open space, drainage courses and any easements running with the land. The subdivision plat shall be based on a boundary survey with a maximum error of closure of 1 in 10,000 certified by a land surveyor registered in the State of New Hampshire. Distances shall be to the nearest 100th of a foot and bearings to the nearest 10 seconds. Computations of the boundary survey shall be submitted upon request by the Board. 

b. 
Stations, radii, curve data and paving widths for proposed streets and additionally provide metes and bounds description for all proposed streets and for all easements within the subdivision, including R.O.W. widths. 

c. 
Lot dimensions, areas in square feet and acres. Lots to be numbered consecutively in the following manner: 


4-4 

Tax Map Sheet Number -Parcel Number -Further subdivision of parcel number: 
Example 1A-1-1 
d. 
Accurate locations of all easements, either on or off the site; 

e. 
North arrow indicating True North; 

f. 
A statement from the owner's engineer of the work required on existing streets to meet the minimum standards set herein including cost estimates and the method of meeting such costs: 

g. 
Names of proposed streets as endorsed by the Merrimack Fire Department; 

h. 
House numbers may be assigned to Preliminary Layout by the Planning Board, or their agent; 

i. 
Locations of all monuments to be set at street intersections, points of curvature and tangency of curved streets and at angles of lots; 

j. 
If the subdivision abuts a state highway, or if a proposed street intersects a state highway, a written statement from the New Hampshire Department of Public Works and Highways approving any proposed driveway or street access with such state highway; 

k. 
The plat shall contain the following statement: "The Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Merrimack are a part of this plat, and approval of this plat is contingent on completion of all the requirements of said Subdivision Regulations, excepting only any variances or modifications made in writing by the Board or any variances granted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment and attached hereto"; 

l. 
Proposed methods of sanitary sewerage and computations therefore; proposed drainage accompanied by a drainage analysis map and computations for the entire watershed area; methods of supplying water; existing and abutting well locations within 100'; 

m. 
If a subdivision is to be served by public water supply or by public sewers, a statement from the Municipal Department or company involved, attesting to the availability of such services; 

n. 
Abutting subdivision names or titles and registry plan numbers, or, when abutting property is not a recorded subdivision, a certified statement from the owner's surveyor of the names and addresses of the current owners of record 


4-5 

thereof prior to final submission, and the book and page where abutting subdivisions of properties are recorded. Where an undeveloped subdivision is an abutter, Registry Plan Number shall be shown; 
o. 
Name and seal of engineer and of land surveyor licensed by the State of New Hampshire; 

p. 
Notes on the plan shall be grouped together and titled as they relate to their specific purpose: 


Example: 	Town Related Notes 
State Related Notes 
County and Registry Notes 
Survey Notes 
Engineering & Misc Notes 

q. 
In cluster subdivisions snow storage areas must be designated by location on the plan. 

r. 
All residential subdivision plans shall provide for a paved pedestrian way or sidewalk to be constructed along all existing or proposed collector streets providing frontage to any lot or common area in a subdivision. 

s. 
Any plat wherein it is the intent of the developer that the streets will remain private shall contain the following statement: 


"The ways shown on this plat are intended by the subdivider ________________ (name) and the Town of Merrimack Planning Board to remain as private ways. The recording of this plat shall not be construed as an offer of dedication of those ways as public highways under the New Hampshire common law of dedication and acceptance, nor shall the approval of this plat constitute an approval of those ways as public streets pursuant to RSA 674:40. " 
4.06.2 Road Plan and Profile The road plan and profile shall be prepared on a horizontal scale of 50 feet to the inch and a vertical scale of five feet to the inch. 
The road plan and profile shall show the following: 
a. 
Plan of all proposed streets and roads within the proposed subdivision and all intersecting streets for a distance of 300 feet in either direction from their intersection with proposed streets and roads or the subdivision frontage; 

b. 
Stations, radii, curve data, street bounds, and paving widths for proposed streets and roads; 

c. 
Existing and proposed plans for telephone, electricity, gas, water, and street lighting; 

d. 
Final road profiles; cross section; location with stationing of all proposed public drain and sewer structures showing rim and flow line elevations, sizes and classes of pipe; 

e. 
Final road plan and profiles shall show proposed centerline grades vertical curve information, existing contour information extending beyond the proposed right-of-way, proposed grading information within the right-of-way, culverts at driveways, location and widths of all proposed sidewalks and pedestrian ways; 

f. 
Where cross country easements are required for drainage, a plan and profile shall be provided showing existing contours and proposed grading for culverts or swales that are required; 

g. 
Plans should also show methods for controlling any increased surface run-off and for erosion control during the period of construction. If no such controls will be needed, the engineer will so state on the plans. 


4-6 

4.06.3 Topographic Plan The scale of the topographic plan shall be the same as the scale of the final plat. The topographic plan shall show the following; 
a. 
Existing and proposed contours at 2-foot intervals with at least two benchmarks provided by the developer and shown on the plan. All elevations shall relate to U.S.C.& G. sea level datum. The accuracy of the plan shall be verified by an actual field survey and shall be certified on the plan by a land surveyor registered in the State of New Hampshire; 

b. 
Topographic plans should show finished grading for drainage facilities required for storm runoff and to control erosion and improper routing of runoff onto private property. Ditch and sideline construction should adapt to existing site conditions rather than relying on typical sections for all situations. Erosion control and stabilization plans shall be in accordance with Hillsborough County Conservation District-Vegetative Standard and Specifications for Seeding Grasses and Legumes for Long-Term Cover on Excavated Areas. 


4.06.4 Assessors Plat One copy of the approved final subdivision plan to the scale of the applicable Town Tax Map shall also be submitted. (Some of the tax maps are at a scale of 1" = 100', and some are at 1" = 200') 
The plan should clearly show the subdivision name, location, lot dimensions, lot areas, tax plat number, parcel numbers, street names, and street numbers (if available). A photo-reduced copy of the final plat is acceptable provided the 
4-7 

required data is legible. 

4.07 	Minor Subdivisions [and Lot Line Adjustments] 
Where the proposed subdivision is a “Minor” subdivision on an existing approved street or road with no possibility of future subdivision (i.e. no remaining frontage and/or acreage abutting or included in parcel by same owner), [or a Lot Line Adjustment,] eliminate Section 4.05(h) through (o), Section 4.06.2, and Section 
4.06.3 and any other portions of Sections 4.05 and 4.06.1 as may be deemed unnecessary by the Board. [Further, in the case of a Lot Line Adjustment eliminate such portions of Section 4.06.4 and Section 4.09 as may be deemed unnecessary by the Board.] 
4.08 	Filing Fees Filing fees in accordance with the schedule below shall be charged and shall accompany submission of final plat or minor subdivision. Failure to pay such costs shall constitute valid grounds for the Planning Board to terminate further consideration and to disapprove the plat without a public hearing. 
A. Subdivision Plan 
1. 
$100.00 per lot, or $250.00 per subdivision plan, whichever is greater; the Hillsborough County Registry of Deeds recording fee; and the mailing cost for notification of abutters. 

2. 
In the case of a preliminary plan submittal, the fee shall be the same as in A.1, above less the recording fee. 


When the preliminary plan or any portion thereof is submitted for final approval, a minimum fee of $250.00; the Hillsborough County Registry of Deeds recording fee; and the mailing cost for notification of abutters shall be collected. 
B. Site Plan 
Multi-family: 	$50.00 per unit. 
Commercial, Semi-public, Civic, 	$70.00 per 1,000 square feet of building 
and Recreational Facilities: 	space or fraction thereof for the first 100,000 square feet and $50.00 per 1,000 square feet thereafter. 
Industrial: 	$40.00 per 1,000 square feet of building space or fraction thereof for the first 100,000 square feet and $30.00 per 1,000 square feet thereafter. 
4-8 

In no instance is the site plan fee collected to be less than $250.00, except in the case of review of home occupation site plans for which a filing fee of $50.00 shall be collected. In addition the mailing cost for notification of abutters shall accompany submission of the site plan. 
C. Engineering Analysis Cost 
The Planning Board may also require the payment of such fees to reimburse the town for the cost of any engineering analysis of plans and/or documents provided by the applicant as may be reasonably required by the said Board. No plan shall be approved until such fees are paid in full. 
4.09 	Legal Data Required Where applicable to a specific subdivision, the following are required, in form as approved by Town Counsel, prior to approval of a Subdivision plat: 
a. A properly executed satisfactory deed by the legal owner to convey unencumbered title to the Town of: 
1. 
Real estate to be used for streets, open space, and other public purposes; 

2. 
Easements and rights-of-way over property to remain in private ownership; 

3. 
Rights to drain out or across other property, whether public or private, including a street. 


All such deeds shall be held by the Town in escrow until completion of improvements, and transfer of title to such interests shall be effective only at such time as the Board of Selectmen shall by vote accept such conveyances. 
b. 
The developer's engineer shall prepare, on a form provided by the Town, an estimate of costs for improvements to proposed or existing streets, drainage and sewerage structures, and any related improvements to the site as may be necessary. The estimate is to be reviewed and recommended by the Director of Public Works to the Planning Board prior to the board's signing of the plan(s). 

c. 
Evidence satisfactory to the Board indicating the ownership of the land in the proposed subdivision to be in the subdivider's name or his principal or other agent. 

d. 
Where electric lines or other utilities are to be installed by a public utility, corporation or a municipal department, a statement shall be received in writing from such public utility, corporation or municipal department prior to final plat 


4-9 

approval that the utility and/or services are available to the site and will be provided without expense to the Town. 
e. A written acknowledgment of the subdivider's responsibility for maintenance, and the assumption by him of liability for injuries that may occur on any land to be dedicated for public use, until such land has been legally accepted by the Town. 
4.10 	Open Space Whenever the Planning Board determines that there is a specific need related to the nature of the development, and to the extent such need is created by the subdivision, the Board may require that the subdivision reserve land for public use either as open space or recreational land. 
No more than fifty percent of any land so reserved shall be swampland or contain impounded waters unless specifically specified on the plan and approved as such by the Board. 
Where the Board finds it conducive to the most effective utilization of the land so reserved, it may require access through public right-of-way not less than fifteen feet in width at a suitable location. 
Where appropriate, the Board may require the developer of land so reserved to execute such private restricting covenants and/or establish a homeowners association and/or institute a provision for the continued responsibility for the land as may be deemed necessary to assure the desired use or state of the land. 
4.11 	Trees and Planting Due regard shall be give to preservation of existing features, trees, scenic points and other natural and historic resources within the subdivision. The Board may require additional tree planting and other landscaping appropriate to the area being developed. Removal of stripped topsoil or surplus materials from the subdivision area shall not be permitted unless in accord with the zoning regulations. Existing trees on lots and open space land shall be preserved wherever feasible, or unless otherwise directed by the Board. 
ROAD AND UTILITY STANDARDS 

4.12 	Street Design 
a. 
Streets shall be designed in accordance with generally accepted engineering practices, A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, 1990, (AASHTO), and these regulations, including the typical sections found herein. Street right-of-way widths shall be not less than fifty feet. 

b. 
Street grades shall not exceed 6% over a distance of 800 feet or 8% over a distance of 600 feet; variations from these grades may be permitted by the Board 


4-10 

where advisable based on topographic conditions and the feasibility of development of the parcel in question. Maximum slope grades shall include only the tangent distance between limits of vertical curves. No street grades shall be less than 1.5%. Vertical curves shall conform to the Formula: Length in feet equals K x algebraic difference in grade. The requirements as shown in the table below. 
STOPPING SITE DISTANCE  RADII  CREST K  SAG K  
Min.  Des.  Min.  Des.  Min.  Des.  Min.  Des.  
Residential Streets  200  200  300  400  30  30  40  40  
Collector Streets  275  325  575  700  60  80  60  70  

A maximum K of 143 shall not be exceeded to facilitate drainage. 
c. 
Dead-end or cul-de-sac streets, whether designed to be permanently closed or continued in the future, shall not exceed 1200 feet in length as measured, along the centerline of the right-of-way from the right-of-way line of an intersecting through street to the far end of the cul-de-sac right-of-way. The cul-de-sac shall have a turnaround at the closed end as follows: 

1. 
Minimum radius to outside edge of right-of-way shall be 50 feet in residential areas and 60 feet in commercial areas. 

2. 
Minimum radius to the outside edge of pavement shall be 42 feet in residential areas and 48 feet in commercial areas. 

3. 
An island may be placed in the center of the turn-around in residential developments only provided that the paved roadway is at least 24 feet wide and the island radius, 75 feet. The minimum radius to the outside edge of the right-of-way shall be at least 50 feet. 

4. 
The turnaround may be tangent to one side of the roadway or centered. In both cases the radius return for the outside edge of pavement shall be at least 20 feet and the right-of-way line shall be 11 feet beyond this. 



d. 
Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles and no street shall intersect any other street at less than sixty degrees. Street intersections with major arterial streets, minor arterial streets, and collector streets, as defined in these subdivision regulations, shall be at right angles. All approaches to intersections shall have a maximum grade of -2% for at least 50 feet from the intersection. The maximum grade on the approach leg should not exceed 5 percent for a distance of 200 feet. This distance should be measured 


4-11 

from the outer edge of shoulder of the intersecting street. (New streets shall not intersect existing streets near short-crest vertical curves in the existing streets). For local streets the minimum corner sight distance shall be in accordance with American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) requirements as contained in "A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, 1990" for stopping and intersection sight distance based upon the type of road and speed limit, but in no case shall be less than 200 feet for local streets or 300 feet for collector streets. 
e. 
Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with radius of at least 25 feet with the edge of pavement radius constructed with a parallel curve (See Typical Intersection Plan, Figure 3 Page 9-4). The Board may require greater or lesser radii, whenever it deems such action advisable. 

f. 
Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be prohibited unless the Planning Board shall find good reason exists for making an exception. 

g. 
A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves on all but residential streets. 

h. 
When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point by more than ten degrees, they shall be connected by a curve with a radius adequate to insure a safe sight distance. 


4.12.1 Provision For Future Widening or Upgrading of Streets In proper cases where it may be feasible the Board shall require dedication by deed and platted in general accordance with the typical sections herein, at least 25 feet from the center line of the existing town road or right-of-way for the future widening of streets where existing road widths are insufficient for present standards or are of such a nature as to cause traffic hazards. 

4.13 Street Arrangement 
a. 
The arrangement of streets shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. 

b. 
The arrangement of streets shall provide for the continuation of the appropriate projection of existing streets in adjoining and surrounding areas. Where this is not practical, the arrangements of streets shall conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the Board. 

c. 
Streets shall be arranged to provide maximum separation of through and local traffic and to discourage through traffic in residential areas. 

d. 
Where a subdivision borders on or contains a limited access highway right-of-way, or an open water course, the Board may require a street 


4-12 

approximately parallel to and on one or both sides of such right-of-way or water course, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land for park, residential, commercial, industrial, or other purpose. Such distance shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future intersection grade separations. 
e. Pedestrian right-of-way, not less than twenty feet wide, may be required where deemed essential to provide circulation, or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation, or other community facilities. 
4.13.1 Driveways 
a. 
Driveways shall not interfere with the free flowing drainage in the gutter line. No driveway shall have a slope greater than 10%; each driveway shall have a platform at least twenty (20) feet in length and no less than 1% of slope and no greater than 2% of slope. (See Figure 7, Page 9-7). Driveways having a grade towards the street must be sloped such that surface water drains to the gutter line in the direction of flow under all storm conditions. (See Applicable Figures, Section 9.) 

b. 
No driveway shall intersect the street at less than a 60 degree angle and must have unobstructed vision in each direction based on type of road and speed limit per American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) requirements in document entitled "A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, 1990". The Board may require greater sight distances and driveway locations be shown on the plan where hazardous conditions exist. 

c. 
Driveway entrances shall be constructed such that they be sloped towards the roadway for a minimum distance of four (4) feet from the edge of pavement, this slope shall not be less than one inch per foot to prevent surface water from the roadway from draining into individual lots or depressed lots below road grade. 

d. 
That portion of driveway construction, including culverts and other drainage structures, which is located in the public Right-of-Way, shall be included in the bond estimate figure for bonding of the public way. A typical section, clearly showing construction of same, shall be shown on plan. 

e. 
That portion of driveway construction which is located in the public Right-of-Way shall be paved at the same time the street is paved. 




4.14 Easements 
a. 
Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided for utilities where necessary and shall be at least 20 feet wide. 

b. 
Where a subdivision is traversed by or requires the construction of a watercourse or a drainage way, an easement of adequate width shall be provided for such purpose. 


4-13 


4.15 Underground Utilities 
a. 
All utilities including electric, telephone, and other transmission or utility lines shall be installed underground within the boundaries of any subdivision unless specifically exempted from the requirement by the Board. In the event of the sale of undeveloped lots the responsibility of items noted in this section will remain with the developer. 

b. 
All utilities installed on Town roads shall conform to the Typical Roadway Cross Sections, Figures 1, 2, & 3, Page 9-2, 9-3, and 9-4. 

c. 
All underground utility stubs, both private and public, shall be extended to the right-of-way line prior to placement of gravel and crushed gravel. 



4.16 Storm Drainage System 
a. 
Storm drainage systems shall be designed in accordance with generally accepted engineering practices, rules and regulations of the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services, the New Hampshire Department of Transportation Drainage Manual, and these regulations. A roadway storm drain system may be a closed system, an open system, or a combination of the two. It is the intent of these regulations that system engineers be aware of the following considerations when drainage systems are being designed. 

1. 
Extensive open drainage swales and holding basins often become the responsibility of the Town to maintain and constitute a significant expense to taxpayers. Roadside channels shall be designed in accordance with Federal Highway Administration design procedures publication "HEC 15­Design of Roadside Channels with Flexible Linings-October 1975." 

2. 
Closed systems increase the velocity of flow and have the potential for increased erosion and flooding near the outfall. While good engineering practices can mitigate this potential, demand for water quality requires flow along a grassed swale prior to outfall into any wetland or water body. 

3. 
Under conditions of severe topography, contractors have on occasion not been able to construct the highway and the approved open drainage swales within the 50-foot right of way, leading to problems of easement acquisition or to property owners holding clear title to part of the swale. In an effort to avoid these or similar problems in the road construction, it is expected that the drainage system engineer will carefully consider the relative fiscal impacts of the proposed system and design a system that will impose the least long-term maintenance costs and will preserve the highest level of water quality that is reasonably attainable. Therefore, the Planning Board reserves the right to judge the adequacy of the drainage system based upon these criteria. 



b. 
A storm drainage system, either open or closed, including swales, headwalls, culverts, catch basins and storm drains shall be designed by a Registered Civil Engineer. 


4-14 

Calculations shall be done to a positive outfall. Where the Board anticipates that the additional runoff incident to the proposed subdivision or site plan will overload an existing downstream drainage facility so that there will be damage to private property or an increase in the expenditure of public funds, the Board shall not approve the subdivision or site plan unless the plan makes adequate provision, at the developer's expense, for all downstream drainage improvements. 
c. The engineer shall examine, and perform the necessary calculations, to ensure that runoff due to additional upstream development will not overload the proposed or the existing downstream facilities, either open or closed systems, on either public or private property. Where the engineer determines that the additional runoff shall have no adverse effects on these downstream drainage facilities, or adjacent properties, he shall so certify by placing the following statement on the plan: 
“I certify that I have followed the Town of Merrimack’s Subdivision Regulations as set forth in Section 4.16 Storm Drainage System. Furthermore, in my professional opinion, any runoff incident to development on this site shall have no adverse effects on any open or closed, public or private, downstream drainage facilities, nor shall it have adverse effects on downstream properties.” 
d. Design storm frequency shall be 25 years for roadway sections. Evaluate ponding limits using a fifty-year storm in all sags. All culverts shall be designed to ensure the roadway will not be overtopped or damaged during a design storm with a fifty-year frequency, or where the Board deems necessary a storm of greater intensity where site conditions, protection of private or public property, or an increase in the expenditure of public funds may warrant such action. Design methods may be: 
a. 
Rational method for 0 -200 acre drainage areas within a minimum time of concentration of 10 minutes for rural areas and 5 minutes for urban areas. 

b. 
Soil Conservation Service (SCS) TR-20 method 

c. 
Rainfall intensity shall be based on U. S. Weather Bureau at Concord 


4.16.1 Closed Drainage Systems 
1. Closed Drainage Systems: 
4-15 

a. 
Pipe shall be Reinforced Concrete Pipe (Minimum Class III) or polyethylene. Concrete pipe shall be provided, installed, bedded, and backfilled in strict accordance with the manufacturers recommendations, ASTM specifications C76 and C443, and Section 603 of the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, New Hampshire Department of Transportation. Polyethylene pipe shall be provided, installed, bedded and backfilled in strict accordance with manufacturers recommendations, and ASTM D3450. 

b. 
Minimum cover shall be 3 feet. In instances where this cannot be attained, computations signed and stamped by a Registered Engineer for the structural stability of the proposed design shall be submitted. 

c. 
Minimum pipe diameter is 12 inches for the first 300 feet; minimum size for the remaining closed system is 15 inches. 

d. 
A manhole, or catchbasin if appropriate, is required at every change in direction, and minimally every 300 feet. 

e. 
Design shall be for self-cleaning velocities. 


2. Catch Basins and Manholes: 
a. 
These shall be built in accordance with N.H. Department of Transportation Standard Drawings. Type B catch basin grates shall be used for catch basins within the paved portion of a street. 300' shall be the maximum distance between catch basins on streets. 

b. 
Design intake quantity should not exceed 1.5 cfs per grate. 

c. 
For catch basins located off of the paved portion of the street, Type C catch basin grates shall be used. Type B catch basin grates may be used in locations off of the pavement in special circumstances. 



4.16.2 Open Drainage System 
1. 
Open channel flow shall be designed in accordance with Federal Highway Administration Design Procedures Publication “HEC-15 Design of Roadside Channels with Flexible Linings – October 1975” and the following guidelines: 

2. 
Culvert Design: 


Channel Type  Roughness Coefficient  Design Max. Velocity  
Natural  .024  3 FPS  
Grass  .030  6 FPS  
Natural Ledge  .045  12 FPS  

4-16 

a. 
Culverts shall be designed to ensure ponded water for a storm with a design frequency of 50 years will not infiltrate into the structural section of the roadway or cause any other adverse impacts. As a general guide, the maximum allowable headwater table can be used: 

b. 
Headwall shall be specified for culverts over 15” diameter. When approved by the Director of Public Works, flared end sections may be used for reinforced concrete pipe with diameters of 24” or less. 

c. 
All culverts must have a minimum cover of 24 inches. For culverts with less than 48 inches of cover, computations signed and stamped by a Registered Engineer for structural stability, of the proposed design shall be submitted for review. 

d. 
Minimum culvert size is 12 inches diameter. 


Pipe Diameter  Maximum Headwater  
12” – 30”  2 times culvert diameter  
36” – 40”  1.5 times culvert diameter  
54” or larger  1 times culvert diameter  

3. Catch Basins and Manholes: 
a. 
These shall be built in accordance with New Hampshire Department of Transportation Standard Drawings. Type B catch basin grates shall be used for catch basins within the paved portion of a street. 300' shall be the maximum distance between catch basins on streets. 

b. 
Design intake quantity should not exceed 1.5 cfs per grate. 

c. 
For catch basins located off of the paved portion of the street, Type C catch basin grates shall be used. Type B catch basin grates may be used in locations off of the pavement in special circumstances. 



4.16.3 Underdrains 
a. 
Underdrains shall be considered in all roadway design and where required shall be installed. Underdrains shall be used in areas where the seasonal groundwater elevation is within four feet of finished roadway grade and ledge cuts. 

b. 
Underdrains shall be 6-inch minimum diameter perforated PVC pipe installed with a minimum of 12 inch of crushed stone around pipe. Stone to be wrapped with filter fabric. 

c. 
Underdrains shall outlet into a headwall or catchbasin in accordance with the Standard Detail Sheets issued by the New Hampshire Department of Transportation. 


4-17 



4.17 Lot Size and Arrangement 
a. 
The arrangement of lots shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated. 

b. 
Lot size and dimensions shall conform to the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. Lot sizes shall be adequate to provide off-street parking and loading facilities in commercial, industrial and residential areas as required by the Zoning Ordinances. 

c. 
The subdividing of land shall provide, by means of a public street, satisfactory access for each lot to an existing street. 

d. 
Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited except where their control is definitely placed in the Town of Merrimack under conditions approved by the Board. 

e. 
Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be prohibited except where essential to provide separation of residential development from major traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages to topography and orientation, additionally the plan shall show the location of proposed driveways or access to the lot. 

f. 
All lots shall be bounded with permanently set granite or precast concrete markers with minimum dimensions of 4 inches by 4 inches by 3 feet on frontage corners and with iron pipes at other corners. 


4.17.1 Land which is of such a nature as would involve danger or injury to health, safety, or prosperity by reason of lack of sewers, water supply, drainage or other menace shall not be platted for occupancy or use unless accompanied by detailed engineering data supporting its proposed use. In any case in which such data cannot support its intended use such land shall be combined into the adjacent or abutting lots of owners, or placed in open space in accordance with the provisions of Section 4.10. 

4.18 Right-of-Way Work (Per Typical Cross Sections 1 & 2) 
a. 
Monuments shall be placed at all street intersections, points of curves and angle points. Monuments shall be concrete or granite bound markers. These bounds shall be 4 inches by 4 inches by 4 feet. 

b. 
The entire right-of-way shall be graded to the extent that no cross section slope shall exceed 4:1 in fill or 2:1 in a cut section. 

c. 
A minimum width of 28 feet of gravel base shall be placed on a previously prepared sub-grade of acceptable well draining granular soil for a standard of 24 foot wide paved roadway or thirty-two feet minimum width for a 28 foot wide paved roadway. The base shall consist of a minimum of twelve inches of well-compacted gravel under a minimum of six inches of equally well-compacted crushed gravel. A minimum of twelve inches of sand that conforms with Section 304 of the New Hampshire Department of Transportation Standard Specifications shall be placed under the gravel in sections where the subgrade is ledge. The gravel base and the crushed gravel base under the pavement shall each be graded at a cross slope of 1/4 inch per foot. Gravel and crushed gravel shall meet the material requirements of section 304 of the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, New Hampshire Department of Transportation. The density of gravel and crushed gravel base courses shall not be less than 95 percent of the maximum density per ASSHTO T99. 


4-18 

The center of the right-of-way shall be paved at a minimum width of twenty-four feet. Paving shall be hot bituminous pavement and shall be placed in two courses. A prime coat must be applied before paving starts. The courses shall consist of a 2-inch binder course and a 1-inch wearing course. The bituminous pavement shall be batched and placed in accordance with Section 403 of the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction as published by the New Hampshire Department of Transportation. The centerline of the paved portion shall be identical to the right-of-way centerline. The pavement cross slope shall be 1/4 inch per foot. The developer shall be allowed to pave up to a maximum of 28-foot width. A 3-foot sod shoulder strip or bituminous asphalt (Cape Cod) berm shall be placed as shown on the Typical Cross Sections, Figures 1 and 2, Pages 9-2 and 9-3. 
d. 
As a condition of approval, the Planning Board may provide that when during the course of construction groundwater conditions are encountered which differ from design criteria, the developer shall cease construction on that portion affected and bring same to the attention of the Town, or its agents, who upon inspection shall decide if the impact upon the design is sufficient to require the developer to submit to the Town revised plans for controlling the groundwater conditions. These plans shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Board prior to the developer resuming construction in the affected area. 

e. 
Where public sanitary sewerage is available or is reasonably expected to be available within the subdivision, sewer mains and laterals shall be designed and constructed to serve each lot or dwelling unit meeting the requirements of Standards of Design For Sewage and Wastewater Treatment Facilities, New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services and the Merrimack Department of Public Works. Sanitary sewers shall be located within the street 


4-19 

right-of-way in accord with the Typical Sections unless a waiver is granted by the Planning Board with a recommendation by the Director of Public Works. 
f. The construction of all roadway facilities, including but not limited to storm drainage facilities, sidewalks, curbing, and slopes, shall meet the material and construction requirements of the Standard Specification for Road and Bridge Construction, New Hampshire Department of Transportation, latest edition and the Merrimack Department of Public Works. The construction of all sanitary sewer facilities, including manholes and building connections, shall meet the requirements of Standards of Design For Sewerage and Wastewater Treatment Facilities, New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services and the Merrimack Department of Public Works. 

4.19 STREET SIGNS 
All signs shall meet the requirement of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, latest edition. Street signs shall be placed at a location and of a type approved by the Director of Public Works. Regulatory signs shall be placed at a location and of a type approved by the Police Chief. Street signs shall bear the names of the streets shown on the approved plan provided that the developer shall seek and receive approval from the Board of Selectmen for the list of said names. Signs shall be erected by and at the expense of the developer. 

4.20 PEDESTRIAN WAYS AND SIDEWALKS 
Pedestrian facilities constructed within the right-of-way shall be in accordance with the Typical Cross Sections, Figures 1, 2, and 3, as noted below: 
1) Pedestrian facilities shall be required along sections of Route 3 within the jurisdiction of the Town and shall be consistent with the existing and anticipated pedestrian traffic and the planned widening of the highway. Vertical granite curbing shall be installed in accordance with New Hampshire Department of Transportation Standard Drawings. 
2) A paved pedestrian facility shall be constructed along all existing or proposed collector or arterial streets or streets constructed as a part of a subdivision. Refer to Section 4.21 for definition of collector and arterial streets. 
3) Should it be necessary to locate and construct pedestrian facilities outside of the right-of-way, an easement of twenty feet shall be provided to the Town. 
4) The design of pedestrian facilities shall provide for the use by same by handicapped persons (Architectural Barrier Free Design Code, State of New Hampshire) including ramps at corners, intersections, crosswalks, or where specified by the Planning Board. 
4-20 

5) The design of pedestrian facilities shall be paved with a minimum course of a 2-inch depth of bituminous concrete pavement, placed in two courses, over a twelve inch of compacted gravel. Pedestrian facilities shall be 5 feet wide. All material and construction shall meet the requirements of the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, New Hampshire Department of Transportation, latest edition and the requirement of the Merrimack Department of Public Works. 
6) The Planning Board may waive the requirements to provide pedestrian facilities on both sides of a street providing frontage to a subdivision for good cause, but in any instance one pedestrian facility shall be provided on all residential streets. 
7). Payment in lieu of construction: 
The Planning Board may accept a payment in lieu of sidewalk construction if one 
or more of the following conditions exist: 

1. 
the sidewalk does not connect to potential pedestrian destinations such as parks or schools; 

2. 
a partial improvement is not feasible due to the inability to achieve proper design standards; 

3. 
forthcoming installation of public utilities or street paving would be likely to cause severe damage to the new sidewalk; 

4. 
a partial improvement would create a potential safety hazard to motorists or pedestrians; 

5. 
development on adjacent properties is likely or that sidewalk improvements would be extended by the Town in the foreseeable future. 


Any funds collected under this Section will be used for the construction of a pedestrian way or sidewalks that are related to the needs created by the project and any funds collected under this section will be deposited into the Town’s pooled cash account, to be held by the Town as restricted revenue. No funds generated under this section may be expended for any purpose other than for sidewalk improvements approved and authorized by the Planning Board and no funds generated under this section may be released or expended without prior Planning Board approval. 
In general, pedestrian facilities shall be constructed parallel to the street and located within the right-of-way as far as practical from the travel lanes and usually close to the right-of-way line. The arrangement of pedestrian facilities shall provide for the continuation of existing or planned pedestrian facilities in 
4-21 

adjoining and surrounding areas. 

4.21 STREET LIGHTS 
A street light of the type approved by the Director of Public Works shall be provided where proposed streets intersect the following streets: 
Major Arterials: 
Continental Boulevard 
D. W. Highway (US Rte 3) 
F E Everett Turnpike 
Greeley Street 
Industrial Drive 
Milford Road (NH Rte 101A) 

Minor Arterial Streets: 
Amherst Road 
Baboosic Lake Road 
Bedford Road-East of Wire Road 
Boston Post Road 
Camp Sargent Road 
McQuestion Road 
Naticook Road 

Collector Streets: 
Back River Road 
Bean Road 
Bedford Road-West of Wire Road 
Joppa Road 
Manchester Street 
Meetinghouse Road 
Patten Road 
Pearson Road 
Seaverns Bridge Road 
Tinker Road 
Turkey Hill Road 
Wilson Hill Road 
Wire Road 

Streetlights located on residential streets within the subdivision shall be of a type and a location approved by the Director of Public Works. 
End 4 
4-22 

4-23 

SECTION 5 -BUILDING PERMIT 



5.01 Performance Bond or Construction 
I.  Except in the case of a subdivision in which each lot is on an existing improved Town road, no building permits shall be issued for any lot within the subdivision until: 
a.
 The subdivider or owner shall have completed the streets, public improvements, drainage structures and other utilities or facilities are installed to the extent and manner approved by the Planning Board, and subject to the review and approval of the Department of Public Works of the Town of Merrimack, New Hampshire; or 

b.
 The subdivider or owner shall have filed with the Board an estimate of costs of streets, public improvements, drainage structures, and other utilities or facilities to be installed and constructed, together with maps, plans and supporting data, prepared by an engineer licensed in the State of New Hampshire. The Department of Public Works shall review the estimate of costs together with other data submitted and shall review the estimate of costs together with other data submitted and shall recommend to the Planning Board the amount of the bond or security which would be satisfactory to secure the municipality in accordance with the provisions of R.S.A. 674:36 III.  The Planning Board shall determine the amount of surety bond or security satisfactory to it and such other reasonable conditions as may be deemed appropriate to secure the municipality. 


II. That if the subdivider or owner shall seek phased construction upon lots within a subdivision, then the estimate of costs referred to in Subsection I (b) hereof shall specifically define the costs to be incurred during each phase so that the Planning Board may be able to define and determine the amounts of security or surety that will be required by the Town during any such phase.  Nothing herein shall preclude the subdivider or owner from completing a portion of the required improvements as set forth in Subsection I (a) above, and submitting a surety bond or other security as provided in Subsections I (b) and II for that street work or utility installation sought. 
III.  Upon approval by the Planning Board of an estimate of bond of security or surety 
the subdivider or owner shall submit either: 

a.
 A Surety bond, by a surety company authorized to do business in New Hampshire, in the amount approved by the Planning Board, to be filed with the Town Treasurer; or 

b.
 Cash, irrevocable letter of credit issued by a New Hampshire Banking Institution or bank book properly endorsed to the Town, in the amount as approved by the Planning Board, and deposited with the Town Treasurer. 


IV.  The Planning Board shall specify in each instance where a bond or other security is to be accepted by the Town, the period within which completion of street work and utility installation shall be accomplished, and that specified period shall be expressed in the 
5-1 

bond or other security. 
In order to confirm that various items and features delineated on plans presented to the Planning Board for approval (or which are otherwise required in connection with the development), are, in fact, constructed in accordance with those plans and/or in accordance with applicable codes and standards, the Planning Board may, at the time of plan approval, require the applicant to establish an appropriate escrow, or other security, in addition to a Performance Guarantee otherwise provided by these regulations acceptable to the Planning Board which will be used by the Town of Merrimack as security for retention of appropriate engineers or other consultants to confirm that construction is in conformance with the approved plans and/or applicable codes and standards. The applicant shall reimburse the Town for the cost of such engineers and consultants, prior to release of said security. 
The escrow amount shall be determined by the Department of Public Works to cover the estimated costs of engineering or other consultants and may include a reasonable charge to cover the Town’s administrative costs.  If it is determined that any of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the Town’s construction standards, the applicant shall be responsible for the costs of reconstruction and re-inspection services of the improvements. The escrow funds shall be periodically reviewed to assure that sufficient funds are available to cover all inspection costs and additional escrow shall be provided by the applicant as needed.  Any balance remaining in the escrow after acceptance of the project improvements shall be returned to the Owner/Applicant as indicated in the subdivision or site plan application approved by the Board, unless a release or other instrument signed by the Owner/Applicant directs that any such escrow balance be distributed to another party. 
V. Upon completion of improvements by the subdivider or owner, and approval by the Planning Board, surety covering maintenance of streets for a period of two years from completion shall be required in an amount equal to 10% of the total cost of such improvements or $2,000.00, whichever is greater.  Maintenance of streets shall be defined as work required to correct defects in the construction that becomes apparent to the town within the two year time period. 
5.01.1 Release of Performance and Maintenance Bond 
a.
 The performance bond shall not be released until completion of the public utilities and improvements in substantial accordance with the requirements of the Town of Merrimack. 

b.
 Before a performance bond can be released, as-built plans of all improvements must be submitted with certification by a registered engineer and/or registered land surveyor printed thereon that all installations are as shown.  These as-built plans will show true locations of Sewer MH'S, CB's, headers, underground utility locations and depths (telephone and electric), drain MH's, water and gas mains, shutoffs and entrances, and any other pertinent information.  These plans shall also be certified by the Town Engineer to 


5-2 

the Planning board, that all improvements meet acceptable construction requirements. As-built plans shall be one mylar and one copy. 
c.
 Upon recommendation of the Director of Public Works the Planning Board shall act to approve or disapprove the release of said performance or maintenance bond. Such request for release shall be reviewed by the Planning Board within 45 days of its submission to the Director of Public Works. 

d.
 At the end of the two year period the developer can request of the Department of Public Works that the maintenance bond be released.  Upon the recommendation of the Director of Public Works the Planning Board shall act to approve or disapprove the release of said maintenance bond within 45 days of the submission to the Director of Public Works. 

e.
 Upon failure of the developer to fulfill the terms of the performance or maintenance bond within the time specified, the board may recommend proceedings to recover all sums due and owing under the said bond, on behalf of the Town. 

f.
 Upon completion of the requirements in this Section the Board shall recommend acceptance of such roadways or dedicated land to the Board of Selectmen. 




5.02 Construction Requirements -Building Permits 
Except in the case of a subdivision in which each lot is on an existing improved town road or street, no building permit shall be issued until such time as major improvements within the street right-of-way and appurtenant storm drainage systems have been completed as shown on the final approved plat in accordance with the requirements of the subdivision regulations or a bond or other security as may be provided by the provisions of Section 5.01 hereof has been posted, and subject to any conditions established by the Planning Board at the time of final plat approval. 
As a minimum, however, the following shall be completed prior to issuance of any 
building permit: 
1 	Lots shall be bounded in accordance with Section 4.17 (f). 
2. 	Two copies of the proposed plat plan shall be submitted to the Building Inspector containing the following information: 
a. 
metes and bounds in accordance with the subdivision regulations are set as shown; 

b. 
location to scale of the proposed building foundations with setback dimensions to the two closest property lines, and the proposed slab elevation of the lowest finished floor; 

c. 
if applicable, dimensions from foundations to the well, septic tank cleanout 


5-3 

cover with approximate size and location of leach bed shall be shown; 
d. 
easements and location of any underground utilities and zoning setback lines; 

e. 
plans shall be drawn at a scale of 1" = 50'; or at 1" = 100' if the entire lot will not fit on a 17" x 22" plan. 


end 5 
5-4 

SECTION 6 -OCCUPANCY PERMITS 

6.01 Occupancy Permits 

Prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit, the following must be complete: 
1. 	
Compliance with all applicable codes and ordinances of the Town of Merrimack. 

2. 	
Two copies of the plot plan shall be submitted to the Building Inspector prepared by a Registered Land Surveyor certifying the following information: 

a. 	
metes and bounds in accordance with subdivision regulations are set as shown; 

b. 	
location to scale of the building foundations with setback dimensions to the two closest property lines, and the actual slab elevation of the lowest finished floor; 

c. 	
if applicable, dimensions from foundations to the well, septic tank cleanout cover with approximate size and location of leach bed shall be shown; 

d. 	
easements and approximate location of any underground utilities and zoning setbacks; 

e. 	
plans shall be drawn at a scale of 1" = 50', or at 1" = 100' if the entire lot will not fit on a 17" x 22" plan. 



3. 	
All public utilities for each lot, including, but not limited to, water, gas electric, sewer, and drainage in accordance with the approved phasing plan; 

4. 	
Initial permanent street signs in accordance with Section 4.19; 

5. 	
Bituminous concrete binder course and street bounds in accordance with Section 4.18 (a) on the roadway up to and including the road frontage of the lot requesting occupancy permits in accordance with the approved phasing plan. 

6. 	
The seven-part REQUEST FOR CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY form, effective date: January 2, 1989, shall be completed and signed by each department prior to the issuance of any Certificate of Occupancy. 


6-1 
end 6 
SECTION 7 -NON-RESIDENTIAL SITE REVIEW [Amended 6/17/2014] 
7.01 	Purpose The purpose of these regulations is to provide for Planning Board review and approval or disapproval of all site plans for the development of tracts of land for non-residential uses or multi-family dwelling units other than one and two family residential, as well as a change of development and/or use, whether or not such development includes a subdivision or resubdivision of the site, to assure that minimum standards will be attained so as to provide for and protect the public health, safety and general well being, in accordance with N.H.R.S.A. 36:19-a. 
7.02 	General Standards The review of any non-residential site plan, including the further development by change of development and/or use, or expansion of an allowable use of an existing developed site, conducted by the Planning Board under these regulations shall ascertain that adequate provisions have been made by the owner or his authorized agent for the following: 
A. traffic circulation and access including adequacy of adjacent streets, entrances and exits, traffic flow, sight distances, curb cuts, turning movements or turning lanes, existing or recommended traffic signalization, and projected relocation or widening of such streets; 
B. pedestrian safety and access; 
C. 	adequacy of the off street parking and the loading, safety and circulation of off street parking facilities.  Parking spaces shall be provided as stated in Table I, below. 
D. 	emergency vehicle access; 
E. 	storm water drainage based upon a 25-year storm frequency, utilizing on site absorption wherever practical.  Evaluate ponding limits using a fifty-year storm in all sags. All culverts shall be designed to insure the roadway will not be overtopped or damaged during a design storm with a fifty-year frequency or where the Board deems necessary a storm of greater intensity where site conditions, protection of private or public property, or an increase in the expenditure of public funds may warrant such action; 
F. 	water supply and wastewater disposal; 
G. 	environmental factors such as pollution, noise, odor, and protection of natural land features; 
H. landscaping in keeping with the general character of the surrounding area and or the proposed use; 
7-1 

I. 	signing and exterior lighting; 
J. 	a buffer zone; 
K. 	compatibility with the surrounding uses and no foreseeable diminution of value to surrounding properties anticipated. 
L. In addition, the Planning Board shall review the site plan to assure compliance with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and the minimization of encroachment on neighboring land uses. 


7.03 Parking 
A. General off-street parking and loading standards 
1. 	
At the time any new building or structure is erected or any existing building or structure is subject to a substantial alteration or a change in use, off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the minimum standards set forth below. 

2. 	
Calculation of parking and loading requirements 

a. 	
Where the use is not enclosed in a building, the portion of the lot so used shall be considered as part of the gross floor area for computing parking and loading requirements; 

b. 	
Quantity of parking and loading spaces shall comply with the minimum listed within Table 1 of this section based on allowed uses; 

c. 	
Loading and unloading areas shall not be considered as parking spaces; 

d. 	
When the schedule requires the number of spaces to be calculated per employee the number to be used is the maximum number of employees present during the largest shift. 




B. Dimensional requirements for parking spaces 
1. 	
Minimum parking space sizes and aisle widths shall conform to the following table: 

2. 	
Compact parking spaces (See Section 7.03.G.1) shall be 90 degree spaces, and measure at least 8 feet wide by 15 feet long.  Compact spaces must be conspicuously designated as reserved for compact automobiles by a sign located such that it will not be obscured by a vehicle parked in the space. 

3. 	
Motorcycle parking spaces (See Section 7.03.G.2) shall be 90 degree spaces, and shall be a minimum of 4 feet wide by 8 feet long. Motorcycle spaces must be conspicuously designated as reserved for motorcycles by a sign located such that it will not be obscured by a motorcycle parked in the space. 

4. 	
ADA Accessible parking spaces shall conform to the requirements of Section 


Angle to Travel Lane  Width of space  Length of space  Aisle width  
90 degrees  9’  18’  24’ (2-way traffic)  
60 degrees  10’6”  22’  18’ (1-way traffic)  
45 degrees  13’  25’  16’ (1-way traffic)  
0 degrees (parallel)  9’  22’  16’ (1-way traffic) 20’ (2-way traffic)  

7-2 

7.03.I. 
C. Minimum stacking space requirements 
All uses which include a drive-thru window or which are characterized by patrons remaining in their vehicles to receive service shall provide stacking spaces. Stacking spaces are not considered parking spaces and cannot be utilized to meet the parking requirements of Section 7.03.E.  Stacking spaces shall be a minimum of eighteen (18) feet in length. All stacking areas must be separated from other circulation aisles and parking spaces. Drive-thru lanes should be designed to include a means for vehicles to leave the queue. 
1. 	
Restaurant drive-thru windows A minimum of ten (10) stacking spaces (inclusive of the space at the window) shall be required for restaurants with drive-thru windows. 

2. 	
Car washes A minimum of four (4) stacking spaces per car wash bay (inclusive of the vehicle in the bay) shall be required. 

3. 	
Financial institution drive-thru “windows” A minimum of four (4) stacking spaces (inclusive of the space at the “window” or terminal) shall be required for financial institutions for each drive-thru window/terminal. 

4. 	
Sales and installation of auto parts & accessories (including, but not limited to 

drive-thru tire, muffler, glass, and lubrication services) A minimum of four (4) stacking spaces per bay or stall (inclusive of the space for the vehicle in the bay or stall). 

5. 	
Other uses with drive-thru windows or similar characteristics 


7-3 

For other uses not specifically provided herein, the Planning Board (with a recommendation from the Community Development Department) shall make a determination regarding the number of stacking spaces required. 
D. Loading space standards 
1. 	
No on-street loading or unloading shall be permitted. 

2. 	
Off-street loading spaces shall not be counted to satisfy the off-street parking requirements. 

3. 	
Minimum dimensions for a loading space shall be determined by evaluation of the size of anticipated delivery vehicles. 


E. Minimum parking required 
Off-street parking spaces shall be provided whenever any new use is established or any existing use is enlarged. The quantity of required spaces will be determined as shown in TABLE 1, below. The gross square footage of any use is utilized to determine the minimum parking required in cases where an area measurement is used for the basis of the requirement.  In the case where options are available for a particular requirement, the requirement that results in the larger number of required spaces shall be utilized. Any calculations that result in fractions of total parking spaces required for the site shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. 
TABLE 1 
TYPE OF USES  REQUIRED NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES  
Residential Uses  

Dwelling, multi-family  1.25 per bedroom, plus 0.5 per Dwelling Unit  
Elderly Housing  1.5 per Dwelling Unit  
Assisted Living Facilities  0.5 per resident unit or bed plus one per employee (plus 1 per facility vehicle/bus, if provided)  
Home Occupation (those requiring Planning Board approval only)  Applicant must demonstrate to Planning Board that parking is adequate for the proposed use  

Civic/Educational/Institutional Uses  

Public Facilities or Community center  1 space per 200 SF  
Religious Facilities  1 per each 3 seats or 6 linear ft.of bench space  

7-4 

Funeral homes  1 per 3 seats in largest assembly area, plus 1 per employee, plus 1 per service vehicle  
Crematorium  1 per 150 SF of group seating or assembly areas (5 spaces minimum)  
Education and Training Facilities (intended for those age 16 and over)  1 per faculty member, administrator, and employee, plus 0.5 per student at peak attendance  
Pre-School or private education facility (intended for those under age 16)  1 per faculty member, administrator, and employee, plus 1 per classroom  
Membership club (other than Health Club)  1 per 3 persons the facility is intended to accommodate at maximum occupancy  

Services/Entertainment/Recreation Uses  

Daycare Facility  1 per employee plus 1 per 8 attendees at peak attendance  
Recreational Facilities  1 space per 3 persons the facility is intended to accommodate  
Outdoor Recreation Centers  Parking and loading requirements shall be determined by the Board, with recommendation from the Community Development Department  
Bowling Alley  4 spaces per lane  
Health Clubs  1 space per 200 SF or 1 per 3 equipment stations  
Personal Service Businesses  2 per chair or bed  
Financial institution  1 per 300 SF  
Service establishment  1 per 300 SF or 2 per employee  
Laundromats  1 per every 2 washing machines  
Movie Theater  1.25 per 4 seats  
Theater/Performing Arts Facility  1 per 4 seats  
Dance, music, or martial arts school or studio  1 per 150 SF, plus 1 per employee  
Commercial Kennel or Animal Daycare  1 per employee, plus 1 for every 5 animals served at the facility at maximum occupancy  

Medical Service Uses  

Nursing Home and accessory uses  0.5 per resident unit or bed plus one per employee  
Hospitals  3 per bed  
Medical, Dental, Veterinary and other Healthcare Providers Offices  4 per practitioner, plus 1 per 2 other employees  


7-5 

Lodging/Meeting Facility Uses  

Hotels/Conference or Convention Center  1 per room, plus 1 per 20 rooms, plus 1 space per 200 SF of conference/convention use  
Motels  1 per room plus 1 per employee  

Retail Uses  

Retail Stores up to 75,000 SF  1 per 250 SF  
Retail Stores larger than 75,000 SF  1 per 300 SF (must provide a minimum of 300 spaces)  
Supermarket, Grocery Store or Convenience Store  1 per 200 SF  

Office Uses  

Office up to 50,000 SF  1 per 300 SF  
Office larger than 50,000 SF  1 per 400 SF (must provide a minimum 167 spaces)  

Restaurant/Hospitality Uses  

Restaurant  1 per 3 seats plus 1 per employee  
Restaurant, fast food  1 per 4 seats plus 1 per employee  
Cocktail Lounges in Restaurants/Bars & Nightclubs  1 per 2 seats plus 1 per employee  

Motor Vehicle Oriented Uses  

Gasoline Station  1 per employee  
Motor Vehicle Maintenance, Major Repair and Painting  1 per 800 SF but no less than 3 per service bay  
Motor Vehicle Sales/Rental  1 per 300 SF indoor sales/office area, plus 1 per 1,500 SF outdoor storage, plus 4 per service bay (Note: vehicles displayed for sale are considered “outdoor storage” and cannot be used to satisfy the parking requirement)  
Trucking Terminal  1 per 200 SF plus adequate parking and loading spaces for each company vehicle operating from the premises plus 1 per employee  
Car Wash  1 per employee (see also Section 7.03.C)  
Sales and installation of auto parts & accessories (including, but not limited to, tires, mufflers, glass, lubrication  1 per 250 SF  

7-6 

services)  
Bus/Rail Station/Terminal  Parking requirements shall be determined by the Board based on the type and nature of the facility, with recommendation from the Community Development Department  
Taxi Stand/Terminal  1 per 100 SF  
Bulk fuel storage for distribution  Minimum of 2 plus 1 per 1,500 SF  

Industrial/Construction Uses  

Manufacturing, Heavy  1 per 800 SF  
Manufacturing, Light up to 100,000 SF  1 per 600 SF  
Manufacturing, Light larger than 100,000 SF  1 per 800 SF (must provide minimum of 167 spaces)  
Research or Testing Laboratories up to 100,000 SF  1 per 600 SF  
Research or Testing Laboratories larger than 100,000 SF  1 per 800 SF (must provide minimum of 167 spaces)  
Storage, self serve  1 per 250 storage units plus 2 for employees)  
Warehouse and Storage up to 100,000 SF  1 per 1,200 SF  
Warehouse and Storage larger than 100,000 SF  1 per 1,500 SF (must provide minimum of 84 spaces)  
Wholesale Businesses up to 100,000 SF  1 per 800 SF  
Wholesale Businesses larger than 100,000 SF  1 per 1,000 SF (must provide minimum of 125 spaces)  
Unmanned utility equipment structure  2 where structure less than 2,000 SF (to be determined by Planning Board for larger structures)  
Building Contractor yards including outdoor storage of equipment and materials  1 per 5,000 SF of yard area, plus 1 per employee  
Office/Warehouse/Industrial Flex use  1 per 400 SF  

Other Uses  

Parking for Company Vehicles  1 per company vehicle the site is intended to accommodate  
Sexually Oriented Businesses  1 per 300 SF or 1 per 2 occupants at building capacity  
All Other Uses  Parking and loading requirements shall be calculated for the closest similar use as determined by the Board, with recommendation from the Community Development Department  

7-7 

F. 	Flexibility in off-street parking and loading standards 
1. 	The Board may allow deviations from the parking requirements set forth in Table 1 by issuance of a waiver when it finds that at least two of the following criteria are met (one of which must be either, but not both, subsections “a.” or “b.” as required by NH RSA 674:44): 
a. 	
Strict conformity would pose an unnecessary hardship to the applicant and the waiver would not be contrary to the spirit and intent of the regulations; 

b. 	
Specific circumstances relative to the site plan, or conditions of the land in such site plan, indicate that the waiver will properly carry out the spirit and intent of the regulations; 

c. 	
The applicant is able to demonstrate through studies of similar uses or similar facilities that the actual parking demand for the property is significantly different from the requirements of Table 1, and can document that there have been no parking shortages at such studied sites; 

d. 	
There exists the availability of alternate transportation modes, and the applicant has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Board that the business and its employees will utilize such alternative modes of transportation; 

e. 	
A sole business (not part of a larger multi-tenant building) is primarily oriented to walk-in trade; 

f. 	
There is available sufficient on-street parking (in conformance to Section Chapter 183, Sections 17-20, of the Town’s Administrative Code). 


2. 	Whenever the Board grants a waiver for a deviation from the parking requirements set forth in Table 1, the applicant shall note on the plans the parking requirement that the Board allows for and any reasons for allowing or requiring the deviation and/or conditions of approval as deemed appropriate by the Board. The applicant shall also note the specific number of spaces for which the Board has granted a waiver. 
G. Alternative parking standards In order to encourage alternate modes of travel that will reduce dependence upon single-occupancy vehicles, the following guidelines and standards are offered (the provisions of this subsection do not require the Board to grant a waiver, rather, the Board may permit these alternative parking standards through the approval of a site plan when these sections are applicable and requested to be considered by the applicant): 
1. 	Compact parking spaces For nonresidential uses, not more than ten (10) percent of the total number of required spaces may be designated for compact vehicles and marked 
7-8 

accordingly when deemed appropriate for the particular site and use by the Board. 
2. 	Motorcycle parking spaces Motorcycle parking may substitute for up to five spaces or 5 % of the required automobile parking spaces, whichever is less, when deemed appropriate for the particular site and use by the Board. For every four motorcycle parking spaces provided, the automobile parking requirement may be reduced by one 
(1) space. 
3. 	Future parking 
a. 	
The Board may allow a reduction in the number of parking spaces actually constructed as long as an area is clearly shown as “reserved for future parking” and a note on the plan indicates a prohibition on any structural improvement in that area. 

b. 	
Each plan will be reviewed on individual need.  

c. 	
Future parking areas shall be designed for their eventual construction (including all drainage ways and structures), and shall be required to be constructed if deemed necessary by the Community Development Department, if after initial occupancy of the building, it is determined that the future parking spaces are needed to accommodate the number of vehicles parking at the site. 

d. 	
The applicant shall provide a note on the recordable sheet (or other appropriate sheet containing a Planning Board signature as deemed appropriate by the Community Development Department) of the plan indicating the requirements of Section 7.03.G.3.c, above. 


4. 	Shared parking Where the Board determines that a proposed development consisting of two or more uses located on a single parcel (or multiple parcels part of the same application, or parcels that share common access) will generate different hourly, daily and/or seasonal parking demand due to the varied hours of operation of each use and frequencies of customer and employee occupancy of available parking spaces, the Board may approve a site plan utilizing shared parking. The applicant shall provide the parking space count and justification analysis. Approved shared parking requires the present construction of a lesser number of spaces, provided that: 
a. 	
The location of any shared parking area shall be within 1,000 feet of the property containing the use the parking is intended to serve; 

b. 	
The applicant shall provide the Board with a shared parking plan which shall be based upon the following: 


7-9 

i A complete description of the proposed uses, floor areas devoted to such uses, the number of seats or rooms assigned to each use, and the days and hours of operation of each use for each day of the week and for any seasonal variations in operations. 
ii 	A complete description of the number of employees per shift. 
iii 	A complete description of the projected total peak hour or daily period of occupancy by patrons for each proposed use during weekdays, Saturday, Sunday and any seasonal variations in peak hour or period of occupancy. 
iv 	Where applicable, documentation/execution of any cross-easement arrangements to allow for shared parking on multiple parcels where the parking is on parcels under separate ownership. 
c. 	A future parking plan may be required at the determination of the Board. The Community Development Department may order the applicant to construct future parking spaces if need arises as per Section 7.03.G.3.c. 
5. 	Transportation mitigation plans 
a. 	
Transportation mitigation plans may be implemented in conjunction with any use at the option of the Planning Board, exclusive of parking areas in excess of 250 parking spaces. 

b. 	
New construction of parking areas in excess of 250 parking spaces, or any change to existing uses that requires additional parking on site of greater than 250 parking spaces, may require the applicant to employ parking mitigation to reduce the number of surface parking spaces if deemed appropriate by the Board. 

c. 	
Qualifying parking mitigation shall include but not be limited to: structured parking, parking shuttles, employee carpool plans, incentives for employees to use alternative transportation such as bicycles, telecommuting plans for employees, shared parking, and other similar plans. 

d. 	
The Board shall have the discretion to require parking mitigation for parking lots in excess of 250 parking spaces, as appropriate, taking into consideration stormwater, surface water impairment, the character of the neighborhood, traffic, pedestrian safety, landscaping, and circulation. 


7-10 

6. 	Alternative transportation 
a. 	Carpooling / vanpooling: 
i A reduction of up to ten (10) percent of required parking, based on substantiated projections of reduction in parking demand, may be granted for any building or use exceeding fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of gross floor area that institutes and maintains an approved carpooling/vanpooling program. 
ii 	Such reduction may be terminated immediately upon failure of the owner, operator, tenant, or others responsible for such programs to maintain such programs in an ongoing and acceptable manner as determined by the Board.  
iii 	When permitted by the Board, the applicant shall note on the plans the Carpooling/Vanpooling plan that the Board allows for and any reasons for allowing or requiring the deviation and/or conditions of approval as deemed appropriate by the Board. 
iv 	Future parking plans may be required by the Board to be developed (in accordance with Section 7.03.G.3) for the parking spaces that are subject to the reduction allowed by the Board. 
b. 	Shuttle service: 
i 	A reduction of up to fifteen (15) percent of required parking, based on substantiated projections of reduction in parking demand, may be granted for any building or use that institutes and maintains a continuous, personalized shuttle service. 
ii 	Said reduction may be terminated immediately upon failure of the owner, operator, tenant or others responsible for such program to maintain such program in an ongoing and acceptable manner as determined by the Board. 
iii 	When permitted by the Board, the applicant shall note on the plans the Shuttle Service plan that the Board allows for and any reasons for allowing or requiring the deviation and/or conditions of approval as deemed appropriate by the Board. 
iv 	Future parking plans may be required by the Board to be developed (in accordance with Section 7.03.G.3) for the parking spaces that are subject to the reduction allowed by the Board. 
7-11 

H. Traffic circulation:  The parking lot design shall be such that: 
1. 	
There is safe and adequate vehicular traffic and pedestrian circulation; 

2. 	
All parking spaces can be safely accessed  from the aisles, with particular attention paid to ensure that spaces near the end of an aisle have sufficient room for backing and turning; 

3. 	
Cars will not back into any public or private roadway. 


I. 	ADA compliance 
1. 	
Parking lots shall be in compliance with the Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA), as amended. 

2. 	
ADA Accessible parking spaces.  All sites which provide on-site parking shall provide accessible parking spaces and accompanying access aisles as required by Federal Law. 


J. 	Bicycle parking: Off-street bicycle parking may be required by the Board whenever any new use is established or any existing use is enlarged for which more than 25 vehicle parking spaces are required. If required by the Board, the quantity of required bicycle stalls will be determined as shown in TABLE 2, below 
TABLE 2 BICYCLE PARKING 
Vehicle Spaces Required  Bicycle Stalls Required  
25-100  5% of vehicle  
100+  3% of auto (minimum of 5 stalls)  

1. 	
A minimum of two (2) stalls shall be provided. 

2. 	
A bicycle “stall’ shall include a delineated and safe parking area, and an appropriate structure to which bicycles can be secured. 

3. 	
Appropriate structure means a stand or other device constructed so as to enable the user to secure by locking the frame and one wheel of each bicycle parked therein. Racks must be easily usable with both U-locks and cable locks. Racks shall support the bikes in a stable upright position so that a bike, 


7-12 

if bumped, will not fall or roll down. Racks that support a bike primarily by a wheel are not acceptable. 
4. 	Bicycle parking racks, shelters or lockers must be securely anchored to the ground or attached to a structure. 

7.04 SUBMISSION PROCEDURE 
The following procedures apply to non-residential site plan review and will be followed by the Planning Board when considering or acting upon a plat or application submitted to it for approval: 
A. A completed application (as defined below) sufficient to invoke jurisdiction of the Board shall be submitted to and accepted by the Board only at a public hearing of the Board with notice as provided in Section 7.04.4.  The applicant shall file the application with the Board at least 15 days prior to the meeting at which the application will be accepted.  The application shall include the names and addresses of the applicant and all abutters as indicated in Town records not more than 5 days before the day of filing.  Abutters shall also be identified on any plat submitted to the board. 
A completed application to invoke the Board jurisdiction under Section 7 shall consist of all information required in Section 7.05.  Said application must contain sufficient information to allow the Board to make an informal decision. 
B. The Board shall, at the next regular meeting or within 30 days following the delivery of the application, determine if a submitted application is complete according to the Board’s regulations and shall vote upon its acceptance.  Upon determination by the Board that a submitted application is complete according to the Board’s regulations, the Board shall begin formal consideration and shall act to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove within 65 days, subject to extension or waiver as provided in Section 7.04.3.  Upon failure of the Board to approve or disapprove the application, the applicant may obtain from the Selectmen an order directing the Board to act within 15 days.  Failure of the Planning Board to act upon such order of the Selectmen shall constitute grounds for an applicant to petition the Superior Court in accordance with the provisions of RSA 676:4 (as amended). 
C. The Planning Board may apply to the Selectmen for an extension not to exceed an additional 90 days before acting to approve or disapprove an application.  The applicant may waive the requirement for Planning Board action within the time periods specified in Section 7.04.2 and consent to such extension as may be mutually agreeable. 
D. Notice to the applicant, abutters and the public shall be give as follows: The Planning Board shall notify the abutters and the applicant by certified mail, return 
7-13 

receipt requested, of the date upon which the application will be formally submitted to the Board.  Notice shall be mailed at least 10 days prior to submission.  Notice to the general public shall be given at the same time by posting a copy of the notice in a public place within the town.  The notice shall include a general description of the proposal that is the subject of the application and shall identify the applicant and the location of the proposal. 
For any public hearing on the application, the same notice as required for notice of submission of the application shall be given.  If notice of public hearing has been included in the notice of submission or any prior notice, additional notice of that public hearing is not required nor shall additional notice be required of an adjourned session of a hearing with proper notice if the date, time and place of the adjourned session was made known at the prior hearing.  All costs of notice, whether mailed, posted or published, shall be paid in advance by the applicant. Failure to pay such costs shall constitute valid grounds for the Planning Board to terminate further consideration and to disapprove the plat without a public hearing. 
E. Reasonable fees	 in addition to fees for notice under Section 7.04.4 may be imposed by the Board to cover its administrative expenses and costs of special investigative studies, review of documents and other matters which may be required by particular applications. The Board may, with the input and recommendation of the Director of Public Works and/or the Director of Community Development, require fees to be escrowed with the Town to cover the costs and expenses to the Town associated with any engineering or legal reviews, investigative studies, or inspections, which the Board may deem necessary with respect the particular application as further defined in these regulations. 
F. 	In case of disapproval of any application submitted to the Planning Board, the ground for such disapproval shall be adequately stated upon the records of the Planning Board. 
7.05 	SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS When the owner of the property or his authorized agent makes formal application for site review his application shall contain the following exhibits and information: 
A. A fully executed and signed copy of the application for site plan review. 
B. Approvals as required by law from any other municipal, state or federal agency that may have jurisdiction. 
C. For all proposed commercial or industrial uses the applicant shall provide a narrative description of the type and nature of the commercial or industrial operations to be conducted on the premises.  The narrative should discuss the types of processes to be performed in sufficient detail to show consistency with the Merrimack Zoning Ordinance and Building Code, Paragraphs; Commercial C­
7-14 

2, 2.02.3 – B1, and Industrial Site plans I-1, I-2, Para 2.02.4 – A and Industrial I­3, Paragraph 2.02.5 A. The discussion should include hours of operation, number of employees by shift, the types and quantities of materials to be handled, timing and number of deliveries and pick-ups, and effects on the surrounding air quality, noise levels and visual appearance. 
D. Four (4) copies of the site plan drawn at a scale sufficient to allow review of the items listed under the preceding general standards, but at not more than 50 feet to the inch and showing the following: 
1. 	
owners name, address and signature; and name and address of applicant if different from owner; 

2. 	
names and addresses of all abutting property owners; 

3. 	
key maps sketch showing general location of site in the town; 

4. 	
boundary of the entire parcel held in single ownership regardless of whether all or part is being developed at this time; 

5. 	
North arrow indicating True North and the bearings and distances of all property lines and the source of the information; 

6. 	
Zoning Classification(s) of the property and the location of zoning district boundaries if the property is located in two or more zoning districts. 


a. 	For subdivisions and site plans that involve land designated as "Special Flood Hazard Areas" (SFHA) by the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP): 
i 	The Planning Board shall review the proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by Federal or State law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. 
ii 	The Planning Board shall require that all proposals for development greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is the lesser, include Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data within such proposals (i.e. floodplain boundary and 100-year flood elevation). 
iii 	The Planning Board shall require the applicant to submit sufficient evidence (construction drawings, grading and land treatment plans) so as to allow a determination that: 
(1) 
all such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 

(2) 
all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and, 

(3) 
adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 


7-15 

7. 	
soil types and location of soil boundaries as certified by a registered engineer or the Soil Conservation Service of the U. S. Department of Agriculture; 

8. 	
all building setbacks required by the zoning district (through shading, hatching or overlay); 

9. 	
the location, size, and character of all signs and exterior lighting; 

10. 
the lot area of the parcel, street frontage and the zoning requirements for minimum lot size and frontage; 

11. 
the location of all existing and proposed buildings, driveways, sidewalks, parking spaces, loading areas, open spaces, large trees, open drainage courses, signs, exterior lighting, service areas, easements and landscaping; 

12. 
the location of all buildings within 50 feet of the parcel to be developed and the location of intersecting roads or driveways within 200 feet of the parcel; 

13. 
a storm water drainage plan showing: 

a. 	
the existing and proposed method of handling storm water run-off. 

b. 	
the direction of flow of the run-off through the use of arrows. 

c. 	
the location, elevation, and size of all catch basins, drywells, drainage ditches, swales, retention basins, and storm sewers. 



14. 
engineering calculations used to determine drainage requirements based upon a 25 year storm frequency, if the project will significantly alter the existing drainage pattern due to such factors as the amount of new impervious surfaces (such as paving and building area) being proposed 

15. 
existing and proposed topography of the site at 2-foot contour intervals if major changes to the existing topography are being proposed; 

16. 
statement of Plan: 


"When this plan is implemented, the owner or applicant agrees to make all improvements as may be approved by the Planning board and shown on this plan. This includes all improvements shown as graphics or called out as notes on this plan.  I understand that failure to implement all improvements may result in the withholding of the Certificate of Occupancy at this site." 
Date_______________Signature______________________ 
7-16 

17. 
snow storage areas must be designated by location on the plan; 

18. 
all non-residential site plans submitted to the Board for approval shall show a landscaped area between the site and all adjacent parcels except as specifically waived by the Board or where common driveways make it impractical.  The purpose of this area, particularly between sites with compatible uses, is to provide adequate space for landscaping, in particular the growth to maturity of trees, in order to preserve the rural character of the community even in those areas where commercial and/or industrial development occurs side by side on several contiguous lots along a street. (See also Section 10 – Landscaping Standards.) 

19. 
all commercial/industrial non-residential site plans shall provide for a paved pedestrian way or sidewalk along all existing or proposed streets in the following manner: 

a. 	
Location-In general, pedestrian ways or sidewalks shall be constructed parallel to the street and located within the right-of-way.  The arrangement of the pedestrian ways or sidewalks shall provide for the continuation of any existing or planned pedestrian ways or sidewalks in adjoining or surrounding areas. 

b. 	
Easements-Should it become necessary to route the pedestrian ways or sidewalks outside the right-of-way, the site plan owner shall provide the Town appropriate deeds describing the necessary easements. 

c. 	
Width-The paved width of all pedestrian ways or sidewalks shall be five (5) feet (minimum). 

d. 	
Design-The design and construction of pedestrian ways and sidewalks shall provide for the use of same by handicapped persons, including ramps at corners, intersections, crosswalks or where specified by the Board.  The walks shall be paved with a minimum of 2 inch thick bituminous concrete laid in two courses with a minimum of 12 inches of bank run gravel sub-base or an alternative design suitable to the Planning Board. 



20. 
Driveways and Access Roads; Commercial Sites, Route 3, Continental Boulevard/Greeley Street and Route 101A: 


a. 	Maximum Number of Driveways Per Lot.  Commercial Lots that have frontage only on Route 3, Continental Boulevard/Greeley Street or Route 101A shall be allowed a single driveway for entrance and egress to the site. 
Two one-way driveways may be substituted for a single driveway, provided that the minimum required distance between driveways can be met. 
7-17 

Where appropriate due to the size of the development (such as a shopping center) a second two-way, a second one way in driveway, or a second one way out driveway may be allowed, provided that the minimum required distance between driveways can be met. 
Where appropriate due to the nature of the development (such as a gasoline filling station) a second two-way driveway may be allowed. 
b. 	Minimum Distance Between Driveways. The minimum distance between driveways on the same side of the highway and offset driveways on the opposite side of a highway, including all road intersections, (unless otherwise specified in Note 1, below), shall be measured from the centerline of the driveways at the right of way line and shall be a function of the posted speed in accordance with the following table: 
MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN DRIVEWAYS 
Highway Speed Minimum in Miles Per Hour Spacing 
Up to 35 150' 40 185' 45 230' 50 275' 
Note 1: The centerlines of all new driveways should be aligned with driveways and road intersections on the opposing side of the highway, if they exist. If such an alignment is not feasible, the driveways shall be located in accordance with the table above. 
c. 	
Driveway Width. Driveways shall not exceed 36 feet in width, (plus the width of any divider median) measured perpendicular to the driveway at its narrowest point. The driveway shall be flared at the property line with minimum radii of 25’. All driveway entrances (regardless of the presence of curbing on the highway) shall be curbed from the edge of the highway to at least the end of the radii at the driveway throat. 

d. 	
Shared Driveways and Access. The use of common shared driveway entrances between adjacent properties is encouraged, especially in high traffic areas having small lot frontages. In order to reduce the need to use public streets for movement between commercial or industrial properties, parking areas shall be designed to connect with parking areas on adjacent properties where feasible. 

k. 	
Adequate On-Site Circulation and Storage. The site design shall provide adequate aisle widths, raised medians, tractor trailer access, and number of parking spaces to promote safe and efficient movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic within, into and out-of the site. 


7-18 

Such shared driveway entrances may be located on the property line between adjacent properties or located totally on one property.  
In order to facilitate pedestrian and bicycle traffic, access and parking area plans shall provide efficient sidewalk and/or pathway connections between neighboring developments or land uses.  
e.  Interconnecting Access Ways. All Projects subject to Site Plan review shall provide interconnecting access roads or easements for future construction of access ways that will provide and promote vehicular and pedestrian access between adjacent lots, without accessing the highway, and shall be designed to provide safe and controlled access to adjacent development and potential development.  
f.  Easements All properties being developed or redeveloped shall provide ingress and egress easements in a form suitable to the Planning Board that provide for the common sharing of driveways, parking areas, and /or mutual access easement areas.  
g.  Access to Lots With Multiple Frontages. Commercial Lots with frontage on both a Major Arterial (Route 3, Continental Boulevard-Greeley Street, Route 101A) and an adjacent intersecting road shall not be permitted to directly access the arterial highway, except where it can be demonstrated that other potential access points would cause greater environmental, safety or traffic impacts.  
h.  Access to Lots Having Adjacent Easements. Lots with frontage on a Major Arterial which also have access easement rights through an adjacent property that already has a direct access to the arterial shall not be permitted to directly access the arterial highway, except where it can be demonstrated that other potential access points would cause greater environmental, safety or traffic impacts.  
i.  Driveway (Throat) Length. The minimum length of a driveway shall be adequate to accommodate the queuing of the maximum number of vehicles, as defined by the peak period of operation identified in the traffic study. The design of the driveway shall to the maximum extent possible, cause no vehicles waiting to enter the site, to remain on the highway.  
j.  Corner Clearances. Lots with frontage on Arterial Highways and on an adjacent or intersecting road, which, due to environmental or traffic impacts, cannot access the adjacent or intersecting streets shall comply with the following standards.  

7-19 


7.06 Post Approval Procedures 
A. Recording of Final Site Plan 
Upon a vote by a majority of the Planning Board to approve a site plan, the application shall be deemed to have final approval and the site plan shall be signed by the Chairman and the Secretary of the Board. The signed plan shall be recorded in the Hillsborough County Registry of Deeds (HCRD) within thirty days of the signing of the plan. The Planning Board, by vote, may extend the filing period for good cause. 
B. Site Plan Conditions of Approval 
All terms of a conditional approval, as determined by the Planning Board in its affirmative vote on the motion for conditional approval, shall be completed to the satisfaction of the Chairman and Secretary prior to signing of the plan by the Chairman and Secretary and within six months of the Planning Board’s affirmative vote of conditional approval. Plans, which have not satisfied the conditions of approval within this time period, shall be null and void. 
In addition to local approvals, the applicant shall be responsible for showing evidence of having obtained such State and Federal permits as may be applicable.  Permits may include a Federal storm water management permit or other permits 
7-20 

as required by the Federal NPDES program, NH Alteration of Terrain Permit, State and/or Federal wetlands permits, NH Department of Environmental Services (DES) Subdivision approvals, and the NH Department Highway Access Permit. 
C. Expiration of Approved Site Plans 
In accordance with RSA 674:39, site plan approvals become vested from subsequent changes to the Zoning Ordinance and Non-Residential Site Review regulations for a period of four years from the date of Planning Board Approval. 
D. Revocation of Approved Site Plans In accordance with RSA 676:4-a, Revocation of Recorded Approval, a 
subdivision, plat, street plat, site plan or other approval which has been filed with the appropriate recording official, under RSA 674:37, Recording of Plats, may not be revoked by the Planning Board in whole or in part except as detailed in the statute.  
7.07  Separability  
If any section, subsection, or phrase of these non-residential site plan review regulations if found for any reason to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of these regulations.  
end 7  

7-21 

SECTION 8 -ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

8.01 Modifications 
The requirements of the foregoing regulations may be modified when, in the opinion of the Board, specific circumstances surrounding a subdivision, or condition of the land in such subdivision, indicate that such modification will properly carry out the purpose and intent of the master plan and of these regulations. 
8.02 	Acceptance of Streets Nothing herein is intended to modify the requirements of law with reference to the acceptance of streets by the Town.  Nothing herein is intended to modify or control the construction, reconstruction, or extension of roads by the Town or State. 
8.03 	Other Regulations Where these regulations are in conflict with other local ordinance, the more stringent shall apply. 
8.04 	Enforcement These regulations shall be enforced by the Board of Selectmen or its duly authorized representative. 
8.05 	Penalties As provided in RSA 676:16, any owner, or agent of the owner, of any land located within a subdivision, who transfers or sells any land, before a plat of the said subdivision had been approved by the Planning Board and recorded or filed in the office of the Register if Deeds shall forfeit and pay a penalty of five hundred dollars for each lot or parcel so transferred or sold; and the description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties. 
8.06 	Appeals Any person, aggrieved by an official action of the Board, may appeal therefrom to the Zoning Board of Adjustment as provided by RSA 676:5. 
8.07 	Validity If any section, subsection, or phrase of these subdivision regulations is found for any reason to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of these regulations. 
8-1 

8.08 	Effective Date The effective date of these regulations shall be: 
Adopted November 7, 1967 Amended December 7, 1971 Amended September 19, 1972 Amended June 27, 1973 Amended January 30, 1976 Amended September 16, 1977 -Effective November 1, 1977 Amended November 22, 1977 Amended February 12, 1980 Amended April 21, 1981 Amended August 31, 1982 Amended July 22, 1985 Amended April 29, 1987 Amended July 31, 1990 Amended February 11, 1992 Amended September 15, 1999 Amended February 5, 2002 Amended June 4, 2002 Amended February 4, 2003 Amended October 7, 2003 Amended February 10, 2004 Amended September 6, 2005 Amended April 17, 2007 Amended May 15, 2007 Amended November 27, 2007 Amended July 8, 2008 Amended October 6, 2009 – Inserted FEMA compliant language to Sect’s. 4.05 & 
7.04. Amended March 16, 2010 – Added LED Lighting language to Sect. 11 Amended March 27, 2013 – Amended Sect. 7, New Parking Subsection Amended June 17, 2014 – Amended Sect. 7, revised parking requirement for self-storage 
end 8 
8-2 









SECTION 10 -LANDSCAPING STANDARDS 

10.01 Non-Residential Site Plans 
All nonresidential site plans submitted to the board shall include a landscape plan that is designed to provide for adequate, year-round buffering and screening from different adjacent uses; preserve and protect prominent natural features of the landscape; enhance public safety and comfort; enhance the aesthetic appeal of the community; enhance conservation and protection of the public water supply and protect indigenous flora and fauna. 
1. General Standards 
a. 
Landscaping should be designed to remain functional and attractive during all seasons of the year through a thoughtful selection of deciduous, evergreen, and flowering plant varieties. 

b. 
Prominent natural or man-made features of the landscape such as mature trees, surface waters, natural rock outcrops, roadways or stonewalls should be retained and incorporated into the landscape plan where possible. The addition of ornamental rocks, fencing and other features new to the landscape are encouraged.  

c. 
Existing natural vegetation should be retained where such vegetation meets the requirements of a), above.  Existing trees and shrubs to be retained may be substituted for any compatible required plantings. 

d. 
Lawn areas should not be planted in strips of less than six feet in width, especially adjacent to roads or parking areas, since such areas are difficult to maintain. Mulched planting beds, decorative pavers and alternative groundcover plant varieties are preferred.   

e. 
Native plant species, or plant species that have been well established in Merrimack or the surrounding region should be used to meet the minimum requirements of this section. Plant varieties selected should be hardy, drought and salt resistant, and require minimal maintenance. Less hardy, exotic or higher maintenance plant varieties may be used to supplement minimum landscaping requirements where appropriate, but are not encouraged. 

f. 
Not less than six inches of loam (minimum 8% organic content) shall be provided on disturbed areas intended for lawns, planting beds or for natural re­growth.  

g. 
Irrigation systems shall be installed to provide sufficient water necessary to maintain the viability of the landscaped area. “Soaker” or drip type systems with soil moisture sensors are the preferred type of irrigation system. 

h. 
Curbing or wheel stops should be provided in all parking areas abutting landscaped strips to avoid accidental damage. 


10-1 

2. Streetscapes –Town Center District 
A landscaped frontage strip, not less than five feet in width, shall be provided between any paved or built on portion of a site and any abutting public right-of­way property line except where driveway entrances/exits or pedestrian ways are required. Such landscaped strips shall contain not less than one deciduous, ornamental, flowering tree, such as crabapple or dogwood, and five shrubs per every 20 linear feet of  frontage strip adjoining any public right-of-way. At least two of every five shrubs shall be of flowering deciduous varieties such as Rosa Rugosa, and at least two shall be evergreens.  Clusters of perennial flowering plants of similar size and massing to a shrub or shrubs that feature a prominent display of flowers and foliage may be substituted for one of every five shrubs required. Supplemental perennial or annual flowering plants are strongly encouraged including the planting of spring flowing bulb varieties such as daffodils. 
A split rail or picket fence or a stone wall, not less than two feet in height and not more than four feet in height, shall be provided between or to the rear of the trees to serve as a back drop and support for the shrubs and other planting, to serve as a unifying architectural element, and to protect against damage cause by pedestrian “cut-through” traffic.  Shrubs and other smaller plantings should be placed between the fence and the street or on both sides where the fence is placed toward the center of the landscaped strip. 
Landscape strips may be mulched or planted with hardy groundcover plant varieties rather than planted as lawn areas. 
Sidewalks, benches, trash receptacles, lighting fixtures, permitted signs and other similar improvements shall be integrated into landscaped strips where appropriate. 
3. Streetscapes –Daniel Webster Highway (Outside of Town Center District) 
A landscaped frontage strip, not less than ten feet in width, shall be provided between any paved or built on portion of a site and any abutting public right-of­way except where driveway entrances/exits or pedestrian ways are required. A deciduous shade tree shall be planted along the front property line of all sites adjoining the Daniel Webster Highway at a rate of not less than 1 tree per 50 linear feet of frontage strip. Where larger shade trees may interfere with overhead utilities, ornamental/flowering tree varieties with a spacing of 40 feet should be used.   
Landscape strips may be mulched or planted with hardy groundcover plant varieties or as lawn areas. The use of landscaping berms and fences is encouraged where appropriate. 
10-2 

Sidewalks, benches, lighting fixtures, permitted signs and other similar improvements shall be integrated into landscaped strips where appropriate. 
4. Buffers 
All non-residential site plans submitted to the Board for approval shall show a natural or landscaped buffer area between the site and all adjacent parcels with a different use.  Common driveways, access ways, drainage ways and structures and utilities may be located within or traverse buffer areas where necessary. The size, type and composition of buffer areas are based upon the classification of the proposed use as well as the classification of abutting uses. Larger buffer areas may be required by the Board to provide adequate screening between abutting uses where necessary. There are four buffer categories: A, B, C and D, as shown in Table 1, with A being the least protective. In addition, there are four ways that each category of buffer can be developed as shown in Table 2.  Each of the buffer categories and types are more fully described on the pages that follow. 
Table 1 Required Buffer Categories by Land Use Classification 
Proposed Use  
Abutting Use*  Res 1  Res 2  Comm 1  Comm 2  Ind 1  Ind 2  Ind 3  
Res 1  NA  B  C  C  D  D  D  
Res 2  B  A  B  C  D  D  D  
Comm 1  C  B  NA  B  C  C  NA  
Comm 2  C  C  B  NA  B  C  NA  
Ind 1  D  D  C  B  NA  NA  NA  
Ind 2   D  D  C  C  NA  NA  NA  
Ind 3  D  D  NA  NA  NA  NA  NA  

Res 1 = Single-Family/Two-Family Res 2 = Multi-Family/PRD Residential Comm 1 = Limited commercial use within C-1 Zone Comm 2 = Commercial use within C-2 Zone Ind. 1 = Industrial use within the I-1 Industrial Zone Ind. 2 = Industrial use within the I-2 Industrial Zone Ind 3 = Industrial use within the I-3 Industrial Zone 
• 	
Where the existing abutting use is a nonconforming use, such as a residential use in an industrial district, the required buffer area for the proposed use may be reduced by one step (i.e. C to B).   

• 	
See Zoning Ordinance Sect 2.01.1 F. for specifically designated buffer zone for district I­


2. 
10-3 

Table 2 
Buffer Areas, Minimum Widths (in feet) 

Type  
Category  Type 1  Type 2  Type 3  Type 4  
A  5  10  15  25  
B  5  10  20  30  
C  10  20  30  50  
D  20  30  50  100  

Buffer Category A: 
Buffers in this category are intended to be used between sites within the same land use category or between low impact uses of different categories. They are designed to enhance the appearance of the areas, to provide a visual break between differing sites, and to create more hospitable environments for pedestrians, residents, and visitors to the areas. They are generally not intended to provide visual screens, or as screens for noise or odor. For these reasons, ornamental plantings and landscape features are emphasized rather than more dense masses of vegetation, evergreens or solid walls, fences or berms. Sidewalks, benches, trash receptacles, lighting fixtures, permitted signs and other similar improvements may be integrated into the buffers where appropriate.      
Type 1: a buffer area not less than five feet wide containing a picket or split rail fence or low stone wall with not less than one ornamental deciduous tree and three shrubs per 25 linear feet. Clusters of perennial flowering plants of similar size and massing to a shrub may be substituted for up to two of every three shrubs required. Supplemental perennial or annual flowering plants are encouraged. 
Type 2: a buffer area not less than ten feet wide containing not less than one ornamental tree and three shrubs per 25 linear feet. Clusters of perennial flowering plants of similar size and massing to a shrub may be substituted for up to two of every four shrubs required.  Supplemental perennial or annual flowering plants are encouraged. 
Type 3: a buffer area not less than fifteen feet wide containing one ornamental or small shade tree and between three and four shrubs per 40 linear feet. Clusters of perennial flowering plants of similar size and massing to a shrub may be substituted for any shrubs required.  Supplemental perennial or annual flowering plants are encouraged.  Type 3 buffers may include portions of preexisting woodlands or vegetation. 
Type 4: a buffer area not less than twenty-five feet wide containing natural preexisting woodland or partial woodland vegetation. Additional tree plantings may be used fill-in gaps in natural vegetation where appropriate. Clusters of perennial flowering plants and ornamental shrubs are encouraged along peripheral areas.  Type 4 buffers should be generally limited to rear yard areas of a site. 
10-4 

Buffer Category B: 
Buffers in this category are intended to be used between sites of different land use categories where relatively few conflicts are anticipated.  They are designed to enhance the appearance of affected areas as well as to provide for partial visual screens. Ornamental plantings and landscape features are emphasized along with somewhat denser masses of vegetation and the required use of evergreens.  Solid walls and privacy fences may also be used. Sidewalks, benches, trash receptacles, lighting fixtures, permitted signs and other similar improvements may be integrated into the buffers where appropriate. 
Type 1: a buffer area not less than five feet wide containing a stockade or privacy fence or solid wall not less than six feet in height, and not less than one ornamental deciduous tree and three shrubs per 25 linear feet. Clusters of perennial flowering plants of similar size and massing to a shrub may be substituted for two of every three shrubs required.  Supplemental perennial or annual flowering plants are encouraged.  Buffer areas should be arranged with plantings facing in toward the site with the “good” side of the fence or wall facing the abutting property. 
Type 2: a buffer area not less than ten feet wide containing a picket or split rail fence or low solid wall and not less than one ornamental tree and three shrubs per 25 linear feet. Clusters of perennial flowering plants of similar size and massing to a shrub may be substituted for one of every three shrubs required and two of every three shrubs is an evergreen. 
Supplemental perennial or annual flowering plants are encouraged. 
Type 3: a buffer area not less than twenty feet wide containing not less than one ornamental or small shade tree and four shrubs per 20 linear feet where two clusters of perennial flowering plants of similar size and massing to a shrub may substitute for two of every four shrubs required and two of every four shrubs required are evergreens. Supplemental perennial or annual flowering plants and ornamental shrubs are encouraged.  
Type 4: a buffer area not less than thirty feet wide containing natural preexisting woodland or partial woodland vegetation.  Additional evergreen tree plantings should be used to fill-in gaps in natural vegetation where necessary. Clusters of perennial flowering plants and ornamental shrubs are encouraged along peripheral areas.  Type 4 buffers should be generally limited to rear yard areas of a site. 
Buffer Category C: 
Buffers in this category are intended to be used between sites of different land use categories where some land use conflicts are anticipated.  They are designed primarily to provide visual screens while also screening out some noise and other potentially objectionable circumstances as well as enhancing the appearance of the general area. Relatively dense masses of vegetation and the required use of evergreens are emphasized 
10-5 

along with well-integrated ornamental plantings and landscape features.  Solid walls, privacy fences and earthen berms are also used. Sidewalks, bike trails, benches, trash receptacles, lighting fixtures, permitted signs and other similar improvements may be integrated into the buffers where appropriate. 
Type 1: a buffer area not less than ten feet wide containing a stockade or privacy fence or solid wall not less than six feet in height, and not less than one evergreen tree per 10 linear feet.  Shrubs or clusters of perennial flowering plants of similar size and massing to a shrub may be added. Supplemental perennial or annual flowering plants are encouraged.  Buffer areas should be arranged with plantings facing in toward the site with the “good” side of the fence or wall facing outwardly.  
Type 2: a buffer area not less than twenty feet wide containing a fence, a low solid wall or earthen berm and not less than four evergreen trees per 10 linear feet. Supplemental perennial or annual flowering plants are encouraged. 
Type 3: a buffer area not less than thirty feet wide containing a blend of preexisting and newly planted vegetation with three evergreen trees and five shrubs per 20 linear feet. Two of every five shrubs shall be evergreens; existing shrubs or undergrowth may be substituted for four of every five shrubs required and clusters of perennial flowering plants of similar size and massing to a shrub may be substituted for up to three of every five shrubs required. 
Type 4: a buffer area not less than fifty feet wide containing natural preexisting woodland or partial woodland vegetation.  Additional evergreen tree plantings should be used fill-in gaps in natural vegetation where necessary. Clusters of perennial flowering plants and ornamental shrubs are encouraged along peripheral areas.  Type 4 buffers should be generally limited to rear yard areas of a site. 
Buffer Category D: 
Buffers in this category are intended to be used between sites of different land use categories where land use conflicts are likely.  These buffers are designed to provide visual screening and some screening for noise,  glare and other objectionable circumstances. Dense masses of vegetation, the required use of evergreens and wide areas of natural woodland are emphasized along with the use of solid walls, privacy fences and earthen berms as needed. Well-integrated ornamental plantings and landscape features are encouraged as well. Sidewalks, bike trails, benches, trash receptacles, lighting fixtures, permitted signs and other similar improvements may be integrated into the buffers where appropriate.      
Type 1: a buffer area not less than twenty feet wide containing an earthen berm not less than four feet in height with not less than one deciduous ornamental or shade trees, two evergreen trees, and four shrubs per 20 linear feet. Clusters of perennial 
10-6 

flowering plants of similar size and massing to a shrub may be substituted for one of every four shrubs required and three of every four shrubs required shall be evergreens.  Supplemental perennial or annual flowering plants are encouraged.  
Type 2: a buffer area not less than thirty feet wide containing a stockade fence not less than six feet high or chain link fence not less than four feet high, and not less than one deciduous ornamental or shade tree, one evergreen tree[s], and five shrubs per 20 linear feet where clusters of perennial flowering plants of similar size and massing to a shrub may be substituted for two of every five shrubs required and two of every four shrubs is an evergreen. Supplemental ornamental shrubs perennial or annual flowering plants are encouraged. 
Type 3: a buffer area not less than fifty feet wide containing a blend of preexisting and newly planted vegetation with at least two trees and three shrubs per 20 linear feet. One of every three trees and one of every three shrubs shall be evergreens; existing shrubs or undergrowth may be substituted for one of every three shrubs required and clusters of perennial flowering plants of similar size and massing to a shrub may be substituted for one of three five shrubs required. Supplemental ornamental shrubs perennial or annual flowering plants are encouraged. 
Type 4: a buffer area not less than one hundred feet wide containing natural preexisting woodland or partial woodland vegetation.  Additional evergreen tree plantings should be used fill-in gaps in natural vegetation where appropriate. Clusters of perennial flowering plants and ornamental shrubs are encouraged along peripheral areas. 
5. Maintenance 
a. 
Low maintenance, drought, insect and disease resistant plant varieties are encouraged so that buffer areas and other required landscaping can be maintained with minimal care and the need for watering, pesticide or fertilized use is minimized.  For these reasons, native species and species that have long thrived within the Merrimack area are preferred since such plant species are well adapted to the local environment. 

b. 
To avoid maintenance problems, soil testing should be conducted prior to planting to ensure that the appropriate plant varieties are selected for various portions of a site. 

c. 
To avoid maintenance problems and excessive watering, organic matter such as compost or peat should be added the soil before planting as appropriate to increase the water holding capacity and of the soil and to provide nutrients. 

d. 
Where used, irrigation systems should be installed with moisture meters or other devices designed to avoid unnecessary or excessive watering. Alternatively, irrigation systems should be manually activated. 


10-7 

6. Informal, Re-growth and Peripheral Landscape Areas 
Disturbed areas intended for natural re-growth should be, at a minimum, graded, loamed and seeded with wildflowers, perennial rye grass or similar varieties.  The planting of native trees, shrubs and other plant varieties is encouraged.  The planting of lilac, blueberry, forsythia, rhododendron and other hardy shrubs along the edge of cleared woodlands provides for an attractive transition between natural woodland and more formally landscaped portions of a site.  Where woodland areas are intended to serve as buffers, such plantings can fill in voids by rapidly reestablishing undergrowth.  Perennial flowerbeds are also encouraged.   
10.02 Residential Subdivisions 
Conventional and cluster residential subdivisions plans are not necessarily required to submit detailed landscape plans, however, certain general development standards intended to enhance the safety and comfort of residents, enhance the aesthetic appeal of the neighborhood, and protect prominent natural features of the landscape while helping to safeguard the public water supply should be addressed as a part of any subdivision plan.      
1. General Standards 
a. 
Prominent natural or man-made features of the landscape such as mature trees, surface waters, natural rock outcrops, old roadways or stonewalls should be retained and incorporated into the subdivision plan where possible. 

b. 
Land clearing should be kept to a minimum with existing natural vegetation retained where possible. 

c. 
In order to retain the rural character of the residential areas of Town, existing stonewalls and mature trees within the public right-ofway shall be preserved except where road or driveway access points and their associated sight lines are required.  Exception is made for dead, diseased, dangerous or dying trees which present an obvious safety hazard. The rebuilding of aged, fallen, or damaged stone walls, the construction of new stone walls and the replanting of shade or ornamental trees along disturbed portions of existing rights-of-way are encouraged. 

d. 
Lawn areas should be kept to a minimum.  Natural re-growth of disturbed areas, mulched planting beds and alternative groundcover plant varieties are encouraged 

e. 
Not less than four inches of loam shall be restored to all disturbed areas intended for lawns, planting beds or for natural re-growth.  

f. 
Landscaped entrances to new subdivision streets are encouraged.  Plant varieties selected should be hardy, drought resistant and require minimal maintenance. A blend of deciduous, evergreen, flowering and non-flowering plant varieties is encouraged to provide an attractive year-round display. Native plant species, or plant species that are been well adapted for growth 


10-8 

and survival in Merrimack or the surrounding region are preferred.    
10.03 Plant Specifications and Definitions 
1. Trees and shrubs – size requirements 
a. 
Minimum size for shade or canopy trees shall be 3 inches in diameter measured at a point six inches above grade with a height of not less than 12 feet. 

b. 
Minimum size for small or minor shade trees shall be 2.5 inches in diameter measured at a point six inches above grade with a height of not less than nine feet. 

c. 
Minimum size for ornamental or flowering fruit trees shall be 2 inches in diameter measured at a point six inches above grade with a height of not less than seven feet. 

d. 
Minimum size for evergreen trees shall be six feet in height. 

e. 
Minimum size for shrubs shall be 1.5 feet in height. 


2. Planting Specifications 
a. 
Areas intended as planting beds for shrubs or hedges shall be cultivated to a depth of not less than 18 inches.  All other planting beds shall be cultivated to a depth of not less than 12 inches. 

b. 
Pits for planting trees or shrubs shall be generally circular in outline with vertical sides. Pits for trees or shrubs shall be deep enough to allow one-eighth of the ball of the roots to be the existing grade.  Pits for trees shall be wide enough to allow for at least 9 inches between the ball of the tree and the sides of the pit on all sides. 

c. 
Cultivated areas shall be covered with not less than a two to three inch deep layer of mulch after planting. 

d. 
All trees and shrubs shall be appropriately pruned after planting with all broken or damaged branches removed.   

e. 
All plants shall be nursery grown. 


3. 
Retention of Existing Vegetation 

The boundary of areas to be cleared should be well defined in the field with tree markings, construction fencing or silt fencing as appropriate to avoid unnecessary cutting or removal.  Care should be taken to protect root systems from damage from excavation or compaction.  Individual trees, rock formations and other landscape features to be retained should also be clearly marked and bounded in the field. 

4. 
Recommended Plant Varieties 


Ornamental/Flowering Trees 
10-9 

Common Name American Hazelnut Birch – River Birch Catalpa – Northern Catalpa Cherry – Purple leaf sandcherry Cherry – Yoshino Crabapple -Prairifire Dogwood  -White Dogwood – Pink Dogwood – Red Dogwood – White Flowering Golden Raintree Hawthorne Kentucky Coffee Tree Serviceberry 
Shade Trees 
Common Name American Hophornbeam Ash – Green Ash Birch – River Birch Catalpa – Northern Catalpa Hackberry Kentucky Coffee Tree Maple – Red Maple Maple – Silver Maple Oak – Bur Oak 
Evergreen Trees 
Common Name Botanical Name 
Betula nigra Catalpa speciosa Prunus cistena Prunus x. Ydoensis Malus ‘prairifire’ Cornus florida ‘cloud nine’ Cornus florida ‘rubra’ Cornus kousa ‘satomi’ Cornus kousa Koelteuria paniculata Crataegus (4 species) Gymnocladus dioicus Amelanchier grandiflora 
Botanical Name Ostrya virginiana Fraxinus (5 species) Betula nigra Catalpa speciosa Celtis occidentalis Gymnocladus dioicus Acer ‘rubrum’, ‘red sunset’, others Acer saccharinum Quercus macrocarpa 
Botanical Name 
Fire – White Fir Pine – Austrian Pine Pine – White Pine Pine – Dwarf White Pine Spruce – Colorado Blue Spruce  Abies concolor Pinus nigra Pinus strobus Pinus strobus ‘Brevifolia’ Picea pungens  
Shrubs – Evergreen  
Common Name Hemlock – Canadian Hemlock Pine – Mugo Pine  Botanical Name Tsuga canadensis Pinus mugo  
Shrubs  
Common Name  Botanical Name  

10-10 

American Cranberry Viburnum  Viburnum trilobum  
Bayberry  Myrica pensylvanica  
Blackshaw  
Forsythia  Forsythia  
Gray Dogwood  Cornus racemosa  
Highbush Blueberry  Vaccinium corymbosum  
Inkberry  Ilex glabra  
Lilac (Purple and White)  Syringa vulgaris  
Broad-leaved Meadowsweet  Spirea latifolia  
Northern Wild Raisin  
Potentilla  Potentilla fruiticosa  
Rhododendron  Rhododendron (select hardy cultivar)  
Rose Rugosa  Rosa rugosa  
Spriraea  Spirea (many)  
Sweet Gale  Myrica gale  
Ground Covers  
Common Name  Botanical Name  
Creeping Juniper  Juniperous horizontalis  
Pachysandra  Pachysandra terminalis  
Virginia Creeper or Woodbine  Parthenocissus quinquefolia  
Purpleleaf Wintercreeper  Euonymus forutnei coloratus  

Flowers (shrub alternatives and landscaping enhancements) 
Common Name Astilbe Black-Eye Susan Coreopsis Daylily (various types & mixes) Daffodil Salvia Sedum Wildflower mixes (New England) Botanical Name Astilbe Rudbeckia fulgida ‘Goldstrum’ Coreopsis verticillata Hermerocallis Narcissus pseudonarcissus Salvia Sedum 
5. 	
Prohibited Plant Varieties – Plant varieties prohibited by the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services are prohibited. 

6. 	
Definitions: 

a. 
Berm: a linear earthen mound designed to block, views, noise or other potentially objectionable circumstances. 

b. 	
Deciduous: a plant with foliage that is shed annually. 

c. 
Evergreen: a plant with foliage that is retained and remains green throughout the year. 

d. 
Mulch: nonliving organic or synthetic matter spread over cultivated ground to retain moisture, limit weed growth and control erosion. 

e. 
Ornamental tree: a deciduous tree, generally smaller than a shade tree, that is planted primarily for its aesthetic or ornamental value. 

f. 
Shade tree: a large deciduous tree with a high crown of foliage or overhead canopy. 

g. 
Shrub: A self-supporting woody plant, smaller than a tree, which consists of several small stems or branches from a base at or about the ground.  




10-11 

10-12 

SECTION 11 -OUTDOOR LIGHTING STANDARDS 

11.01 Purpose 

The purpose of these outdoor lighting standards is to present requirements for non­residential site plans within the Town of Merrimack to insure that each developed site plan will address concerns resulting from light trespass, excessive glare, and to protect the nighttime environment, while at the same time providing adequate safety, energy efficiency and security for nighttime business and industrial operations. The goal of this lighting regulation is to recognize the benefits of outdoor lighting and provide clear requirements for its installation. Appropriately regulated and properly installed outdoor lighting will maintain the Town’s character and contribute to the safety and welfare of the residents of the Town. 

11.02 Applicability 
The lighting requirements of this section shall apply to all outdoor lighting in all non­residential developments requiring a site plan approval from the Planning Board, as well as new and replacement lighting in non-residential properties. 
11.03 Terms and Definitions 
Bulb: A glass envelope enclosing a light source of an electric lamp or such an envelope together with the light source it encloses. 
CRI: Color Rendering Index – A measurement of the amount of color shifts that objects undergo when lighted by a light source as compared with the color of those same objects when seen under a reference light source of comparable color temperature. (Range 0-100) 
Candela: The approximate amount of light emitted by a common tallow candle and the way of measuring how much light is produced by a light source. Currently the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Reference on Constants, Units, and Uncertainty defines a candela to be the luminous intensity, in a given direction, of a source that emits monochromatic radiation of frequency 540 x 1012 hertz and that has a radiant intensity in that direction of 1/683 watt per solid angle. 
Candela per square meter (cd/m2): Is a standard unit for measurement of luminance, and is referred to as a “nit” or “nits”, from Latin meaning “to shine”. 
Direct Light: Light emitted directly from the lamp, off of the reflector, or the reflector diffuser, or through the refractor or diffuser lens, of a luminaire. 
Dissolve: A mode of message transition on an electronic message display accomplished by varying the light intensity or pattern, where the first message gradually appears to dissipate and lose legibility simultaneously with the gradual appearance and legibility of a second message. 
11-1 

Fade: A mode of message transition on an electronic message display accomplished by varying the light intensity, where the first message gradually reduces intensity to the point of not being legible and the subsequent message gradually increases intensity to the point of legibility. 
Fixture: The assembly that houses the lamp or lamps and can include all or some of the following parts: a housing, a mounting bracket or pole socket, a lamp holder, a ballast, a reflector or mirror, and/or a refractor or lens. 
Flood or Spot Light: A light fixture or lamp that incorporates a reflector or a refractor to concentrate the light output to a directed beam in a particular direction. 
Full Cutoff Luminaire: A luminaire provided with shielding or constructed so that light rays emitted by the fixture are projected below the horizontal plane passing through the lowest point on the fixture from which light is emitted. 
Foot-Candle: Measure of light falling on a given surface. One foot-candle is equal to the amount of light generated by one candle shining on a one square foot surface one foot away. Unless otherwise noted, in this regulation, foot candles are measured on a horizontal surface at ground level. 
Frame: A complete, static display screen on an Electronic Message Display. 
Frame Effect: A visual effect on an electronic message display applied to a single frame to transition from one message to the next. 
Glare: Light emitting from a luminaire with an intensity great enough to reduce a viewer’s ability to see, and in extreme cases causing momentary blindness. 
Height of Luminaire: The height of a luminaire shall be the vertical distance from the ground directly below the center line of the luminaire to the lowest direct-light emitting part of the luminaire. 
IESNA: Illuminating Engineering Society of North America. 
Illuminance: The amount of light falling on a surface, measured in lux (lx) or foot candles (fc). 
Illuminated Sign: A sign lit with either an internal or external artificial light source. 
Indirect Light: Direct light that has been reflected or has scattered off other surfaces. 
Lamp: The component of a luminaire that produces the actual light. 
11-2 

Light Trespass: The shining of light produced by a luminaire beyond the boundaries of the property on which it is located. 
Lumen: (A unit of luminous flux) One foot-candle is one lumen per square foot. For the purposes of this Regulation the lumen output values shall be the INITIAL lumen output ratings of a lamp. 
Luminaire: This is a complete lighting system. A lamp or lamps and a fixture. 
Luminance: The physical measure of brightness, and is the amount of visible light leaving a point on a surface in a given direction. This "surface" can be a physical surface or an imaginary plane, and the light leaving the surface can be due to reflection, transmission, and/or emission. 
Nit: A unit of luminance that is used to describe the brightness of a display, as a measure of the amount of light a sign emits; where one nit is equal to one candela per square meter (cd/m2). For an LED display it is calculated as the following: nit = candela per pixel times pixels per square meter. 
Referenced below are typical luminance values: 
120,000 nit (cd/m2) is equal to a frosted incandescent 60w lamp. 
11,000 nit (cd/m2) is equal to “cool white” T8 fluorescent lamp. 
8,000 nit (cd/m2) is equal to an average clear sky 
2,500 nit (cd/m2) is equal to the Moon surface. 
2,000 nit (cd/m2) is equal to an average cloudy sky 
0.0004 nit (cd/m2) is equal to the darkest sky. 
Outdoor Lighting: The nighttime illumination of an outside area or object by any man made device located outdoors that produces light by any means. 
Pitch: The line spacing center-to-center from pixel to pixel (1 or more LED diodes). Pitch determines the resolution of the display. Smaller pitches have more pixels per unit area and better/higher resolutions. 
Scroll: A mode of message transition on an electronic message display where the message appears to move across the display surface. 
Security Lighting: Lighting primarily for safety of persons and property which is part of an overall security plan for a site which includes at least illumination, surveillance, and response. 
11-3 

Scrolling Graphics: A mode of message transition on an electronic message display sign where the message appears to move across the display surface. 
Sign, Electronic Message Display: An electronic changeable sign capable of displaying text, symbols, figures or graphics, which can be electronically or mechanically changed by remote or automatic means, and incorporates both Electronic Changeable Copy and/or Electronic Graphic Display signs. 
a. 	
Sign, Electronic Changeable Copy: A sign or portion thereof that displays electronically, non-pictorial, text information in which each alphanumeric character or symbol is defined by some number of matrix elements using different combinations of light emitting diodes (LED’s), fiber optics, light bulbs or other illumination devices within the display area. Electronic Changeable Copy includes computer programmable, microprocessor controlled electronic displays. Electronic changeable copy signs do not include time and temperature signs. 

b. 	
Sign, Electronic Graphic Display: A sign or portion thereof that displays electronic, static images, static graphics, or static pictures, with or without text information, defined by some number of matrix elements using different combinations of light emitting diodes (LED’s), fiber optics, light bulbs or other illumination devices within the display area where the message change sequence is accomplished immediately or by means of fade, re-pixelization or dissolve modes. Electronic Graphic Display Signs include computer programmable, microprocessor controlled electronic displays. 


Sign, Flashing: An illuminated sign which has intermittent flashing lights, revolving beacons, rolling marquee or exhibits a noticeable change in color or light intensity during the duration of the viewing time. 
Temporary Outdoor Lighting: The specific illumination of an outside area or object by any man made device located outdoors that produces light by any means for a period of less that 30 days, with at least 180 days passing before being used again. 
Transition: A visual effect used on an electronic message display to change from one message to another. 
Uniformity Ratio: The ratio of average to minimum illuminance. 
Viewing Time: Time that the message is visible for vehicular traffic. 
11-4 


11.04 	Non-Residential Site Plans – General Requirements 
The intent of this ordinance is to reduce the problems created by improperly designed and installed outdoor lighting, by establishing regulations which limit the areas that certain outdoor lighting luminaires can illuminate, and by limiting the total allowable illumination of commercial and industrial developments located in the Town of Merrimack. 
1. 	
Prohibited Lighting Specifically prohibited by this regulation are all types of flashing, blinking, moving or apparently moving light sources intended to attract attention to a business location. 

Searchlights and laser beam lights for attracting attention are also prohibited. 

2. 	
Lighting Plans All non-residential site plans submitted to the Planning Board shall include a lighting plan, prepared by a professional with expertise in lighting design, that shows all the exterior lighting to be installed as part of the site plan development. 


All site lighting designs shall conform to the applicable requirements of the NH Energy Code (New Hampshire Code of Administrative Rules, Chapter Puc 1800, New Hampshire Code for Energy Conservation in New Buildings), The National Electrical Code (NEC), latest edition, and The International Building Code (IBC) and Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) Lighting Handbook. 
The lighting plan should contain: 
a. 	
Details of the lighting fixtures proposed to illuminate all buildings, signs, roadways, service areas, landscaping, parking and pedestrian areas, including the location, height, make, model, lamp type, and wattage of each outdoor fixture. 

b. 	
Specifications and illustrations of all proposed lighting fixtures including pole heights, height of luminaire, photometric data, Color Rendering Index (CRI) of all lamps, and other descriptive information. 

c. 	
A narrative that describes the hierarchy of site lighting, how lighting will be used to provide safety and security and esthetic effects. 

d. 	
For site plans with more than 20 parking spaces or high traffic volumes (over 10 vph after darkness) the Lighting Plan shall include the following additional information: 


1) 	A photometric diagram that shows horizontal illumination levels at ground level on the site from all externally visible lighting sources, including existing sources, to show the amount of illumination that will be provided and that the standards for light maximum and uniformity set by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) in Reference 7 will not be exceeded. 
2) Illumination levels should not exceed the levels to provide safe conditions as currently defined in Reference 7, in Section, 11.12.7. 3) As a guide, poles and fixtures should be proportionate to the buildings and 
11-5 

spaces they are illuminating, and designed with good engineering practices. 
4) 	The plan should consider the ultimate size of the trees that could obscure the lighting or create dark spots. 
5) 	Lighting shall not create dangerous conditions due to glare on adjacent roadways. No upward lighting or bare bulbs should be used in the exterior Lighting Plan. 
6) 	Buffers, screen walls, fencing, and other landscape elements should be coordinated with the lighting plan to shield neighboring properties from light trespass. 
7) 	Wherever practicable lighting design should include the installation of timers, photo sensors, and other energy saving devices to reduce the overall energy required for the development and to eliminate unnecessary lighting. 
8) 	Electrical service to outdoor lighting fixtures shall be underground except for fixtures mounted directly to utility poles. 
9) 	Where commercial or industrial uses abut residential uses, lighting in parking lots should be reduced to the lighting levels required for security lighting as described in section 11.08 of this regulation within one hour after closing. 
10) 	Where commercial or industrial zones abut residential uses, the light levels at the edge of the commercial or industrial property abutting the residential property shall be reduced to a maximum of 0.1 horizontal foot candles (fc) and 0.1 vertical foot candles 5 feet above the ground on a plane parallel to the property line, attributable to the commercial development. The 0.1 fc level shall be measured as an average level measured over any ten foot interval, and the maximum level at any point in this interval shall not exceed 1.0 fc. 
11) 	Where commercial or industrial zones abut residential uses, lighting from the commercial or industrial site shall produce no glare or reflectance so as to cause a nuisance on the adjacent residential properties. Each site plan bordering residential uses shall have a note stating that “No lighting, glare or reflected lighting from this site shall be allowed to shine or reflect onto neighboring residential properties.” 
12) 	For sites with Electronic Message Displays: provide the sign location of the proposed sign, and describe the controls and the hours that the sign will be illuminated. The installer is to provide a written certification from the sign manufacturer that the light intensity has been factory pre-set not to exceed the levels specified below in section 11.10.6, and the intensity level is protected from end-user manipulation by password-protected software or other method as deemed appropriate by the Town. Installer shall submit Form 11.04.12frm. (Form for Electronic Message Displays). 
3. 	Luminaire Designs 
a. 	
Any luminaire with a lamp or lamps rated at a total of more than 1800 lumens, and all flood or spot luminaries with a lamp or lamps rated at more than 900 lumens, shall be full cutoff fixtures in accordance with Reference 7. 

b. 	
Lamp types shall be selected for optimum color rendering index (CRI) as listed by the manufacturer. Lamps with a CRI lower than 50 are not permitted except for security lighting (11.08). 


11-6 

4. 	General Exceptions 
a. 	
Any single luminaire with a single lamp or set of lamps rated at a total of 1800 lumens or less, and all single flood or spot luminaries with a lamp or set of lamps rated at 900 lumens or less, may be used without restriction to light distribution or mounting height, except that if any [delete-spot or flood] luminaire of 900 lumens or less is aimed , directed, or focused so as to cause direct light from the luminaire to be directed toward residential buildings on adjacent or nearby land, or to create glare perceptible to persons operating motor vehicles on public ways, the luminaire shall be redirected or its light controlled as necessary to eliminate such conditions. 

b. 	
All hazard warning luminaries required by federal agencies are exempt from the requirements of this article to the extent that federal requirements cannot otherwise be achieved. 

c. 	
Outdoor light fixtures producing light directly by the combustion of fossil fuels (kerosene, gas, etc.) are exempt from the requirements of this regulation. 


11.05 	Parking Lot lighting 
Parking lot lighting shall be designed to provide the minimum lighting necessary to ensure adequate vision and comfort in parking areas, and to not cause glare or direct illumination onto adjacent properties or streets. All lighting fixtures serving parking lots shall be full cut-off fixtures (luminaries) as defined in Reference 7. Metal halide lamps are preferred for color rendition. 
1. 	
Light poles should be incorporated within planting areas or landscape islands to avoid damage from vehicles and plows. 

2. 	
Should the design for a particular site suggest the use of parking lot lighting fixtures of a particular “period” or architectural style, as either alternatives or supplements to the lighting described above, the alternative fixtures shall either be “cut off fixtures” as defined in Reference 7, or the maximum lumens generated by each fixture shall not exceed 2000. (equivalent to a 150 watt incandescent bulb) 

3. 	
Parking lot lighting standards shall be as follows: 

a. 
Minimum Illumination Level (at darkest spot in the parking area) -no less than 

0.3 fc; 

b. 
Maximum Uniformity ratio – 4:1 

c. 
Minimum CRI -50 





11.06 	Lighting of Gasoline Station/Convenience Store Aprons/Canopies 
Lighting levels on gasoline station/convenience store aprons and under canopies shall be adequate to facilitate the activities taking place in such locations. 
1. 	Areas on the apron away from the gasoline pump islands used for parking or vehicle storage shall be illuminated in accordance with the requirements for parking areas in 
11-7 

section 11.04 of this regulation. If no gasoline pumps are provided the entire apron shall be treated as a parking area. 
2. 	
Areas around the pump islands and under canopies to 10 feet outside the canopy footprint shall be illuminated so that the maximum horizontal illuminance at grade level does not exceed 30 foot candles in the service area and is at least 1.0 foot-candles and no more than 8 foot-candles at the edge of the service area. The uniformity ratio shall be no more than 4:1 

3. 	
Light fixtures mounted on canopies shall be recessed so that the lens cover is recessed or flush with the bottom surface (ceiling) of the canopy so that light is restrained to no more than 85 degrees from vertical. (5 degrees below horizontal). 

4. 	
Lights shall not be mounted on the top or sides (fascias) of the canopy and the sides of the canopy shall not be illuminated. 



11.07 	Lighting of Exterior Sales/Display Areas 
The applicant shall designate on the plan areas to be considered display/sales areas and areas to be used as parking or passive vehicle storage areas. 
1. 	
Areas designated as parking or passive vehicle storage areas shall be illuminated in accordance with the requirements for parking areas in section 11.04. 

2. 	
Areas designated as exterior display/sales areas may be illuminated so that the average horizontal illuminance is no more than 20 foot-candles. The uniformity ratio shall be no greater than 5:1 adjacent to the roadway frontage, and 10:1 along other rows or display areas. The average and minimum shall be computed only for that area designated as exterior display/sales area. 

3. 	
Light fixtures shall be full cut off luminaries and shall be located, mounted, aimed and shielded so that direct light is not cast onto adjacent properties. 



11.08 	Security Lighting 
If security lighting is to be installed, the purpose and need for such lighting must be demonstrated as part of an overall security plan and which designates the area to be illuminated for security purposes. The use of sensor (i.e. motion, beam interrupt) activated lights in security systems and dual switching for security purposes is encouraged. 
1. 	In addition to the application materials set forth in the general provisions of this regulation, applications for security lighting installations shall include a written description of the need and purposes for the security lighting. The site plan shall show the area to be secured and the location of all security lighting fixtures, specifications of all fixtures, the horizontal and vertical angles at which the lights will be directed, and 
11-8 

adequate details to show how light will be directed only onto the areas to be secured. 
2. 	
All security lighting fixtures shall be shielded and aimed so that illumination is directed only to the designated area and not cast in other areas. In no case shall lighting be directed in a horizontal plane through the top of the lighting fixture and the fixture shall include shields that prevent the light source or lens from being visible from adjacent properties and roadways. The use of general floodlighting fixtures is discouraged. 

3. 	
Security lights intended to illuminate a perimeter (such as a fence line) may include motion sensors and be designed to be off unless triggered by an intruder. 

4. 	
Lighting standards in designated secure areas shall be as follows: 

a. 	
Average Horizontal Illumination Level on Ground -no more than 1.5 fc 

b. 	
Average Illumination Level on Vertical Surface measured 5 feet above the ground -no more than 1.5 fc 

c. 	
Minimum CRI -20 





11.09 	Illumination of Building Facades and Landscaping 
In general, the exterior lighting of building facades is discouraged. When buildings are to be illuminated, the design for the illumination shall be approved by the Planning Board and the following provisions shall be met. 
1. 	
The maximum illumination on any vertical surface or angular roof surface shall not exceed 5.0 foot-candles. 

2. 	
Lighting fixtures shall be carefully located, aimed, and shielded so that light is directed only on the building facade. Lighting fixtures shall not be directed toward adjacent streets, roads or properties. 

3. 	
Lighting fixtures mounted on the building and intended to “wash” the façade with light are prohibited. 

4. 	
Lighting fixtures shall be directed downward (i.e. below the horizontal) rather than upward. 

5. 	
When landscaping is to be illuminated, it shall be part of the landscaping plan approved by the Planning Board. The lighting plan shall show the location of all lighting fixtures and what landscaping features each is to illuminate, and demonstrate that the installation will not generate excessive light levels, cause glare, or direct light beyond the landscaping into the night sky. 


11-9 


11.10 	Illuminated Signs 
It is the intent of this section to allow illuminated signs but to insure that they do not create glare or unduly illuminate the surrounding area and to eliminate/prevent potential hazards and a nuisance to motorists and pedestrians. 
To establish standards which permit businesses a reasonable and equitable opportunity to advertise their name and service, and to ensure that signs are designed, constructed, installed, and maintained in a manner that does not adversely impact safety and unduly distract motorists. 
All signs in Merrimack shall meet the requirements of Section 17 of the Merrimack Zoning Ordinance. The applicant shall provide the Planning Board with sufficient technical and design information to demonstrate that the following provisions are met. 
1. 	
The average level of illumination shining onto the vertical surface of the sign shall not exceed 10 foot-candles, and the uniformity ratio shall not exceed 5:1. 

2. 	
The lighting fixtures illuminating signs shall be carefully located, aimed, and shielded so that the light is directed only onto the sign façade. Lighting fixtures shall not be aimed toward adjacent streets, roads, or properties. 

3. 	
Light fixtures illuminating signs shall be of the type such that the light source (bulb) is not directly visible from adjacent roads, streets or properties. 

4. 	
To the extent practicable, fixtures used to illuminate signs shall be top mounted and directed downward. (i.e. below the horizontal). 

5. 	
Internally Illuminated Signs In order to prevent internally illuminated signs from becoming light fixtures in their own right, it is the intent of this section that such signs consist of light lettering or symbols on a dark background. 

a. 	
The lettering or symbols shall constitute no more than forty (40) percent of the surface area of the sign. 

b. 	
The luminous transmittance for the lettering symbols shall not exceed thirty five 

(35) percent. 

c. 	
The luminous transmittance for the background portion of the sign shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent. 



6. 	
Electronic Message Displays are allowed as described in the zoning ordinance and building code, section 17. 

a. 	
In instances where Electronic Message Displays are located in areas where the light source/sign is visible from an abutting residentially used property, the Planning Board shall review the location for requiring suitable screening or landscaping to block the view of the sign. 

b. 	
The applicant shall provide the Planning Board with sufficient technical and design information to demonstrate that the following requirements are met. 




11-10 

1) 	Electronic Message Displays shall be located at least 100 feet from residentially zoned property. 
2) 	The message shall have minimum interval between changes in the text, symbols, & graphics of not less than 20 minutes, which is static for each message, with a transition between messages of not more than two seconds. 
3) 	The message shall be limited to static displays. Messages that appear or disappear from the Electronic Message Display through dissolve, fade, travel or scroll modes, or similar transitions and frame effects that have text or images that appear to move or change in size, or be revealed sequentially rather than all at once, shall not be permitted. 
4) 	The following displays shall not exceed the following intensity levels specified: Day: 7500 nit; Night: 500 nit. Also all signs shall have automatic phased proportional dimmer and photocells used to reduce the illumination settings to a brightness level of 0.3 foot candles above ambient light conditions; as measured using a foot candle meter at a pre­set distance. Distance is based on square footage of sign; see section d.2, below for Demonstration of Compliance for measurement criteria. 
5) 	The installer is to provide written certification that the light intensity has been pre-set not to exceed the daylight and the nighttime settings and that the use of a dimmer and photocell has been properly incorporated into the operation of the Electronic Message Display. 
6) 	The size and location of the Electronic Message Display is consistent with the requirements of Section 17.10 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
c. 	
Exemptions 

d. 	
Demonstration of Compliance 


1) 	Indoor Electronic Message Displays shall not require a permit; except those located in store windows and viewable from any property line. 
11-11 

1) 	Electronic message display signs shall have an automatic dimmer control which automatically adjusts the sign’s brightness based on ambient light conditions. 
2) 	The reading shall be taken at the appropriate pre-set distance for the sign, based on square footage of the electronic message display, as measured using a foot-candle meter. 
i. Measurement distance criteria follows: 
1. 	
0-100 square foot signs to be measured 100 feet from source, 

2. 	
101-350 square foot sign to be measured 150 feet from source, 

3. 	
351-650 square foot sign to be measured 200 feet from source, 

4. 	
651-1000 square foot sign to be measured 250 feet from source, 

5. 	
Over 1000 square foot sign to be measured 350 feet from source. 


3) 	The Installer shall test the Electronic Message Display signs brightness. Notification of the testing day and time shall be provided to the town 48 hours in advance. Procedure for compliance testing shall be as follows: 
i. 	At least 30 minutes past sunset, using a foot candle meter to record the ambient light reading for the area. The reading shall be taken with the meter aimed directly at the digital sign at the appropriate pre-set distance. 
ii. 	This first reading shall be done while the electronic message display sign is off or displaying all black. 
iii. 	The second reading shall be done after the installer turns on the electronic message display sign to a fully white display. 
iv. 	If the difference between the readings is 0.3 foot candles or less, the brightness is properly adjusted. 

11.11 	Sports Lighting 
Sports venue lighting is exempt from any lumens per square foot standards for the playing field only. Full-cutoff fixture design per paragraph 11.04 III is required and the light trespass requirements of paragraph 11.04 II, I, J, and K apply. 
11-12 


11.12 	References 
1. 	NHOSP Technical Bulletin 16, Outdoor Lighting, summer, 2001. 
2. 	
Outdoor Lighting Manual for Vermont Municipalities, Chittenden County Regional Planning Commission, May 1996. 

3. 	
Route 101A Community Guidebook, Draft 06/10/02. 

4. 	
NH Citizens for Responsible Lighting, New England Light pollution Advisory Group, International Dark Sky Association & Sample Lighting Ordinances distributed by NHOSP, April, 2002. 

5. 	
Lighting Improvement Ordinance Framework – The Indiana Council on Outdoor Lighting. -http://home.att.net/~icole/ord_framework.html. 

6. 	
Model Site Plan Regulations, Nashua Regional Planning Commission, June, 2002. 

7. 	
The IESNA Lighting Handbook, Reference and Applications, 2000 Edition, Illumination Engineering Society of North America. 


End 11 
11-13 

SECTION 12 – BUILDING DESIGN 





12.01 Purpose 
To encourage high quality building design and construction that enhances the visual quality of Merrimack, protects neighborhood and community character, reinforces pedestrian character where appropriate, encourages sensitively to natural, architectural, cultural and historic resources, and respects generally accepted design principles while encouraging creativity and innovation in design.   

12.02 Applicability 
The Building Design Standards of this section apply to all non-residential (including multi-family) developments requiring site plan approval from the Planning Board within the districts identified in Section 12.03, below. These regulations apply to new building construction, building additions, or alteration to an existing building that is visible from a public street or right­of-way or from abutting properties (except as otherwise noted below).  
These regulations do not apply to: 
1 2 3 4 5  any single or two-family dwellings;  routine repair or maintenance of structures; structures for which no building permit is required;  any work on the interior of a building; or any modifications to existing buildings solely for the purpose of providing ADA compliant or emergency egress or access.  
12.03  Design Districts  
1.  Town Center & Reeds Ferry Districts  
Includes the area within the Town Center Overlay District, and that portion of the Reeds Ferry area fronting on DW Highway between Rainbow Avenue and Hilton Drive.  
2  Industrial Design District  
Includes all areas within the I-2 and I-3 Industrial Districts as well as all portions of the I-1 Industrial area except for properties lacking street frontage  or with frontage exclusively on Columbia Circle, Wright Avenue, Starr Drive, Herrick Street, King Street, Caron Street, Mast Road, Webb Drive and areas included within any PRD overlay District.  
3.  Transitional  
All C-1, C-2 and PRD districts.  

12-1 


12.04 Design Standards 
1. Town Center & Reeds Ferry Districts: Within this district, building 
th	th th
design compatible with the 18, 19and early 20Century building styles that typify the area are encouraged for residential and commercial buildings as well as for public facilities and institutions. 
a) 	Site Design & Layout: Where permitted under the Zoning Ordinance, principal buildings should be sited in conformity with the building setbacks of principal buildings on abutting properties. Where the setbacks differ from one side of the property to the other, the setback most consistent with the general vicinity should be followed.  Principal buildings should be oriented toward the street with parking areas situated to the side or rear. Buildings, landscaping and other site features should also be arranged with sensitivity to oncoming views from public streets, especially for sites located on prominent corners or opposite intersecting streets.  
b) 	Facades:  No uninterrupted length of any facade shall exceed 50 horizontal feet.  Building facades exceeding 50 feet in length, measured horizontally, shall incorporate wall plane projections or recesses having a depth of at least 10 percent of the width of the entire facade and extending for at least 20 percent of the length of the facade. 
Facades facing public streets shall have doorways, windows, awnings, or other similar features designed to break up the monotony of the facade along no less than 50 percent of their horizontal length.  Window and doorframes, shutters, porches, porticos and other enhancements shall be counted toward the 50% requirement. 
c) 	Roofing: Pitched or hip roofed design with slopes with an average slope greater than or equal to 1 foot of vertical rise for every 3 feet of horizontal run with overhanging eaves extending not less than 18 inches beyond the supporting walls.  Varied roof planes, gabled windows and other similar features are encouraged.  
d) 	Materials: Exterior building materials shall include wood, brick or other stone masonry native to the State of New Hampshire.  Synthetic materials of similar appearance and durability to wood are permitted as determined by the Planning Board.  Poured concrete or concrete block foundations are permitted provided that not more than three feet of any such foundation is visible above the ground line.   
12-2 

e) 	Doorways: All sides of any principal building that directly faces an abutting public street shall feature at least one public entrance.  All public door or entry ways should be clearly defined through utilization of at least two of the following features: (1) porticos, (2) porches,  (3) roof overhangs, (4) raised corniced parapets over the door, (5) peaked roof forms, (6) accent windows, (7) architectural details such as tile work or moldings, (8) planters, (9) landscaped walkways, (10) benches, or other similar features. 
Public entrances should be located in such a way as to minimize walking distances from parking areas, facilitate ready pedestrian access from public sidewalks and provide for safe and convenient access to differing units or buildings in multi-tenant sites. 
f) 	Windows: Windows should be of a vertical expression, arranged in a balanced pattern and suitably framed through the use accentuated trim, shutters, sills, lintels, quoins and other similar features. 
g) 	Other Features: All exterior building features or elements visible from any adjoining public right-of-way or neighboring residential property, including lighting fixtures, utility structures, mechanical equipment, drainage structures, chimneys, signs, and other similar elements, should be integrated into the building design.   
2. Industrial Design District  
The Industrial Design District is characterized by large manufacturing and warehousing facilities and office buildings situated on large tracts of land as well as smaller commercial buildings intended for various support uses.  Though most sites are devoted to single users, many contain multiple buildings, often arranged in a campus style setting.  Within these areas, modern architectural styles are prevalent, characterized by buildings with strong horizontal expressions, relatively unornamented facades and flat roofs.  Materials typically include glass, steel, brick, and concrete, or synthetic panels. 
a) 	Site Design & Layout: Principal buildings should be sited in harmony with the surrounding landscape, taking maximum advantage of site conditions including slope, existing vegetation, surface waters, rock outcroppings, views and other features, and incorporating the same into the building and site design.   
b) 	Facades: No uninterrupted length of any facade shall exceed 200 horizontal feet.  Building facades exceeding 200 feet in length, measured horizontally, shall incorporate wall plane projections or 
12-3 

recesses having a depth of at least 2.5 percent of the width of the entire facade and extending for at least 20 percent of the length of the facade. This requirement may be waived where it would interfere with research, development or manufacturing processes. 
c) 	Roofing: Flat or mansard roofs on single story-buildings or buildings of less than 20 feet in height are discouraged.        
d) 	Materials: The liberal use of pre-cast or poured concrete, glass, steel or synthetic materials consistent with a sleek modern expression is encouraged.  Split, architectural or concrete block is discouraged and where provided, may not exceed 25% of the visible exterior of any facade. 
e) 	Doorways: All sides of any principal building that directly faces an abutting public street shall feature at least one public entrance.  All public door or entry ways should be clearly defined through utilization of at least two or more of the following features:  (1) porches, (2) roof overhangs, raised parapets over doorways,  (3) recesses/projections, (4) arcades, (5) arches, (6) display windows, 
(7) architectural details such as tile work and moldings, (8) planters, (9) wing walls, (10) landscaped walkways, (11) benches or built-in seating, or other similar features. 
Public entrances should be located in such a way as to minimize walking distances from parking areas, facilitate ready pedestrian access from public sidewalks and provide for safe and convenient access to differing units or buildings in multi-tenant sites. 
f) 	Mechanical Equipment: Rooftop or other exterior mechanical equipment shall be screened from all abutting properties or public rights-of way through the use of parapets, walled or fenced enclosures, or other similar means, camouflaged, or incorporated into the building or site as a design feature.   
g) 	Decorative Elements: The incorporation of outdoor sculpture, fountains, or other forms of public art into building and site design is encouraged. 
h) 	Other Features: All exterior features or elements visible from any adjoining public right-of-way or neighboring residential property including windows, lighting fixtures, utility structures, drainage structures, chimneys, signs and other similar elements, should be integrated into any building design.   
12-4 

3. 	Transitional Districts: These districts are comprised of areas located within the Limited Commercial, General Commercial and PRD Districts situated between the Industrial Design, Town Center and Reeds Ferry Districts.  The Transitional Districts are characterized by a wide variety of architectural styles and include numerous small-scale retail and business establishments, shopping centers, multi-family complexes and individual single-family dwellings. These areas are generally automobile-oriented, though pedestrian accommodations are desired due to the large number of residences located in and around the districts. It is also noteworthy that a number of buildings and sites of historic importance are located within these areas along with newer construction. 
Given the diverse character of the transitional areas, no dominant architectural theme is contemplated. Rather, an emphasis should be placed on building design and site layouts that are in harmony with surrounding uses and serve to bridge the wide stylistic gaps between the differing design districts as well as between individual buildings and sites within the Transitional Districts.  In meeting these goals, creativity, innovation and expressiveness in design is strongly encouraged.  The use of prototypical building types common to national and regional franchises and chains, however, is strongly discouraged.      
a) 	Site Design & Layout: Where permitted under the Zoning Ordinance, principal buildings should be sited in conformity with the building setbacks of principal buildings on abutting properties where possible. Where the setbacks differ from one side of the property to the other, the setback most consistent with the general vicinity should be followed. Principal buildings should be oriented toward the street with parking areas and drive-through service areas situated to the side or rear. 
b) 	Facades: No uninterrupted length of any facade shall exceed 100 horizontal feet.  Building facades exceeding 100 feet in length, measured horizontally, shall incorporate wall plane projections or recesses having a depth of at least 5 percent of the width of the entire facade and extending for at least 20 percent of the length of the facade. 
Facades facing public streets shall have doorways, windows, awnings, or other similar features designed to break up the monotony of the facade along no less than 50 percent of their horizontal length.  Window and doorframes, shutters, porches, porticos, wall sign areas, and other enhancements shall be counted toward the 50% requirement. 
c) 	Roofing: Pitched or hip roofed design with slopes with an average 
12-5 

slope greater than or equal to 1 foot of vertical rise for every 3 feet of horizontal run with overhanging eaves extending not less than 18 inches beyond the supporting walls.  Varied roof planes, gabled windows and other similar features are encouraged.  Flat roofs are only permitted for buildings of two or more stories.   
d) 	Materials: Due to the diverse nature of the transitional districts, a wide variety of finish materials can be used appropriately, however, split, architectural or concrete block is discouraged and where provided, may not exceed 25% of the visible exterior of any facade. 
e) 	Doorways: All sides of any principal building that directly faces an abutting public street shall feature at least one public entrance.  All public door or entry ways should be clearly defined through utilization of at least two or more of the following features: (1) porticos, (2) porches, (3) roof overhangs, (4) raised corniced parapets over the door, (5) peaked roof forms, (6) accent windows, 
(7) 
recesses/projections, (8) arcades, (9) arches; (10) display windows, (11) architectural details such as tile work and moldings, 

(12) 
planters, (13) wing walls, (14) landscaped walkways, (15) benches or built-in seating, or other similar features. 


Public entrances should be located in such a way as to minimize walking distances from parking areas, facilitate ready pedestrian access from public sidewalks and provide for safe and convenient access to differing units or buildings in multi-tenant sites. 
f) 	Windows: Windows should be of a vertical expression, arranged in a balanced pattern and suitably framed through the use accentuated trim, sills, lintels, quoins and other similar features. 
g) 	Mechanical Equipment: Rooftop or other exterior mechanical equipment shall be screened from all abutting properties or public rights-of way through the use of parapets; walled or fenced enclosures, or other similar means, camouflaged, or incorporated into the building or site as a design feature.    
h) 	Other Features: All exterior features or elements visible from any adjoining public right-of-way or neighboring residential property, including lighting fixtures, utility structures, drainage structures, chimneys, and other similar elements, should be integrated into any building design.   
12-6 

12.05 	Submittal Requirements The applicant shall submit no fewer than seven sets of proposed external building elevations depicting all of the design features and elements noted above, for each side of all proposed buildings, building additions, or building modifications visible from any public right-of-way or abutting residential property at the time of application for Non-Residential Site Plan Review. Such submittals shall be considered to be a part of the full plan set pending before the Board and upon approval, shall be binding.  
Architectural renderings shall include specifications of all finish materials, and any necessary specifications or details required to adequately describe each proposed design.  
Photographs, material samples, color charts, sketches, models, or other materials that will assist the Board in gaining a visual understanding of the application should be provided to supplement application materials. 
End 12 
12-7 

SECTION 13 
Outlet Village Shops in I-2 Industrial District 
Zoning Ordinance, Section 2.02.4.D.9 
Conditional Use Permit Rules and Regulations 


Adopted – April 17, 2007 
Contents 
13.01 General Provisions.............................................................................................................1 

13.01.1 Purpose and Authority........................................................................................1 

13.01.2 Applicability .......................................................................................................1 

13.01.3 Relationship to Other Zoning Laws and Regulations.........................................1 

13.01.4 Relationship to Other Application and Submission Requirements ....................1 

13.02 Definitions...........................................................................................................................1 

13.03 Phasing................................................................................................................................2 

13.04 Preliminary Review ...........................................................................................................3 

13.04.1 Preliminary Conceptual Consultation.................................................................3 

13.04.2 Design Review....................................................................................................3 

13.05 Application Requirements: General ................................................................................4 

13.05.1 Pre-Application Review by Community Development Department..................4 

13.05.2 Form of Application ...........................................................................................4 

13.05.3 Signatures ...........................................................................................................4 

13.05.4 Request for Waivers ...........................................................................................4 

13.05.5 Number of Copies...............................................................................................5 

13.05.6 Abutters List .......................................................................................................5 

13.05.7 Other Variances, Permits and Conditional Use Permits.....................................5 

13.05.8 Preliminary Layout.............................................................................................5 

13.06 Application Requirements: Plans and Drawings............................................................5 

13.06.1 Locus Map ..........................................................................................................6 

13.06.2 General Layout Map...........................................................................................6 

13.06.3 Existing Conditions Plan ....................................................................................6 

13.06.4 Master Site Development Plan ...........................................................................6 

i 
13.07 Application Requirements: Reports.................................................................................8 

13.07.1 Existing Conditions Report ................................................................................9 

13.07.2 Proposed Site Development Report....................................................................9 

13.07.3 Traffic Impact Assessment Report ...................................................................11 

13.07.4 Community and Fiscal Impact Report..............................................................13 

13.07.5 Environmental Impact Report ..........................................................................15 

13.07.6 Relationship of Report Requirements to Other Jurisdictions ...........................18 

13.07.7 Additional Information.....................................................................................18 

13.08 Site Visit ............................................................................................................................19 

13.09 Disposition of Application ...............................................................................................19 

13.09.1 Action by Planning Board ................................................................................19 

13.09.2 Approval Criteria..............................................................................................19 

13.09.3 Conditions of Approval ....................................................................................19 

13.09.4 Development Agreement..................................................................................19 

13.09.5 Modification or Amendment of Conditional Use Permit .................................20 

13.09.6 Relationship to Subdivision and Site Plan Approval........................................20 

13.10 Lapse and Renewal of Conditional Use Permit.............................................................20 

13.10.1 Duration and Lapse of Conditional Use Permit................................................20 

13.10.2 Extension of Conditional Use Permit ...............................................................20 

13.11 Application, Review And Inspection Fees .....................................................................21 

13.11.1 Application Fees...............................................................................................21 

13.11.2 Project Review Fees .........................................................................................21 

13.11.3 Inspection Fees .................................................................................................21 

13.11.4 Transcription Costs...........................................................................................22 

ii 
TOWN OF MERRIMACK, NEW HAMPSHIRE 
PLANNING BOARD 

Rules and Regulations for Conditional Use Permits 
Under Zoning Ordinance, Sec. 2.02.4.D.9: 
Outlet Village Shops Permitted by Conditional Use Permit 

13.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS 
13.01.1 Purpose and Authority 
These Rules and Regulations are adopted by the Merrimack Planning Board, hereinafter called the Board, for the purpose of establishing uniform rules and procedures for the granting of conditional use permits pursuant to the Town of Merrimack Zoning Ordinance, Sec. 2.02.4.D.9, Outlet Village Shops permitted by Conditional Use Permit. 
13.01.2 Applicability 
All applications for Outlet Village Shops projects within the I-2 Industrial District under Sec. 2.02.4.D.9 of the Zoning Ordinance are subject to all applicable provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and to these Rules and Regulations. 
13.01.3 Relationship to Other Zoning Laws and Regulations 
These Rules and Regulations are promulgated under RSA 674:21(II), and accordingly, in the event of any conflict between these Rules and Regulations and the Zoning Ordinance, the applicable provisions of the Zoning Ordinance shall control. 
13.01.4 Relationship to Other Application and Submission Requirements 
Unless specifically stated otherwise herein, an application for an Outlet Village Shops conditional use permit is subject to (a) the plan requirements and road and infrastructure standards of Section 4 of the Subdivision Regulations and (b) the Non-Residential Site Review standards and submission requirements set forth in Section 7 of the Subdivision Regulations. Unless specifically stated otherwise herein, these Rules and Regulations are intended to supplement the above standards and requirements and are not intended to relieve the applicant or proposed project from subsequent compliance with said standards and requirements. 









13.02 DEFINITIONS 
The following terms shall be defined as indicated below. Some of these terms have been previously defined in the Town of Merrimack Zoning Ordinance and are set forth here for convenience. Any term defined in the Zoning Ordinance and used herein shall have the same meaning as set forth in the Zoning Ordinance. 
Outlet Village Shops in I-2 Industrial District 4/17/2007 
Conditional Use Permit Rules & Regulations Page 1 

13.02.1 	Applicant shall mean an applicant for an Outlet Village Shops conditional use permit. 
13.02.2 	Application shall mean an application for an Outlet Village Shops conditional use permit. 
13.02.3 	Board shall mean the Planning Board of the Town of Merrimack, New Hampshire. 
13.02.4 	Outlet Village Shops conditional use permit shall mean a conditional use permit granted by the Planning Board authorizing development pursuant to Sec. 2.02.4.D.9 of the Zoning Ordinance and these Rules and Regulations. 
13.02.5 	Outlet Village Shops project shall mean a planned development of Outlet Village Shops pursuant to Sec. 2.02.4.D.9 of the Zoning Ordinance, whether or not the entire development is proposed to be authorized under a single conditional use permit, together with all adjacent land that is required or proposed to be used for access to the Outlet Village Shops, utilities, parking, accessory uses, or other ancillary or supporting purposes. 
13.02.6 	Town shall mean the Town of Merrimack, New Hampshire. 
13.03 PHASING 
13.03.1 	An Outlet Village Shops project in the I-2 Industrial Zone may be reviewed, approved and constructed in phases. If more than one phase is proposed, the initial Application shall include a conceptual master plan for the entirety of the proposed development, not just for the initial phase. The conceptual master plan shall include information on subsequent phases that is sufficient in the Board’s opinion to enable the Board to evaluate the desirability of types, scale, intensity and design of development under the master plan, and shall include analyses of the impacts of full build-out and proposed mitigation measures. 
13.03.2 	Each phase of an Outlet Village Shops project must include all infrastructure components required to support that phase and all measures needed to fully mitigate the projected impacts of that phase. 
13.03.3 	An application for an Outlet Village Shops conditional use permit shall include the information required in Sections 13.05 and 13.06 of these Rules and Regulations for the entire site, and the more detailed information and assessment of impacts pursuant to Section 13.07 of these Rules and Regulations for the phase being proposed. 
13.03.4 	Under an Outlet Village Shops conditional use permit, project timing and phasing of development and mitigations into two or more phases may not exceed five (5) years from the grant of the Outlet Village Shops conditional use permit, unless extended as provided in Section 13.10.2. 
Outlet Village Shops in I-2 Industrial District 4/17/2007 
Conditional Use Permit Rules & Regulations Page 2 

13.03.5 	An Outlet Village Shops conditional use permit shall include sufficient monitoring requirements to allow the Planning Board to evaluate impacts during project build-out and up to five years following issuance of the last certificate of occupancy for improvements authorized by any Outlet Village Shops conditional use permit for the entire development. 

13.04 PRELIMINARY REVIEW 
13.04.1 Preliminary Conceptual Consultation 
(a) 
In accordance with RSA 676:4(II)(a), the Applicant may meet with the Planning Board for preliminary conceptual consultation. Preliminary conceptual consultation discussions may take place without the necessity of giving formal notice to abutters but may occur only at formal meetings of the Board. Any information exchanged as part of this meeting shall be considered as advisory and shall not be binding on the part of the Applicant or the Board. 

(b) 
Request for a preliminary conceptual consultation shall be submitted not less than 15 days prior to the regular meeting of the Board and shall be properly posted as part of the Board’s agenda as required by applicable State statutes. Preliminary conceptual consultation meetings shall be separate and apart from consideration of a formal application for an Outlet Village Shops conditional use permit and shall not establish the time limits for acting on such formal application. 

(c) 
Preliminary conceptual consultation meetings shall be directed at review of the basic concept of the proposal and suggestions which might be of assistance in resolving problems with meeting requirements during final consideration. Preliminary plans or sketches may be submitted for discussion purposes and to assist in the identification of the nature of information necessary to meet the requirements of these Rules and Regulations and the Zoning Ordinance and to address issues of concern to the Town and abutters. The Board and the Applicant may discuss the Project in conceptual form only and in general terms such as desirability of types of development and proposals under the master plan. 

(d) 
Preliminary conceptual consultation shall not bind either the Applicant or the Board, and statements made by Planning Board members shall not be the basis for disqualifying said members or invalidating any action taken. 



13.04.2 Design Review 
(a) 
Prior to submitting an Application for a Conditional Use Permit, the Applicant may meet with the Planning Board for design review. Design review shall include nonbinding discussions beyond conceptual and general discussion, involving more specific design and engineering details than in the preliminary conceptual consultation. 

(b) 
Design review meetings may proceed only after identification of and notice to abutters, holders of conservation, preservation, or agricultural preservation restrictions, and the general public as required by RSA 676:4(I)(d) and Section 7.03(4) of the Subdivision Regulations. Design review meetings shall be separate and apart from consideration of a formal application for an Outlet Village Shops conditional use permit and shall not establish the time limits for acting on such formal application. 

(c) 
Statements made by Planning Board members in design review meetings shall not be the basis for disqualifying said members or invalidating any action taken. 


Outlet Village Shops in I-2 Industrial District 4/17/2007 
Conditional Use Permit Rules & Regulations Page 3 



13.05 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS: GENERAL 
13.05.1 Pre-Application Review by Community Development Department 
Prior to making formal application to the Planning Board for an Outlet Village Shops Conditional Use Permit, the Applicant shall submit the proposed Application to the Community Development Department for review. The purpose of this pre-application review is to identify required information that may be missing or incomplete. Any information exchanged as part of this meeting shall be considered as advisory and shall not be binding on the part of the Applicant, the Board or the Town of Merrimack. 

13.05.2 Form of Application 
An Application shall be made on an official Application Form on file at the Community Development Department office and shall be accompanied by a check or checks made payable to the Town for the Application Fee as specified in these Rules and Regulations. Any communication not on this official form shall be considered a notice of intention to apply and not an actual Application. It is the responsibility of the Applicant to ensure the accuracy and completeness of all information submitted to the Board. The Applicant is also responsible for factually supporting the Application, including references for methodologies used. Failure to meet these requirements may constitute grounds for disapproval of the application. 

13.05.3 Signatures 
A property owner of record and/or an agent or prospective purchaser may file an Application. Without exception, the property owner(s) of record and, if applicable, the agent(s) or prospective purchaser(s), shall be signatories on the official Application Form. An Application submitted without all the required signatures shall be considered incomplete and shall be returned for completion and re-filing. The date of such re-filing shall be the official date of Application. 

13.05.4 Request for Waivers 
Strict compliance with these Rules and Regulations may be waived if the Board finds by majority vote that the waiver is in the public interest or is consistent with the intent and 
Outlet Village Shops in I-2 Industrial District 4/17/2007 
Conditional Use Permit Rules & Regulations Page 4 

purpose of these Rules and Regulations and Sec. 2.02.4.D.9 of the Zoning Ordinance, provided that no waiver shall be from specific provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. Any request from an Applicant for a waiver of these Rules and Regulations or any separate provisions hereof must be submitted in writing to the Board. Such requests must clearly identify the provision of these Rules and Regulations that is to be waived and the reasons why, in the Applicant’s opinion, granting such a waiver would be in the public interest or consistent with the intent and purpose of these Rules and Regulations and Sec. 2.02.4.D.9 of the Zoning Ordinance. Failure to provide the information may constitute grounds for disapproval of the waiver request. 

13.05.5 Number of Copies 
(a) 
At the time of Application, the Applicant shall file a minimum of ten (10) copies of the official Application Form and all plans, exhibits, analyses and any other information and/or attachments with the Board. Unless otherwise approved by the Community Development Director, the plan sheets shall be provided at both 22” x 34” and 11” x 17” (10 copies each). 

(b) 
The Applicant shall also be responsible for submitting to the Community Development Department complete copies of the Application and all subsequent filings for distribution to the Board’s outside consultants. 



13.05.6 Abutters List 
The Applicant shall provide a list of abutters as defined in Section 2.01 of the Subdivision Regulations. 

13.05.7 Other Variances, Permits and Conditional Use Permits 
The Applicant shall provide a list and copies of variances, permits, other conditional use permits and approvals previously issued by Town boards or commissions or by state and federal agencies and a list of any additional variances, permits or conditional use permits that will be required to complete the proposed development. This list should include all permits and approvals required under applicable local, state and federal regulations. The list should include the name of the person or entity as it appears on the permit or approval, the date of issuance, and, where applicable, the Book and Page or Document Number as evidence of recording or filing with the Registry of Deeds. 

13.05.8 Preliminary Layout 
If subdivision of the site is contemplated by the development plan, the Application shall include a preliminary subdivision layout. 


13.06 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS: PLANS AND DRAWINGS 
An application for a CUP shall comply with Section 4 and 7.04 of the Subdivision regulations, and shall include the following information: 
Outlet Village Shops in I-2 Industrial District 4/17/2007 
Conditional Use Permit Rules & Regulations Page 5 

13.06.1 Locus Map 
An Application shall include a Locus Map showing the boundaries of the project site, adjoining properties, zoning districts, public and private streets and ways, buildings, water bodies and other landmarks within a minimum distance of one (1) mile. 

13.06.2 General Layout Map 
An Application shall include a General Layout Map on one (1) sheet, showing the project site including the existing and proposed layouts of the streets and ways, lot and zoning district boundary lines, lot numbers, and proposed structure locations. The general layout map shall be shown on the title sheet or the next sheet. 

13.06.3 Existing Conditions Plan 
An application shall include an Existing Conditions Plan showing the information listed in Section 4.05 and 4.06 of the Subdivision Regulations as applicable for the project site and, to the extent that such information is available from public records or aerial surveys, for an area extending two hundred and fifty (250) feet around the perimeter of the site, and shall include the following information: 
(a) 
Existing site features such as, but not limited to, flood plains, waterways, drainage courses, ponds, water supply wells, leachfields, ledge outcroppings, soil types per Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS), stratified-drift aquifers per the United States Geological Survey (USGS), significant trees and vegetation, and the generalized location and habitat for any endangered or threatened species, species of special concern, or exemplary natural community as listed by the New Hampshire Natural Heritage Bureau, New Hampshire Nongame and Endangered Wildlife Program, or US Fish and Wildlife Service.  

(b) 
All existing monuments and improvements such as, but not limited to, buildings, structures, roads and ways, stone walls, underground and above ground storage tanks, wastewater disposal systems and wells. 

(c) 
Designation of all existing monuments and improvements to be removed. 

(d) 
Existing topographic contours shown at two (2) foot intervals. 

(e) 
All zoning classifications and zoning district boundaries, including the boundaries of the I-2 Industrial Districts and, if applicable, the Special Flood Hazard Areas, Aquifer Conservation District, Wetlands Conservation District, and Wellhead Protection Area. 



13.06.4 Master Site Development Plan 
An application shall include a Master Site Development Plan showing the information listed below. The Master Site Development Plan is not intended to be a fully engineered 
Outlet Village Shops in I-2 Industrial District 4/17/2007 
Conditional Use Permit Rules & Regulations Page 6 

site plan, but is a graphic depiction of the proposed project that will be referenced in a Development Agreement and will serve as the basis for the development and review of the final site plan(s) for the Outlet Village Shops project. 
The Master Site Development Plan shall consist of the following elements: 
13.06.41 Structure and Circulation Plan 
(a) 
Proposed alterations to special site features including, but not limited to, waterways, wetlands, bridges, dams, drainage courses and public water supply wells. 

(b) 
All proposed streets, ways, access and interior driveways, shared driveways, walkways, sidewalks, parking lots, parking structures, and other impervious covers. 

(c) 
All proposed buildings or structures, including footprint, floor area, general setbacks, height (feet and number of stories), proposed uses, number of retail establishments, and surface and structured parking spaces, as applicable for each building or structure. 


13.06.42 Grading Plan 
Proposed grading (cut and fill). 
13.06.43 Drainage Plan 
General location, type and anticipated size of storm water drainage facilities. Information relating to placement of the drainage system components shall be sufficient to evaluate the operation of the system. Locations of retention/detention ponds and other proposed stormwater Best Management Plan facilities shall be shown. Information shall be sufficient to demonstrate that the existing system will support the new addition to the system must be provided. Actions to achieve substantial recharge and appropriate treatment of storm water must also be provided. 
13.06.44 Utilities Plan 
(a) 
Access, utility and any other easements. 

(b) 
Location, type and size of existing and proposed water services facilities. Locations of any on-site wells, including setbacks from any building, structure or wastewater disposal system must be shown. Any public water service mains serving the site must be identified. Sufficient information demonstrating that the existing system will support the new addition to the system must be provided. Actions proposed to manage both peak and average water demands of the project must also be provided. 

(c) 
Location, type and size of existing and proposed sewer services. Information relating to placement of the sewer system components shall be sufficient to evaluate the operation of the system. Sufficient information demonstrating both high flow and low flow capacities of existing and proposed sewer mains must be provided. 


Outlet Village Shops in I-2 Industrial District 4/17/2007 
Conditional Use Permit Rules & Regulations Page 7 

(d) 
Measures to minimize generation of wastewater and other wastes, including conservation, reclamation or recycling. 

(e) 
Location, type and size of any underground utilities, whether or not within public right-of-ways, including, but not limited to, electric, gas, telephone and/or cable television services. Any emergency power facilities must also be shown. 

(f) 
Preliminary location, type, size and screening of any solid waste disposal facilities. 

(g) 
Measures to minimize generation of solid waste from the site, including recycling. 


13.06.45 Landscaping Plan 
Location of areas of retained vegetation and areas proposed for landscaping. 
13.06.46 Buffering Plan 
Proposed measures to screen and buffer the development from surrounding properties and public and private ways, including retained vegetation, new plantings, fencing and constructed berms where appropriate. 


13.07 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS: REPORTS 
An application for an Outlet Village Shops conditional use permit shall include the following five reports: 
• 
Existing Conditions Report 

• 
Proposed Site Development Report 

• 
Traffic Impact Assessment Report 

• 
Community and Fiscal Impact Report 

• 
Environmental Impact Report. 


Each report must meet the minimum requirements set forth in this Section. Each report shall also include a detailed explanation of the methodology used for each area of analysis, and any calculations derived as part of the analysis, which may be included in a separate appendix. 
The five reports may be combined into a single, comprehensive report that contains a separate section addressing each area of analysis required by these reports (i.e., existing conditions, proposed development, service improvements, traffic impact, transportation demand management, fiscal and community impact, and environmental impact). The single, comprehensive report must contain section headings that clearly identify the subject matter that is analyzed in each section. 
Each report should address the construction phase and ongoing operations separately. 
Outlet Village Shops in I-2 Industrial District 4/17/2007 
Conditional Use Permit Rules & Regulations Page 8 

13.07.1 Existing Conditions Report 
An application for an Outlet Village Shops conditional use permit shall include an Existing Conditions Report that presents a generalized narrative and tabular description of existing conditions on the site of the proposed development and in the area within one half mile from the site boundaries. To the extent possible, the Existing Conditions Report shall present information through tabulation supplemented by narrative description. When relevant, information should be included in the Existing Conditions Plan. The Existing Conditions Report shall include, at a minimum, the following information for the area covered by the Outlet Village Shops project and for adjoining areas: 
(a) 
Zoning districts, including all overlay districts. 

(b) 
Gross and net floor area of development by land use. 

(c) 
Natural resources such as wetlands, water resources, vegetation and wildlife habitat. 

(d) 
Status (i.e., public, private), width and condition of existing streets and ways. The Applicant shall provide information regarding rights of third parties in any streets or ways. 

(e) 
Drainage conditions and impervious areas, including an estimate of the impervious area within the area covered by the Outlet Village Shops project, both in square footage and as a percent of the total area of covered by the Outlet Village Shops project. 

(f) 
Description of the topographic character of the site. 

(g) 
Characterization of soil types. 



13.07.2 Proposed Site Development Report 
An application for an Outlet Village Shops conditional use permit shall include a Proposed Development Report that presents a generalized narrative and tabular description of the proposed project. When relevant, information should be included in the Master Site Development Plan. 
(a) Site and Development Data 
The Proposed Development Report shall include, at a minimum, the following data 
for the Outlet Village Shops project area. For each of the applicable items specified 
below, information shall be provided in tabular form for: 
• 
existing pre-development conditions; 

• 
minimum or maximum requirements set forth in the Zoning Ordinance 

• 
each proposed phase of the Outlet Village Shops project; and 

• 
full build-out of the Outlet Village Shops project. 


Outlet Village Shops in I-2 Industrial District 4/17/2007 
Conditional Use Permit Rules & Regulations Page 9 

(1) 
General 

(i) 
land area 

(ii) 
non-wetland area 


(iii) total gross floor area 

(2) 
Outlet Village Shops buildings/uses 

(i) 
size, height, number of stories 

(ii) 
gross floor area of retail use 


(iii) statement of intended uses for each building 

(3) 
Other buildings/uses 

(i) 
size, height, number of stories 

(ii) 
gross floor area by use 



(4) 
Parking 

(i) 
number of surface lots 

(ii) 
number surface parking spaces 


(iii) number of parking structures 
(iv) 
number of parking structure spaces 

(v) 
total impervious area of parking lots and structures 

(vi) 
total interior and boundary landscaped area 


(vii) total gross area of parking areas (impervious areas plus landscaped areas) 

(5) 
Area and percentage of 

(i) 
building coverage 

(ii) 
open space 




(iii) landscaped area (outside of parking areas) 
(iv) impervious surface 
(b) 
Proposed plan for implementation of the project by phase, including both on-site and off-site infrastructure improvements. 

(c) 
Proposed construction timetable by phase, including both on-site and off-site infrastructure improvements. 

(d) 
Proposed plan for addressing stormwater handling and treatment, including drainage design methodology, proposed stormwater facilities, temporary and permanent erosion control measures, and inspection and maintenance schedule for stormwater facilities. 

(e) 
Location, type and size of existing and proposed water service facilities and sewer facilities. 

(f) 
Proposed actions relating to the collection and disposal of sanitary wastes, including actions to minimize wastes generated by site occupants. 

(g) 
Improvements to infrastructure that the Applicant proposes to make at its own expense, with an estimate of the cost of each such improvement and the proposed timetable for completion by phase or stage. Included in this report shall be any proposed infrastructure improvement or mitigation which may involve, but not be limited to: 

• 	
public streets and private streets that are used or practically available for use by the public; 

• 	
traffic coordination and traffic calming devices; 

• 	
water mains, sewage systems and other utilities; 

• 
public transportation such as buses, shuttles and train systems; and • open space or parkland that is or will be available to the public. 



(h) 
Improvements to infrastructure that the Applicant proposes to be made by public entities. The Applicant shall provide an alternative plan for making these improvements in case that construction by public entities is not realized. 

(i) 
Description of the proposed methods for monitoring and correcting adverse impacts of each phase of development and means of making changes in later phases if earlier phases have traffic, school enrollment, groundwater quality or quantity, sitework or other impacts substantially departing from those in the projections upon which the Board relied on in its approval of the Outlet Village Shops conditional use permit, but only to the extent attributable to development pursuant to such Outlet Village Shops conditional use permit. 

(j) 
Schematic renderings, computerized renditions, drawings and/or photographs depicting the project. These shall be at a detail sufficient for the Board to evaluate its overall design, general use of building materials, and general sense of individual units within a building, such as retail uses and their locations. 

(k) 
Drawings to illustrate seasonal view lines to and from abutting properties to the project. 

(l) 
Proposed design standards and guidelines for architecture, signage, lighting, landscaping, and roadways (e.g., typical roadway cross-sections including lane/shoulder widths, cross slope, curbing and sidewalk width/location). These standards and guidelines shall be included in a design handbook for the Outlet Village Shops. 


Outlet Village Shops in I-2 Industrial District 4/17/2007 
Conditional Use Permit Rules & Regulations Page 10 


13.07.3 Traffic Impact Assessment Report 
The Applicant shall prepare a Traffic Impact Assessment Report, the scope and methodology of which will be determined by the Planning Board. The Applicant shall consult with the Board and the Community Development Department prior to submitting 
Outlet Village Shops in I-2 Industrial District 4/17/2007 
Conditional Use Permit Rules & Regulations Page 11 

an Application to determine the proper scope of the Traffic Impact Assessment. The Traffic Impact Assessment Report shall include information for any roadways and intersections adjacent to the Outlet Village Shops project and outside of this area that are, in the opinion of the Board, likely to be affected by the proposed development. 
13.07.31 Project Scoping 
The Applicant shall meet with the Community Development Department and its consultants to develop a proposed written scope of the traffic assessment, which shall be presented to the Board for its review and approval by vote. The scoping shall include representatives of the Nashua Regional Planning Commission and the New Hampshire Department of Transportation to ensure that regional traffic information and issues are adequately addressed in the Traffic Impact Assessment. 
The scoping meeting will serve to identify available data, will allow coordination of multiple developments, will assist in the prevention of duplication of work efforts, and will assure that the product to be submitted will contain all information required by the Town of Merrimack, and achieves a level of completion to the satisfaction of the Planning Board. 
13.07.32 General Standards for Traffic Impact Study 
The traffic assessment scope shall address the following: 
(a) Study Area 
The preliminary study area will be defined as part of the project scoping meeting. Nonetheless, it is possible that there will be some intersections or roadways not originally identified for study, that may be included later once the potential project impacts are better known. It is recommended that the applicant have a scoping meeting for the traffic study with NHDOT in advance of the project scoping meeting to ensure that the preliminary study area reflects state requirements. 
The study area will typically include all signalized intersections impacted by project traffic, major unsignalized intersections impacted by project traffic, selected minor unsignalized intersections impacted by project traffic, and interchange ramps/toll plazas impacted by project traffic. 
(b) Analysis Scenarios 
Appropriate analysis scenarios for the Build and No-build Conditions shall be defined and analyzed in accordance with prevailing professional standards. 
(c) 
Traffic Data Collection 

(d) 
Trip Generation and Distribution 

(1) 
Trip generation 

(2) 
Pass-by and Diverted Trips 




Outlet Village Shops in I-2 Industrial District 4/17/2007 
Conditional Use Permit Rules & Regulations Page 12 

(3) Distribution assumptions 
(e) 
Background Growth Rates 

(f) 
Planned Development and Improvements 

(1) 
Planned transportation improvement projects anticipated to impact the proposed study area 

(2) 
Planned development projects anticipated to generate traffic impacting the 
proposed study area 




(g) 
Access Location and Design Elements 


Traffic flow and safety issues regarding the location and design of primary and 
emergency access points to the proposed project. 
13.07.33 Technical Elements of Traffic Impact Study 
(a) 
Study Area Existing Conditions 

(b) 
Future Conditions without Development (No Build Condition) 

(c) 
Future Conditions with Development (Build Conditions w/o Mitigation) 

(d) 
Future Conditions with Development (Build Conditions w/ Mitigation) 

(1) 
Mitigation 

(2) 
Transportation Demand Management 

(3) 
Emergency Access Management 



(e) 
Construction Traffic Management 


An Application for an Outlet Village Shops conditional use permit shall include a narrative regarding traffic during construction, including any specific provisions aimed at minimizing the impacts of constructon-related traffic. 

13.07.4 Community and Fiscal Impact Report 
The Applicant shall meet with the Community Development Department and its consultants to develop a proposed scope of the community and fiscal impact assessment, which shall be presented to the Board at a meeting for its review and approval by vote. The scoping meeting will serve to identify available data, will assist in the prevention of duplication of work efforts, and will assure that the product to be submitted will contain all required information and achieves a level of completion to the satisfaction of the Planning Board. 
The applicant shall provide the Planning Board with a detailed Community and Fiscal Impact Report for the proposed project. The Community and Fiscal Impact Report shall include the following: 
Outlet Village Shops in I-2 Industrial District 4/17/2007 
Conditional Use Permit Rules & Regulations Page 13 

(a) 
A description of the development including the likely tenant profile by size and type of tenant (retail shops, larger retailers, cinema, restaurant, etc), by phase. 

(b) 
A case study analysis of two similar developments in similar community settings (subject to approval by the Planning Board or its designee) setting forth for each of the case studies: 

(1) 
A time line of the development, showing date completed, expanded, hours of operation, etc. 

(2) 
Assessed valuation and municipal tax revenues 

(3) 
Operating and capital impacts on specific town services including, at a minimum, police, administrative services/general government, fire, ambulance, road maintenance and solid waste. 

(4) 
A statement of emergency service calls including police, fire and ambulance to the development and its immediate neighborhood, including type and purpose of each call, if available. 

(5) 
Off-site improvements funded by the developer and the cost of those 
improvements. 


(6) 
The pre-and post-development character of the neighborhood, including a 
statement of induced development. 


(7) 
Pre-development and post-development traffic counts. 

(8) 
An analysis of the fiscal impact of the development considering municipal 
revenues, operating expenses and capital outlays. 


(9) 
A statement of the development’s impact on surrounding residential property values. 

(10) 
Aerial photographs and other depictions of the development. 



(c) 
A community and economic impact assessment including: 

(1) 
An estimate of the number of full-time and part-time jobs created, by phase. Local and regional offsite net employment impact should be estimated by the use of employment and wage multipliers. 

(2) 
An estimate of annual wages likely to be paid at prevailing area wage rates for similar positions, by phase. 

(3) 
An estimate of the type of service demands and expenditures generated by the project that would be redirected into the local economy (e.g., snow plowing, payroll services, landscaping, etc.). 

(4) 
An estimate of the Merrimack population and housing impact resulting from the development’s job creation, by phase. 

(5) 
An estimate of the amount of induced development (type, building area, and employment) likely to occur within one mile of the development. 

(6) 
An analysis of the impact of the development on existing businesses within the town. 

(7) 
An estimate of the impact of the development on residential and on nonresidential property values in consideration of traffic, lighting, noise and such other factors as may influence value. 

(8) 
A graphic depiction of how the proposed development will look from various ground-level compass points. 

(9) 
An analysis of the direct and indirect impacts on Merrimack’s community 
character, as may be requested by the Board. 




(d) 
A fiscal impact analysis estimating phase-specific (including build-out) direct and indirect (resulting from induced development) impacts including: 

(1) 
The estimated assessed valuation and resulting property tax revenues accruing to the town, after consulting with the town Assessor. 

(2) 
The estimated non-property tax revenues accruing to the town from user fees, licensing, etc. 

(3) 
An estimate of the impact (capital and operating) of the development on all existing town services, based on interviews with department heads and the case study analysis. The analysis will specifically address the cost of educating students entering the school system as a result of identified induced residential development. 

(4) 
An analysis of the capacity of impacted town services to accommodate the identified impacts, without degrading services to existing town residents and commercial enterprises. 

(5) 
A statement of capital outlays for roads, streets, sewer, water, storm drainage, police and fire services, buildings and grounds, sanitation recreation, schools and such other facilities as may be impacted. 

(6) 
Identification of capacity enhancement and operating costs of servicing the development, including allowance for any proposed mitigation measures required by the town or offered by the developer. 

(7) 
An estimate of the municipal cost (capital and operating) of servicing the development including staffing, wages, overhead, training, recruiting, supplies, general operating expenses, etc. 

(8) 
A statement of the annual costs (capital and operating) and revenues accruing to the town, by phase. 

(9) 
The fiscal impact analysis will be conducted utilizing a mutually agreed methodology. A simple per capita or proportional share approach is unlikely to provide the level of detail and confidence needed in this analysis. Reliance on the case studies, interviews with town staff, analysis of the town’s budget, master plan and capital improvement program will likely be required. 




Outlet Village Shops in I-2 Industrial District 4/17/2007 
Conditional Use Permit Rules & Regulations Page 14 


13.07.5 Environmental Impact Report 
The Environmental Impact Report shall include the following: 
(a) Water budget analysis for the affected sub-basins that includes the net flows resulting from inflows (stormwater recharge and discharge) and outflows (surface water 
Outlet Village Shops in I-2 Industrial District 4/17/2007 
Conditional Use Permit Rules & Regulations Page 15 

diversions, groundwater withdrawals, sewer flows, and other consumptive uses) for existing conditions and post-development conditions. At a minimum, the water budget analysis must undertake the following: 
(1) 
Assess existing stream flow, precipitation, evapotranspiration, and infiltration in and around the project site to establish baseline conditions; 

(2) 
Provide an estimate of the amount of impervious surfaces to be created as a result of the project build-out; 

(3) 
Calculate the water that leaves the site as a result of surface water diversions, stormwater discharges, impervious surfaces, groundwater withdrawals, sewer flows, water consumption, and grading changes, including changes in the direction of flow and resulting impacts on different sub-basins; 

(4) 
Provide an estimate of the amount of water to be recharged back into the sub-basin through stormwater retention and water recycling; 

(5) 
Demonstrate that the post-development flow rates will not exceed that of the pre­development for the 2, 10, and 50-year storm events; 

(6) 
Evaluate the 100-year storm event and design stormwater management systems to avoid increase of peak rates of discharge from the property after development; 

(7) 
Consider all practicable methods for preserving groundwater recharge capacity, including collection, treatment and recharge of runoff from roofs, roadways, and surface lots. 


(b) 
Analysis of existing water quality for potentially affected surface water and ground water resources (including the Merrimack Village District wells) and the potential impacts to these resources resulting from full implementation of the proposed Outlet Village Shops project, including a determination of potential mitigation measures and the likely impact of these mitigation measures. At a minimum, the water quality analysis shall include the following information: 

(1) 
Documentation of pre-development surface water and ground water quality to establish a benchmark or reference to compare with results from post-development monitoring; 

(2) 
Identification of potential sources of contamination, including point sources and non-point sources such as road and parking lot runoff; hazardous materials and solid wastes; erosion and sedimentation; fertilizers, herbicides and pesticides; and sewage disposal; 

(3) 
Pollution load analysis that identifies anticipated levels of contamination from the sources identified above; 

(4) 
Description and consideration of potential mitigation measures listed below to ensure that there is no degradation of water quality as a result of the proposed project; 

(i) 
Collection and recharge of runoff from roofs, roadways, and surface lots; 

(ii) 
Treatment of runoff for dissolved contaminants and suspended solids; 


(iii) A snow removal plan that includes a prohibition of the storage of road salt and considers alternative de-icing materials; and 
(iv) Consideration of alternatives to traditional fertilizers, herbicides and pesticides. 

(5) 
An operation and maintenance plan for the stormwater collection, recharge, and water treatment systems. 

(6) 
A post-development water quality monitoring plan for potentially affected surface water and ground water resources. 



(c) 
Identification and location of any known, existing hazardous waste sites and a description of how these sites will be or are being remediated. 

(d) 
Identification, delineation and assessment of the functions, values and condition of all existing wetland resources, including identification of wetlands that function as vernal pools, and identification/quantification of all proposed alteration, restoration and replacement of these wetland resources. 

(e) 
Identification of any state-protected or federally-protected endangered or threatened species or species of special concern known to exist within the area of the Outlet Village Shops project or previously sighted in this area and reported to NHNHB, and preliminary assessment of any impacts on these species or their habitats associated with implementation of the Outlet Village Shops project, including a determination of potential mitigation measures and the likely impact of these mitigation measures. 

(f) 
Identification of any state-listed or federally-listed landmarks or historic or archeological resources within or in the immediate vicinity of the area of the Outlet Village Shops project and preliminary assessment of any impacts on these resources associated with implementation of the Outlet Village Shops project, including a determination of potential mitigation measures and the likely impact of these mitigation measures. 

(g) 
Identification and preliminary assessment of air quality impacts associated with implementation of the Outlet Village Shops project, both at the construction stage and at the post-development stage, including a determination of potential mitigation measures and the likely impact of these mitigation measures. The assessment shall 


Outlet Village Shops in I-2 Industrial District 4/17/2007 
Conditional Use Permit Rules & Regulations Page 16 

Outlet Village Shops in I-2 Industrial District 4/17/2007 
Conditional Use Permit Rules & Regulations Page 17 

include “hot-spot analysis” of key locations which shall estimate likely future localized pollutant concentrations resulting from the proposed development, and shall compare those concentrations to the relevant National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) for ozone, carbon monoxide, nitrogen dioxide, sulfur dioxide, particulate matter (PM) and lead. 
(h) 
Identification and preliminary assessment of any noise impacts associated with implementation of the Outlet Village Shops project, both at the construction stage and at the post-development stage, including a determination of potential mitigation measures and the likely impact of these mitigation measures. Include analysis of noise impacts from trucks, tour buses and other vehicles, and measures to mitigate such impacts. 

(i) 
Identification of any potential cumulative environmental impacts including known development projects and proposals that may impact the same areas or resources as the Outlet Village Shops project. 

(j) 
Description of a construction management plan describing proposed actions to mitigate environmental impacts for each issue and feature addressed in (a) through (h) above. 



13.07.6 Relationship of Report Requirements to Other Jurisdictions 
The information and reports required for an Outlet Village Shops conditional use permit application are independent of any information or reports required for any other federal, state or local permit or approval. The requirements for an Application for an Outlet Village Shops conditional use permit are intended to provide the Planning Board with comprehensive overview of (i) proposed development, (ii) anticipated impacts that will result from proposed development, and (iii) measures by which the impacts requiring mitigation may be mitigated. To that end, an Applicant is encouraged to plan and prepare required federal or state filings consistent with the requirements of this Section as far as practicable. The Board, in its sole discretion, may accept all or part of such federal or state filings as satisfying the requirements of this Section in all or in part. The purpose of this Section 13.07.6 is not to eliminate any other requirement of these rules and regulations, but rather to allow the Applicant, where practicable, to prepare reports that satisfy both the requirements of these rules and regulations and the requirements of federal or state agencies. 

13.07.7 Additional Information 
The Applicant may submit additional information that the Applicant feels is relevant to properly inform the Board about the proposed development, which may include legal opinions, deeds, historical data, studies and reports. The Board is empowered to require information in addition to that specifically required by the Zoning Ordinance or these Rules and Regulations if it finds that this information is necessary to properly act upon the Application. 
Outlet Village Shops in I-2 Industrial District 4/17/2007 
Conditional Use Permit Rules & Regulations Page 18 



13.08 SITE VISIT 
From time to time the Board may request a site visit to the proposed development site. The date and time for such visits shall be satisfactory to both the Board and Applicant. The Board may request that any work subject to these Rules and Regulations be clearly flagged or otherwise delineated prior to the scheduled site visit. The Board may also request a “balloon” test or other test in the field sufficient to illustrate the proposed height and location of a proposed building or structure in relation to the surrounding area. 

13.09 DISPOSITION OF APPLICATION 
13.09.1 Action by Planning Board 
The Board shall, within 45 days following delivery of an Application for a Conditional Use Permit, determine if the Application is complete according to these regulations. Upon determination that the Application is complete, the Board shall accept the Application for review and begin formal consideration of the Application and shall approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the permit Application within 90 days, subject to any extension of time agreeable to the Applicant and the Board. 

13.09.2 Approval Criteria 
The Board may approve or approve with conditions an Application only upon its written determination that the proposed Outlet Village Shops development fully complies with the Zoning Ordinance, including the specific provisions and standards of Section 
2.02.4.D.9 of the Ordinance regarding Outlet Village Shops. In case of disapproval of an Application, the ground for such disapproval shall be stated in the Board’s minutes. 

13.09.3 Conditions of Approval 
An Outlet Village Shops conditional use permit is granted at the discretion of the Planning Board in accordance with applicable law. The use, density and construction standards that may be permitted by the Planning Board under its authority as conditional use permit granting authority may be more stringent than as allowed by these Rules and Regulations and shall be based on the merits of the application and the approval criteria set forth in the Zoning Ordinance and herein. 

13.09.4 Development Agreement 
The Planning Board shall require, as a condition of its approval of an Outlet Village Shops Conditional Use Permit, the execution of a Development Agreement or other similar instrument specifying the phasing, timing and sequence of the improvements contained within the Outlet Village Shops project; the performance guarantees relating thereto; actions to mitigate development impacts; and any other information and commitments the Board deems necessary to insure the successful completion of the project as proposed and approved, including all mitigation commitments. A copy of the signed agreement shall be recorded at the Hillsborough County Registry of Deeds. 
Outlet Village Shops in I-2 Industrial District 4/17/2007 
Conditional Use Permit Rules & Regulations Page 19 


13.09.5 Modification or Amendment of Conditional Use Permit 
(a) 
The Board shall have the authority to allow for the correction of an inadvertent or clerical error or omission provided such correction does not constitute a reversal of the decision on an Outlet Village Shops conditional use permit or conditions contained therein. 

(b) 
In the event that field conditions, building plan modifications or requirements of the Town of Merrimack or any other governmental authority necessitate changes to the Outlet Village Shops project, a detailed written description of such changes shall be submitted to the Board. The Board shall determine whether such changes warrant further review by the Board. If the Board determines that such changes are not minor as contemplated by Sec. 2.02.4.D.9 of the Zoning Ordinance, then the petition to amend the Outlet Village Shops project conditional use permit shall be subject to the notice and public hearing requirements as set forth in Section 7.03 of the Subdivision Regulations and in applicable law. 



13.09.6 Relationship to Subdivision and Site Plan Approval 
The approval by the Planning Board of an Outlet Village Shops conditional use permit shall neither oblige the Planning Board to approve the related Final Subdivision Plat or Site Plan nor substitute the approval of the Application for the approval of the related Final Plat or Site Plan. 


13.10 LAPSE AND RENEWAL OF CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT 
13.10.1 Duration and Lapse of Conditional Use Permit 
(a) 
If an approved Outlet Village Shops conditional use permit is not acted upon within a period of two (2) years from the date of approval, then such approval shall be null and void. 

(b) 
Actions sufficient to vest an approval for a conditional use permit include site plan approval, subdivision approval, issuance of a building permit authorized under the conditional use permit. However, should any site plan or subdivision approval or building permit granted under an approved Outlet Village Shops conditional use permit expire unused after the conclusion of the two-year validity period provided for herein, said conditional use permit shall become void as well. 



13.10.2 Extension of Conditional Use Permit 
Prior to the expiration of an Outlet Village Shops conditional use permit, the Applicant may apply for an extension of the conditional use permit from time to time for a period not to exceed two (2) years. Requests for extension may be made in such form as the Planning Board shall require. The Applicant may apply for an extension if the construction or substantial use thereof has not commenced for good cause. Any application to extend the two-year validity period shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of 
Outlet Village Shops in I-2 Industrial District 4/17/2007 
Conditional Use Permit Rules & Regulations Page 20 

the Planning Board that it was impossible or impractical to receive the necessary approvals to move forward in reliance on the conditional use permit granted within two years. Any application for renewal or extension of the conditional use permit shall be filed with the Planning Board no sooner than 90 days, nor later than 30 days, prior to the conditional use permit expiration. The Planning Board may, in its sole discretion, grant such extension of the above validity period as it deems warranted. If granted, such extension shall be retroactive to the date of expiration. 


13.11 APPLICATION, REVIEW AND INSPECTION FEES 
13.11.1 Application Fees 
(a) 
The application fee for an Outlet Village Shops Application shall be Fifty Dollars ($50.00) per acre of land area in the parcel proposed for development, plus Five Cents ($0.05) per square foot of proposed gross floor area. 

(b) 
No additional filing fees shall be required for Applications for conditional use permits required by Sections other than Section 2.02.4.D.9 of the Zoning Ordinance where such Applications are consolidated into the Outlet Village Shops Application. 

(c) 
Application fees shall be non-refundable. 



13.11.2 Project Review Fees 
The Board shall impose Project Review Fee(s) on an Outlet Village Shops Application which requires, in the judgment of the Board, review by outside consultants due to the size or complexity of the proposed project, the project’s potential impacts, or because the Town lacks the necessary expertise to perform the necessary review. In hiring outside consultants, the Board may engage engineers, planners, attorneys, designers, or other qualified professionals to assist the Board and to ensure compliance with all relevant laws, statutes, the Zoning Ordinance and these Rules and Regulations. Such assistance may include, but need not be limited to, analyzing an Application, monitoring or inspecting a project or site for compliance with the Board’s decisions or regulations, or inspecting a project during construction or implementation. The Board may receive the assignment of contracts with outside consultants from other Town boards. 

13.11.3 Inspection Fees 
(a) 
The Applicant shall be required to pay an Initial Inspection Fee to the Town to compensate the Town for costs associated with inspections by the Department of Public Works or its consultants and designees, as required by Section 4.02 of these Rules and Regulations. At the time an Application is filed, the Applicant shall submit a non-refundable Initial Inspection Fee as determined by the Board, in consultation with the Town’s Director of Public Works, based upon estimates provided by potential outside consultants and/or the estimated number of inspection hours by the Town Engineer and/or designee(s) on the staff of the Department of Public Works. 

(b) 
The Board, in consultation with the Department of Public Works, shall determine the amount of any supplemental Inspection Fee funds required should the initial Inspection Fee funds approach depletion. 

(c) 
If it is determined that a supplemental Inspection Fee is required, then the Board shall notify the Applicant by mail, postage prepaid, within seven (7) days of such decision. The required fee must be received by the Town within fourteen (14) days after the receipt of the notification. 

(d) 
Excess Inspection Fee funds shall be returned to the Applicant or the Applicant’s successor in interest, with the final inspection of the approved project or at the time of final disapproval of the Application. 


Outlet Village Shops in I-2 Industrial District 4/17/2007 
Conditional Use Permit Rules & Regulations Page 21 


13.11.4 Transcription Costs 
The Applicant shall be responsible for all costs associated with the transcription of the public hearing for the Application. 
Outlet Village Shops in I-2 Industrial District 4/17/2007 
Conditional Use Permit Rules & Regulations Page 22 





