CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
i
November 1, 2018
SUBPART A. CHARTER
Subpt. A. Charter, §§ 1-111-a
Subpt. B. Related Laws, §§ A-101 – A-1214
Ch. 1. Board of Police Commissioners, §§ 1-101 – A-146
Subch. 1. Police Commission Appointed by Governor, §§ A-101 – A-107
Subch. 2. Police Commissioners Appointed by Mayor and Board of
Alderman, §§ A-141 – A-146
Ch. 3. Cemeteries, §§ A-251 – A-338
Subch. 1. Edgewood Cemetery, §§ A-251- A-259
Subch. 2. Woodlawn Cemetery, §§ A-291 – A-299
Subch. 3. Suburban Cemeteries, §§ A-331 – A-338
Ch. 5. Finances, §§ A-441 – A-444
Subch. 1. Municipal Indebtedness, §§ A-441 – A-444
Subch. 2. Pensions, §§ A-481 – A-488
Ch. 7. Fire Department, §§ A-591 – A-596
Ch. 9. Organizations and Institutions, §§ A-701 – A-742
Subch. 1. Grand Army Hall, § A-701
Subch. 2. John F. Stark Homestead, §§ A-731 – A-733
Subch. 3. Nashua Historical Society, §§ A-741, A-742
Ch. 11. Public Library, §§ A-831 – A-841
Ch. 13. Land, § A-941 – A-1003
Subch. 1. Private Land Development, §§ A-941 – A-943
Subch. 2. Subdivision of Land, § A-971
Subch. 3. Land Acquisition, §§ A-1001 – A-1003
Ch. 15. Airports and Aviation, §§ A-1201 – A-1214
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
ii
November 1, 2018
CHARTER1
§ 1. Corporate existence
The inhabitants of the city of Nashua shall continue to be a body politic and corporate
under the name of the city of Nashua, and as such shall exercise and enjoy all the rights,
immunities, powers and privileges, and shall be subject to all the duties and obligations now
incumbent on or pertaining to said city as a municipal corporation.
§ 2. Property: debts
All existing property now of said city of Nashua shall be and remain vested in said city
under the provisions of this charter, and all debts and obligations of said city shall be considered
and shall continue for all purposes to be the debts and obligations of said city of Nashua under
this revised charter.
§ 3. [City Wards]2
The City of Nashua is hereby divided into nine wards. At least as often as each
recurring federal census, the board of aldermen shall review the ward boundaries and, if
necessary to comply with Constitutional requirement to equalize populations, shall, by
ordinance, re-divide the city into nine wards. A public hearing on the proposed ward
boundaries shall be held not more than 30 days before its adoption by the board of
aldermen, at such time and place as the board of aldermen shall direct, and notice of such
public hearing shall be published at least 30 days in advance of the hearing by the city
clerk. In addition, informational meetings shall be held in all wards proposed for
boundary changes not more than 30 days before the vote. All wards shall be composed
of contiguous and compact territory, as nearly equal in population as possible, and
bounded by natural boundaries, street lines, railroad tracks or other easily identifiable
physical features. Until passage of an ordinance re-dividing the city into nine wards,
ward lines shall remain as approved by the voters of Nashua on November 5, 2002.
Notwithstanding any changes in the ward boundaries, the elected ward officers in office
at the time of the re-division of city wards shall continue in said offices until the end of
the terms for which they were elected.
Representation in General Court—1971, ch. 568:2 eff. Jan. 3, 1972, provided for the apportionment of
districts 16 to 24, inclusive, as follows:
District 16 Nashua Ward 1 3
District 17 Nashua Ward 2 4
District 18 Nashua Ward 3 3
District 19 Nashua Ward 4 4
1 Editor’s note—The charter of the city of Nashua was adopted by the laws of 1913, chapter 427. Since its adoption it
has been amended by the laws of 1915, ch. 270; 1919, ch. 3; 1921, ch. 246; 1937, ch. 314; 1941, chs. 277 and 278;
1943, ch. 288: 1957, ch. 377; 1961, chs. 319, 335 and 356; 1965, chs. 425 and 496; 1969, chs. 569, 610, 617 and 627;
1970, ch. 73; 1971, chs. 258, 259, 405 and 568; 1975, ch. 415, §§ 13 – 15. The charter has also been amended, under
RSA 49-A: 8-12, providing for home rule amendment of charters by popular referendum without the necessity of a
legislative act, by referendum questions 1, 2, 4 and 5 referred to the voters at the November 4, 1975, regular municipal
election.
Charter amendments—City charters, RSA chapter 49-A.
2 Editor’s note—Bracketed section headings supplied by publisher. For a description of ward boundaries, see NRO 23
– 7.1, eff. July 13, 2011. Prior history: Res. R-82-106, Sept. 28, 1982, effective Jan. 1, 1983; Res. R-91-146, 11-12-91;
Res. R-01-247A, 11-6-01, effective 6-1-02; Res. No. R-02-82, 8-13-02; effective 1-1-03; Res. No. R-03-193, 6-13-03
[approved by voters on 11-4-03]; Res. No. R-03-233, 8-15-03 [approved by voters on 11-4-03].
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
iii
November 1, 2018
District 20 Nashua Ward 5 3
District 21 Nashua Ward 6 4
District 22 Nashua Ward 7 4
District 23 Nashua Ward 8 3
District 24 Nashua Ward 9 3”
Limitation of 1982 amendment—Resolution R-82-106, eff. Jan. 1, 1983, provided: “Nothing in this
resolution [establishing new ward lines and reapportioning representation in the general court] shall affect the
representation of the City of Nashua in the General Court Election which will be on November 2, 1982. The ward lines
in effect for that election shall remain in effect until the General Court is dissolved seven days before the first
Wednesday of January 1985. Any elections to fill vacancies in that General Court shall be held on the basis of the
ward lines as they existed for the election of November 2, 1982. Any representative in office on the effective date of
this act [Jan. 1, 1983} does not lose his eligibility for that office because of the changes in ward boundaries made in
this resolution.”
Incumbents—Resolution R-82-106, eff. Jan. 1, 1983, provided. “Notwithstanding any changes in the ward
boundaries the elected City and Ward officers in office at the time of passage of this resolution [Jan. 1, 1983] shall
continue in said offices until the end of the term for which they were elected.”
Limitation of 1971 amendment—1971, ch. 568:3, eff. Jan. 3, 1972, provided: “Nothing in this act
{establishing new ward lines and reapportioning representation in the general court] affects the representation of the
city of Nashua in the general court that assembled on January 6, 1971. The ward lines for membership in that general
court remain in effect until the general court is dissolved seven days before the first Wednesday of January, 1973. Any
elections to fill vacancies in that general court shall be held on the basis of the ward lines as they existed on January 6,
1971. Any representative in office on the effective date of this act [Jan. 3, 1972] does not lose his eligibility for that
office because of the changes in ward boundaries made in this act.”
Incumbents—1971, ch. 568:4, eff. Jan. 3, 1972, provided: “Notwithstanding any changes in the ward
boundaries the elected ward officers in office at the time of passage of this act [eff. Jan. 3, 1972] shall continue in said
offices until the end of the term for which they were elected.”
Apportionment—1965, 496:2, 3, provided:
“496:2 Apportionment of House of Representatives—The apportionment of the members to the house of
representatives from the city of Nashua is as follows:
I. Ward 1 is entitled to two representatives.
II. Wars 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9 are each entitled to three representatives.
“496:3 Apportionment of Senate—The apportionment of the wards of the city of Nashua to the senatorial
districts of the state is as follows:
I. Wards 1 and 2 are in senatorial district 12.
II. Wards 3 and 7 are in senatorial district 22.
III. Wards 4, 5, 6, 8 and 9 are in senatorial district 12.”
Saving provisions—1965, 496:4 provided in part: “Nothing in this act [redefining Nashua ward boundaries
and reapportioning Nashua representatives and senators in the general court] affects the representation of the city of
Nashua in the general court that assembled on January 6, 1965.”
Apportionment—Laws of 1992, Ch. 130, amending RSA 662:5 and 662:3, provided:
“662:5 Apportionment of House of Representatives—The apportionment of the members to the house of
representatives from the City of Nashua is as follows:
Art. VI. Hillsborough County:
District No. 26 Nashua 29
“662:3 Apportionment of Senate—The apportionment of the wards of the City of Nashua to the senatorial
districts of the state is as follows:
I. Senatorial district number 12 is constituted of wards 1, 2, 3 and 5.
II. Senatorial district number 13 is constituted of wards 4, 6, 7, 8 and 9.
Apportionment—Laws of 1992, Ch. 183, amending RSA 662:5 provided:
“662:5 Apportionment of state representative districts—The apportionment of the wards of the City of
Nashua is as follows:
District 26 Nashua Ward 1 3
District 27 Nashua Ward 2 3
District 28 Nashua Ward 3 3
District 29 Nashua Ward 4 3
District 30 Nashua Ward 5 3
District 31 Nashua Ward 6 3
District 32 Nashua Ward 7 3
District 33 Nashua Ward 8 3
District 34 Nashua Ward 9 3
District 35 Nashua Wards 1, 2 1
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
iv
November 1, 2018
3, 5
District 36 Nashua Wards 4, 6 1
7, 8, 9
Delegates to State Party Conventions—Laws of 1992, Ch. 183:8, amending RSA 662:6 provided:
“662:6 Delegates to state party conventions—At every state primary election, the voters shall elect
delegates to each state party convention as follows:
Nashua 29
State law references—Similar provisions, relating to senators, RSA 62:23, 24 and 33; relating to
representatives, 66:3 VI.
Limitation of 2002 Amendment—Resolution 02-82, eff. Jan. 1, 2003. Notwithstanding any changes in the
ward boundaries, the City and Ward officers serving in office, or elected to office, at the time of passage of this
resolution shall continue in said offices until the end of the terms for which they were elected. Any elections to fill
vacancies in the General Court shall be held on the basis of the ward lines as they existed for the election of November
5, 2002. Any representative or senator in office on the effective date of this act (January 1, 2003) does not lose his or
her eligibility for that office because of the changes in ward boundaries made by this amendment.
Representation in General Court—Opinion of the Supreme Court of New Hampshire (No. 2002-0210)
issued July 26, 2002. Representative Peter Burling and a. v. Gene Chandler, Speaker of the House & a. Argued June
11, 2002. Provided for the apportionment of districts 59 to 65, inclusive, as follows:
District 59 Nashua Ward 2 3
District 60 Nashua Ward 3 3
District 61 Nashua Ward 1 3
District 62 Nashua Ward 4 6
and 6
District 63 Nashua Ward 5 3
District 64 Nashua Ward 9 3
District 65 Nashua Ward 7 6
and 8
Limitations of 2001 Amendment—Resolution 01-247, eff. June 1, 2002. Notwithstanding any changes in
the ward boundaries, the City and Ward officers serving in office, or elected to office, at the time of passage of this
resolution shall continue in said offices until the end of the terms for which they were elected. Any elections to fill
vacancies in the General Court shall be held on the basis of the ward lines as they existed for the election of November
7, 2000. Any representative in office on the effective date of this act (June 1, 2002) does not lose his or her eligibility
for that office because of the changes in ward boundaries made by this amendment.
Mayor and Board of Aldermen
§ 4. Mayor and board of aldermen
The administration of the fiscal, prudential, municipal and other affairs of the city and the
government thereof shall, except as herein otherwise provided, be vested in a principal officer to
be called the mayor, and a board to be called the board of aldermen. The board of aldermen shall
consist of fifteen aldermen, sitting and acting together as a single body. The mayor and six
aldermen shall be chosen by the qualified voters of the city at large, voting in their respective
wards, and the other nine aldermen shall be elected, one from each ward, by the qualified voters
thereof. The board of aldermen shall be the final judge of the election and qualification of its
members. The board of aldermen shall choose one of its own members, an alderman-at-large, as
president, who shall be its presiding officer. A majority of said board shall constitute a quorum
for the transaction of business. The city clerk shall act as clerk of said board.
§ 5. Municipal elections3
All the city and ward officers who are to be hereafter elected by the legal voters of the
city, or of any ward therein, except moderators, ward clerks, selectmen and inspectors of the
3 Editor’s note—Under RSA 40:1, moderators are required to be elected in odd-numbered years. Inspectors of the
checklists are no longer elected. See § of this charter.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
v
November 1, 2018
checklists, shall be chosen at elections hereinafter called municipal elections to be holden on the
first Tuesday following the first Monday of November in the year 1933 and biennially thereafter
on the first Tuesday following the first Monday in November.
§ 5a. Mayoral primary4
In the event three candidates or more file petitions of nomination for the office of mayor,
as provided for under section 11, the city clerk shall declare that a primary for said office is
necessary. Primaries shall be conducted by the regular election officers, to be held at the regular
polling places in each ward on the second Tuesday of September in each odd numbered year, at
which time the two candidates receiving the highest number of votes for the office of mayor shall
be placed on the municipal general election ballot in November.
§ 6. Method of election exclusive
The mode of nomination and election of all elective officers of the city to be voted for at
any municipal election shall be as provided in this act [charter] and not otherwise.
§ 6a. Qualifications for office5
No person shall be a candidate for the office of, or serve as, mayor or alderman-at-large
who is not a duly qualified voter of the city. No person shall be a candidate for the office of, or
serve as, ward alderman who is not a duly qualified voter in the ward in which he seeks election,
or holds office.
§ 7. Nomination by petition
The name of the candidate shall be printed upon the ballot, when a petition of nomination
shall have been filed in his behalf, in the manner and form and under the conditions hereinafter
set forth.
§ 8. Form of nomination papers6
The petition of nomination for each candidate to be voted for at large shall be signed by
not less than fifty qualified voters of the city, and, for each candidate to be voted for from a single
ward, fifteen qualified voters of each ward, on individual certificates in form substantially as
follows:
PETITION OF NOMINATION
Individual Certificate
State of New Hampshire
County of Hillsborough, ss.
City of Nashua
I do hereby petition for the nomination of ______________ whose residence is at
No._________________ Street, Nashua, for the office of _________________ to be voted for at
the municipal election to be held in the city of Nashua, on the __________ day of ___________,
19___; and I certify that I am qualified to vote for a candidate for said office, and after signing
4 Res.-01-242-GR, effective 7-1-02.
5 Referendum of Nov. 4, 1975, Referendum, Proposal No. 1.
6 R-05-252. Approved by voters on November 8, 2005. Amendment allowed voters to sign as many petitions as there
were openings for an office.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
vi
November 1, 2018
this certificate, I will not have signed more nominating certificates than there are positions to be
filled in the upcoming election for the above named office, nor more than one certificate per
candidate; that my residence is at No. ___________________ Street, Nashua.
(Signed)
Witness:
(Signed)
Residence of witness:
No.______________ Street; Nashua.
§ 9. Blanks
It shall be the duty of the city clerk to furnish, upon application, a reasonable number of
forms of such certificates, and of acceptances of nomination.
§ 10. Requirements of certificate
Each certificate shall be a separate paper. All certificates shall be of uniform size as
determined by the city clerk. Each certificate shall contain the name and signature of one signer
thereof and no more. In case a voter has signed two or more conflicting petitions, only that one
of his conflicting signatures which was included in the petitions first presented to the city clerk,
as provided in the following section of this act [charter], shall be valid. Each witness may be any
qualified voter of Nashua except the candidate named in the certificate.
§ 11. Presenting petition, when7
Petitions of nomination for mayoral candidates shall be presented to the city clerk during
the ten (10) consecutive working days (excluding Saturday and Sunday) commencing on the
second Monday in June in each odd numbered year, and for non-mayoral candidates not earlier
than seventy (70) days nor later than sixty (60) days before the election. The city clerk shall
endorse on each petition the date upon which it was presented to him and by whom it was
presented. All papers constituting a petition of nomination shall be presented to the city clerk at
one time, except as provided in the following section of this act [charter].
§ 12. Defective petition amended
When a petition of nomination is presented to the city clerk for filing, he shall forthwith
examine the same and ascertain whether it conforms to the provisions of this act [charter]. If
found not to conform thereto, he shall then and there in writing on said petition state the reason
why such cannot be filed, and shall within three (3) days return the petition to the person named
therein as the person to whom it shall be returned. The petition may then be amended and again,
but not later than three (3) days after said petition shall have been returned, presented to the city
clerk, as in the first instance. The city clerk shall forthwith proceed to examine the amended
petition as hereinbefore provided.
§ 13. Petition filed8
If either the original, or the amended petition of nomination, be found sufficiently signed
and witnessed as hereinbefore provided, the city clerk shall file the same forthwith: provided that
no petition, amended, or otherwise, shall be presented later than 5 p.m. on the last day of the
filing period.
7 Res.-83-223, effective Jan. 1, 1984; Res. R-01-242-GR, effective July 1, 2002.
8 Res.-83-223, effective Jan. 1, 1984; Res. R-01-242-GR, effective July 1, 2002.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
vii
November 1, 2018
§ 14. Acceptance filed9
Any person nominated under this article [the foregoing provisions] shall file his
acceptance, his signature thereto witnessed by a qualified voter of Nashua, with the city clerk not
later than sixty (60) days before the day of the election, and in the absence of such acceptance, the
name of the candidate shall not appear on the ballot.
§ 15. Form of acceptance
The acceptance mentioned in the preceding section shall be substantially in the following
form:
State of New Hampshire, Hillsborough, ss. _______________ City of Nashua.
I, ______________ having heretofore been nominated for the office of
_______________ in the city of Nashua, to be voted for at the municipal election to be held in
said city on the ____________ day of ______________, 19___, do hereby accept the said
nomination, and I hereby declare that I am a qualified voter of said city, that my residence is at
No. ____________ ____________ Street, Nashua, and that I have not become, and am not a
candidate for any other office to be voted for at said election.
(Signed)
Witness:
(Signed)
Residence of Witness:
No. ___________ ____________ Street, Nashua.
§ 16. Petitions, etc., preserved
The city clerk shall preserve in his office for a period of four (4) years from the time of
the respective filing of the same, all petitions of nomination, and all certificates, acceptances, and
memoranda belonging thereto, filed under this act [charter], but shall thereafter destroy the same.
§ 17. Certifying candidates
The city clerk shall, not later than the fifteenth day before every city election, certify the
list of candidates, with their residences, whose names are entitled to appear on the ballot, as being
the list of candidates nominated as required by this act [charter], together with the offices for
which they are respectively candidates at such election, designating whether such election is for a
full or for an unexpired term; and he shall file in his office said certified list of names and offices,
and he shall cause to be published before such election, in two successive issues of at least one
newspaper of general circulation published in the city of Nashua, or in any different or additional
manner that may be provided by ordinance, an election notice which shall contain said certified
list names of candidates and offices to be filled, and the time and the places of holding such
election.
§ 18. Official ballots prepared10
The city clerk shall cause ballots for each general and special municipal election to be
prepared, printed and authenticated as provided by the constitution and laws of the state, except
as is otherwise required by this act [charter]. The ballots shall contain the full list and correct
9 Res.-83-223, effective Jan. 1, 1984.
10 Editor’s note—“Section 39” referred to in text of this section has been repealed. By Resolution R-7-277, approved
Oct. 28, 1971, the city adopted the provisions of RSA 656:40, relative to the use of voting machines.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
viii
November 1, 2018
names of all the offices to be filled, and the names and residences of all the candidates nominated
respectively therefore, except as provided in section 39.
§ 19. Form of ballots
Except that the crosses here shown shall be omitted, and that in place of the names,
residences and offices here shown shall be substituted the names and residences of the actual
candidates and the offices for which they are respectively nominated, the ballots shall be in
substantially the following form:
General (or special) Municipal Election
City of Nashua
(Inserting date thereof).
Instructions—To vote for any person make a cross (x) in the square at the right of the
name voted for.
If you wrongly mark, tear, or deface this ballot return and obtain another.
For Mayor vote for One (1)
RICHARD ROE, 2 A STREET X
JAMES HOE, 6 F STREET
JOHN DOE, 24 G STREET
LOUIS COE, 4 B STREET
For Board of Education Vote for Four (4)
FRANK SMITH, 4 FIRST STREET
HARRY JONES, 6 SECOND STREET X
FRED BROWN, 8 THIRD STREET X
HIRAM BLOCK, 10 FOURTH STREET X
ROBERT WHITE, 5 SIXTH STREET X
ALBERT GRAY, 7 EIGHTH STREET
WILLIAM GREEN, 9 NINTH STREET
SAMUEL HILL, 3 TENTH STREET
ENOCH VALLEY, 2 ELEVENTH STREET
JAMES DALE, 1 FIFTH STREET
§ 20. Blanks on ballots
As many blank spaces as there are persons to be elected shall be left below the printed
names of the candidates for each office or kind of office to be voted for, wherein the voter may
write the names and residences of the person or persons, respectively, for whom he may wish to
vote.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
ix
November 1, 2018
§ 21. Order of names, etc.
The names and residence of candidates for the same office shall be printed on the ballot
in the order in which they may be drawn by the city clerk, whose duty it shall be to make such
drawing and to give each candidate an opportunity to be present thereat personally or by one
representative. Nothing on the ballot shall be indicative of the source of the candidacy or of the
support of any candidate. No ballot shall have printed thereon any party or political designation
or mark, and there shall not be appended to the name of any candidate any such party of political
designation or mark, or anything indicating his views or opinions. There shall also appear on the
ballot all questions required by law, or by this act [charter] to be submitted to a vote of the
qualified voters of the city.
§ 22. Sample ballots
The city clerk shall, at least ten (10) days before the election, cause to be printed a
sufficient number of sample ballots, upon paper of different color but otherwise identical with the
ballot to be used at the election, and shall distribute the same to qualified voters at his office.
§ 23. Ballots counted: returns11
As soon as the polls are closed, the ward officers shall immediately open the ballot boxes
or voting machines, tallying the votes in public view, and enter the total number thereof on the
tally sheet provided therefore by the city clerk. They shall also carefully enter the number of
votes for each candidate on said tally sheet and the ballots and tally sheets used at such municipal
election shall be sealed up in the manner provided in the case of general biennial elections, and
returned within one hour to the city clerk. A return of the result of the vote in each ward for all
officers to be chosen at such election, certified by the moderator, shall be made to the city clerk
within the same time on blanks provided by him for that purpose; and the city clerk shall
immediately record all such returns and the same, together with his record thereof, shall be open
to the inspection of any citizen. He shall submit his record of the returns of each municipal
election to the board of aldermen, at a meeting to be holden at eight o’clock in the evening on the
Tuesday next following such election, and the board of aldermen shall canvass the returns and
declare the result. Such declaration shall be duly recorded by the city clerk, and, except as
hereinafter provided, shall be conclusive as to the rights of the persons declared elected to hold
the offices to which they are so declared elected. A plurality of votes shall elect, except in the
case of a tie vote. The tie shall be determined by lot under the direction of the city clerk and the
person so winning the ties shall be declared elected.
§ 24. Cost of special election12
To cover the cost of special municipal elections provided for in this act [charter], the city
council shall appropriate at the time of issuing the warrants for such elections such sums as are
necessary, the same to be taken from any unexpended balances at the end of the fiscal year, or
carried forward as a deficit to the next year and then cared for by a special appropriation.
§ 25. “Qualified voter” defined
The term “qualified voter” wherever it occurs in this act [charter] means a voter qualified
by law to vote for candidates for the office named in the petition of nomination or acceptance of
nomination in which their names occur, except that witnesses may be residents of any part of the
city.
11 Res.-01-242-GR, effective July 1, 2002.
12 Editor’s note—“City council,” referred to in text, as meaning board of aldermen, see sections 48 and 111 of this
charter.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
x
November 1, 2018
§ 26. Recount of votes13
Any candidate who is dissatisfied with the return of the vote at any municipal election
may have a recount of the vote cast at such election for the office for which he was a candidate,
or may contest the election or nomination as to that office on the ground of fraud or misconduct
in relation to such municipal election, by notifying the city clerk and all candidates for the same
office who were returned as having received a larger number of votes than himself that he
requests such recount or proposes to make such contest by notice in writing left at the office of
the city clerk and delivered in hand to or left at the usual place of abode of each of such other
candidates at least forty-eight hours before the meeting of said city council in 1914 or at least
forty-eight hours before the meetings of the board of aldermen thereafter in subsequent years at
which the returns are to be canvassed. The city council in 1914, and in subsequent years of said
municipal elections the board of aldermen, at said meeting, or at an adjourned meeting or
meetings specially held for that purpose within one week thereafter, shall thereupon recount the
ballots in the presence of the interested parties, or their representatives, or shall proceed in the
manner provided as to contested elections of mayor by Revised Laws, chapter 63 section 3, the
provisions of that section being hereby made applicable to all contests of any such municipal
election so far as consistent with this act [charter]. The said city council at the first election in
1914, and the board of aldermen thereafter in subsequent years of said elections, shall, not later
than the second Tuesday after such election, declare the results of such recount or contest, which
declaration shall be duly recorded by the city clerk and shall be final and conclusive. The city
clerk shall retain all packages containing ballots returned to him unopened until the time for
demanding a recount or contest has expired. In case of a recount or contest, they shall be
produced by him unopened at the time and place of such recount or contest, and shall be opened
by the mayor in the presence of the city council at the first election in 1914, and of the board of
aldermen in subsequent years of said municipal elections.
§27. Vacancies prior to inauguration
In case any officer chosen at a municipal election shall decline the office, or die prior to
the first secular day of January next following his election, the incoming board of aldermen shall
fill the resulting vacancy at its first meeting in the manner hereinafter provided as to a like
vacancy occurring after its inauguration.
§ 28. Polling places, where
The municipal elections shall be holden at the regular polling place in each ward, or if
there be no such regular polling place, at a suitable place in the ward provided and equipped for
that purpose by the selectmen of the ward at the expense of the city.
§ 28-a. [Absentee voting]
Any legal voter of said city who, by reason of physical disability or absence from the
city, is unable to vote in person on the day of meeting for the election of city and ward officers,
may vote at said election by so-called absentee ballot. The provisions of chapter 60 of the
Revised Statutes Annotated as amended, so far as applicable hereto and not inconsistent herewith,
shall apply to such absent voting in said city, provided that the city clerk shall prepare the forms
and ballots, for such voting and said clerk shall also prepare the instructions required in section
14 of said chapter 60.
13 Editor’s note—“Revised Laws, chapter 63, section 3,” referred to in text of section, is now classified to RSA 45:3.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
xi
November 1, 2018
Board of Registrars
§ 29. [Board of registrars—Appointment]
The mayor, subject to confirmation of the board of aldermen, shall appoint three voters of
Nashua, who shall constitute a board of registrars of voters. No more than two members of the
board shall be members of the same political party. On or before January first the mayor shall
appoint one registrar for a term of three years beginning January 1, provided that for the first
appointments hereunder one shall be appointed for a term of three years, one for a term of two
years and one for a term of one year. Each of said registrars shall hold office until his successor
is appointed and has qualified. The board of registrars shall annually elect one of its members as
chairman and one as clerk.
§ 29-a. [Same—Removal from office]
If upon written compliant to the mayor it shall appear, after notice and hearing, that a
registrar of voters has ceased to be a member of the political party which he was appointed to
represent, the mayor shall remove him from office and appoint another in his stead with the
approval of the board of aldermen.
§ 29-b. [Same—Compensation]
The registrars shall receive such compensation for their services as the board of aldermen
may determine.
§ 29-c. [Same—Incompatible offices]
No person shall be appointed a registrar or deputy registrar who holds any other political
office, appointive or elective.
§ 30. [Same—Appointment of deputy registrars]14
The board of registrars of the city of Nashua is hereby empowered to appoint up to two
deputy employees, who may execute any instrument required by law to be signed by a member of
the board of registrars, and in the absence or disability of a member of the board of registrars,
shall perform all of his duties, including the registration of voters. The board of registrars are
also empowered to appoint such temporary deputy registrars as they deem necessary. Such
deputy registrars shall hold office during the pleasure of the board of registrars.
§ 30-a. [Same—Sessions]
The said board of registrars or their deputies shall be in session at the city hall building,
or at such other suitable place as they shall designate, for the purpose of registering voters and
revising and correcting the checklist, during business hours of city hall and at such other times as
they may designate.
§ 30-b. [Same—Checklist closing]15
The registrars shall cause no additions or corrections to be made on the checklists after
5:00 P.M. then (10) days prior to election day.
14 Judicial construction—For construction of section by court, see Attorney General v. Caldwell (1942) 92 NH 216,
29A2d 124.
15 Editor’s note— Res.-83-223, effective Jan. 1, 1984.
The dates and times for the closing of the checklists are now set by RSA 654:28 and 659:12.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
xii
November 1, 2018
§ 30-c. [Same—Checklist posting]16
The registrars shall post two complete alphabetical checklists containing the names and
addresses of legal voters of said ward in each ward in the city not later than thirty days prior to
the date on which state or municipal, biennial or annual elections are held or any other election at
which such checklists are to be used. A corrected checklist shall be posted in the same places the
day before the election.
§ 30-d. [Same—List of qualified voters]17
The registrars shall keep records of all persons qualified to vote in the city in sufficient
detail to identify the voters and their rights to vote.
§ 30-e. [Personal application for voter registration]
Every qualified person who wishes to become a registered voter must apply in person for
registration and prove by satisfactory evidence that he or she is qualified to vote.
§ 30-f. [Fraudulent registration; penalty]
Any person who attempts fraudulently to have his name entered on the general register
shall be liable to a fine not exceeding fifty dollars for each such attempt.
§ 30-g. [Voters qualified by election day]
If a person is not qualified to vote on or before the last day registration but who shall
clearly be qualified to vote on election day the registrars shall enter his name on the checklist on
or before the last day of registration.
§ 30-h. [Improper registration]
If a registered voter complains to the registrars in writing under oath, fourteen days at
least before an election, that the complainant believes that a person has been improperly
registered, and sets forth the reasons for such belief, the registrars shall examine into such
complaint. If satisfied there is sufficient ground for complaint, the registrars, after proper notice
and opportunity for all persons concerned to be heard, shall rule on said complaint. The board
shall have power to subpoena witnesses at public expense and to administer oaths. The person
against whom such complaint is made shall have a right to a public hearing upon demand.
§ 30-i. [Records open to inspection]18
All records of the board of registrars shall be open to public inspection, except to the
extent that such records or the information contained therein are treated as confidential
information and exempt from public disclosure under RSA 657 or other State statute.
§ 30-j. [Voting lists by wards]
Registrars shall prepare voting lists by wards for use at elections and deliver them to the
ward election officials before the opening of the polls on election day.
§ 30-k. [Certificate of registration]
The registrars shall, on the day of an election, give to a voter whose name has been
omitted from the voting list by error, or whose party designation has been incorrectly designated
by error, a certificate of registration authorizing him to vote. On presentation thereof to the
presiding election officer of the ward in which the voter was registered, he shall be allowed to
16 Res.-83-223, effective Jan. 1, 1984.
17 Res.-83-223, effective Jan. 1, 1984.
18 Res. No. R-030207, 8-15-03 [approved by voters on 11-4-03].
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
xiii
November 1, 2018
vote, and his name shall be checked on the certificate, which shall be attached to and considered
part of the voting list and returned and preserved therewith. For this purpose the registrars and/or
their deputies shall be in session at city hall during the hours the polls are open.
§ 30-l. [Certification of registered voters]
The registrars shall, after the last day for registration for a city or state election, certify to
the city clerk the number of registered voters in the city and in each ward therein.
§ 30-m. [Applicability to board of registrars]
Any provisions of the charter of the city of Nashua referring to inspectors of checklists,
not inconsistent with the provisions of this act [charter], shall apply to the board of registrars
hereby established.
§ 31. City elections, how conducted
The municipal elections shall be conducted by the regular election officers of the wards,
and all provisions of the Public Statutes and amendments thereto, penal or otherwise, relating to
the warning and manner of conducting generally biennially elections, the sealing and return of
ballots and tally-sheets, and the record and return of the result of the vote, shall apply to such
municipal elections, except in so far as they are modified by the provisions of this act [charter].
And such municipal elections shall be deemed to be elections within the meaning of all penal
statutes relating to offenses against the purity of elections. The polls shall be open at each
municipal election from six o’clock in the forenoon to three o’clock in the afternoon in each
ward.
§ 32. Checklists for city elections19
The checklists used at every general biennial election next preceding the municipal
elections to be held under this act [charter] shall be posted up in the manner in which checklists
are by law required to be posted for use at such general biennial elections and the same number of
days before said municipal elections. The said board of inspectors shall be in session at the city
hall building, or at such other suitable place as they shall designate, for the purpose of revising
and correcting the said list of voters, for six consecutive days beginning with the second Monday
next preceding each municipal election, and they shall deliver an attested copy of the said lists of
voters, so prepared and corrected, to the clerks of the respective wards before the time for
opening of any such meeting of the voters; and the said ward clerks shall use the list of voters,
prepared and corrected as aforesaid, and no others. In preparing the said list of voters said
inspectors shall follow the foregoing provisions of this act [charter] with reference to general
biennial elections in the matter of recording the first name of each voter in full, and in all other
respects shall follow the provisions following that provision in section 29. And in matter of the
hours of holding sessions and times, and in other matters, they shall proceed and act as provided
in section 30 of this act [charter], beginning with the words following, namely: “They shall hold
sessions on said days as follows.”
19 Editor’s note—The “board of inspectors” was replaced by the “board of registrars,” and sections 29 and 30 of this
charter were deleted and new sections 29 to 30-m added, by 1970, ch. 73. Former sections 29 and 30 related to a board
of inspectors of checklist.
Verification in 1971-72 ratified—Acts 1973, 395:2 provided: “Notwithstanding the provisions of RSA
69:26-a, I and 1972, 33, the verification of the checklist of the city of Nashua which was done in 1971 and which
verification was updated in 1972 following the redistricting of such city is hereby ratified and confirmed, and the city
of Nashua shall not be required to verify their checklist until 1981 and every ten years thereafter, provided however that
the city of Nashua shall comply with all other requirements of RSA 69:26a.”
State law references—Meetings of supervisors of checklist in cities and towns, see Acts 1977, ch. 344,
effective Aug. 20, 1977, amending RSA 55:8 and adding 55:8-a.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
xiv
November 1, 2018
Board of Education
Cross reference—Board of Education, see §§ 74-76 of this charter.
§ 33. Repealed. November 4, 1975, Referendum, Proposal No. 1.
§§ 34-38. Repealed. 1919, ch. 3.
§ 39. Repealed. 1941, ch. 277.
Mayor; Board of Aldermen
§ 40. [Governing body; terms]
The terms of the members of the governing body shall be as follows:
I. The mayor shall be elected for a term of four years at every other municipal election
beginning in the year 1971.
II. The nine ward aldermen shall be elected for a term of two years at every municipal
election.
III. The six at-large aldermen shall be elected for a term of four years, three to be elected at
each municipal election.
§ 41. Inauguration of aldermen20
The board of aldermen so chosen shall meet at ten o’clock in the forenoon on the first
Sunday after the first secular day of January next following their election, in their capacity as the
board of aldermen, for the purpose of taking their respective oaths of office, organizing, adopting
rules for the transaction of business by such board, electing such officers as are by law or
ordinance required to be elected and transacting any other business required by law or ordinance
to be transacted at such meeting. The persons elected to the offices of mayor, board of education,
board of public works, board of fire commissioners, ward moderators, clerks, selectmen, and all
other offices who are required to take an oath of office shall meet in the convention with the
board of aldermen at said time and take their respective oaths of office.
§ 42. [City officers appointed; qualifications; compensation]
The mayor with consent of the board of aldermen shall appoint a city clerk, a welfare
officer, three assessors, a treasurer and collector of taxes who shall be one and the same person,
and a city solicitor, each of whom shall serve an indefinite term at the pleasure of the mayor; and
such other officers as may be necessary to administer all departments which the board of
aldermen shall establish. Said city officers shall receive such compensation as may be set by
ordinance. Each assessor shall prior to his appointment have demonstrated knowledge of
property appraisal or assessment and of the laws governing the assessment and collection of
property taxes. It shall be the duty of the board of assessors to assess all taxable property in the
city in accordance with general law and such administrative regulations as may be promulgated
pursuant thereto, to maintain a standard system of assessment records, and to perform such other
duties as the board of aldermen may prescribe by ordinance. The powers and duties of officers
20 Editor’s note—The board of inspectors of checklist has been replaced by the board of registrars. See § 29 of this
charter. 1975, ch 415:13, effective Nov. 4, 1975; Res. R-83-223, effective Jan. 1, 1984.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
xv
November 1, 2018
and heads of departments appointed by the mayor shall be those prescribed by state law, by this
charter or by ordinance.
§ 42-a. [Deputy city treasurer and deputy tax collector]21
The city treasurer and collector of taxes is authorized to appoint a deputy city treasurer
and deputy tax collector, who shall be one and the same person, provided that said appointment
shall be approved by a majority vote of the board of aldermen. In the absence of the city treasurer
and collector of taxes the said deputy shall perform the same duties and exercise all the powers of
the city treasurer and tax collector of said city. Said deputy city treasurer and deputy tax collector
shall serve during the pleasure of the city treasurer and tax collector. The board of aldermen shall
determine the compensation for said deputy treasurer and tax collector. Said deputy shall be
appointed from the employees in the office of the city treasurer and collector of taxes.
§ 43. Vacancy in office of mayor22
(1) Temporary vacancy. Whenever the office of mayor shall be temporarily vacant by
reason of illness, absence from the city, or other cause, the mayor shall advise the
president of the board of aldermen of the beginning and end of that temporary
vacancy by a writing filed with the city clerk. The president of the board of
aldermen shall during such vacancy have and exercise all powers and authorities
which by this charter the mayor is vested with, except for appointment and removal
powers. The president of the board of aldermen shall not hold office in the board of
aldermen while exercising the office of mayor; however, his aldermanic position and
office shall not be deemed vacant. The elected mayor shall continue to be
compensated as provided by ordinance, and the president of the board of aldermen
while exercising the office of mayor shall continue to receive compensation as a
member of the board of aldermen in the same manner as would occur as had the
president continued to attend meetings of the board of aldermen as a qualified
member. When the temporary vacancy in the office of mayor ends, the president of
the board of aldermen shall resume the office of that presidency and shall thereupon
cease to exercise the office of mayor.
(2) Long-term disability or absence. Whenever the office of mayor shall be vacant by
reason of the disability of the mayor to exercise the office, or absence from the city,
and that disability or absence lasts for a period in excess of thirty (30) consecutive
calendar days, the mayor shall acknowledge that disability or absence by a writing to
the city clerk, which writing shall state the date the mayor expects the disability or
absence to end. In the event such vacancy occurs and the mayor fails to
acknowledge that disability or absence, the board of aldermen may, by a vote of a
majority of the members of the board then holding office, declare the office of mayor
vacant by reason of disability or absence. In the event the mayor vetoes that vote in
accordance with the provisions of this charter, the city’s legal representative shall
within three working days by petition to the superior court ask for a declaratory
judgment that the office of mayor is vacant by reason of disability or absence. No
reconsideration of the vote of declaration of vacancy by the board of aldermen is
required as a condition precedent to the filing of the petition with the superior court.
21 1959, ch. 388 approved May 14, 1959, effective May 14, 1959.
22 Editor’s note—Former section 43 was repealed and replaced by Res. R-82-08, Sept. 28, 1982, effective Jan. 1, 1983.
Res.-82-08, Sept. 28, 1982, effective Jan. 1, 1983; amended Res. R-83-223, effective Jan. 1, 1984.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
xvi
November 1, 2018
If the office of mayor is declared vacant by the writing of the mayor, vote of the
board of aldermen, or judgment of the court, the board of aldermen shall choose an
alderman-at-large to serve as acting mayor during the period of the mayor’s
disability or absence. The acting mayor shall during the period of the mayor’s
disability or absence have and exercise all powers and authorities which by this
charter the mayor is vested with. He may select an administrative assistant and
personal secretary but shall have no other removal and appointment powers. The
acting mayor shall not hold office in the board of aldermen; however, his aldermanic
position shall not be deemed vacant during his tenure. The mayor elected by the
voters and the acting mayor shall both draw the compensation of the mayor as
provided by ordinance.
When the mayor elected by the voters determines that his disability or absence has
ended, he shall file a letter stating that fact with the city clerk. In the event the acting
mayor then fails to relinquish the office of mayor, the mayor elected by the voters
may file a resolution with the board of aldermen asking that the vacancy in the office
of mayor be declared ended. In the event that resolution is not passed by a majority
of the members of the board of aldermen then holding office, the mayor may seek a
determination in the superior court that the vacancy in the office of mayor has ended.
Upon the relinquishment of office of mayor by the acting mayor, or upon passage of
a resolution declaring the vacancy ended, or upon judgment of the court that the
vacancy has ended, the acting mayor shall resume the office of alderman-at-large,
and shall thereupon cease to exercise the office of mayor.
In the event that the term of office as alderman-at-large of the individual acting as
mayor expires prior to the return to office of the elected mayor, the board of
aldermen shall elect an acting mayor from among the seated aldermen-at-large in the
same fashion as previously set forth.
(3) Permanent vacancy. Whenever the office of mayor shall be permanently vacated by
reason of death, resignation or other cause, the board of aldermen shall at their next
regular meeting declare the vacancy and elect an alderman-at-large to serve as
mayor. A simple majority of the members of the board then holding office shall
elect the mayor. The mayor elected by the board of aldermen shall have to exercise
all powers and authorities which by this charter the mayor is vested with. He may
select an administrative assistant and personal secretary but shall have no other
removal and appointment powers. The mayor elected by the board of aldermen shall
not hold office in the board of aldermen; however, his aldermanic position shall not
be deemed vacant during his tenure. The mayor elected by the board of aldermen
shall receive the compensation of mayor as provided by ordinance.
If there is at least six (6) months and one (1) day remaining in the term of the mayor
who has permanently vacated the office of mayor, there shall be held a special
election to fill the unexpired term of the mayor not later than forty-five (45) days
after such vacancy occurs or not later than forty-five (45) days after this section takes
effect, whichever occurs later. However, if such a permanent vacancy occurs within
six (6) months or less of the next regularly scheduled election, then said permanent
vacancy shall be filled in that regularly scheduled election. The city clerk shall make
all the necessary preparations for the conduct of such special election during the
hours to be determined by the board of aldermen. All nominations for the office of
mayor shall be handled in the same manner as nominations for mayor at a regularly
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
xvii
November 1, 2018
scheduled election with the exception that petitions of nominations shall be presented
to the city clerk not earlier than forty (40) days nor later than thirty (30) days before
the election. In all cases, the mayor elected by the board of aldermen shall serve
only until the results of the election to fill the office of mayor are declared.
§ 43-a. Repealed. R-82-08, Sept. 28, 1982.23
§ 44.Vacancy in office of aldermen24
Vacancies occurring in the office of alderman [aldermen] from any cause shall be filled
as follows: If there is at least six (6) months and one (1) day remaining in the unexpired term, the
vacancy shall be filled by a special election held on a date determined by the board of aldermen
which shall not be earlier than forty (40) days and not later than one hundred eighty (180) days
after the vacancy occurs. All nominations for the office of aldermen shall be handled in the same
manner as nominations for the office of aldermen at a regularly scheduled election with the
exception that petitions and acceptances of nominations shall be presented to the city clerk not
earlier than forty (40) days nor later than thirty (30) days before the election. Provided, however,
that if the board of aldermen determines that the vacancy shall be filled on the date of the next
regularly scheduled municipal election, the vacancy shall not be filled by a special election.
Instead, the candidate who receives the most votes at the regular municipal election for the next
term of the office which is then vacant, and who is not then an incumbent member on the board,
shall be sworn in to complete the unexpired term as soon as the elections results are final. If the
vacancy occurs within six (6) months or less of the end of the unexpired term, the vacancy shall
not be filled before the next regularly scheduled municipal election. The candidate who receives
the most votes at the regular municipal election for the next term of the office which is then
vacant, and who is not then an incumbent member on the board, shall be sworn in to complete the
unexpired term as soon as the election results are final.
§ 45. [Mayor, general duties; administrative assistant, compensation]
The mayor shall be the chief administrative officer and the head of the administrative
branch of the city government. He shall supervise the administrative affairs of the city and shall
carry out the policies enacted by the board of aldermen. He shall enforce the ordinances of the
city, this charter, and all general laws applicable to the city. He shall keep the board of aldermen
informed of the condition and needs of the city and shall make such reports and recommendations
as he may deem advisable, and perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this charter or
required of him by ordinance or resolution of the board of aldermen, not inconsistent with this
charter. He shall have and perform such other powers and duties not inconsistent with the
provisions of this charter as now are or hereafter may be conferred or imposed upon him by
municipal ordinance or upon mayors of cities by general law. The mayor shall nominate and the
aldermen confirm an administrative assistant to the mayor who shall serve for an indefinite term
and perform such duties and functions as the mayor shall designate. Said administrative assistant
shall be chosen for his executive and administrative qualifications and need not be a resident of
this state. He shall receive such compensation as may be set by ordinance.
§ 45-a. [Mayor and aldermen; compensation]
The mayor shall devote his full time to his duties and shall not be employed by any other
employer during his term of office. He shall receive such salary as may be designated by
23 The subject matter of repealed section 43-a is now covered in section 43 of this charter.
24 Amended by R-04-126 approved by the voters on November 8, 2005. Filling-vacancies provision effective January
1, 2006. Amended by R-11-139 approved by the voters on November 8, 2011. Filling vacancies provision effective
November 8, 2011.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
xviii
November 1, 2018
ordinance. The aldermen shall be compensated per meeting based upon attendance not to exceed
an aggregate sum which shall be set by ordinance.
§ 45-b [Appointive power of mayor]
The mayor shall have the power to appoint and remove all officers and employees in the
administrative services of the city, subject to the provisions of this charter, and he may authorize
and empower the head of a department or officer responsible to him to appoint and remove
subordinates in such department or office. All such appointments shall be without definite term
unless made for a provisional, temporary or emergency service not to exceed the maximum limits
which may be prescribed by the merit plan.
§ 46. Mayor: powers in board of Public Works
The mayor shall be chairman ex-officio and a member of the board of public works for
all purposes, including voting and counting of a quorum. He shall have no negative on the action
of such board, but may in his discretion suspend the operation or execution of any vote or
decision adopted by it until the same shall be approved by the full board of aldermen, by causing
an order to that effect to be entered on the records of the board of public works, and
communicated to each member of the latter board and any other persons affected, within seven
days after the adoption of such vote or decision and before any obligations have been incurred
thereunder. The matter shall then be laid before the board of aldermen at its next regular meeting
or at a special meeting called for that purpose and the action of said board confirming, annulling
or reversing the vote or decision of the board of public works shall, subject to the negative given
the mayor by the next following section, be final and conclusive.
§ 47. Mayor; initiative and veto power
The mayor shall, at all times, have the right to introduce bills and initiate other measures
in the board of aldermen. He shall have a negative upon all ordinances, resolutions and votes
passed by it except such as relates (1) to the time, manner or order of its session or procedure, (2)
to the filling of vacancies in its own membership, the office of incumbents of other municipal
offices or the filling of vacancies therein, and the conformation or nonconformation of persons
appointed thereto by himself or to the determination of the qualifications and election of
candidates for office nominated and voted for at the municipal elections, (3) to the fitness of
applicants for licenses, the removal of municipal officers for cause, assessment of land damages
or other matters of judicial nature. He shall exercise such negative in all cases, by written
declaration filed with the city clerk within seven days thereafter, stating the grounds of his
disapproval; and no ordinance, and no such resolution or vote shall take effect until the expiration
of such seven days unless first signed by him. In case of an ordinance or a resolution
contemplating district appropriations or other severable provisions he may veto one or more of
such appropriations or provisions and approve the remainder of the bill, plainly specifying above
his signature thereto the items disapproved, whereupon the bill shall take effect in accordance
with its terms except as to such items. No ordinance, resolution or vote or part thereof by him
vetoed conformable to this section shall take effect unless on reconsideration the same be passed
over this veto by affirmative of at least ten aldermen on roll call.
§ 47-a. [Aldermanic interference prohibited]
It is the intention of this charter that the board of aldermen shall act in all matters as a
body, and it is contrary to the spirit of this charter for any of its members to seek individually to
influence the official acts of the mayor, or any other officer, or to direct or request, except in
writing, the appointment of any person to, or his removal from, office; or to interfere in any way
with the performance by such officers of their duties. The board of aldermen and its members
shall deal with the administrative service solely through the mayor and shall not give orders to
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
xix
November 1, 2018
any subordinate of the mayor either publicly or privately, but they may make suggestions and
recommendations. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the board of aldermen from appointing
committees of its own members or of citizens to conduct investigations into the conduct of any
officer or department, or any matter relating to the welfare of the municipality, and delegating to
such committees such powers of inquiry as the board of aldermen may deem necessary
§ 48. General powers and duties of aldermen
Except as herein otherwise provided, the board of aldermen hereby established shall have
all the powers and discharge all the duties conferred or imposed upon city councils in convention,
city councils voting concurrently, or board of mayor and aldermen acting separately, by chapters
44 to 48 inclusive, of the RSA or other general law now in force or hereinafter enacted, or upon
the existing city councils or board of mayor and aldermen of the city of Nashua by special laws
not herby repealed. The board of aldermen shall have the powers of selectmen of towns so far as
consistent with this charter. All provisions of such laws pertaining to the powers or duties of any
or all such bodies shall be construed to apply to the board of aldermen herby established unless a
contrary intent or provision herein appears.
§ 48-a. [Ordinances]
Municipal legislation shall be by ordinance. Each ordinance shall be identified by a
number and a short title. The enacting clause of each ordinance shall be “The City of Nashua
ordains,” and the effective date of each ordinance shall be specified in it. All ordinances shall be
recorded at length uniformly and permanently by the city clerk, and each ordinance so recorded
shall be authenticated by the signature of the mayor and the city clerk. Ordinances shall be
published, compiled and revised in such manner and at such times as the board of aldermen shall
determine.
§ 48-b. [Appointments requiring confirmation]
The following appointments made by the mayor shall require confirmation by the board
of aldermen:
I. Members of the Nashua housing authority notwithstanding the provisions of RSA
203:5;
II. Members of the city planning board notwithstanding the provisions of RSA 36:4.
§ 49. Board of aldermen; standing committees; appropriations
The members of the standing committees of the board of aldermen shall be appointed by
the president of the board of aldermen subject to the approval of the board. No ordinance, and no
resolutions containing an appropriation or contemplating an expenditure of money shall be laid
before the board of aldermen for action except as otherwise herein provided until the signature of
the mayor, president of the board, or alderman introducing the same, or, if introduced by a
committee by its chairman, is indorsed thereon. Upon the final passage of every resolution or
ordinance containing an appropriation or contemplating an expenditure of one hundred dollars or
more the vote shall be viva voce and major vote on roll call.
§ 49-a. [Department of administration]
The city shall have a department of administration headed by the mayor, and such other
departments, divisions, and bureaus as the board of aldermen may establish by ordinance. It shall
be the duty of the first mayor elected under the provisions of this section to draft and submit to
the board of aldermen within six months after assuming office, an ordinance providing the
division of the administrative service of the city into departments, divisions and bureaus, and
defining the functions and duties of each. Subsequent to the adoption of such ordinance, upon
recommendation of the mayor, the board of aldermen by ordinance may create, consolidate or
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
xx
November 1, 2018
abolish departments, divisions and bureaus and define the functions and duties of each. The
compilation of such ordinances shall be known as the “Administrative Code.” Each officer shall
have supervision and control of his department and of the employees therein and shall have
power to prescribe rules and regulations, not inconsistent with general law, this charter, the
administrative code, and the provisions of the merit plan. Prior to adoption of the administrative
code, the mayor shall have the power to establish temporary rules and regulations to insure
economy and efficiency in the several divisions of the city government.
§ 50. Finance committee25
The finances and accounts of the city shall be under the supervision of a finance
committee composed of the mayor and three aldermen-at-large and three ward aldermen, the
three ward aldermen and three aldermen-at-large to be appointed by the president of the board
aldermen with the mayor acting as chairman. The city comptroller shall be responsible for
establishing and maintaining a system of accounts in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles as they apply to municipalities, which will show at all times the financial
condition and financial operations of the city in all it departments.
§ 50-a. [Fiscal and budget year]26
The fiscal and budget year of the city shall begin on the first day of July and end on the
last day of June, provided, however, that the first budget under this section shall be for the period
of January 1, 1972 to June 30, 1973.
§ 50-b. [Financial control through city comptroller]27
Control of finances shall be under a director known as a “city comptroller” who shall be
chosen solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualification, his actual knowledge
of accepted practice in respect to the duties of municipal fiscal management. Such city
comptroller need not be a resident of the city of state at the time of his appointment but during
tenure of office, he may reside outside the state only with approval of the board of aldermen. The
control function shall include provisions for an encumbrance system of budget operation, for
expenditure only upon written requisition, for the pre-audit of all claims and demands against the
city prior to payment, and for the control of all payments out of any public funds by individual
warrants for each payment to the official having custody thereof.
25 Res. R-83-223, effective Jan. 1, 1984.
26 Debt time limitation for discharge not applicable—1971, ch. 447:1, eff. Aug. 29, 1971, provided:
“Notwithstanding the provisions of FSA 31:94-d, the city of Nashua may exceed the nine year time limitation for the
discharge of any debt incurred pursuant to the transition period resulting from the change of dates of its fiscal year.”
Implementation of fiscal year change—1969, ch. 627:29, eff. Jan. 1, 1972, provided:
“I. Accounting Period. The city of Nashua and departments thereof are hereby authorized to budget their
receipts and expenditures, to raise and appropriate revenues and to assess taxes for the eighteen month accounting
period between January 1, 1972 and June 30, 1973, as provided in Laws of 1913, 427: part 1, Sect. 50-a, as inserted by
section 14 of this act [this section of this charter].”
“II. Debt Authorized. The city of Nashua may incur debt under the provisions of RSA 33 in an amount not
exceed one third of the taxes assessed by said city on April 1, 1972, excluding payment due on outstanding debts. Debt
incurred pursuant to this paragraph shall be discharged within nine years after it is incurred. The amount of the debt
incurred pursuant to this paragraph shall not be included in the debt limit of the city of Nashua, and shall be incurred
only for the purpose of defraying costs that result from the eighteen month transitional accounting period provided for
in Laws of 1913, 427: part 1, Sect. 50-a, as inserted by section 14 of this act [this section of this charter].”
27 Res.-83-223, effective Jan. 1, 1984.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
xxi
November 1, 2018
§ 50-c. [Real estate tax payments]28
The board of aldermen may provide that taxes upon real estate shall be collected in the
following manner. A partial payment of the taxes assessed on April 1 in any tax year computed
by taking the prior year assessed valuation times ½ of the previous year tax rate; provided,
however, that whenever it shall appear to the assessors that certain individual properties have
physically changed in valuation they may use the current year appraisal times ½ the previous
year’s tax rate to compute the partial payment. Partial payment of taxes assessed under this
section shall be due and payable on July 1 of the present tax year. A payment of the remainder of
the taxes assessed on April 1, minus the payment due on July 1 of that year shall be due and
payable December 1. Interest charged on all taxes shall be in the amount as prescribed in RSA
76:13.
§ 51. [Centralized purchasing and contract system]
The administrative code shall establish a centralized purchasing and contract system,
including the combination of purchasing of similar articles for different departments, and
purchasing by competitive bids whenever practical. The mayor shall be charged with the
administration of the system so established.
§ 52. Deposit of city funds29
The board of aldermen may designate the depository or depositories of city funds, and
may provide for the daily deposit of all city monies. The board of aldermen may provide for such
security for city deposits as it may deem necessary, except that personal surety bonds may not be
deemed proper security. In the absence of such action by the board of aldermen, the city treasurer
shall exercise sound discretion in the deposit of city funds.
§ 53. [Expenditure of city funds; transfers]
After the budget has been adopted, no money shall be drawn from the treasury of the city,
nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred, except pursuant to a budget
appropriation unless there shall be a specific appropriation therefore specifying the source from
which the funds shall come. Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the board of aldermen
may transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance or any portion thereof from one
department, fund, or agency, to another.
§ 54. Annual audit of city account30
An independent audit shall be made of all accounts of the city government at least
annually and more frequently if deemed necessary by the board of aldermen. Such audit shall be
made by certified public accountants experienced in municipal accounting. An abstract of the
results shall be made public.
§ 54-a [Borrowing money; issuance of bonds, etc.]
Subject to the applicable provisions of state law and the rules and regulations provided by
ordinance in the administrative code, the board of aldermen, by resolution may authorize the
28 Senior citizens exemption—By referenda of Nov. 6, 1979, the voters of Nashua approved the following question:
“Shall we adopt the provisions of RSA 72:43-b and 43c for expanded exemptions on real estate which provide for a
resident of 65 years of age up to 75, a $5,000 exemption; a resident 75 years of age up to 80 to $10,000 exemption; a
resident of 80 years of age or older, a $20,000 exemption, provided that the resident owns real estate individually or
jointly with another or his spouse with whom he has been living with for 5 years as man and wife; said resident had a
net income of less than $7,000 or combined income with spouse of less than $9,000; and owns assets of any kind
tangible or intangible less bona fide encumbrances, not in excess of $50,000?” (Res. R-83-223, effective Jan. 1,1984)
29 Res. 83-223, effective Jan. 1, 1984.
30 Res.-83-223, effective Jan. 1, 1984.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
xxii
November 1, 2018
borrowing of money for any purpose within the scope of the powers vested in the city and the
issuance of bonds of the city or other evidence of indebtedness therefore, and may pledge the full
faith, credit, and resources of the city for the payment of the obligation created thereby.
Borrowing for a term exceeding one year shall be authorized by the board only after a duly
advertised public hearing.
§ 55. Repealed. Res. R-83-223, effective Jan. 1, 1984.
§ 56. Annual budget and estimates
The municipal budget shall be prepared by the mayor with the assistance of the officer
exercising the control function provided for in section 50-b. At such time as may be requested by
the mayor or specified by the administrative code, each officer or director of a department shall
submit and itemized estimate of the expenditures for the next fiscal year for the department or
activities under his control. The mayor shall submit the proposed budget to the board of
aldermen at least one month before the start of the fiscal year of the budget.
§ 56-a. [Budget hearing]31
A public hearing on the budget shall be held before its adoption by the board of
aldermen, at such time and place as the board of aldermen shall direct, and notice of such public
hearing shall be published at least one week in advance of the hearing by the city clerk. Copies of
the proposed budget shall be available for public inspection in the city clerk’s office at least one
week prior to said hearing.
§ 56-b. [Changes in budget items]
The board of aldermen may reduce any item or items in the mayor’s budget by a vote of a
majority of the board, but an increase in or addition of any item or items therein shall become
effective only upon an affirmative vote of two thirds of the members of the board of aldermen.
The budget shall be finally adopted not later than the first day of the second month of the fiscal
year.
§ 56-c. Limitation on budget increases32
Recognizing that final tax rates for the City of Nashua are set by the New Hampshire
Department of Revenue Administration pursuant to RSA 21-J:35(1), the mayor, the board of
aldermen, and all departments in the City of Nashua including the mayor’s office, aldermanic
office, legal department, administrative services division, community services division,
community development division, school department, public works division, fire department,
police department, public libraries, parking garages and cemeteries shall prepare their annual
budget proposals and the Board of Aldermen shall act upon such proposals in accordance with the
mandates in this paragraph.
In establishing a combined annual municipal budget for the next fiscal year, the mayor
and the board of aldermen shall consider total expenditures not to exceed an amount equal to the
combined annual budget of the current fiscal year, increased by a factor equal to the average of
the changes in the Gross Domestic Product Implicit Price Deflator (IPD) for State and Local
Government Consumption Expenditures and Gross Investment of the three (3) calendar years
immediately preceding budget adoption as published by the Bureau of Economic Analysis.33
31 Res.-83-223, effective Jan. 1, 1984.
32 Res. of 11-2-93.
33 Res.-13-147, effective Jan. 1, 2015.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
xxiii
November 1, 2018
This provision shall not prevent the mayor and the board of aldermen from establishing a
combined annual municipal budget below this limit.
This provision shall not prevent the mayor and the board of aldermen from appropriately
funding any programs or accounts mandated to be paid from municipal funds by state and federal
law.
§ 56-d. Exception to budget limitation34
The total or any part of principal and interest payments of any municipal bond, whether
established for school or municipal purposes, may be exempted from the limitation defined in
paragraph 56-c upon an affirmative vote of at least ten (10) aldermen. This decision shall be
made annually.
In addition, capital expenditures deemed necessary by the mayor and the board of
aldermen, subject to recommendation by the capital improvements committee (ref. Paragraph 77-
a of the City Charter) may similarly be exempted from this limitation upon an affirmative vote of
at least ten (10) aldermen.
§ 56-e. Reserve fund35
In the event actual property tax collections and/or revenues exceed the budget allocation
prescribed in paragraph 56-c, plus additional expenditure authorized pursuant to paragraph 56-d,
such excess funds shall be deposited in a reserve account specifically established for the purpose.
These funds shall be drawn upon as a contingent revenue source in succeeding fiscal
years, to offset a part of the budget estimated otherwise having to be funded by property taxes, or
for any other municipal budget purposes, or to meet federal and state mandates, or for
unanticipated emergency expenses, or as a property tax credit, upon an affirmative vote of twothirds
of the members of the board of aldermen.
§ 56-f. Deficit budget control36
The actual annual municipal budget shall not incur a deficit, wherein total spending
exceeds total income during the fiscal year. If the total actual and projected income from all
sources, including property taxes, municipal, county, state, and federal revenues, and funds
transferred from the reserve fund established pursuant to paragraph 56-e during a fiscal year fails
to meet actual and projected expenditures for the remaining part of that fiscal year, an automatic,
equal and immediate across-the-board percentile cut shall be instituted in the annual budget of
every city department cited in paragraph 56-c. The city comptroller (ref. Paragraph 50-b of the
City Charter) shall determine the status of actual and projected income vs. expenditures for this
purpose, in coordination with the city treasurer (ref. Paragraph 42 of the City Charter) and
determine the requisite numeric percentile cut. The board of aldermen, upon notification by the
city comptroller and the city treasurer, shall then order the cut.
This cut may be exempted or adjusted upon an affirmative vote of three-fourths of the
members of the Board of Aldermen.
34 R-04-121 approved by voters on November 8 2005. Amended section to read “at least ten aldermen” in lieu of “twothirds
of the members of the board.” Res. of 11-2-93.
35 Res. of 11-2-93.
36 Res. Of 11-2-93.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
xxiv
November 1, 2018
This provision shall not prevent the mayor and the board of aldermen from appropriately
funding any programs or accounts mandated to be paid from municipal funds by state and federal
law.
§ 56-g. Approval of salaries and collective bargaining agreements of the Nashua School
District37
The mayor and board of aldermen shall approve the cost of all salaries and collective
bargaining agreements approved by the Nashua Board of Education before the same shall become
effective and binding upon the school district or the city.
§ 57. Removals from office
The board of aldermen may, on specific charges and after due notice and hearing, at any
time remove from office the mayor or one of its own members for prolonged absence from or
other inattention to duty, mental or physical incapacity, incompetency, crime, immorality, or
misconduct in office upon affirmative vote on roll call of at least two thirds of the aldermen. A
vacancy occasioned by removal under this section shall be filled in the manner provided in
section 44 of this charter.
§ 58. Incompatible offices
No alderman shall, during his term as such, be eligible to hold any other municipal office
except acting mayor, and volunteer member of the fire department; and no board or commission
established in the city and empowered to select subordinates shall, except where expressly
authorized by law or ordinance creating it, select one of its own members for any position to
which a salary or other emolument is attached.
Board of Public Works
§ 59. How chosen: tenure of office38
The board of public works shall be composed of the mayor and four members to be
chosen by the qualified voters of the city at large, voting in their respective wards. At the first
general municipal election to be holden under this act [charter], there shall be elected four
members of the board of public works: the two candidates receiving the two highest preferences
shall serve for three years, and the two candidates receiving the next highest preferences shall
serve for one year, and at each subsequent general municipal election there shall be elected two
members for the full term of four years, and the members so chosen shall hold their respective
offices from the first secular day of January next following their election for the terms above
specified, and until their successors are chosen and qualified. Vacancies shall be filled as
follows: If there is at least six (6) months and one (1) day remaining in the unexpired term, the
vacancy shall be filled by a special election held on a date determined by the Board of Aldermen
which shall not be earlier than forty (40) days and not later than one hundred eighty (180) days
after the vacancy occurs. All nominations for the board of public works shall be handled in the
same manner as nominations for the board of public works at a regularly scheduled election with
the exception that petitions and acceptances of nominations shall be presented to the city clerk not
earlier than forty (40) days nor later than thirty (30) days before the election. Provided, however,
that if the board of aldermen determines that the vacancy shall be filled on the date of the next
regularly scheduled municipal election, the vacancy shall not be filled by a special election.
37 Rev. of 11-2-93.
38 Amended by R-04-126 approved by the voters on November 8, 2005. Filling-vacancies provision effective January
1, 2006. Amended by R-11-139 approved by the voters on November 8, 2011. Filling vacancies provision effective
November 8, 2011.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
xxv
November 1, 2018
Instead, the candidate who receives the most votes at the regular municipal election for the next
term of the office which is then vacant, and who is not then an incumbent member on the board,
shall be sworn in to complete the unexpired term as soon as the elections results are final. If the
vacancy occurs within six (6) months or less of the end of the unexpired term, the vacancy shall
not be filled before the next regularly scheduled municipal election. The candidate who receives
the most votes at the regular municipal election for the next term of the office which is then
vacant, and who is not then an incumbent member on the board, shall be sworn in to complete the
unexpired term as soon as the election results are final.
§ 59-a. Board of Public Works: qualifications for office39
No person shall be a candidate for the office of, or serve as, a member of the board of
public works who is not a duly qualified voter of the city. No person shall hold any other city
office during his tenure as an elected member of the board of public works.
§ 60. General powers and duties
The said board shall have cognizance, direction and full control (a) of the construction,
alteration, cleaning, watering and repair of streets, highways, bridges and sidewalks; (b) of the
location, construction, extension, care and maintenance of public sewers and drains; (c) of the
planting and care of the shade and ornamental trees standing in the streets and public ways; (d) of
the location and supervision of electric power, electric light, telephone, telegraph, and trolley
wires; of electric light, telephone, trolley and telegraph poles, and of any gas and water pipes and
other conduits, and erection, placing and removing thereof; (e) they shall have all the powers and
authority now vested in the committee on highways and bridges and the committee on sewers and
drains, as well as full power and authority to contract for and purchase all material and supplies
used in the department created by this act [charter]; (f) they shall have the purchasing as well as
the care and control of all teams and other property used in the department of public works
established as aforesaid. And all powers and duties by law vested in surveyors of highways shall
apply to said board of public works when inconsistent herewith. The board of public works shall
also have sole power to select and purchase land for the purpose of the public works department;
and when the said board has secured by vote of the board of aldermen an adequate appropriation
for the purchase of a specified lot at a specified price, then said board may purchase the same.
The said board and the land and buildings committee of the board of aldermen, jointly shall direct
the construction of all buildings erected, altered, remodeled or changed, for the use of the public
works department; and no building shall be erected, altered, remodeled or changed, unless the
plans thereof have previously been submitted to the board of public works and approved by it.
Upon completion of such building or after the selection and purchase of land, the board of public
works shall have full and complete care and control of the same; and whenever such land or
buildings shall no longer be used for the purposes of the public works department the care and
control thereof shall revert to the city.
Sidewalks. The board of public works for the city of Nashua, whenever in their judgment the
public good requires, shall lay out and construct sidewalks, or repair sidewalks already
constructed, about any city square in the thickly settled part of the city of Nashua. Such
sidewalks shall be of uniform width on the same street, and, as far as possible, of uniform
material. The cost of such construction or repair may be assessed upon the abutters on such
sidewalks in just proportions, not exceeding one half of the same, and all assessments so made
shall constitute a lien upon the abutting premises and be collected in the same manner as taxes on
real estate; and such sidewalks shall afterwards be maintained at the expense of the city. After
such sidewalks are so constructed or repaired, they shall be maintained by the city under the
39 Nov. 4, 1975, Referendum, Proposal No. 1.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
xxvi
November 1, 2018
supervision of the board of public works, who may give such instructions to the city engineer as
they deem necessary for this purpose.
Meaning of Terms. A “city square” for the purposes of this act [charter] shall be of at least one
acre in extent and bounded on at least three sides by public ways. “Thickly settled part of the
city” shall mean the territory contiguous to any way which is built up with structures devoted to
business, or where the dwelling-houses are situated at such distances as will average less than one
hundred feet between such dwelling-houses for a distance of a quarter of a mile or more upon one
side of a street.
§ 61. Expends appropriations
The board of public works shall have the expenditure of all appropriations made by the
board of aldermen for any purpose specified in the preceding section. The said board shall elect
and employ a city engineer, and such other agents and employees as it may deem necessary for
the purpose of the execution of the details of the work under its charge, and prescribe their duties;
and such city engineer and other subordinates shall act in all respects in accordance with its plans
and directions, and may be removed by it at pleasure. Said city engineer shall perform such other
duties in aid of the assessors or other departments of the city as the ordinances of the city may
now or hereafter prescribe, and, in the absence of special ordinances, such other duties as have
customarily been performed by the city engineer of the city. It shall have charge of all horses,
vehicles, machinery, tools, material and equipment owned by the city for the purposes of such
work; may from time to time purchase all new equipment required for such purposes; and sell any
discarded equipment; may make such regulations for its own government and for the government
of its subordinates and of the property under its charge as it may deem expedient. And, may, in
its discretion, procure the performance of any work under their charge by contract, and for that
purpose, call for proposals and make and execute in the name and on the behalf of the city, a
suitable contract therefore with the lowest responsible bidder, taking from him sufficient security
for the performance of such contract, but no such contract shall call for the expenditure of a sum
exceeding the amount appropriated or available in such a case.
§ 62. Appropriations, etc., how made
The board of aldermen shall make no appropriation for any purpose other than fixed
charges and general maintenance and repairs, unless an appropriation for that purpose has first
been requested by the board of public works; and the latter board shall undertake no highway or
sewer work in the nature of new construction and permanent improvement unless an
appropriation therefore has first been granted by the board of aldermen, nor undertake work of
any kind, except in the case of emergency, the anticipated cost whereof will exceed the
appropriation available for that purpose. At the close of every year the board of public works
shall make a detailed report to the board of aldermen of its doings for that year, which report shall
be published with the report of the other municipal departments.
§ 63. Permits and licenses, etc.
The board of public works shall also have exclusive jurisdiction, subject to the laws of
the state, and to such laws and regulations in the premises, as the board of aldermen may from
time to time ordain for its guidance and for the public protection and convenience, to grant, deny
and revoke permits and licenses, for making excavations in, moving buildings along, or placing
and maintaining poles, wires, pipes or other structure, in, over, or under the streets, highways, or
sidewalks of the city; to fix the terms of such permits and licenses, to prescribe and change the
location and compel the repair or removal of such structures; and to exercise within the city all
powers conferred by law and ordinance on municipal officers relative to the location and manner
of street railway structures. Authority to grant permits for excavations and other temporary
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
xxvii
November 1, 2018
obstructions, and to designate the particular portion of the streets in which structures shall be
located, may be delegated by it to the superintendent of streets, or to adjust such limits as it may
prescribe. Whenever any street, highway or sidewalk in the city is obstructed or occupied in any
manner mentioned, without statutory authority or a permit or a license, or in violation of the
conditions of such permit or license, or of its lawful orders, the said board or its authorized agent
may abate the offending obstruction or structure as a public nuisance.
Board of Assessors
§ 64. Repealed. 1969, ch. 627:30, II, eff. Jan. 1, 1972
Editor’s note—1969, ch. 627:27, eff. Jan. 1, 1972, provided: “The elected board of
assessors is hereby abolished and the terms of office of the members of said board in
office as of January 1, 1970 shall hereby expire.”
§ 65. Repealed. 1969, ch. 627:30, II, eff. Jan. 1, 1972
§ 66. Repealed. 1969, ch. 627:30, IV, eff. Jan. 1, 1972
§ 67. Repealed. 1969, ch. 627:30, V, eff. Jan. 1, 1972
§ 68. Repealed. 1969, ch. 627:30, VI, eff. Jan. 1, 1972
§ 69. Clerk of board: duties
The clerk of the board of assessors, with the assistance of the other members and such
clerical assistance as may be furnished by the vote of the board of aldermen shall keep all the
books, records and accounts of the board’s condition, correspondence, and financial accounts as
its executive officer, subject to the direction of the majority of the board as to the methods of
performing such duties.
§ 70. Assistant assessors: clerks
The board of aldermen may by ordinance employ assistant assessors to aid in making the
list of ratable polls, such assistants to be employed for such time and for such compensation as
shall be fixed by the board of aldermen. It may also by ordinance authorize the employment of
such clerical assistance as may be required by the board of assessors, and fix the amount to be
expended for such assistance.
§ 71. Records open to inspection
The books and records of the assessors shall be the property of the city, and at all times
be open to public inspection during office hours.
§ 72. Repealed. 1969, ch. 627:30, VII, eff. Jan. 1, 1972
§ 72-a. [Special assessments]
The board of aldermen shall have power to determine that the whole or any part of the
expense of any public improvement shall be defrayed by special assessments upon the property
especially benefited and shall so declare by resolution. Such resolution shall state the estimated
cost of the improvement, what proportion of the cost thereof shall be paid by special assessments,
and what part, if any, shall be a general obligation of the city, the number of installments in which
assessments may be paid, and shall designate the districts or land and premises upon which
special assessments shall be levied.
§ 72-b. [Special assessment—Procedure; collection]
The board of aldermen shall prescribe by general ordinance complete special assessment
procedure concerning plans and specifications, estimate of costs, notice and hearing, the making
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
xxviii
November 1, 2018
of the assessment roll and correction of errors, the collection of special assessments, and any
other matters concerning the making of improvements by the special assessment method.
Fire Commissioners
§ 73. Fire commissioners, how chosen
The Board of Fire Commissioners shall continue to be composed of three members, one
of whom shall be chosen at large at each general municipal election to hold office from the
inauguration day in January next following his election; provided, however, that effective with
inauguration day in 1978, the board shall be composed of five members to be chosen by the
qualified voters of the city at large, voting in their respective wards. At the general municipal
election to be held in 1977, there shall be elected three members of the fire commission; the
candidate receiving the highest preference shall serve for four years; and the two candidates
receiving the next highest preference shall each serve for two years. At the general municipal
election to be held in 1979 there shall be elected three members for the fire commission; the three
candidates receiving the highest preference shall each serve for four years. At the general
municipal election to be held in 1981 there shall be elected two members of the fire commission;
the two candidates receiving the highest preference shall each serve for four years. At each
subsequent general municipal election three or two members of the fire commission shall
alternatively be elected for a full four-year term, in order to maintain a board of five members.
The members so chosen shall hold their respective offices from the inauguration day in January
next following their election for the terms above specified, and until there successors are chosen
and qualified. The board shall exercise all the powers and perform all the duties that the laws and
ordinances now prescribe, or that may hereafter be prescribed by law and the City Ordinances.40
Vacancies shall be filled as follows: If there is at least six (6) months and one (1) day remaining
in the unexpired term, the vacancy shall be filled by a special election held on a date determined
by the board of aldermen which shall not be earlier than forty (40) days and not later than one
hundred eighty (180) days after the vacancy occurs. All nominations for the board of fire
commissioners shall be handled in the same manner as nominations for the board of fire
commissioners at a regularly scheduled election with the exception that petitions and acceptances
of nominations shall be presented to the city clerk not earlier than forty (40) days nor later than
thirty (30) days before the election. Provided, however, that if the board of aldermen determines
that the vacancy shall be filled on the date of the next regularly scheduled municipal election, the
vacancy shall not be filled by a special election. Instead, the candidate who receives the most
votes at the regular municipal election for the next term of the office which is then vacant, and
who is not then an incumbent member on the board, shall be sworn in to complete the unexpired
term as soon as the elections results are final. If the vacancy occurs within six (6) months or less
of the end of the unexpired term, the vacancy shall not be filled before the next regularly
scheduled municipal election. The candidate who receives the most votes at the regular
municipal election for the next term of the office which is then vacant, and who is not then an
incumbent member on the board, shall be sworn in to complete the unexpired term as soon as the
election results are final.41
40 Nov. 4, 1975, Referendum, Proposal No. 5.
41 Amended by R-04-126 approved by the voters on November 8, 2005. Filling-vacancies provision effective January
1, 2006. Amended by R-11-139 approved by the voters on November 8, 2011. Filling vacancies provision effective
November 8, 2011.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
xxix
November 1, 2018
Board of Education
§ 74. Board of education; duties
The City of Nashua shall continue to constitute one school district, and the school
committee of said City shall be styled the Board of Education. It shall perform all such duties as
the School Committee in towns is required by law to perform, and shall have the power to protect
the health of children attending the public schools of the city when exposed to danger from any
cause connected with the schools, whether the cause be unsanitary conditions, exposure to
contagious disease, association with those who are afflicted with sickness such as is commonly
communicable to others, or other causes. General appropriations for the maintenance of the
schools of the city shall be deemed available to meet any expenses incurred by the Board of
Education under this provision for the protection of the health of the children attending the public
schools.
§ 75. Board of education: How chosen
Any person, qualified to vote in the affairs of the City of Nashua, may vote at all
elections for the choice of a board of education of said city, and be a candidate for and be chosen
to such membership upon receiving the necessary votes required for election upon the board,
provided that no person shall serve as a member of the board of education who is not a duly
qualified voter of the city. Any duly qualified voter may also sign an initiative petition such as
provided for in this charter in case of any measure pertaining to the affairs under the board’s
administration, which it, after this charter takes effect, may lawfully pass, and vote upon its
submission to a vote of the qualified voters of the city for adoption or rejection at a general or
special municipal election when the measure is by this charter to be voted upon.
The board of education shall continue to be composed of twelve members, four of whom
shall be elected at large at each general municipal election to hold office from the following
January first; provided, however, that effective with the terms of those members which
commence January 1, 1972, the term of office of members shall be four years and, provided
further, that effective with the election in November 1975, five candidates shall be elected to the
board and the membership of the board shall be reduced to nine effective January 1, 1976.
Subsequently, four or five candidates shall be elected to the board at each general municipal
election in order to maintain a board of nine members.42 Vacancies shall be filled as follows: If
there is at least six (6) months and one (1) day remaining in the unexpired term, the vacancy shall
be filled by a special election held on a date determined by the board of aldermen which shall not
be earlier than forty (40) days and not later than one hundred eighty (180) days after the vacancy
occurs. All nominations for the board of education shall be handled in the same manner as
nominations for the board of education at a regularly scheduled election with the exception that
petitions and acceptances of nominations shall be presented to the city clerk not earlier than forty
(40) days nor later than thirty (30) days before the election. Provided, however, that if the board
of aldermen determines that the vacancy shall be filled on the date of the next regularly scheduled
municipal election, the vacancy shall not be filled by a special election. Instead, the candidate
who receives the most votes at the regular municipal election for the next term of the office which
is then vacant, and who is not then an incumbent member on the board, shall be sworn in to
complete the unexpired term as soon as the elections results are final. If the vacancy occurs
within six (6) months or less of the end of the unexpired term, the vacancy shall not be filled
before the next regularly scheduled municipal election. The candidate who receives the most
votes at the regular municipal election for the next term of the office which is then vacant, and
42 Nov. 4, 1975, Referendum, Proposal No. 1.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
xxx
November 1, 2018
who is not then an incumbent member on the board, shall be sworn in to complete the unexpired
term as soon as the election results are final.43
§ 76. Board of Education; officers; compensation; incompatible offices44
The Board of Education shall choose a president and clerk from its own members. Each
member of the board shall be compensated in such amounts as the mayor and board of aldermen
from time to time appropriate in the budget of the city. No person shall hold any other city office
during his tenure as a member of the Board of Education.
§ 77. Planning Board45
(a) Membership. There shall be in the city a Planning Board whose membership shall
consist of nine members; the mayor or his appointed representative, the city engineer,
a member of the board of aldermen who shall be appointed by it, and six citizen
members who shall be appointed by the mayor, said appointments to be confirmed by
the board of aldermen.
(b) Qualifications, terms and removal of members. The qualifications and terms of
members, and removal of members shall be as specified by RSA Chapter 36, as
amended.
(c) Vacancies in membership. Vacancies in the membership of the board occurring
otherwise than through the expiration of term may be filled for the duration of the
unexpired term by the mayor, in the case of members appointed by him. Such
appointments by the mayor are to be confirmed by the board of aldermen. The board
of aldermen may make appointments in the case of the aldermanic members.
(d) Organizations: meetings and rules.
(1) The board shall elect a chairman from the appointed members and create and
fill such other offices as it may deem necessary for its work. The term of the
chairman shall be one year, with eligibility for re-election.
(2) The board shall hold at least one regular meeting each month, shall adopt
rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a public record of its
resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, and shall forward a copy
of the minutes of its meetings to the city clerk for distribution to each member of
the board of aldermen.
(e) Staff and finances. Subject to the limitations hereinafter provided, the Planning
Board may appoint such employees as it may deem necessary for its work, whose
appointment, promotion, demotion and removal shall be subject to the same
provisions of law as govern other corresponding civil employees of the city. The
board of aldermen may provide such funds, equipment and accommodations as they
may deem necessary or advisable for the Planning Board’s work. All expenditures of
the Planning Board, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the funds appropriated for the
purpose by the board of aldermen.
43 Amended by R-04-126 approved by the voters on November 8, 2005. Filling-vacancies provision effective January
1, 2006. Amended by R-11-139 approved by the voters on November 8, 2011. Filling vacancies provision effective
November 8, 2011.
44 Nov. 4, 1975, Referendum, Proposal No. 4.
45 Editor’s note—A prior § 77 was repealed by P.S. ch. 114 § 11.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
xxxi
November 1, 2018
(f) Powers and duties. The Planning Board shall promote public interest in, and
understanding of, the master plan and of the official map of the city as hereinafter
provided and it shall do all things necessary and incidental to the promotion and
execution of said plan and map. It shall also have all the powers conferred by statute
on municipal planning boards. The board shall, however, be limited in the exercise
of the foregoing duties and powers to the funds appropriated by the board of
aldermen for such purposes.
The Planning Board shall review and make recommendations to the mayor and board
of aldermen on all locations for proposed municipal buildings and facilities, including
educational, on the purchase and sale of any land by the city and on existing or
dedicated streets to be discontinued or vacated.
(g) Master plan. The Planning Board shall formulate a master plan of the city, carry out
the statutory powers of a zoning commission, prepare an official map of the city,
formulate regulations for the subdivision of land, the location of buildings within the
bed of mapped streets, and have all other such powers as are conferred by statute
upon municipal planning boards. All proposed plans, maps, regulations and zoning
changes must be submitted to the board of aldermen for enactment into law, either by
resolution or ordinance, as the case may be.
(h) Limitations. The Planning Board shall not do any act or acts pursuant to its power
and duties which contemplate or necessitate the expenditure of municipal funds by
resolution, inclusion in the municipal budget, appropriations or supplementary
appropriations, or otherwise without authorization by the board of aldermen. (Nov.
4, 1975, Referendum, Proposal No. 2; Res. R-83-223, effective Jan. 1, 1984)
§ 77-a. Capital Improvements Committee46
(a) Establishment and purpose. There is hereby established, as a sub-committee of the
City Planning Board, a capital improvements committee with the responsibility of
preparing a six-year capital improvement program and a one-year capital
improvement budget for the consideration of the mayor and board of aldermen. It is
also the responsibility of the committee to annually review the progress of approved
capital improvement projects and annually update and revise its six-year program and
one-year budget.
(b) Requests for capital improvement projects. All requests for capital improvement
projects, as defined by the committee, shall be referred to the committee for a
recommendation prior to any formal commitment by the city to proceed. All
departments shall supply the necessary information required by the committee to
properly conduct their review.
(c) Membership and term of office.
(1) The committee shall consist of four citizen members appointed by the City
Planning Board, the City Treasurer, the City Comptroller, the City Planning
Director and a member of the board of aldermen appointed by it.
46 Nov. 4, 1975, Referendum, Proposal No. 2; amended Res. R-83-223, effective Jan. 1, 1984.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
xxxii
November 1, 2018
(2) Terms of office shall, for ex-officio members, coincide with their terms of
office and, for citizen members, be for a two-year term with two of the four
terms ending in alternate years.
(d) Responsibilities. The committee shall have the following responsibilities:
(1) To receive, evaluate and make recommendations on capital improvement
projects requested by each municipal department. To the extent feasible, the
review of each project shall be premised upon the master plan for the City of
Nashua or parts thereof, as amended from time to time;
(2) The committee shall recommend to the City Planning Board those capital
improvement projects which should be considered in the ensuing six-year
period, and those which should be deferred beyond;
(3) The committee shall also recommend to the City Planning Board those
capital improvement projects which should be considered in the coming
year’s fiscal budget for the city;
(4) The committee shall also include in its report to the City Planning Board the
financial effects of the proposed capital improvements program;
(5) The committee shall also review the progress of all approved capital
improvement projects and issue a status report semi-annually to the City
Planning Board, mayor and board of aldermen;
(6) The committee, upon submission to it by the mayor and board of aldermen
shall review and report on any capital improvement request received by the
mayor and/or the board of aldermen for inclusion within the one-year capital
improvements budget which has not previously been reviewed by the
committee. The committee shall submit its report on the proposed capital
improvement to the City Planning Board within 30 days of its referral to the
committee from the mayor and/or board of aldermen. The City Planning
Board shall submit the committee’s report and any additional comments of
the Planning Board to the mayor and board of aldermen within 30 days of
receipt of the committee’s report.
The City Planning Board, upon receiving the committee’s recommended capital improvements
program and budget, may amend the program and budget before its submission to the mayor and
the board of aldermen, but such amendments shall be in the form of supplementary
recommendation or comments attached to the submitted program and/or budget.
Board of Health
§ 78. Board of Health, how chosen
The board of aldermen on the first secular day of January, 1915, shall elect a board of
health, to be composed of three members, whose terms of office shall be for one year, and on the
first secular day of January in 1916 and thereafter biennially on said first secular day of January
following the regular municipal election they shall elect said board of health for the term of two
years, to be composed of three members, two of who shall be physicians.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
xxxiii
November 1, 2018
§ 79. Board of Health: duties and powers
Said board shall have control of and attend to all matters and perform all duties relating to
public health, and shall perform such special duties as may be imposed upon them by ordinance
or by the general statutes of the state.
§ 80. Health officer, duties and salary
The board of health shall elect a health officer who shall hold the office at the pleasure of
said board. The health officer shall devote his time to the performance of the duties imposed
upon him by and by the board of health, including the inspection of milk.
§ 81. Board of Health, to make rules
The board of health may make such rules and regulations relating to plumbing, sanitation
and drainage of buildings and connection with public sewers, as in their judgment the health and
safety of the occupants or the public may require. They may also make such rules and regulations
relating to the public health as in their judgment the public health and safety may require. All
such rules and regulations shall be subjected to the action of the board of aldermen approving the
same.
City Treasurer-Tax Collector; City Clerk
§ 82. City Treasurer-Tax Collector: duties
The city treasurer, who shall also be collector of taxes, shall collect all moneys due to the
city, except license fees or other moneys, the collection of which is otherwise provided for by
law. He shall have the custody of, and pay out all moneys, and cause his accounts in both said
capacities to be kept in proper books of account and in manner approved by the finance
committee and shall perform such other duties as the ordinance prescribed; he shall perform all
the duties and exercise all the powers assigned by law to city treasurers or collectors of taxes, or
town treasurers and collectors of taxes, so far as such laws can apply to said city.
§ 83. City Treasurer-Tax Collector’s books open to inspection
All books and records of the city treasurer and collector of taxes shall be the property of
the city and shall be at all times open to public inspection during the office hours of said officer.
§ 84. Reports of City Treasurer-Tax Collector to Mayor or Aldermen
The board of aldermen or the mayor may call for such reports as to the uncollected taxes,
and as to the moneys on hand, and as to the finances of the city, as they may deem needful for
their information.
§ 85. [Bonding of city officers]
Any city officer elected or appointed by authority of this charter may be required by the
board of aldermen to give a bond to be approved by the city solicitor for the faithful performance
of the duties of his office, but all officers receiving or disbursing city funds shall be so bonded.
All official bonds shall be corporate surety bonds, and the premiums thereon shall be paid by the
city. Such bonds shall be filed with the city clerk.
§ 86. [City clerk, general duties]
The city clerk shall perform all the duties and exercise all the powers that the existing or
future ordinances prescribe as to the functions of city clerk; he shall also perform all the duties
and exercise all the powers assigned by law to such officers or officer in towns and cities as far as
such law apply to said city.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
xxxiv
November 1, 2018
Personnel Administration
§ 86-a. [Merit system for personnel administration; exceptions]
Appointments and promotions to all positions in the service of the city shall be made
solely on the basis of merit and only after examination of the applicant’s fitness. The first mayor
elected under the provisions of this charter shall draft and submit to the board of aldermen within
six months after assuming office an ordinance providing for the establishment of merit system for
personnel administration. Such ordinance shall include provisions with regard to classification,
compensation, selection, training, promotion, discipline, vacations, retirement and any other
matters necessary to the maintenance of efficient service and the improvement of working
conditions. Officials elected by the people shall be exempt from the provisions of such
ordinance. With reasonable dispatch thereafter the board of aldermen shall enact, amend or
revise the ordinance so submitted, but in any event the board of aldermen shall enact a merit plan
which embodies the provisions herein required. It shall be the duty of the mayor to administer the
merit plan so enacted. He may submit revisions of the merit plan to the board of aldermen from
time to time as changes in conditions and circumstances in the city service justify.
§ 86-b. [Personnel advisory board]
There is hereby established a personnel advisory board of three citizens holding no other
public office and appointed by the mayor, subject to the approval of a majority of the board of
aldermen. The term of each member shall be for three years and until his successor is appointed
and qualified. However, in the case of first appointments, one member shall be appointed for one
year, one for two years, and one for three years. Vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of
any term in the same manner as the original appointment. It shall be the duty of the personnel
advisory board to study the broad problems of personnel policy and administration, to advise the
board of aldermen concerning the personnel policies of the city and the mayor regarding the
administration of the merit plan, and to hear appeals from any employee aggrieved as to the status
or condition of his employment. The board shall issue written reports containing findings of fact
and recommendations to the mayor upon such appeals. But the board shall have no power to
reinstate an employee unless it finds after investigation, that disciplinary action was taken against
the employee for religious, racial or political reasons.
§ 86-c. [Retirement system for city employees]47
The merit plan may contain provisions for a system for the retirement of any city
employee who shall have attained an age or condition of health which warrants retirement from
further service. Any such plan shall provide payments to retired employees only as additional
compensation for services rendered after the inauguration of such a plan and before a retirement.
Other Boards; Recall; Initiative Petition
§ 87. Sundry board and officers continued48
The board of police commissioners and police force, the boards of trustees of cemeteries,
public library, hospital, and Hunt legacy, and all other bodies or officers not specially abolished
or superseded herein, as at present constituted, are hereby continued; provided, however, that the
board of aldermen shall, in all cases, determine the members of any board of commissioners or
trustees required heretofore to be named or elected by the aldermen or city councils, and name or
elect the member to fill any vacancy in said board, in convention with such other board.
47 Cross reference—General retirement system, Subpart B, § A-481 et seq.
48 Cross references—Board of police commissioners, Subpart B, Chapter1; board of trustees of cemetery, Subpart B,
Chapter 3; board of trustees of public library, Subpart B, Chapter 11.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
xxxv
November 1, 2018
§ 88 (Repealed. P.S. ch. 323)
§ 89. Elective officers subject to recall49
Any holder of an office elected at large may be recalled and removed therefrom by the
qualified voters of the city as herein provided.
§ 90. Procedure for recall
Any qualified voter of the city may make and file with the city clerk an affidavit
containing the name of the officer sought to be removed and a statement of the grounds of
removal. The city clerk shall thereupon deliver to the voter making such affidavit a sufficient
number of copies of petition blanks for such recall and removal, printed forms of which he shall
keep on hand. Such blanks shall be issued by the city clerk with his signature and official seal
thereto attached; they shall be dated and addressed to the board of aldermen, shall contain the
name of the person to whom issued, the number of blanks so issued, the name of the person
sought to be removed, the office from which such removal is sought, the grounds of removal as
stated in said affidavit, and shall demand the election of a successor to such office. A copy of the
petition shall be entered in a record book to be kept in the office of the city clerk. Said recall
petition shall be returned and filed with said city clerk within thirty days after the filing of the
affidavit. Said petition, before being returned and filed, shall be signed by qualified voters equal
in number to at least twenty-five percent of the ballots cast for first choice for all the candidates
for the office from which it is sought to recall the incumbent at the next preceding election when
said office was filled, and to every such signature shall be added the place of residence of the
signer, giving the street and number. Such signatures need not all be on one paper. One of the
signers of every such paper shall make an affidavit thereto that the statements therein contained
are true, and that each signature appended to the paper is the genuine signature of the person
whose name it purports to be. All such papers for the recall of any one officer shall be fastened
together and shall be filed as one instrument, with the endorsements thereon the names and
addresses of three persons designated as filing the same.
§ 91. Petition for recall certified; defective petition amended
Within ten days after the filing said petition, the city clerk shall ascertain by examination
thereof and of the election returns and checklists used when said office was filled whether the
petition is signed by the requisite number of qualified voters, and shall attach thereto his
certificate showing the result of such examination. He shall, if necessary, be allowed extra help
by the board of aldermen. If his certificate shows the petition to be insufficient, he shall within
said ten days so notify in writing one or more of the persons designated on the petition as filing
the same and the petition may be amended by the addition of signatures at any time within ten
days after the giving of said notice by the city clerk. The city clerk shall, within ten days after
such amendment, make like examination of the amended petition, and attach thereto his
certificate of the result. If then insufficient, or if no amendment was made, he shall return the
petition to one of the persons designated thereon as filing it, without prejudice, however, to the
filing of a new petition for the same purpose.
§ 92. Recall election, when held
If the petition or amended petition shall be found and certified by the city clerk to be
sufficient, he shall submit the same with his certificate to the board of aldermen without delay,
and the board of aldermen shall, if the officer sought to be removed does not resign within five
49 Streeter v. McGrath, et al./05-E-427, Superior Court, found the recall provisions in the City Charter, Sections 89
through 96, invalid.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
xxxvi
November 1, 2018
days thereafter, thereupon order an election to be held on a Tuesday fixed by it, not less then
thirty nor more than forty-five days after the date of the city clerk’s certificate that a sufficient
petition is filed; provided, however, that if any other municipal election is to occur within sixty
days after the date of said certificate, the board of aldermen may, in its discretion, postpone the
holding of the removal election to the date of such other municipal election. If a vacancy occurs
in said office after a removal election has so been ordered, the election shall nevertheless proceed
as in this section provided.
§ 93. Nominations for recall election how made
Any officer sought to be removed may be a candidate to succeed himself, and unless he
requests otherwise in writing, the city clerk shall place his name on the official ballot without
nomination. The nomination of other candidates, the publication of the warrants for such removal
election, and the conduct of the same, shall all be in accord with the provisions of this act
[charter], relating to elections.
§ 94. Incumbent’s duties, pending recall
The incumbent shall continue to perform the duties of his office until the removal
election. If then re-elected, he shall continue in office for the remainder of his unexpired term,
subject to recall as before, except as provided in section 95 of this act [charter]. If not re-elected
in the removal election, he shall be deemed removed upon the qualification of his successor who
shall hold office during the unexpired term. If the successor fails to qualify within ten days after
receiving notification of his election, the incumbent shall thereupon be deemed removed and the
office vacant.
§ 95. Restriction on right of recall
No recall petition shall be filed against any officer within three months after his election,
nor, in the case of an officer re-elected in a removal election, until three months after that
election.
§ 96. Disqualification by recall
No person who has been removed from an office by recall, or who has resigned from
such office while recall proceedings were pending against him, shall be appointed to any city
office within two years after such removal by recall or such resignation.
§ 97. “Qualified voter” defined
The term “qualified voter,” whenever it occurs in sections 89 to 96, both inclusive, of this
act [charter], means a voter qualified by law and by section 33 of this act [charter] to vote for
candidates for the office from which a removal is sought.
§ 98. Initiative petition to include what
A petition, meeting the requirements hereinafter provided and requesting the board of
aldermen to pass an ordinance, resolution, order or vote, or requesting the board of education to
pass a resolution, order or vote, all of these four terms being hereinafter designated or included in
the term “measure,” shall be termed an initiative petition, and shall be acted upon as hereinafter
provided.
§ 99. Initiative petition, how signed, and filed; procedure for submission50
Signatures in initiative petitions need not all be on one paper, but one of the signers of
every such paper shall make an affidavit thereto that the statements therein contained are true, and
50 Editor’s note—Section 109, referred to in this section, has been repealed.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
xxxvii
November 1, 2018
that each signature appended to the paper is the genuine signature of the person whose name it
purports to be. All such papers pertaining to any one measure shall be fastened together and shall
be filed in the office of the city clerk as one instrument, with the endorsements thereon of the
names and addresses of three persons designated as filing the same. With each signature to said
petition shall be stated the place of residence of the signer, giving the street and number. Within
ten days after the filing of said petition the city clerk shall ascertain by examination thereof and of
the checklists and election returns, by what number of qualified voters the petition is signed and
what percentage that number is of the last preceding vote cast in the city for all candidates for
governor of the state, except as is provided in section 109 of this act [charter], and shall attach
thereto his certificate showing the result of such examination. He shall forthwith transmit the
measure with the said certificate to the board of aldermen or to the board of education,
accordingly as the petition is addressed, and at the same time shall send a copy of said certificate
to one or more of the persons designated on the petition as filing the same.
§ 100. Procedure, if initiative petition signed by 25% of last vote51
If an initiative petition be signed by qualified voters equal in number to at least twentyfive
percent of the last preceding vote cast in the city for all candidates for governor of the state,
the board of aldermen or the board of education to whom such measure is transmitted, provided
that said measure be one which the respective board, after this act [charter] takes effect, have a
legal right to pass, shall within twenty days after the date of the city clerk’s certificate, either—(a)
pass said measure without alteration, subject to the referendum vote provided by this act
[charter]; or (b) the board of aldermen shall call a special meeting of the voters to be held on a
Tuesday fixed by it not less than thirty nor more than forty-five days after the date of the city
clerk’s certificate that a sufficient petition has been filed, and shall submit the proposed measure
without alteration to a vote of the qualified voters of the city at that meeting; provided, however,
that if any municipal election is otherwise to occur within ninety days after the date of said
certificate, the board of aldermen may at its discretion omit the special meeting and submit the
proposed measure to the voters at such other pending election.
§ 101. Procedure, if initiative petition signed by at least 5% of last vote52
If an initiative petition be signed by qualified voters equal in number, except as provided
in section 109 of this act [charter], to at least five percent, but less than twenty-five, of the past
preceding vote cast in the city for all candidates for governor of the state, as shown in the manner
hereinbefore provided, and said proposed measure be not passed without alteration by the board
of aldermen or the board of education within twenty days, as provided in section 100 of this act
[charter], then such proposed measure, without alteration, shall be submitted by the board of
aldermen to a vote of the qualified voters of the city at the next municipal election.
§ 102. Referendum measure from board of education submitted to popular vote, when
The board of aldermen may, of its own motion, and shall, upon request of the board of
education in case of a measure originating with said board of education and pertaining to the
affairs under its administration, submit to a vote of the qualified voters of the city for adoption or
rejection, at a general or special municipal election, any proposed measure, or a proposition for
the repeal or amendment of any measure, which the respective board may, after this act [charter]
takes effect, have a legal right to pass, in the same manner and with the same force and effect as
are herein provided for submission on petition.
51 Editor’s note—Section 109, referred to in this section, has been repealed.
52 Cross reference—Section 109, referred to in this section, has been repealed.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
xxxviii
November 1, 2018
§ 103. When measures conflict
If two or more proposed measures passed at the same election are in conflict in respect of
any of their provisions, they shall go into effect in respect of such of their provisions as are not in
conflict. In each case of conflicting provisions in such measures, that one of the provisions in
conflict shall take effect which was contained in that one of such measures which received the
greatest number of affirmative votes, and all others of such conflicting provisions shall be void.
§ 104. Form of enacting clauses of initiative and referendum
The enacting clause of any measure adopted by the qualified voters, upon proposal by
initiative petition, shall be,--“Be it ordained by the people of the City of Nashua:” and of any
measure referred to the people by the board of aldermen of its own motion, or upon request of the
board of education, as provided in section 102 of this act [charter], shall be,--“Be it ordained by
the people of the City of Nashua upon referendum of the board of aldermen thereof: provided,”
that for the work “ordained” shall be substituted the word “resolved” or the word “ordered”
respectively, if the measure is a resolution or order; and for the words “Be it ordained” shall be
substituted the word “Voted” if the measure is a vote.
§ 105. Sample ballots
The city clerk shall print and distribute at his office to qualified voters sample ballots
together with the text of every measure to be submitted to a vote of the qualified voters of the
city.
§ 106. Form of official ballots; majority vote required
The ballots used when voting upon such proposed measure shall state the nature of the
measure in terms sufficient to show the substance thereof. If a majority of the qualified voters
voting on any proposed measure, which has been duly submitted to them as herein provided and
which falls within the lawful rights and powers of the city, shall vote in favor thereof, the same
shall thereupon go into effect.
§ 107. Further provisions as to ballots
Provisions shall be made on each ballot for voting upon all proposed measures submitted
at that election.
§ 108. Information and arguments
Provisions not in conflict herewith shall be made by ordinance for supplying the voters
with the information and arguments pro and con upon measures submitted to a vote by the
qualified voters of the city and for carrying out the purposes of sections 1 to 11 of this chapter
[sections 98-108 for this charter].
§ 109. Repealed. 1919, ch. 3.
§ 110. “Qualified voter” defined
The term “qualified voter” whenever it occurs in sections 1 to 11, both inclusive, of this
act [sections 98-108 of this charter], means a voter qualified to vote for the elective officers
within whose rights and powers the proposed measure would fall under this act [charter].
§ 111. Prior or special acts repealed or saved, when: act takes effect when
So much of the original charter of said city, and of the special acts, since passed in
amendment or supplement thereof as is now in force relative to police court, police
commissioners, police force, fire department and other departments and officers as is referred to
in section 87 is hereby continued in force, with the exception of such provisions as are
inconsistent with this act [charter]: but all special legislation relative to the government of said
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
xxxix
November 1, 2018
city inconsistent with provisions of this act [charter] is hereby repealed. All General Laws
relative to the government of cities shall remain in force in said city so far as the same can be
applied consistently with the intents and purposes of this act [charter], but shall be deemed
superseded as to said city by this act [charter] so far as inconsistent herewith. The Board of
Aldermen hereby established shall cause the city ordinances to be thoroughly revised
conformably with this act [charter] as soon as practicable; pending such revision all existing
ordinances and other municipal regulations shall remain in force so far as the same can be applied
consistently with the intents and purposes of this act [charter], but are hereby annulled so far as
inconsistent herewith. In all existing laws, ordinances and regulations hereby saved, references to
the city councils, board of mayor and aldermen, street commissioner or other bodies or officers
hereby abolished or superseded, or to bodies or officers whose constitution or functions are
hereby altered, shall be taken to mean the body or officer upon whom jurisdiction of the matter in
question is conferred by this act [charter].
§ 111-a. Charter commission
A charter commission may be created by vote of the mayor and aldermen. Said
commission shall consist of the mayor, three members of the board of aldermen of the City of
Nashua, two to be appointed by the president of the board, and one to be chosen by the board of
aldermen, three members of the Nashua delegation to the General Court to be appointed by the
chairman of the delegation, and three residents of the City of Nashua, one of whom shall be
appointed by the mayor, one by the president of the board of aldermen, and one by the chairman
of the Nashua delegation to the General Court.
Each charter commission is hereby authorized to review and revise the charter of the city
of Nashua and to submit its recommendations to the Nashua delegation to the General Court
during the first legislative week of the regular session of the General Court next following the
creation of the charter commission.
Each charter commission shall be discharged of its rights, responsibilities and functions
at the same time that the General Court to which it submits its recommendations is prorogued.
All city departments and officials are hereby authorized and directed to cooperate with
and assist each charter commission, said cooperation and assistance to include but not be limited
to the production and use of documents and records related to their respective offices and
departments.
The sum of five thousand dollars shall be appropriated from the general fund of the City
of Nashua each time for use by each charter commission in its review and revision of the charter.
Any and all funds not expended or marked for expenditure by a charter commission shall lapse
and return to the general fund of the City of Nashua.
No member of a charter commission shall receive any compensation for his services on
said commission.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
xl
November 1, 2018
SUBPART B. RELATED LAWS
CHAPTER 1. BOARD OF POLICE COMMISSIONERS
SUBCHAPTER 1. POLICE COMMISSION APPOINTED BY GOVERNOR
§ A-101. Appointment of commissioners53
On or before September 1, 1913, the governor shall, with the advice and approval of the
council, appoint and commission (for Nashua) a police commission consisting of three persons;
one of whom shall hold office for one year, one for two years and one for three years from
September 1, 1923, or until their successors are duly appointed and qualified. Said
commissioners shall have been residents of the city or town where appointed at least five years
immediately preceding the date of their appointment. But not more than two of each of said
commissioners shall be of the same political party. The governor shall, annually, on or before the
first day of August thereafter, with the advice and approval of the council, appoint and
commission one commissioner, who shall succeed the one whose term expires and who shall
serve for three years from September first unless sooner removed as (hereinafter) provided, and
any vacancy in said board shall be filled in the same manner.
§ A-102. Removal of commissioners54
The governor, with the advice and [approval] of the council shall have full power to
remove any commissioner at any time.
§ A-103. Duties; appointing and removing officers55
It shall be the duties of said police commissioners, to appoint such police officers,
constables and superior officers as they may in their judgment deem necessary, and fix their
compensation, who shall devote their whole time to their said duties and who shall not be
engaged or engage in any other business or occupation, or hold any other state, county or
municipal office; all of who shall be appointed by the police commissioners, and who shall serve
during good behavior and while competent to discharge the duties of the office. The police
commissioners shall have authority to remove any officer at any time for just cause and after due
hearing, which cause shall be specified in the order of removal. The members of the regular and
reserve police force of the City of Nashua shall be relieved of police duties, without loss of pay
two days in each seven days, for a period of not less than forty-eight consecutive hours, except
for the time required to answer at roll-call immediately before the beginning or immediately after
the end of a tour of duty. The time and manner of such relief shall be determined in each instance
by the police commissioners of the city or under authority by their chief of police or other
superior officer or officers. A member so relieved shall be exempt for the time from actual
service and from presence for duty, but otherwise shall be subject during such relief to all laws,
rules, orders and regulations for the government of the force which may be in effect from time to
time. Should the exigencies of the service, in the judgment of the commissioners, or of the
superintendent or other superior officer authorized thereto by the commissioners, require at any
time that a member of the force should be deprived of his period of relief or that it should be
curtailed, the time so lost shall be made up to him as soon thereafter as may be practicable.
53 Source: 1891, ch. 208; 1913, ch. 148.
54 Source: 1891, ch. 208; 1913, ch. 148:3.
55 Source: 1891, ch. 208; 1913, ch. 148:4, 6; 1917, ch. 340; 1945, ch. 260; 1951, ch. 304:1.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
xli
November 1, 2018
§ A-104. Rules; control over buildings56
The police commissioners shall have full power to make all rules for the government of
the police force and to enforce said rules. The said commissioners shall have full and complete
care and control of all lands and buildings thereon, used and erected for the use of the police
department; and whenever the same shall cease to be used for said purpose, they shall revert to
the care and control of the city. All buildings erected, altered, remodeled, or changed, for the use
of the police department shall be constructed and made under the joint direction of the
commissioners and the land and buildings committee of the board of aldermen; and no building
shall be erected, altered, remodeled, or changed, unless the plans thereof have been previously
submitted to the board of police commissioners and approved by it, and upon completion thereof
they shall be and continue in the sole control and care of the commissioners.
§ A-105. Chairman and clerk57
The said board shall elect one of their number who shall act as chairman, and one who
shall act as clerk and keep a record of all proceedings, issue all notices, and attest all such papers
and orders, as said board shall desire.
§ A-106. Records and reports58
The said board shall make a detailed report of their doings quarterly to the mayor and
aldermen of said city and annually to the governor in the month of December. The records of
said board shall at all times be open to the inspection of the governor and the citizens of said city.
The said board of police commissioners shall annually submit as early as practicable in each year
and not later than February first to the mayor and the board of aldermen, one copy to each, a
detailed estimate in writing of the appropriations required for that year.
§ A-107. Compensation; appropriations59
The compensation of the police commissioners shall be fixed by the city councils and the
total amount expended for the maintenance of said police force shall at no time exceed the
amount appropriated for that purpose by the city councils.
SUBCHAPTER 2. POLICE COMMISSIONERS APPOINTED
BY MAYOR AND BOARD OF ALDERMEN
§ A-141. Police commissions60
At any regular municipal election in any of the following cities: Manchester, Nashua,
Portsmouth, Laconia, Somersworth or Berlin, if a majority of the governing body of such city so
votes, or if ten percent of the registered voters file a petition so requesting, the following special
question shall be presented to the voters at said election:
“Shall the city of ____________________ authorize the mayor and
city council (or the mayor and board of aldermen, as the case may be)
to appoint a police commission instead of having the governor and
governor’s council appoint the commission?”
Yes No
56 Source: 1891, ch. 208; 1913, ch. 148:7; 1917, ch. 323:1.
57 Source: 1891; ch. 208.
58 Source: 1891; ch. 208; 1913, ch. 429:56.
59 Source: 1891; ch. 208; 1913, ch. 148.4, 5.
60 Source: 1963, ch. 275:3.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
xlii
November 1, 2018
If a majority of those voting on the question vote in the affirmative, the provisions of Laws 1913,
chapter 148 relating to such city shall, effective January one next succeeding the date on which
said vote was taken, be of no further force and effect with respect to said city except as provided
in section 7 of this chapter [A-145], and the provisions of sections 4 through 7, inclusive, of this
chapter [A-142 to A-145] shall thereafter apply in such city.
§ A-142. Appointment of commissioners61
The mayor and city council of the respective cities shall appoint for the respective city a
police commission consisting of three members. The term of office of each such commissioner
shall be for three years and until his successor is duly appointed and qualified. Said
commissioners shall have been residents of the city where appointed and qualified. Said
commissioners shall have been residents of the city where appointed at least five years
immediately preceding the date of their appointment. Not more than two of each of said
commissioners for a respective city shall be of the same political party. Any vacancy in said
board shall be filled for the unexpired term. The mayor and council of the respective city shall
have full power to remove any commissioner at any time.
§ A-143. Duties; powers62
It shall be the duty of said police commissioners to appoint such police officers,
constables and superior officers, as they may in their judgment deem necessary; and to fix their
compensation. The police commissioners shall have authority to remove any officer at any time
for just cause and after due hearing, which cause shall be specified in the order of removal. Said
commissioners shall have full authority to make and enforce all rules and regulations for the
government of the police force.
§ A-144. Compensation63
The compensation of the police commissioners shall be fixed by the respective city
councils.
§ A-145. Present incumbents64
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 4 [A-142 of this chapter] any person holding
office as a commissioner under appointment of the governor and council under the authority of
Laws 1913, chapter 148, at the date of the passage of this act [chapter] shall continue in office as
such commissioner until the expiration of his said term of office.
§ A-146. Police commissions65
Laws 1913, chapter 148, relative to appointment of police commissions in certain cities
by the governor and council, will be of no further force and effect with respect to any city named
in section 3 [A-141 of this chapter] if a referendum in said city is adopted.
61 Source: 1963, ch. 275.4.
62 Source: 1963, ch. 275.5.
63 Source: 1963, ch. 275.6.
64 Source: 1963, ch. 275.7.
65 Source: 1963, ch. 275.8.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
xliii
November 1, 2018
CHAPTER 3. CEMETERIES
SUBCHAPTER 1. EDGEWOOD CEMETERY
§ A-251. Trustees; meetings; vacancies66
Joseph W. Howard, Harry S. Norwell, William H. D. Cochrane, Ira F. Harris, William T.
Spear, Henry H. Davis, John D. Chandler, Charles W. Hoitt, Elmer W. Eaton, Charles E.
Cummings are hereby appointed and constituted a board of trustees, who shall have the sole care,
superintendence, and management of the property, expenditures, business, prudential affairs, and
sale of lots in the cemetery located between Amherst, Cushing, and Forest streets in the city of
Nashua, together with any and all additions thereto, two members of which board shall retire
from office each year, and two members shall be elected by ballot, annually, in the month of
March, by the board of mayor and aldermen of said city, in convention with said board of
trustees, by major vote, to hold their office for five ears, retiring trustees having no vote therein,
the first of which elections shall take place in March, 1894; and the term for which the members
herein appointed shall hold their office shall be determined by lot, two to hold their office for five
years, two for four years, two for three years, two for two years, and two for one year. The mayor
of said city shall be ex-officio a member of said board. Said trustees shall receive no
compensation for their services as such. No person shall be eligible as such trustee who is not a
resident and taxpayer in said city and a lot owner in said cemetery. Said board shall meet
annually on the first Monday in April for organization, and shall elect a chairman and secretary
from their own number and six members shall constitute a quorum for the exercise of the powers
and the performance of the duties of said board. Any vacancy occurring in said board, by death,
removal, resignation, or otherwise, shall be filled by said board of mayor and aldermen in
convention with said board of trustees for the remainder of the term.
§A-252. Powers and duties67
The said board of trustees shall set apart and lay out a portion of said cemetery, not
exceeding one tenth of its area, as a public burial-place for the use of the inhabitants of said
Nashua, free of any charge therefore, and they shall lay out the balance of said cemetery in
suitable lots or other subdivisions for family or other burying-places, with all the necessary paths,
avenues and drives, and may plant and embellish the same with trees, shrubs, flowers, and other
ornaments, and may enclose the same with proper and suitable fences or hedges, and erect or
annex thereto such suitable edifices, appendages, and conveniences as they from time to time
deem expedient; and said board shall have the same power and authority as cities and towns now
or hereafter may have in such premises, to acquire, by purchase or otherwise, land adjoining said
cemetery, to be used in connection therewith for the same purposes; and said board may make all
necessary by-laws, rules, and regulations in the execution of their trust, not inconsistent with this
act [charter] or the laws of this state, as they shall deem expedient; and said board of trustees shall
hold said property and estate for the same uses and purposes, and charged with the same duties
and liabilities for and subject to which the same are now held by the city councils of the said City
of Nashua; and all rights of ownership of lots which any person or persons have acquired in said
cemetery shall remain to the same extent as if this act [charter] had not been passed.
66 Source: 1893, ch. 243.
67 Source: 1893, ch. 243.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
xliv
November 1, 2018
§ A-253. Authority to convey rights and privileges68
The said board of trustees shall have authority to grant and convey to any person or
persons, by deeds duly executed, the sole and exclusive right of burial, and of erecting tombs,
cenotaphs, tablets, and other monuments, in any of the designated lots or subdivisions of said
cemetery, upon such terms and conditions as they by their rules and regulations shall prescribe.
§ A-254 Money how disposed69
The proceeds of sales of lots or rights of burial, appropriations by the city councils, or
other moneys, except as hereinafter provided, received for said cemetery, shall be paid into the
city treasury to be kept separate from any other funds of the city and subject to the order of said
trustees, and shall be devoted to the care, improvement, embellishment, and enlargement of said
cemetery under the direction of said trustees.
§ A-255. May receive bequests, etc.70
The said board of trustees are authorized to take and hold any grant, donation, or bequest
of property, upon trust, to apply the same, or the income thereof, for the improvement or
embellishment of said cemetery, or for the erection, repair, preservation, or renewal of any
monument or other erection, or for the planting and cultivation of trees, shrubs, or plants in or
around any lot, or for improving the said premises in any other manner or form consistent with
the purposes for which said cemetery is established, according to the terms of such grant,
donation, or bequest; and whenever any such grant, donation, or bequest, or any deposit, shall be
made by the owner of any lot in said cemetery, for the annual repair, preservation, or
embellishment of such lot and the erection thereon, the said trustees may give to such owner, or
his or her representative, an agreement or obligation, in such form and upon such terms and
conditions as they may establish, binding themselves and their successors to preserve and keep in
repair said lot forever, or for such period as may be agreed on; and any legacy, bequest, donation,
grant, or deposit heretofore made to said city for like purposes in said cemetery, and now in force,
shall be placed under the control of said board of trustees. The board of trustees, as constituted
under said act [chapter], are hereby authorized and empowered to establish and create a perpetual
care fund additional to that authorized by the original act, by setting aside such sum or sums as
said board may deem best and to take, receive and place therein any donation, legacy or bequest
specifically made therefore and which shall be known as the fund for the perpetual care of the
paths, walks, drives and avenues of said cemetery, as well as for the fences enclosing the grounds
thereof; that such fund created as aforesaid shall be invested, treated, considered, and held and the
liability of the City of Nashua shall be the same as other perpetual care funds, as set forth in the
original act; that the interest or income only of such fund shall be used and applied by said board
of trustees for the construction, care and maintenance of such paths, walks, drives, avenues and
fences of such cemetery.
§ A-256. Disposal of gifts, etc.71
Any sums of money so received by said trustees shall be invested by the city treasurer of
Nashua, under the direction of said trustees, in savings banks, or in any securities in which
savings banks are authorized to invest, and all such property received under the provisions of the
foregoing section, unless other provision is made by the terms of any such grant, donation, or
bequest, shall be invested under the charge of said city treasurer, but shall always remain separate
from and independent of any other moneys or property belonging to said city of Nashua and free
68 Source: 1893, ch. 243.
69 Source: 1893, ch. 243.
70 Source: 1893, ch. 243.
71 Source: 1893, ch. 243.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
xlv
November 1, 2018
from all control of the city council; and the income of such fund or funds shall be received by
said treasurer, subject to the order of said trustees, and shall be appropriated by them in such
manner as shall in their opinion best promote the purposes for which said grants, donations,
bequests, or deposits are made.
§ A-257. City responsible for trustees72
The City of Nashua shall be responsible for the good faith of said trustees and the
treasurer of said city in the execution of any trust which they may assume pursuant to the
foregoing provisions; but said trustees shall not be liable to make any renewal or reconstruction
of any monument or other erection, on any lot in said cemetery, unless such liability shall be
expressed in the agreement given them as aforesaid, or in the terms and conditions under which
they accept any grant, donation, or bequest.
§ A-258. Trustees to report73
Said board of trustees shall annually, in the month of December, make a detailed report in
writing to the city councils of their acts and proceedings and of the condition of the cemetery, and
an account of the receipts and expenditures for the same, and funds subject to their order.
§ A-259. Name74
The said cemetery shall hereafter be called and known as The Edgewood Cemetery.
SUBCHAPTER 2. WOODLAWN CEMETERY
§ A-291. Trustees; meetings; vacancies75
Albert Shedd, Charles H. Burke, George F. Hammond, George Phelps, Charles S.
Collins, Fred C. Anderson, Frank C. Kellogg, Daniel F. Funnell, Henry P. Whitney, and Charles
W. Stevens are hereby appointed and constituted a board of trustees, who shall have the sole care,
superintendence, and management of the property, expenditures, business, prudential affairs, and
sale of lots in the cemetery located between Hollis and Kinsley streets in the city of Nashua,
together with any and all additions thereto, two members of which board shall retire from office
each year, and two members shall be elected by ballot, annually in the month of March, by the
board of mayor and aldermen, of said city, in convention with said board of trustees, by major
vote, to hold their office for five years, retiring trustees having no vote therein, the first of which
elections shall take place in March, 1896; and the term for which the members herein appointed
shall hold their office shall be determined by lot, two to hold their office for five years, two for
four years, two for three years, two for two years, and two for one year. The mayor of said city
shall be ex-officio a member of said board. Said trustees shall receive no compensation for their
services as such; no person shall be eligible as such trustee who is not a resident and taxpayer in
said city and a lot owner in said cemetery. Said board shall meet annually on the first Monday of
April, for organization, and shall elect a chairman and secretary from their own number, and six
members shall constitute a quorum for the exercise of the powers and the performance of the
duties of said board. Any vacancy occurring in said board, by death, removal, resignation, or
otherwise, shall be filled by the board of mayor and aldermen in convention with said board of
trustees, for the remainder of the term.
72 Source: 1893, ch. 243.
73 Source: 1893, ch. 243.
74 Source: 1893, ch. 243.
75 Source: 1895, ch. 223.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
xlvi
November 1, 2018
§ A-292. Powers and duties76
The said board of trustees shall set apart and lay out a portion of said cemetery, not
exceeding one tenth of its area, as a public burial-place for the free use of the inhabitants of said
City of Nashua, free of any charge therefor; and they shall lay out the balance of said cemetery in
suitable lots or other subdivisions, for family or other burying-places, with all necessary paths,
avenues, and drives, and may plant and embellish the same with trees, shrubs, flowers and other
rural ornaments, and may enclose the same with proper and suitable fences or hedges, and erect
or annex thereto such suitable edifices, appendages, and conveniences as they from time to time
deem expedient; and said board shall have the same power and authority as cities and towns now
or hereafter may have in such premises, to acquire, by purchase, or otherwise, land adjoining said
cemetery to be used in connection therewith for the same purposes; and said board may make all
necessary by-laws, rules, and regulations in the execution of their trusts not inconsistent with this
act [chapter] or the laws of this state, as they shall deem expedient; and said board of trustees
shall hold said property and estate for the same purposes and charged with the same duties and
liabilities for and subject to which the same are now held by the city councils of said Nashua; and
all rights of ownership of lots which any person or persons have acquired in said cemetery shall
remain to the same extent as if this act [chapter] had not been passed; provided, however, if any
person or persons shall fail or neglect for one year after a written notice to make improvements
upon their lot, said lot shall be forfeited to this corporation.
§ A-293. Authority to convey rights and privileges77
The said board shall have the authority to grant and convey to person or persons, by
deeds duly executed, the sole and exclusive right of burial, and of erecting tombs, cenotaphs,
tablets, and other monuments, in any of the designated lots or subdivisions of said cemetery, upon
such terms and conditions as they by their rules and regulations shall prescribe.
§ A-294. Money how disposed78
The proceeds of sale of lots or rights of burial, appropriations by the city councils, or
other moneys, except as hereinafter provided, received for said cemetery, shall be paid into the
city treasury, to be kept separate from any other funds of the city and subject to the order of said
trustees, and shall be devoted to the care, improvement, embellishment and enlargement of said
cemetery, under the direction of said trustees.
§ A-295. May receive bequests for cemetery improvements79
The said board of trustees are authorized to take and hold any grant, donation, or bequest
of property, upon trust; to apply the same, or income thereof, for the improvement or
embellishment of said cemetery, or for the erection, repair, preservation, or renewal of any
monument or other erection, or for the planting and cultivation of trees, shrubs or plants in or
around any lot, or for improving the said premises in any other manner or form consistent with
the purposes for which said cemetery is established, according to the terms of such grant,
donation, or bequest; and whenever any such grant, donation, or bequest, or any deposit, shall be
made by the owner of any lot in said cemetery, for the annual repair, preservation, or
embellishment of such lot and the erection thereon, the said trustees may give to such owner, or
his or her representatives, an agreement or obligation, in such form and upon such terms and
conditions as they may establish, binding themselves and their successors to preserve and keep in
repair said lot forever, or for such period as may be agreed on; and any legacy, bequest, donation,
76 Source: 1895, ch. 223.
77 Source: 1895, ch. 223.
78 Source: 1895, ch. 223.
79 Source: 1895, ch. 223.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
xlvii
November 1, 2018
grant, or deposit heretofore made to said city for like purposes in said cemetery, and now in force,
shall be placed under the control of said board of trustees.
§ A-296. Disposal of gifts, etc80
Any sums of money so received by said trustees shall be invested by the city treasurer of
Nashua under the direction of said trustees in savings banks, or in any securities in which the
savings banks are authorized to invest; and all such property received under the provisions of the
foregoing section, unless other provision is made by the terms of any such grant, donation or
bequest, shall be invested under the charge of said city treasurer, but shall always remain separate
from and independent of any other moneys or property belonging to the said city of Nashua and
free from all control of the city councils; and the income of such fund or funds shall be received
by said treasurer, subject to the order of said trustees, and shall be appropriated by them in such
manner as shall, in their opinion, best promote the purpose for which said grants, donations,
bequests, or deposits are made.
§ A-297. City responsible for trustees81
The City of Nashua shall be responsible for the good faith of said trustees and the
treasurer of said city in the execution of any trust that they may assume pursuant to the foregoing
provisions; but said trustees shall not be liable to make any renewal of or reconstruct any
monument or other erection on any lot in said cemetery, unless such liability shall be expressed in
the agreement given them as aforesaid, or in terms and conditions under which they accept any
grant, donation, or bequest.
§ A-298. Trustees to report82
Said board of trustees shall annually, in the month of December, make a detailed report in
writing to the city councils of their acts and proceedings, and of the condition of the cemetery,
and on account of the receipts and expenditures of the same and funds subject to their order.
§ A-299. Name83
The said cemetery shall hereafter be called and known as Woodlawn Cemetery.
SUBCHAPTER 3. SUBURBAN CEMETERIES
§ A-331. Trustees; meetings; vacancies84
That Samuel P. Wilson, Willard C. Tolles, Levi W. Goodrich, Charles H. Lund and
Benjamin F. Cotton are hereby appointed and constituted a board of trustees, who shall have the
sole care, superintendence and management of the property, expenditures, business, prudential
affairs, and sale of lots in the cemeteries hereinafter described in the city of Nashua, together with
any and all additions thereto. One member of each (such) board shall be elected by ballot
annually in the month of March by the board of mayor and aldermen of said city, in convention
with said board of trustees by major vote, to hold the office for five years, the retiring trustee
having no vote therein, the first of which elections to take place in March, 1898; and the term for
which the members herein appointed shall hold their office shall be determined by lot; one to hold
his office for five years, one for four years, one for three years, one for two years, and one for one
80 Source: 1895, ch. 223.
81 Source: 1895, ch. 223.
82 Source: 1895, ch. 223.
83 Source: 1895, ch. 223.
84 Source: 1897, ch. 194.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
xlviii
November 1, 2018
year. The mayor of said city shall be, ex-officio, a member of said board. Said trustees shall
receive no compensation for their services as such. No person shall be eligible as such trustee
who is not a resident and taxpayer in said city. Said board shall meet annually on the first
Monday in April for organization, and shall elect a chairman and secretary from their own
number, and three members shall constitute a quorum for the exercise of the powers and the
performance of the duties of said board. Any vacancy occurring in said board by death, removal,
resignation, or otherwise, shall be filled by the board of mayor and aldermen in convention with
said board of trustees, for the remainder of the term.
§ A-332. Lots, etc.; conveyed; forfeited85
The said board shall have the authority to grant and convey to person or persons, by
deeds duly executed, the sole and exclusive right of burial and of erecting tombs, cenotaphs,
tablets and other monuments in any of the designated lots or subdivisions of said cemeteries upon
such terms and conditions as they, by their rules and regulations, shall prescribe; and said board
may make all necessary by-laws, rules, and regulations in the execution of their trust, not
inconsistent with this act [chapter] or repugnant to the laws of this state, as they shall deem
expedient; and said board shall hold said property and estate for the same purposes, and charged
with the same duties and liabilities for and subject to which the same are now held by the city
councils of said Nashua, and all rights of ownership of lots which any person or persons have
acquired in said cemetery shall remain to the same extent as if this act [chapter] had not been
passed. Provided, however, if any person or persons shall fail or neglect for one year after a
written notice to make improvements upon their lot, said lot shall be forfeited to this corporation.
§ A-333. Disposition of funds86
The proceeds of sale of lots or rights of burial, appropriations by the city councils, or
other moneys, except as hereinafter provided, received for said cemeteries, shall be paid into the
city treasury, to be kept separate from any other funds of the city, and subject to the order of said
trustees, and shall be devoted to the care, improvement, embellishment, and enlargement of said
cemeteries under the direction of said trustees. Said board of trustees shall have the same power
and authority as cities and towns now or hereafter my have in such premises, to acquire, by
purchase or otherwise land adjoining said cemeteries, to be used in connection therewith for the
same purposes.
§ A-334. May receive bequests, etc.87
The said board of trustees are authorized to take and hold any grant, donation or bequest
of property upon trust to apply the same, or the income thereof, for the improvement or
embellishment of said cemeteries, or for the erection, repair, preservation, or renewal of any
monument or other erection, or for the planting and cultivation of trees, shrubs, or plants in or
around any lot, or for improving the said premises in any other manner or form consistent with
the purposes for which said cemeteries are established, according to the terms of such grant,
donation, or bequest; and whenever any such grant, donation, or bequest, or any deposit, shall be
made by an owner of a lot in said cemeteries for the annual repair, preservation or embellishment
of such lot and the erection thereupon, the said trustees may give to such owner or his or her
representatives, an agreement or obligation in such form and upon such terms and conditions as
they may establish, binding themselves and their successors to preserve and keep in repair said lot
forever, or for such period as may be agreed on; and any legacy, bequest, donation, grant or
85 Source: 1897, ch. 194.
86 Source: 1897, ch. 194; 1915, ch. 298
87 Source: 1897, ch. 194.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
xlix
November 1, 2018
deposit heretofore made to said city for like purpose in said cemeteries, and now in force, shall be
placed under the control of said board of trustees.
§ A-335. Investment of funds88
Any sums of money so received by said trustees shall be invested by the city treasurer of
Nashua, under the direction of said trustees, in savings banks, or in any securities in which
savings bank are authorized to invest; and all such property received under the provisions of the
foregoing section, unless other provision is made by the terms of any such grant, donation, or
bequest, shall be invested under the charge of said city treasurer, but shall always remain separate
from, and independent of, any other moneys or property belonging to said city of Nashua, and
free from all control of the city councils; and the income of said fund or funds shall be received
by said treasurer, subject to the order of said trustees, and shall be appropriated by them in such
manner as shall, in their opinion, best promote the purposes for which said grants, donations,
bequests, or deposits are made.
§ A-336. City responsible for trustees89
The city of Nashua shall be responsible for the good faith of the said trustees and the
treasurer of said city, in the execution of any trust which they may assure pursuant to the
foregoing provisions; but said trustees shall not be liable to make any renewal of, or reconstruct
any monument or other erection on any lot in said cemeteries, unless such liability shall be
expressed in the agreement given by them as aforesaid, or in the terms and conditions under
which they accept any grant, donation, or bequest.
§ A-337. Reports and accounts90
Said board of trustees shall annually, in the month of December, make a detailed report in
writing to the city councils of their acts and proceedings and of the conditions of the cemeteries,
and an account of the receipts and expenditures of the same and funds subject to their order.
§ A-338. Cemeteries affected91
Said board of trustees shall have charge of the cemetery situated on the west side of the
Lowell road adjoining and northerly of the brick schoolhouse, and bounded on the west by land
of Lund, on the north by land of Thompson, and commonly known as the “Old South Cemetery”;
also the cemetery situated on the west side of the Lowell road, bounded on the south by land of
Hiland A. Holt, on the west by land of Marshall, on the north by land formerly owned by Aaron
F. Stevens, and known as the “Pratt Cemetery”; also the cemetery near the Stillman Swallow
place, and known as the “Gilson’s Road Cemetery”; also the cemetery situated on the easterly
side of Amherst Road, so called, bounded on the north by land of Roby, on the south by land of
Roby and known as the “Roby Cemetery.” Said cemeteries are generally classed and known as
Suburban Cemeteries, and shall thereafter be known and called as Suburban Cemeteries.
88 Source: 1897, ch. 194.
89 Source: 1897, ch. 194.
90 Source: 1897, ch. 194.
91 Source: 1897, ch. 194.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
l
November 1, 2018
CHAPTER 5. FINANCES
SUBCHAPTER 1. MUNICIPAL INDEBTEDNESS
§ A-441. Amount of debt authorized92
Notwithstanding the provisions of RSA 33:4-a, the city of Nashua shall not incur net
indebtedness at any one time outstanding for school purposes to an amount exceeding in the
aggregate 6 percent of its last assessed valuation as computed under RSA 33:4-b and for all other
purposes, to an amount exceeding the aggregate of 2 percent of its last assessed valuation as
computed under RSA 33:4-b, provided, however, that in ascertaining the amount of such debt so
it be compared with said 6 percent and 2 percent, indebtedness lawfully incurred outside of said
debt limit shall not be considered.
§ A-442. City to be single corporation; school district 93
Said city shall constitute a single municipal corporation with powers for municipal and
school purposes, including all the powers of a school district. All provisions of law or of the
charter of said city affecting school districts or schools shall, so far as to inconsistent herewith,
continue to apply to said city.
§ A-442a. (Repealed. 1978, ch. 8:2, eff. June 13, 1978)
See, now, § A-441 of this chapter.
§ A-443. Advances to be reimbursed94
All indebtedness of any governmental subdivision territorially coextensive with said city
hitherto incurred for school purposes, in whatever form or however incurred, and all orders and
votes authorizing the incurring of indebtedness or the issuance of bonds or notes or other
obligations for school purposes by any such subdivision are hereby confirmed, ratified and
validated. The city treasurer is hereby authorized to reimburse the city treasury for any sums
advanced therefrom temporarily to pay any portion of such indebtedness pending the receipts of
process of school bonds or notes which may be issued within said aggregate debt limit.
§ A-444. Debt time limitation for discharge not applicable95
Notwithstanding the provisions of RSA 31:94-d, the city of Nashua may exceed the nineyear
time limitation for the discharge of any debt incurred pursuant to the transition period
resulting from the change of dates of its fiscal year.
92 Source: 1923, ch. 227:1; 1978, ch. 8:1, eff. June 13, 1978.
93 Source: 1923, ch. 227:2.
94 Source: 1923, ch. 227.3.
95 Source: 1971, ch. 447:1.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
li
November 1, 2018
SUBCHAPTER 2. PENSIONS
§ A-481. General retirement system96
The city of Nashua is hereby empowered to create a general retirement system, which all
employees of the city of Nashua, who are not under any other system of retirement, will be
eligible to become members of and receive the benefits therefrom, by complying with the
requirements of said retirement system.
§ A-482. Trustees97
The mayor and board of aldermen under the powers granted in section 1 [section A-481
of this chapter], may create a general retirement system, which shall have the powers, privileges
and immunities of a municipal corporation and shall be given such appropriate title as the mayor
and board of aldermen may designate. All of its business shall be transacted, all of its funds
invested, and all of its cash, securities and other property held in trust, for the purposes for which
received and in the name designated as the title for said retirement system. The mayor and board
of aldermen shall elect a board of trustees, the number of and tenure of office to be determined by
the mayor and board of aldermen, which board of trustees shall have the control of and the duty
of administering the affairs of said general retirement system.
§ A-483. Powers of the board of mayor and aldermen98
For the purpose of this act [chapter], the cit may raise and appropriate money; may accept
money or other property to be held in trust and invested and reinvested under the direction of the
board of trustees, and use the income thereof; may enter into contracts of insurance or annuity
with insurance companies admitted to do business in New Hampshire to effectuate the purposes
of this act [chapter] and pay the premiums of such contracts from moneys coming into its
possession under the terms of this act [chapter].
§ A-484. Amount of benefit99
No retirement benefit shall be granted for a sum greater than one-half of the maximum
annual salary which the employee received while in the service of the city.
§ A-485 Interpretation100
Said city in adopting a retirement system shall consider the same free from the discharge
of any existing legal or contractual liability to said employees, and past services rendered by
employees shall only be considered as a means of qualification for retirement benefits.
96 Source: 1943, ch. 292:1.
Cross references—Board of Public Works Retirement System, § 2-601 et seq.; city employees, retirement
system, § 2-601 et seq.; teachers’ retirement system, § 2-661 et seq.
State law references—Firemen’s retirement system, RSA ch. 102; policemen’s retirement system, RSA ch.
103, Acts 1973, Ch. 444:1, 2: state employees’ retirement system, RSA ch. 100; teachers’ retirement system, RSA ch.
100-A:35, 36; transfer of Nashua policemen to state retirement system, Acts 1977, Ch. 484; 2, 4 and 5, noted following
§ 2-216 of this Code.
97 Source: 1943, ch. 292:2.
98 Source. 1943, ch. 292:3.
99 Source. 1943, ch. 292:4.
100 Source. 1943, ch. 292:5.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
lii
November 1, 2018
§ A-486. Exemption from attachment101
The retirement benefits to be received by said employees as may hereunder be provided
by said city shall be exempt from attachment and the operation of laws relating to insolvency or
bankruptcy.
§ A-487. Separability102
If any provisions hereof shall be declared unconstitutional, the remaining provisions
hereof shall not be reason thereof be invalid.
§ A-488. City of Nashua, pension plan103
The retirement system now in effect shall be integrated with the old age and survivors’
insurance system so that for all employees or city officials eligible for pension and with less than
twenty-five years’ service, the social security benefits will be offset against the benefits payable
under the city retirement system; that for all employees or city officials eligible for pension with
twenty-five years or more service and less than thirty years’ service, one-half of the social
security benefits will be offset against the benefits payable under the city retirement system; that
for all employees or city officials eligible for pension with thirty years’ service or more, the social
security benefits will not be offset against the benefits payable under the city retirement system.
Provided that no city employee or official will be eligible for a retirement pension until said
employee or official has reached the age of sixty or has completed thirty years of service for the
city, except that the sixty-year age limitation or the thirty years of service limitation or the thirty
years of service limitation will not apply to employees or officials who have completed twenty
years of service with the city on or before July 1, 1963.
CHAPTER 7. FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ A-591. Fire department104
The fire department of the city of Nashua shall consist of a board of five fire
commissioners, and such officers and other members as the board of fire commissioners appoint
within the limits of the funds appropriated for that purpose by the mayor and board of aldermen.
§ A-592. Other offices prohibited105
No member of said board shall hold any other municipal office.
§ A-593. Organization; duties; powers106
The said board shall organize annually in the month of January by the choice of one of
their members as chairman. They shall also choose a clerk, who may be clerk of the board of
engineers, and they shall make such rules and regulations for their own government and for the
government of all other officers and members of the fire department, also all buildings and
apparatus and horses now used for the transportation of apparatus in case of fire (and the said
horses so used are hereby transferred to the fire department) as they may deem expedient. The
board of fire commissioners shall also have the sole power to select and purchase land for the
101 Source. 1943, ch. 292:6.
102 Source. 1943, ch. 292:7.
103 Source. 1933, ch. 437:1.
104 Source. 1891, ch. 153; 1917, ch. 353.
Cross reference—Fire commissioners, charter § 73.
Nov. 4, 1975, Referendum, Proposal No. 5.
105 Source. 1891, ch. 153; 1913, ch. 427:73, 87, 89.
106 Source. 1891, ch. 153; 1917, ch. 342.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
liii
November 1, 2018
purpose of the fire department; and when said board has secured by vote of the board of aldermen
an adequate appropriation for the purchase of a specified lot at a specified price, then said board
may purchase the same. The said board and the land and buildings committee of the board of
aldermen, jointly, shall direct the construction of all buildings erected, altered, remodeled or
changed, for the use of the fire department; and no building shall be erected, altered, remodeled
or changed, unless the plans thereof have been previously submitted to the board of fire
commissioners and approved by it. Upon the completion of any such building or after the
selection and purchase of land, the board of fire commissioners shall have full and complete care
and control of the same; and whenever such land and buildings shall no longer be used for the
purposes of the department, the care and control thereof shall revert to the city. For their services
the fire commissioners shall receive such compensation as the city councils may from time to
time determine.
§ A-594. Tenure of appointments107
The board of engineers, the janitor, and all permanent men shall be appointed by said
board to serve during good behavior, and so long as they are competent to discharge the duties of
their respective positions.
§ A-595. Salaries108
Are to be determined by the board of aldermen upon recommendation of the department.
§ A-596. Powers of engineers109
The board of engineers shall have all powers possessed by fire-wards in the
extinguishment of fires.
CHAPTER 9. ORGANIZATIONS AND INSTITUTIONS
SUBCHAPTER 1. GRAND ARMY HALL
§ A-701. Purposes110
The city of Nashua is authorized and empowered to acquire by deed of gift, with such
conditions as to when the same shall take effect as may be mutually agreed upon between the
grantor and grantee, for the John G. Foster Post 7, G. A.R., the building and estate known as the
Grand Army Hall, located in Nashua, with such photographs, pictures or other persona property
as may be therein and belonging to the grantor and to hold the same in trust, upon the death of all
but one member of said John G. Foster Post 7, for the purpose of maintaining said Grand Army
Hall as a community building for the use of patriotic organizations located in Nashua; and to
make appropriations therefore from time to time; the entire control and management thereof to be
then vested in a board of trustees comprising the mayor of the city, one alderman elected
annually, and one member from each of the following organizations: J.Q.A. Warren, No. 18, Sons
of Veterans, Woman’s Relief Corps, Daughters of Veterans, Spanish War Veterans, Veterans of
Foreign Wars, and the American Legion; with such other stipulations in said deed as may be
mutually satisfactory to grantor and grantee, in addition to or varying the foregoing, if not
contrary to law.
107 Source. 1891, ch. 153
108 Source. 1941, ch. 278
109 Source. 1891, ch. 153.
110 Source. 1927, ch. 219.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
liv
November 1, 2018
SUBCHAPTER 2. JOHN F. STARK SOMESTEAD
§ A-731. To take title; appropriations111
Whereas, the Stark Improvement Corporation has acquired ownership of the homestead
of the late John F. Stark of Nashua, New Hampshire, a great grandson of General John Stark,
consisting of a large tract of land with the buildings thereon situated at the junction of Concord
and Manchester streets in said Nashua, and whereas said corporation voted January 15, 1927, to
offer and later offered to said city of Nashua, a gift of said real estate in fee simple to said city as
soon as the title can be conveniently made clear and free, with the purpose and upon the condition
that the city accept and receive title to this property and devote it to historical, educational and
charitable purposes; and whereas said city, by its board of aldermen on February 8, 1927, voted to
accept said gift for the foregoing purposes; now therefore, the city of Nashua is authorized and
empowered to acquire by deed of gift as aforesaid from the Stark Improvement Corporation the
land and buildings known as the John F. Stark homestead, located in said Nashua, and to hold,
maintain and care for the same for historical, educational and charitable purposes and to make
appropriations therefore from time to time.
§ A-732. Board of trustees112
The control and management thereof shall be vested in a board of seven trustees,
comprising the mayor of the city and five citizens and one alderman to be appointed by the mayor
with the consent of the board of aldermen; the mayor and the president of the board of aldermen
and their successors to hold office during their municipal terms, and the other five trustees to hold
their offices as follows: two for six years, two for four years, and one for two years respectively,
from the date of their appointment. Upon the passage of this act [chapter] the board of aldermen,
upon nominations submitted by the mayor, shall choose five trustees for the terms and purposes
aforesaid; and thereafter, upon the expiration of each of said terms, the mayor with the consent of
the board of aldermen shall appoint a trustee or trustees, according to the vacancies to be filled,
each for the term of six years next ensuing and until his successor shall have been chosen and
qualified. Any vacancy in the office of an appointed trustee, arising from any caused other than
his expiration of office, shall be filled by appointment of the mayor with the consent of the board
of aldermen, but only for the unexpired term of the trustee whose place is thus filled.
§ A-733. Compensation113
The said trustees shall receive no compensation for their services.
SUBCHAPTER 3. NASHUA HISTORICAL SOCIETY
§ A-741. Exemption from taxation114
All property, real and personal, of the Nashua Historical Society shall be exempted from
taxation so far as same is and shall be devoted to and used and occupied for educational,
entertainment and historical purposes of said association and not for profit or gain.
§ A-742. Repeal limitation of property115
Laws of 1885, 180, 2 limiting the amount of real and personal property that may be held
by the Nashua Historical Society is hereby repealed.
111 Source. 1924, ch. 227.
112 Source: 1924, ch. 227.
113 Source: 1924, ch. 227.
114 Source: 1972, ch. 40:1.
115 Source: 1972, ch. 40:2.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
lv
November 1, 2018
CHAPTER 11. PUBLIC LIBRARY
§ A-831. Board created116
A board of trustees of the public library of Nashua, to consist of nine persons, is hereby
established, which shall have full control of the public library department.
§ A-832. Personnel of board; vacancies117
The mayor of said city shall be president, ex-officio, of said board of trustees and the
president of the board of aldermen shall be one, and Elbert Wheeler, Thomas A. McCarthy,
Henry A. Cutter, Oliver P. Hussey, William H. Beason, Ira F. Harris, and Frank A. Dearborn, are
hereby appointed and constituted the remaining members of said board, to hold their offices, one,
two, three, four, five, six and seven years, respectively, from the first day of May last; and
hereafter at the commencement of each municipal year of the board of aldermen of said city in
convention with said board of trustees by joint ballot, shall elect one person to be a trustee of the
public library for the term of seven years form May 1st, next ensuing, and until his successor shall
have been chosen and qualified in his stead. Whenever a vacancy occurs in said board by the
expiration of any of said terms, or by the expiration of the term of any trustee hereafter elected, it
shall be filled on the joint ballot of the said board of trustees and the board of aldermen, and shall
be for the term of seven years. Any vacancy from any other cause shall be filled in the same
manner, but only for the unexpired term of the trustee whose place is thus filled.
§ A-833. Powers and duties118
Said board of trustees shall have the sole care, superintendence, and management of the
property, expenditures, business and prudential affairs of said public library department and of all
property of the city relating thereto; and may employ librarians and such assistants as they shall
deem necessary and establish their compensation. Said board shall also have the same power and
authority as cities and towns now or hereafter may have, to acquire by purchase, lease or
otherwise, for and in the name of the city, land and buildings or rooms, to be used in connection
with and for the purpose of the public library department, whenever the funds at their disposal
will so allow. Said board may also sell and dispose of for the benefit of said public library
department, all grants, gifts, devises and bequests, as may be made to it or to the city for the
purpose of increasing or improving the public library department.
§ A-834. Authority to hold property119
Said board of trustees are authorized to take and hold any grant, gift, bequest or devise, of
property upon trust, to apply the principal or the income thereof for the establishment or
improvement of the public library department, or for the erection of buildings or repair of the
same, or for the embellishment or improvement of the premises in connection therewith. The
application or expenditure of said moneys and grants, and the establishment, improvement,
erection, repair and embellishment, of said buildings and premises shall be made under the sole
supervision, direction and control of said board, who shall make all necessary contracts in
connection with the same, for and in the name of the city, in accordance with their best judgment
and in any manner or form that will promote the purposes for which the public library department
is established: all, however, in any event, to be in accordance with the terms of such grant, gift,
116 Source: 1917, ch. 306.
117 Source: 1917, ch. 306; 1965, ch. 440.
118 Source: 1917, ch. 306.
119 Source: 1917, ch. 306.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
lvi
November 1, 2018
bequest or devise. Also all moneys or property that the said city may receive by gift from any
source or by grant, bequest or devise, in behalf of said public library department, and any gift,
grant, bequest or devise, heretofore made to said city for the benefit of the library or library
department and now in force, shall be placed in the care and control of said board of trustees, to
be expended or retained by them for and in behalf of the city for the support and maintenance of
said public library and the public library department in accordance with the conditions of each or
any gift, grant, bequest or devise, accepted by the city; and if there are no conditions attaching to
such gift, grant, bequest or devise, then the same is to be retained or expended as in the judgment
of the trustees will most effectively promote the purposes of the public library department. Said
board of trustees shall hold all of said property and estate for the same uses and purposes and
charged with the same duties and liabilities for and subject to which the same may now be held
by the board of aldermen of said city of Nashua.
§ A-835. Investment of funds120
Any sums of money so received by said trustees, so long as the same remain unexpended,
shall be invested by the city treasurer, under the direction of said trustees, in savings banks, or in
any securities in which savings banks are authorized by law to invest, unless other provision is
made by the terms of any such gift, grant, bequest or devise, and shall be under the charge of the
city treasurer but shall always remain separate from and independent of any other moneys or
property belonging to said city of Nashua and free from all control of the board of aldermen. The
income of such fund or funds shall be received by said treasurer, subject to the order of said
trustees, and shall be appropriated and expended by them in accordance with the terms of said
grant, gift, bequest or devise; and in the absence of such terms, then in such manner as shall in
their opinion best promote the purposes for which the same are given, granted, bequeathed or
devised. In like manner, any appropriation made by said city shall be received by said trustees
and held by the city treasurer subject to the order of said trustees.
§ A-836. City responsible for trustees121
The city of Nashua shall be responsible for the good faith of said trustees and the
treasurer of said city in the execution of any trust which they may assume pursuant to the
foregoing provisions; and the city treasurer’s bond shall be such as to cover among other things
the faithful performance of his duty in connection herewith.
§ A-837. May make rules and regulations122
The said board of trustees shall make and execute all such rules and regulations for its
government, the preservation of property under its charge, and the use and management thereof,
as they may from time to time deem necessary or expedient.
§ A-838. Annual appropriations; budget123
There shall be annually appropriated by the city and made subject to the order of the
trustees of the library a sum of money sufficient to maintain the library for one year, including
salaries, heating, lighting and ordinary maintenance and repairs. There shall also be made an
annual appropriation for the purchase and repair of books, and subscriptions for newspapers and
periodicals and, as occasion demands, such additional appropriations may be made as, in the
judgment of the board of aldermen shall be desirable for procuring suitable additions and
conveniences and the establishment of reading rooms or branch libraries and other utilities
120 Source: 1917, ch. 306.
121 Source: 1917, ch. 306.
122 Source: 1917, ch. 306.
123 Source: 1917, ch. 306.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
lvii
November 1, 2018
pertaining to library work. Said trustees shall have the sole expenditure of all moneys so raised
and appropriated. For the purpose of the appropriations aforesaid the trustees shall annually, not
later than February 1st, submit to the mayor and to the board of aldermen, one copy to each, a
detailed estimate in writing of the appropriations required for that year under the heads above
designated.
§ A-839. Records; reports124
The said trustees shall organize annually by the choice of a secretary from their own
number and shall keep a record of their proceedings. They shall make report annually to the
board of aldermen of all their receipts and expenditures, and of all the property of the city in their
care and control, including a statement of any unexpended balance of money they may have, and
of grants, gifts, bequests or devises they may have received and are holding in behalf of the city,
with such recommendations in reference to the same as they may deem necessary for the board of
aldermen to consider.
§ A-840. Extension authorized125
Said trustees are authorized to establish and maintain in connection with said library
department, reference and circulating libraries, reading-rooms, collections of arts and antiquities,
and museums, whenever in their judgment the funds at their disposal shall make the same
practicable.
§ A-841. Compensation126
The said trustees other than the secretary shall receive no compensation for their service;
the pay of the secretary to be fixed by the board of trustees.
CHAPTER 13. LAND
SUBCHAPTER 1. PRIVATE LAND DEVELOPMENT
§ A-941. Approval of plans127
Any person, firm or corporation proposing to cut up into lots any tract of land in the city
of Nashua for the purpose of selling the same, either publicly or privately, shall before such sale
prepare and submit a plan of said tract of land to the city engineer of the city of Nashua. Such
plan shall plainly show the number, size, and location of lots, the location and width of all
proposed highways, and the location of the tract of land with reference to an existing public
highway, and such plan shall also show present and proposed elevations at fifty-foot stations
along the center lines of all proposed highways. The location of said tract of land shall also be
plainly marked on the ground by suitable stakes. If the plan shall meet with the approval of the
said city engineer, it shall be his duty to plainly mark the plan “Approved,” so that intending
purchasers shall have knowledge of the said approval. In case the city engineer shall disapprove
of the proposed plan, he shall mark said plan “Disapproved” and file a statement of the reasons of
such disapproval with the city clerk for the use of the board of aldermen of the said city, and shall
transmit a like statement to the owner of the land. In such case the owner shall submit a new plan
in accordance with the requirements of the city engineer, as thus set forth, which he shall marked
“Approved” as hereinbefore provided.
124 Source: 1917, ch. 306.
125 Source: 1917, ch. 306.
126 Source: 1917, ch. 306.
127 Source: 1921, ch. 227:1.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
lviii
November 1, 2018
§ A-942. Proposed highway lay-out128
No such highway shall be laid out by the board of aldermen of the said city of Nashua
until such plan has been submitted to said city engineer and approved by him as provided in
section 12 [A-941 of this chapter]; but it shall not be obligatory upon said board of aldermen to
lay out any proposed highway because of the approval of any such plan by the said city engineer.
§ A-943. Appeal from refusal to lay-out129
In case the board of aldermen refuse to accept and lay out any such highway, appeal may
be taken to the superior court in the same manner as is now provided by law in the laying out of
highways.
SUBCHAPTER 2. SUBDIVISON OF LAND
§ A-971. City of Nashua; subdivision of land130
Before exercising the powers provided by RSA 36:19 the planning board of the city of
Nashua shall adopt regulations governing the subdivisions of land within its jurisdiction as set
forth in RSA 36:21 provided, however, that no such regulations shall be adopted until after public
hearing thereon and said regulations shall not become effective until they have been approved by
the mayor and aldermen of said city. Said regulations may be amended by the planning board but
only after a public hearing and approval thereof by the mayor and aldermen.
SUBCHAPTER 3. LAND ACQUISITION
§ A-1001. Early land acquisition131
Notwithstanding any contrary provision of [RSA] chapter 205, as amended, the Nashua
Housing Authority may, with the consent of the city of Nashua, acting by the mayor with the
authorization of the board of aldermen, and after a temporary loan contract for the purpose has
been executed under the federal housing act of 1949, as amended, take, by eminent domain as set
forth in RSA chapter 203:12, or acquire by purchase, lease, gift, bequest or grant, and hold, clear,
repair, operate, and after having taken or acquired the same, dispose of, land constituting the
whole or any part or parts of any area which, after a public hearing of which at least twenty days’
notice has been given by publication in a local or area newspaper having a general circulation in
the city of Nashua, it has determined to be an area necessary for its purposes under RSA 205, as
amended, and for which it is preparing a redevelopment plan or an urban renewal plan, and for
such purposes may borrow money from the federal government or use any available funds, or
both; provided, however, that no such taking or acquisition shall be effected unless and until the
expiration of thirty days after the Nashua Housing Authority has caused a notice of such
determination to be published in a local or area newspaper having a general circulation in the city
of Nashua. Within thirty days after publication of the notice of such determination, any person
aggrieved by such determination may file a petition in the superior court for a writ of certiorari
against the Nashua Housing Authority to correct errors of law in such determination, which shall
be the exclusive remedy for such purpose.
128 Source: 1921, ch. 227:2.
129 Source: 1921, ch. 227:3.
Revision—The 1950 revision of Nashua ordinances, in the chapter relating to public works, set forth Laws 1921,
227:1—3, which provided that the plans for lots and highways proposed to be laid out from undivided lands first be
approved by the city engineer and board of aldermen, with right of owner to appeal adverse decision to superior court.
That act is not included in this Subpart, as Ordinance approved July 12, 1965, excluded sections one and two thereof,
and section 3, relating to appeals, would have no foundation. The subject matter of the said 1921 act is now covered by
Laws 1965, ch. 454, which is set forth in this Subpart.
130 Source: 1965, ch. 454:1.
131 Source: 1963, ch. 450:1.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
lix
November 1, 2018
§ A-1002. Guarantee by city in early land acquisition132
If the Nashua Housing Authority proposes to take, acquire or clear land constituting the
whole or part or parts of an area which the authority has determined to be an area necessary for its
purposes under RSA 205, as amended, and for which the authority is preparing a redevelopment
plan, or an urban renewal plan, the city of Nashua may enter into an agreement with the Nashua
Housing Authority to bear any loss that may arise as the result of such taking, acquisition, or
clearance in the event that such land is not used for redevelopment or urban renewal.
§ A-1003. Early land acquisition in urban renewal area for low income housing133
Notwithstanding any contrary provision herein contained, the Nashua Housing Authority
may acquire by eminent domain under RSA 203:12 or by purchase or otherwise under RSA 203:8
any lands within a redevelopment area or an urban renewal area which the Nashua Housing
Authority requires for a housing project for persons of low income, upon approval of the
redevelopment plan or urban renewal plan as required by section 1 and section 2 of this act [A-
1001 and A-1002 of this chapter]. The area of the housing project for persons of low income is to
be considered part of the redevelopment area or urban renewal area as the case may be, which
plan shall provide for the reimbursement of the Nashua Housing Authority for any excess in its
use value as provided under RSA 205:5 without any conditions. The Nashua Housing Authority
and the city of Nashua are authorized to make guarantees as required by the Public Housing
Administration.
CHAPTER 15. AIRPORTS AND AVIATION
§ A-1201. Declaration of need and purposes134
It is declared that there is a need for the development of air navigation facilities for the
betterment and improvement of air transportation services required in the public interest. It is the
purpose of this act [chapter] to create an instrumentality empowered to acquire, own, maintain
and operate airports and other air navigation facilities, to broaden the base upon which to support
the operation of existing and future facilities and the financing of extensive and costly
improvements and developments required to keep pace with the demand for fast, reliable and
economical air transportation services. It is further declared that the purposes of this act [chapter]
are public and that the airport authority, created hereunder, shall be regarded as performing a
governmental function in the carrying out of the provisions of this act [chapter].
§ A-1202. Definitions135
As used in this act [chapter] the following words and terms shall have the following
meanings:
I. The word “authority” shall mean the Nashua Airport Authority.
II. The word “board” shall mean the board of directors of said authority.
III. The work “project” shall be deemed to include all property, rights, easements,
and franchises relating thereto and deemed necessary or convenient for its
operation, and shall embrace all means of accomplishing the purposes set forth in
section 1 [A-1201 of this chapter] including the development of non-aviation
revenue.
132 Source: 1963, ch. 450:2.
133 Source: 1963, ch. 450:3.
134 Source: 1961, ch. 343:1.
135 Source: 1961, ch. 343:2.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
lx
November 1, 2018
IV. The words “cost of project” shall embrace the cost of construction, development,
improvement, the cost of all lands, property, rights, easements, and franchises
acquired, which are deemed necessary for such construction, development and
improvement, the cost of all machinery and equipment, financing charges,
interest prior to and during construction, development and improvement, cost of
engineering and legal expense, plans, specifications, surveys, estimates of costs,
and other expenses necessary or incident to determining the feasibility or
practicability of any project, the proportionate administrative expense properly
allocable to such project as determined by the board, together with such other
expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing herein authorized and
the construction, development and improvement of the project and the placing of
the same in operation. Airport and air navigation facility shall have the meaning
of the work and term as defined in RSA 422:3.
§ A-1203. Authority created136
There is hereby created the Nashua Airport Authority which shall be a body corporate
and politic having the powers and jurisdiction hereinafter enumerated and such other and
additional powers as shall be conferred upon it by the legislature.
§ A-1204. Management137
The management of said corporation shall be vested in a board of five directors, to be
appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the board of aldermen, one of whom shall be
designated as chairman. Not more than three of such members shall be of the same political
party. One member shall be appointed originally for five years, a second for four years, a third
for three years, a fourth for two years and a fifth for one year. Thereafter each appointment shall
be for five years and a member shall serve until his successor shall have been appointed. All
members shall serve without salary but they may be reimbursed for expenses incurred in the
performance of their duties. The mayor and board of aldermen may at any time remove a director
for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office; but no director shall be removed
without a hearing, after notice in writing of the charges against him.
§ A-1205. General powers138
The Nashua airport authority shall be a corporation in the state of New Hampshire and
shall have the power:
1) To sue and be sued;
2) To have a seal and alter the same at pleasure;
3) To adopt form time to time and amend bylaws covering its procedure, rules and
regulations governing use of non-federal air navigation facilities and any other services
made available in connection therewith, to publish the same, if such publication is
necessary or advisable and to cause records of its proceedings to be kept;
4) To own, construct, maintain, reconstruct, develop and operate airports or other air
navigation facilities and may do so jointly with the United States, State of New
Hampshire, other states or with cities and towns of the state;
5) To extend, enlarge, improve, rehabilitate, lease as lessor or as lessee, maintain, repair,
and operate all projects under its control;
6) To acquire, hold and dispose of personal property for its purposes;
136 Source: 1961, ch. 343:3.
137 Source: 1961, ch. 343:4.
138 Source: 1961, ch. 343:5; 1963, ch. 434.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
lxi
November 1, 2018
7) To acquire in the name of the authority by purchase, condemnation lease or otherwise,
any real property and rights or easements therein, deemed by it necessary or desirable for
its purposes, and to use such property as it may deem necessary;
8) To acquire real property by the exercise of the powers of condemnation in the manner
provided by law by which towns and cities, or the governor and council are authorized to
acquire real property for public purposes;
9) To sell or lease plots of land and to charge and collect fees for services made available in
connection with a non-federal air navigation facility or in the development of nonaviation
revenue;
10) To make contracts with the United States, the state of New Hampshire, public and private
corporations and individuals;
11) To accept grants and the co-operation of the United States or any agency thereof in the
construction, maintenance, reconstruction, operation and financing of airports and other
air navigation facilities and to do any and all things necessary in order to avail itself of
such aid and cooperation;
12) To employ such assistants, agents and servants as it shall deem necessary desirable for its
purposes;
13) To borrow money, make and issue negotiable notes, bonds, and other evidences of
indebtedness or obligations of the authority to secure payment of such obligations or any
part thereof by pledge of any part of the, or the entire, revenue of the authority;
14) To do all other lawful things necessary and incidental to the foregoing powers;
15) To certify annually to the mayor and board of aldermen the amount of tax recommended
to be levied for airport purposes, not to exceed one mill on the dollar upon the assessed
valuation of the taxable property in the city and the mayor and board of aldermen may
levy and collect the taxes so certified at the same time and in the same manner as other
city taxes are levied and collected and the proceeds of such taxes when and as collected
shall be set aside and deposited in the aeronautical fund authorized in the following
paragraph;
16) To establish an aeronautical fund in accordance with the provisions of RSA 423:6, 7 and
8.
All property of the authority shall be exempt from levy and sale by virtue of any execution
and no execution or other judicial process shall be a lien upon its property held pursuant to the
provisions thereof.
§ A-1206. Project reports; hearing and order139
Said Nashua airport authority before commencing any project shall submit to the mayor
and board of aldermen a report, including a detailed description and plan of the project, and a
detailed estimate of the total cost thereof. The mayor and board of aldermen, upon receiving such
report shall determine whether the proposed project will be of public use and benefit and within
the authority conferred upon said corporation. They shall cause a public hearing to be held
thereon and if it shall appear that the project would be of public use and benefit and within the
powers conferred upon said authority, they may, by written order, direct said authority to proceed
with such project. The mayor and board of aldermen shall order notice of the public hearing upon
such report to be given in such manner as they shall deem fit.
139 Source: 1961, ch. 343:6.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
lxii
November 1, 2018
§ A-1207. Bonds authorized140
The authority is hereby authorized to provide by resolution from time to time for the
issuance of bonds for the purpose of paying the costs of developing an airport or airports and
other air navigation facilities. The bonds of the authority shall not be a dept of the city, except as
provided in section 12 [A-1212 of this chapter], but shall be payable solely from the revenue of
the airports and other air navigation facilities under the management of the authority and the
proceeds of taxes levied in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (15) of section 5 [A-1205
of this chapter]. Any provisions of any law to the contrary notwithstanding, any bonds issued
pursuant to this act [chapter] shall be fully negotiable. In case any of the members of the
authority whose signatures appear on the bonds or coupons shall cease to be such members before
the delivery of such bonds, such signatures shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all
purposes the same as if such members had remained in office until such delivery. The authority
may in the resolution authorizing prospective issues provide as to such bonds:
1) The manner of executing the bonds and coupons;
2) The form and denomination thereof;
3) The maturity dates thereof;
4) The interest rates thereon;
5) For redemption prior to maturity and the premium payable therefor;
6) The place or places for the payment of interest and principal;
7) For registration if the authority deems such to be desirable;
**
9) For the replacement of lost, destroyed or mutilated bonds;
10) For the setting aside of reserve and sinking funds and the regulation and disposition
thereof;
11) For limitation on the issuance of additional bonds;
12) For the procedure, if any, by which the contract with the bondholder may be abrogated or
amended;
13) For the manner of sale and purchase thereof;
14) For covenants against pledging of any of the revenue of the project;
15) For covenants fixing and establishing such prices, rates and charges for the use of airports
and other air navigation facilities and services made available therewith, so as to provide,
at all times, funds which will be sufficient:
a. To pay all costs of operation and maintenance of airports and other air navigation
facilities together with necessary repairs thereto;
b. To meet and pay the principal and interest of all such bonds as they severally
become due and payable;
c. For the creating of such revenues for the principal and interest of all such bonds
and for the meeting of contingencies and the operation and maintenance of such
airports and other air navigation facilities as the authority shall determine;
16) For such other covenants as to such prices, rates and charges as the authority shall
determine;
17) For covenants as to the rights, liabilities, powers and duties arising upon the breach by
the authority of any covenant, condition or obligation;
18) For covenants as to the bonds to be issued and as to the issuance of said bonds in escrow
and otherwise and as to the use and disposition of the proceeds thereof;
19) For covenants as to the use of its property and the maintenance and replacement thereof
and the insurance to be carried thereon and the use and disposition of the insurance
money;
140 Source: 1961, ch. 343:7.
Editor’s note—No paragraph (8) was enacted.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
lxiii
November 1, 2018
20) For limitations upon the exercise of the powers conveyed upon the authority by this act
[chapter];
21) For the issuance of such bonds in series thereof, and
22) The performance by the authority of any and all such acts and things as may be necessary
or convenient or desirable in order to secure its bonds or in the absolute discretion of the
authority as will tend to make the bonds more marketable, notwithstanding that such acts
or things may not be enumerated herein, provided, however, that such acts or things shall
not contravene or be inconsistent with any of the provisions of this act [chapter].
§ A-1208. Interim certificates141
Prior to the issuance of the bonds hereunder the authority may issue interim certificates in
such manner and with such conditions as the authority may determine to be exchanged for such
bonds when issued.
§ A-1209. Issuance of notes and purchase by the city treasurer142
The authority may issue to the city treasurer its notes, subject to the limitation as
provided in this act [chapter], in an amount outstanding at any one time sufficient to enable the
authority to carry out its functions under the act [chapter] or any other provision of law, such
notes to mature not more than three years from their respective dates of issue, to be redeemable at
option of the authority before maturity in such manner as may be stipulated in such obligation.
Each such obligation shall bear interest at a rate determined by the city treasurer, taking into
consideration the current average rate on outstanding marketable obligations of the city as to the
last day of the month preceding the issuance of the obligation of the authority. Notwithstanding
the provisions of any other law, the city treasurer is authorized to purchase the notes of the
authority to be issued hereunder and any funds over which the city has exclusive control may be
used for this purpose.
§ A-1210. Debt limitations143
The issued or outstanding notes or bonds of the authority as provided by this act [chapter]
shall at not time exceed two hundred thousand dollars in amount.
§ A-1211. Tax exemption and payment for services in lieu of taxes144
The property of the authority is declared to be public property and shall be exempt from
all taxes and special assessments of the state or any political subdivision thereof; provided that in
lieu of such taxes the authority may agree to make payments to the municipality in which an
airport or other air navigation facility is located for highway maintenance, fire protection or other
services.
§ A-1212. Bonds guaranteed145
The mayor and board of aldermen are hereby authorized in the name of the city to
guarantee, in such manner as may be determined, the payment of the whole or any part of the
principal and interest of any bonds to be issued by the authority. The full faith and credit of the
city shall be pledged to performance of such guarantee of the city. In the event that the authority
shall default in payment of interest or principal upon any of the bonds guaranteed by the city, the
141 Source: 1961, ch. 343:8.
142 Source: 1961, ch. 343:9.
143 Source: 1961, ch. 343:10.
144 Source: 1961, ch. 343:11.
145 Source: 1961, ch. 343:12.
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS
lxiv
November 1, 2018
mayor may draw his warrant upon the treasury out of any money not otherwise appropriated for
the payment of such guarantee, and the sums so paid shall be recoverable from this authority.
§ A-1213. Biennial report146
The authority shall make a biennial report to the mayor and board of aldermen setting
forth in detail the operations and transactions conducted by it pursuant to this act [chapter].
§ A-1214. Separability clause147
If any provision of this act [chapter] or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this act [chapter] and the application of such
provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
146 Source: 1961, ch. 343:13.
147 Source: 1961, ch. 343:14.

Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Provisions Applicable to Entire Code
[Adopted as indicated in section histories]
§ 1-1. Citation of Code. [NRO 1975, T. 1, § 1; amended 2-26-2008 by
Ord. No. O-08-07; 2-26-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-07]
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall
constitute and be designated the Nashua Revised Ordinances (NRO) and
may be so cited or may be cited "the Code."
§ 1-2. Rules of construction and definitions. [Amended 12-26-1995
by Ord. No. O-95-148]
A. In the construction of the Code, and of all ordinances, the rules and
definitions set out in this section shall be observed, unless such
construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the
Board of Aldermen. The rules of construction and definitions set out
herein shall not be applied to any section of the Code which shall
contain any express provision excluding such construction, or where
the subject matter or context of such section may be repugnant thereto.
B. Any reference in the text of the Code to a section, article or chapter
shall, unless otherwise indicated, be construed to refer to a section,
article or chapter, as amended, of the Code.
C. Generally.
(1) All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in
the Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent
and meaning of the Board of Aldermen may be fully carried out.
(2) In the interpretation and application of any provision of the Code,
they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the
promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and
general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater
restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provisions
imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction
or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling.
(3) Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common
and approved usage of the language; but technical words and
phrases, and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and
appropriate meaning in law, shall be construed and understood
according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning.
D. In the constitution of the Code, as it now stands and as it may in the
future be amended, the rules set forth in RSA Chapter 21, exclusive of
§ 42 thereof (Effective dates), shall be observed, insofar as they may be
applicable, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:3
manifest intent of the Board of Aldermen or repugnant to the context of
the provision being construed.
(1) Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
APPROPRIATE ALDERMANIC COMMITTEE — That standing
committee of the Board of Aldermen which would naturally deal
with the matter addressed, pursuant to the duties of the standing
committees of the Board of Aldermen as described in § 5-9 of the
Code.
BOARD OF ALDERMEN — The Board of Aldermen of the City of
Nashua.
CITY — The City of Nashua, New Hampshire.
CORPORATE or CITY LIMITS — The legal boundaries of the City of
Nashua.
COUNTY or THIS COUNTY — The County of Hillsborough in the
State of New Hampshire.
MAYOR — The Mayor of the City.
MONTH — A calendar month.
OATH — Includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law,
an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases
the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words
"affirm" and "affirmed."
OWNER — Applied to a building or land, includes any part owner,
joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant
of the whole or part of such building or land.
PERSON — Extends and is applied to associations, clubs, societies,
firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to
individuals.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Includes every species of property
except real property, as herein described.
PROPERTY — Includes real and personal property.
REAL PROPERTY, LANDS AND REAL ESTATE — Includes lands,
tenements and hereditaments, and all rights thereto and interests
therein.
REGISTERED MAIL — When used in connection with the
requirement for notice by mail, either registered mail or certified
mail.
SIDEWALK — Any portion of a street between the curbline and
the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians,
excluding parkways.
§ 1-2 NASHUA CODE § 1-2
1:4
SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION — Includes a mark when the
person cannot write.
STREET — Construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards,
roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public ways in the City,
and shall include all areas thereof embraced between the property
lines and dedicated to the public use.
TENANT or OCCUPANT — Applied to a building or land, includes
any person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the
whole or a part of such buildings or land, either alone or with
others.
WRITTEN or IN WRITING — Includes printing or any other mode of
representing words and letters, except where the written signature
of a person is required.
YEAR — A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed, and the word
"year" shall be equivalent to "year of our Lord."
E. Word usage.
(1) Computation of time. When time is to be reckoned from a day, date,
act done, or the time of an act done, either by force of law, or by
virtue of a contract made since December 23, 1842, such day, date,
or the day when such act is done shall not be included in the
computation.
(2) Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring
the head of a department or some other City officer to do some act
or perform some duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of
the department or other officer to designate, delegate and
authorize subordinates to perform the required act or perform the
duty unless the terms of the provisions or section specify
otherwise.
(3) Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend
and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships, and
corporations well as to males.
(4) Joint authority. All words purporting to give a joint authority to
three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such
authority to a majority of such persons or officers, unless otherwise
expressly declared.
(5) Number. Words importing the singular number may extend and be
applied to several persons or things; words importing the plural
number may include the singular.
(6) Officers, boards, commissions, etc. Whenever any officer, board,
commission or any other agency of the City is referred to by title,
such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of
the City of New Hampshire," unless indicated to the contrary.
§ 1-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:5
§ 1-3. Headings, notes and references.
Part, chapter, and article headings, and notes and references are included
in this Code for the convenience of users, and are not to be construed as
part of the text to which they relate. The catchlines of the several sections
of the Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to
indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be
titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly
so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including
the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
§ 1-4. Amendments.
All ordinances passed subsequent to the Code which amend, repeal or
in any way affect the Code may be numbered in accordance with the
numbering system of the Code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the
case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by
subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the
Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby and the subsequent
ordinances as numbered printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be
prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time as the
Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a
new revision by the Board of Aldermen.
(7) Or; and. "Or" may be used to read "and", and "and" may be read
"or" if the sense requires it.
(8) Preceding; following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean
next before and next after, respectively.
(9) Said; such. The words "said" and "such" when used by way of
reference to any person or thing, shall apply to the same person or
thing last mentioned.
(10) Shall; may. The word "shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
(11) State. The words "state," "the state" or "this state" shall be
construed to mean the State of New Hampshire.
(12) Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future
as well as the past and present.
(13) Wholesale, wholesaler, etc. In all cases where the words
"wholesale," "wholesaler," or "wholesale dealer" are used in the
Code, unless otherwise specifically defined, they shall be
understood and held to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise,
articles or things in quantity to persons who purchase for purposes
of resale, as distinguished from a retail dealer who sells in smaller
quantities direct to the consumer.
§ 1-2 NASHUA CODE § 1-5
1:6
§ 1-5. Unauthorized alteration or tampering with Code.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the City to change or amend, by
additions or deletions, any part or portions of the Code, or to insert or
delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code
in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be
misrepresented thereby.
§ 1-6. Effect of repeal of ordinances.
§ 1-7. Severability. [NRO 1975, T. 1, § 8; amended 2-26-2008 by Ord.
No. O-08-07]
§ 1-8. Officers, employees not liable to fine for failure to perform
duties.
No provision of the Code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed so as to make such officer or employee liable for any
fine or penalty provided in the Code for a failure to perform such duty,
unless the intention of the Board of Aldermen to impose such a fine or
penalty on such officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in
the section creating the duty.
§ 1-9. Acts punishable under different sections.
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of the Code, the prosecuting officer may elect
under which to proceed, but not more than one recovery shall be had
A. When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive
such former ordinance, clause or provision unless it shall be therein so
expressly provided.
B. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty
incurred before the repeal took affect, nor any suit, prosecution or
proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed
or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed.
A. The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of the Code
are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section
of the Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable
by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction,
such unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect
any of the remaining phrases, sentences, paragraphs or sections of the
Code.
B. Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the
holding of any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or
ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or
constitutionality of any other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-9
1:7
against the same person for the same offense, provided that the revocation
of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to
bar any other penalty being enforced.
§ 1-10. Certain ordinances not affected by repeal.
A. Nothing in the Code or the ordinance adopting the Code shall be
construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the
following:
(1) Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money
for the City, or any evidence of the City's indebtedness.
(2) Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for the levy or
imposition of taxes, assessments or charges, or for an annual
budget. [Amended 2-26-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-07]
(3) Any ordinance annexing territory to the City or excluding territory
as a part of the City.
(4) Any ordinance granting franchise, permit or other right.
(5) Any ordinance zoning or rezoning specific property.
(6) Any ordinance accepting a subdivision plat.
(7) Any ordinance approving, authorizing or otherwise relating to any
contract, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument or the
purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property. [Amended
2-26-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-07]
(8) Any ordinance adopting a preliminary plan or development plan.
(9) Any temporary ordinance.
(10) Any ordinance enacted after July 11, 2007. [Amended 2-26-2008
by Ord. No. O-08-07]
(11) Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or
any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right
or liability. [Added 2-26-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-07]
(12) Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of
this ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
[Added 2-26-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-07]
(13) Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding
pending or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this
ordinance brought pursuant to any legislative provision. [Added
2-26-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-07]
§ 1-9 NASHUA CODE § 1-10
1:8
§ 1-11. Certain Contracts with City prohibited or restricted. [NRO
1975, T. 16, § 2 (Sec. 1-12 of the 1987 Code); amended 9-13-1974 by
Ord. No. O-74-88; 5-11-1982 by Ord. No. O-82-25; 12-22-2009 by
Ord. No. O-09-75]
(14) Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering,
widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing
name, improvement, acceptance or vacating of any right-of-way,
easement, street, road, highway, park or other public place or any
portion thereof. [Added 2-26-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-07]
(15) Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing
the issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or
evidence of the city's indebtedness. [Added 2-26-2008 by Ord.
No. O-08-07]
(16) All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and
manner of payment of salaries and compensation of officers and
employees. [Added 2-26-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-07]
(17) Any legislation relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension
fund for municipal employees. [Added 2-26-2008 by Ord. No.
O-08-07]
B. All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force
and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein.
A. Full payment of outstanding taxes and fees required. The City may
reject or terminate any contract or agreement with any person,
partnership, corporation or other business entity, who owes any sum of
money to the City, or is engaged in any course of conduct which violates
any of the laws of the state, or any of the ordinances of the City, or any
condition, requirement or decision of any officer, board, agency or
department of the City, or any contract or agreement with any such
officer, board, agency or department.
B. Exemption for certain real estate transactions. However, in situations
where a seller has transferred property after April first of that year and
can substantiate that he has paid his share of taxes to the buyer, either
by proration at time of closing or upon receipt of the tax bill after the
time of closing, and the buyer has not paid said tax bill in a timely
manner, the above provisions shall not apply against the seller by
reason of nonpayment of taxes due on such property.
C. Waiver authorized. The requirements of this section may be waived by
the responsible officer, board, agency or department head of the City if
it has been determined that such waiver is in the best interest of the
City. [Added 11-22-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-122; 12-22-2009 by
Ord. No. O-09-75]
§ 1-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-11
1:9

ARTICLE II
General Penalty
[NRO 1975, T. 16, § 1(b); amended 10-14-1980 by Ord. No. O-80-2;
11-10-1983 by Ord. No. O-83-139; 12-9-1997 by Ord. No. O-97-156]
§ 1-12. General penalty for violation of ordinances.
Whenever in the Code or in any ordinance of the City any act is prohibited or
is made or declared to be unlawful or whenever in such Code or ordinance
the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to
be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation
of any such provision of the Code or any ordinance shall be punished by
a fine of not more than $1,000 and/or the issuance of a citation. Each day
any violation of any provision of the Code or of any ordinance shall continue
shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 1-13. Extended applicability.
This section shall be applicable to accomplices and accessories as well as to
principals, and to attempts; and a violation, failure to comply or conspiracy
on the part of a corporation shall also constitute a violation, failure to
comply or conspiracy on the part of any and all individuals participating
therein.
§ 1-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:11

ARTICLE III
Adoption of Code by Board of Aldermen
[Adopted 2-26-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-07]
§ 1-14. Adoption of Code.
The various chapters of the 1987 Nashua Revised Ordinances (Code) and
subsequent ordinances and resolutions of the City of Nashua of a general
and permanent nature adopted by the Board of Aldermen of the City of
Nashua, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and sections
by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1 through
325, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Nashua
Revised Ordinances," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-15. Code supersedes prior legislation, repeal.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede the 1987 Nashua Municipal
Code and all other general and permanent legislation enacted prior to the
enactment of this Code, except such legislation as is hereinafter expressly
saved from repeal or continued in force. The repeal provided for hereof
shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been
repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed.
§ 1-16. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of the legislation in force immediately prior to the enactment of the
Code by this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such legislation
and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall
date from the date of adoption of the prior legislation.
§ 1-17. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-18. Copy of Code on file.
A. A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the
City Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the public
until final action is taken on this ordinance, and, if this ordinance shall
be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the City Clerk, and such
certified copy shall remain on file in the office of said City Clerk to be
made available to persons desiring to examine the same during all
times while said Code is in effect.
B. The City Clerk of the City of Nashua is hereby directed to make copies
of the Code of the City of Nashua available at no charge to members of
the Board of Aldermen, heads of municipal departments and any public
library within the City. Any person may inspect the Code at the office of
the City Clerk at no charge. Any person, other than those enumerated
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-18
1:13
§ 1-19. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, or amendments to the Code, when adopted
in such form as to indicate the intention of the Board of Aldermen to
make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such
Code so that reference to the "Nashua Revised Ordinances (NRO)" shall
be understood and intended to include such additions, deletions, or
amendments. Whenever such additions, deletions, or amendments to the
Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-20. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the City of Nashua, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published, in the manner required by law, a copy of this Adoption
Ordinance. Sufficient copies of the Code shall be maintained in the office
of the Clerk for inspection by the public at all times during regular office
hours. The enactment and publication of this ordinance, coupled with the
availability of a copy of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be
deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-21. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk, or someone authorized and directed
by the Clerk, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing
the Code required to be filed in the Clerk's office for use by the public. All
changes in said Code and all legislation adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-22. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code may be purchased from the Clerk upon the payment of a
fee to be set by the City Clerk, and the Board of Aldermen may also arrange
for procedures for the periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-23. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of
Nashua to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or any
part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not more
than $1,000.
as being able to obtain copies of the Code without charge, shall be
allowed to purchase copies of the Code from the City Clerk.
§ 1-18 NASHUA CODE § 1-24
1:14
§ 1-24. Savings clause.
This legislation shall not effect violations of any other ordinance, code or
regulation of the municipality existing prior to the effective date hereof, and
any such violation shall be governed and shall continue to be punishable to
the full extent of the law under the provisions of those ordinances, codes or
regulations in effect at the time the violation was committed.
§ 1-25. Changes in previously adopted legislation.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances and resolutions for adoption
and revision as part of the Code, certain grammatical changes and
other minor changes were made in one or more of said ordinances and
resolutions. It is the intention of the Board of Aldermen that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances and
resolutions so changed had been previously formally amended to read
as such.
B. Section 1-19 (Amendments to Code): Ordinances adopted after July 11,
2007, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the
Revised Ordinances shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like
provisions of the Revised Ordinances.
C. In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance.1
1. Editor's Note: A complete list of the changes, amendments and revisions is on file in the
City Clerk's office.
§ 1-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-25
1:15
Chapter 5
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, committees and commissions — See
Ch. 12.
Funds — See Ch. 30.
Personnel — See Ch. 50.
Police Department — See Ch. 55.
§ 1-25 NASHUA CODE § 1-25
1:16
Part 1
General Provisions
ARTICLE I
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 5-1. Disposition of departmental income. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 2;
NRO 1987, § 2-1]
All income by City departments during the fiscal year shall be turned over
to the general fund and shall not be used to supplement any departmental
budget.
§ 5-2. Annual reports. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 3; NRO 1987, § 2-2;
amended 5-11-1977 by Ord. No. O-77-169]
§ 5-3. Photocopy fees. [NRO 1987, § 2-3; amended 9-9-1997 by Ord.
No. O-97-106; 11-23-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-32]
Except as otherwise provided by state or federal law, City departments shall
charge a fee of no more than $0.75 for the first page of the document
and $0.10 per page thereafter for photocopying services for documents 8 1/
2 by 11 inches. When photocopies are made of a document for which an
overall price has been otherwise established, the fee for photocopying shall
be the same as the price for the document. Public records requested by an
Alderman in fulfillment of his or her aldermanic duties will be available to
the Alderman at no charge.
§ 5-4. City lands and buildings. [NRO 1975, T. 1, § 451; NRO 1987,
§ 2-4; amended 12-23-1996 by Ord. No. O-96-05; 1-27-2009 by Ord.
No. O-08-54]
A. Every City official and department required by law or ordinance to
make an annual report to the Mayor or the Board of Aldermen shall
submit the report on or before the first day of October in each year.
B. The report shall be as concise as possible and shall be accompanied by
a synopsis or summary of its contents, to be used by the committee on
printing and stationery in making up the annual City report. No report
submitted after October 1 shall be printed in the annual City report.
A. The Board of Aldermen shall approve public funding for the purchase of
all City and school lands and buildings.
B. The Board of Aldermen shall approve the disposition of all City lands
and buildings.
C. The Board of Aldermen shall approve the lease of any City-owned lands
and buildings. This does not apply to leases of City-owned lands and
buildings made by the Board of Education, the Library Board of
Trustees, the Board of Police Commissioners, the Board of Fire
§ 5-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-4
1:17
§ 5-5. Nonpublic sessions. [NRO 1987, § 2-5; amended 6-22-2004 by
Ord. No. O-04-28]
The Mayor being the City's chief executive officer and the Board of
Aldermen being the City's governing body and policymaking authority and
having responsibility for such matters as adoption of budgets, enactment
of ordinances, formulating personnel policies, and other important duties,
it is necessary that the Mayor and members of the Board of Aldermen
have access to information affecting the duties, obligations, claims,
achievements, and shortcomings of all City agencies and agents. In
furtherance of this principle, the following shall apply:
Commissioners, the Board of Public Works, and the Cemetery Board
of Trustees, for lands and buildings within their control, provided the
purpose for the use of the lands and buildings is retained.
D. The Finance Committee shall approve the rental of lands and buildings
not owned by the City. Any rental agreement in excess of $1,000,000
and any rental agreement that extends from the current fiscal year into
succeeding fiscal year(s) in which no funds have been appropriated nor
otherwise designated shall be approved by the full Board of Aldermen.
This does not apply to rentals made by the Board of Education, the
Library Board of Trustees, and the Cemetery Board of Trustees for
lands and buildings for their official use.
E. The Board of Aldermen's Infrastructure Committee shall oversee the
construction and renovation of lands and buildings conducted by the
Board of Public Works, the Board of Fire Commissioners and the Board
of Police Commissioners.
F. The Mayor and the City's governing boards and commissions shall
administer and regulate the daily use of lands and buildings under their
respective authority.
G. The City Clerk shall schedule use of City Hall by the public, shall collect
all rents, if any, from such use, shall keep an account of all monies
received, and shall transfer the same to the City Treasurer on the first
Tuesday of January, April, July and October of each year.
H. No resident of the City of Nashua shall be required to pay rent for use of
the City Hall or any part thereof.
A. Neither the Mayor nor any Alderman shall be excluded from any
nonpublic session of any aldermanic standing or special committee nor
denied access to minutes of any such session.
B. No Alderman shall be excluded from any nonpublic session of the
Finance Committee nor denied access to minutes of any such session.
C. The boards, commissions, committees and authorities of all other City
agencies are urged to invite the Mayor and Aldermen to nonpublic
sessions at which issues are discussed that are relevant to decisions,
§ 5-4 NASHUA CODE § 5-5
1:18
deliberations or votes made by the Mayor or Board of Aldermen.
[Amended 3-27-2007 by Ord. No. O-06-49]
§ 5-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-5
1:19

Part 2
Board Of Aldermen
ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 5-6. Compensation. [NRO 1975, T. 3, § 1; NRO 1987, § 2-21;
amended 2-25-1977 by Ord. No. O-76-115; 4-12-1978 by Ord. No.
O-78-4; 6-24-1980 by Ord. No. O-80-53; 8-9-1988 by Ord. No.
O-88-61; 12-8-1992 by Ord. No. O-92-11; 8-8-2000 by Ord. No.
O-00-43; 8-8-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-18; 8-14-2007 by Ord. No.
O-07-115; 12-22-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-77]
§ 5-7. Meetings. [NRO 1975, T. 3, § 2; NRO 1987, § 2-22; amended
3-24-1998 by Ord. No. O-98-03; 2-13-2001 by Ord. No. O-00-68;
10-22-2002 by Ord. No. O-22-97; 5-13-2003 by Ord. No. O-03-154]
A. Each Alderman shall receive as compensation the sum of $5,000 per
year, payable quarterly.
B. If, in any quarter, any member of the Board of Aldermen is recorded
absent at three or more regular meetings of the Board, the City Clerk
shall transmit a communication stating that fact to the Board of
Aldermen, and the stipend for that quarter shall be withheld. In
accepting the communication, the Board may also determine by vote
that for good cause shown that member shall receive a full or partial
stipend for the quarter. Good cause shall include but not be limited to
attendance at committee and other meetings, or health or other
extenuating circumstances for the absence. Additionally, the Board may
find that the attendance of any member within a quarter has been
unacceptable and by a majority vote withhold any or all of the stipend
for that quarter.
C. The provisions of § 5-93 et seq., Conduct Regulations, and other
conflict-of-interest standards shall not apply to votes on ordinances
setting compensation of the Board of Aldermen under Charter Section
45-a.
A. The Board of Aldermen shall hold regular meetings at 7:30 p.m. on the
second and fourth Tuesday of each month, except during the months of
July and August, when the regular meetings shall be held on the second
Tuesday of those months.
B. When the day fixed for any regular meeting falls on a day designated by
law as a legal or national holiday or the day of an election, the meeting
shall be held at the same hour on the next succeeding day not a holiday.
[Amended 9-23-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-35]
C. A regular meeting may be rescheduled upon majority vote of the full
membership of the Board taken at least 15 days prior to both the
§ 5-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-7
1:21
§ 5-8. Budget hearing; notice. [NRO 1975, T. 3, § 3; NRO 1987,
§ 2-23]
original and rescheduled dates of the meeting to avoid conflict with a
holiday or election.
D. In addition to the Mayor's power to call special meetings under RSA
45:10, special meetings of the Board may be called by the President of
the Board of Aldermen, by a vote of at least eight members of the Board
of Aldermen, or by the signatures of at least eight members on a notice
of the meeting.
(1) The limited purpose(s) of the meeting shall be specified in the
written notice of the meeting, which shall be communicated
individually to the Mayor, every Alderman, the City Clerk and City
Solicitor/Corporation Counsel, and shall be posted in compliance
with RSA 91-A.
(2) For a public hearing required by law, the meeting shall be
scheduled on the same evening as a meeting of the relevant
aldermanic committee, and the committee Chairman shall chair the
public hearing. No final action by the full Board shall be taken at
such a meeting.
(3) A quorum of the Board shall be required, and all other applicable
rules of the Board shall be in effect for special meetings.
E. Participation by members in a meeting by electronic or other means of
communication shall be permitted as long as the participation is
permitted under and conducted in accordance with New Hampshire
Revised Statutes Annotated Chapter 91-A. [Added 12-23-2008 by
Ord. No. O-08-52]
F. The Mayor shall deliver an annual state-of-the-City address before the
Board of Aldermen at a meeting of that body held on the third Tuesday
of February. The only business of that meeting shall be the Mayor’s
address and the provisions of § 5-14 shall not apply. [Amended
12-23-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-52]
G. If the member participating by telephone is the Board President or the
Committee Chairman, then the Vice President or Vice Chairman,
respectively, shall assume the role of presiding officer for the purposes
of conducting the meeting. In the absence of the Vice President or Vice
Chairman, the board or committee shall nominate a protem presiding
officer. [Added 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-52]
A. The date, time and place of public budget hearings shall be published in
a local newspaper at least seven days prior to the hearing. Such
information shall also be posted, with a budget summary, in two public
places at least seven days before the hearing.
§ 5-7 NASHUA CODE § 5-8
1:22
§ 5-9. Standing committees. [NRO 1975, T. 3, § 5; NRO 1987, § 2-24;
amended 1-19-1976 by Ord. No. O-76-2; 9-14-1977 by Ord. No.
O-77-219; 10-11-1977 by Ord. No. O-77-220; 11-14-1977 by Ord. No.
O-77-260; 12-29-1978 by Ord. No. O-78-155A; 2-9-1982 by Ord. No.
O-82-01; 6-11-1985 by Ord. No. O-85-156; 1-6-1986 by Ord. No.
O-86-01; 1-3-1988 by Ord. No. O-88-01; 1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
O-90-03; 4-14-1992 by Ord. No. O-92-02; 12-8-1992 by Ord. No.
O-92-10; 12-26-1995 by Ord. No. O-95-148; 2-24-1998 by Ord. No.
O-98-04; 4-14-1998 by Ord. No. O-98-20; 3-26-2002 by Ord. No.
O-02-05; 9-9-2002 by Ord. No. O-02-50; 5-25-2004 by Ord. No.
O-04-11; 12-28-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-65]
B. Copies of the budget to be presented at a hearing shall be made
available to the public at the City Clerk's office at least seven days prior
to such hearing.
A. The President shall serve as an ex officio member of all standing and
special committees of the Board of Aldermen, except the Finance
Committee. The President shall count as an additional member of a
standing or special committee for the purpose of establishing a quorum
at every meeting he or she attends. The President shall have a vote on
every committee, except the Finance Committee and the joint special
school building committee, regardless of the appointed members
present and voting. The President may assume the Chair of any
committee, except the Finance Committee and the Joint Special School
Building Committee. The President may appoint himself or herself as
one of the Alderman-at-Large members of the Finance Committee per
Charter Section 50.
B. The President shall appoint Aldermen as called for, with the first named
being Chairman and the second named being Vice Chairman, to the
following standing committees:
(1) Seven-member committees:
(a) Budget Review Committee.
(b) Finance Committee as denoted within the City Charter Section
50.
(2) Five-member committees:
(a) Personnel/Administrative Affair: includes, but is not limited to,
the following: appointments: personnel classification, policies,
rules and licenses, and elections and returns.
(b) Infrastructure: responsible for traffic, street acceptance, sewer
fees, roads, lands and buildings. [Amended 1-13-2009 by
Ord. No. O-08-41]
§ 5-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-9
1:23
(c) Planning and Economic Development: encompasses planning
and land use issues as well as economic development,
downtown development, and the City's technology policy.
(d) Human affairs: responsible for community development block
grant (CDBG), affordable housing, grant acceptance, elderly
affairs and the like, and review and comment activities.
(3) Two-member committee: Nashua Housing Authority Liaison
Committee, who, if possible, shall be members of the Human Affairs
Committee.
(4) One-member committees. One-member committees shall have an
alternate member appointed in the same fashion as the regular
member.
(a) Board of Health Liaison Committee, who shall be a member of
the Human Affairs Committee.
(b) Board of Public Works Liaison Committee.
(c) Board of Fire Commissioners Liaison Committee.
(d) Board of Education Liaison Committee.
(e) Board of Police Commissioners Liaison Committee.2 [Added
2-26-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-04]
(f) Hunt Memorial Building Board of Trustees Liaison Committee.
[Amended 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-005]
(g) Planning Board member who, as defined in Chapter 190, shall
be a member of the Planning and Economic Development
Committee.
(h) Cable Television Advisory Board Liaison Committee.
(i) Broad Street Parkway Liaison Committee, who shall be a
member of the Infrastructure Committee. This Committee shall
exist until the Broad Street Parkway project is completed.
[Added 1-13-2009 by Ord. No. O-08-41]
(j) Nashua Airport Authority Liaison Committee. [Added
9-10-2014 by Ord. No. O-14-022]
(k) Nashua Arts Commission Liaison Committee. [Added
11-23-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-36]
(5) Joint committees: Joint Special School Building Committee
comprised of five members of the Board of Aldermen and five
2. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(4)(f), pertaining to the Child Care Liaison Committee,
which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 3-11-2014 by Ord. No.
O-14-004. This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections
B(4)(g), (h), (i), and (j) as Subsections B(4)(f), (g), (h) and (i), respectively.
§ 5-9 NASHUA CODE § 5-9
1:24
§ 5-9.1. Liaisons. [Added 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-21]
§ 5-10. Legislative assistants. [NRO 1987, § 2-25; added 12-14-1999
by Ord. No. O-99-153]
Subject to available funding, the Board of Aldermen shall have such
legislative assistants who shall work under their direction and in
coordination with other City departments and divisions to fulfill the
obligations of the City to maintain records of the legislation and
proceedings of the Board of Aldermen. These employees shall be merit
employees subject to all the provisions of the merit system.3
members of the Board of Education as provided by and for the
purposes of New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated Chapter
199. [Amended 3-11-2014 by Ord. No. O-14-007]
(6) Special committees: [Added 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-077]
(a) Substandard Living Conditions Special Committee, comprised
of five aldermen. This committee is responsible for
investigating the living conditions at large residential
properties where there may be substandard living conditions,
determining whether these conditions violate existing housing
and/or health codes, and recommending whether new housing
and/or health code provisions should be enacted to protect
Nashua residents.
C. When a standing committee lacks a quorum of members as provided in
Subsections A and B, any Alderman at Large who is present where said
meeting is held, selected by the Chairman of the committee, shall be
deemed to be a member of said committee pro tem for the purposes of
establishing a quorum thereof and voting. Should an appointed member
arrive at the meeting thereafter, pro tem members shall step down, and
shall have no vote unless to do so would render the committee without a
quorum.
D. All committee assignments shall be ratified by the Board of Aldermen at
its organizational meeting at each new term.
A. Definition of "Liaison": the contact or connection maintained by
communications between units or with any other organization in order
to ensure concerted action and cooperation.
B. Primary role: The primary role of the Liaison shall be to communicate
with the other board, committee or group and report back to the Board
of Aldermen, and vice versa, so that a mutual understanding will be
established and maintained.
3. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 2-28, pertaining to nonpublic committee sessions, which
immediately followed this section and which was adopted 4-23-2002 by Ord. No. O-02-21,
was repealed 6-22-2004 by Ord. No. O-04-28.
§ 5-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-10.1
1:25
§ 5-10.1. Electronic submission and distribution of materials.
[Added 6-25-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-042]
A. Purpose and intent. It is the intent of this section to provide for
electronic submission and access to the materials needed by the Board
of Aldermen to perform its duties, and to promote the use of electronic
distribution wherever possible, in order to reduce costs, and ensure the
availability of the materials during meetings.
B. Standards. The Information Technology Division Director, in
coordination with the Legislative Manager, shall develop and publish
applicable standards for the format of electronic dissemination of
information to be sent to the Board of Aldermen. All correspondence
from City departments shall adhere to these standards. The standards
shall be established in such a way as to provide searchable individual
copies, as well as to produce single document records of a complete
meeting.
C. Member choices for electronic devices. Members of the Board may
choose one of the following three methods of participating in electronic
distribution of media.
(1) Use of a City-owned tablet device. The Information Technology
Division Director shall select one or more options for devices
provided by the City. A member of the Board may choose to receive
one of these devices. Such devices shall remain the property of the
City of Nashua, and must be surrendered at the end of the
individual’s term of office, unless the individual elects to purchase
the device at its current value at the time, as determined by the
Information Technology Division Director.
(2) Use of a personally-owned device. A member may choose to
purchase a device individually and use it for access. In such case
the device must conform to any constraints the Information
Technology Division Director may develop for such devices.
[Amended 2-25-2014 by Ord. No. O-14-006]
(3) Paper. A member may also request paper agendas and other
supporting material, which will be available in their city hall
mailbox on Fridays at 3:00 p.m. [Amended 2-25-2014 by Ord.
No. O-14-006]
§ 5-10.1 NASHUA CODE § 5-10.1
1:26
ARTICLE III
Rules and Order of Business
§ 5-11. Call to order; roll call. [NRO 1975, T. 3, § 201; NRO 1987,
§ 2-35]
The President of the Board of Aldermen shall take the Chair at the time
appointed for the meeting, and if a quorum is present, shall call the
members to order, and lead the members in the pledge of allegiance to the
flag of the United States of America. The roll call of the members shall then
be taken and the names of the absentees recorded.
§ 5-12. Duties of President. [NRO 1975, T. 3, § 202; NRO 1987,
§ 2-36]
The President of the Board of Aldermen shall preserve decorum and order.
He may speak to points of order in preference to other members and,
subject to an appeal to the Board by motion regularly seconded, shall decide
all questions of order. No other business shall be in order until the question
on appeal has been decided.
§ 5-13. Vice President. [NRO 1975, T. 3, § 203; NRO 1987, § 2-37;
amended 5-10-1978 by Ord. No. O-78-40]
The Board of Aldermen shall choose one of its own Aldermen at large as
Vice President. The Vice President shall be chosen by majority vote of the
members of the Board of Aldermen at any regular or special meeting of
the Board. The Vice President shall serve for a term equivalent to the term
of ward Aldermen unless sooner removed from office by majority vote of
the members of the Board of Aldermen. The Vice President shall preside at
regular and special meetings of the Board of Aldermen when the President
does not assume the Chair. If the President is absent for more than one
meeting, the Board may by a majority vote of those present and voting
authorize the Vice President in the absence of the President to take all such
actions as the President could take were he fully present.
§ 5-14. Order of business. [NRO 1975, T. 3, § 204; NRO 1987, § 2-38;
amended 2-25-1977 by Ord. No. O-77-137; 4-12-1994 by Ord. No.
O-94-01; 8-9-1994 by Ord. No. O-94-42; 12-9-1997 by Ord. No.
O-97-188; 12-28-1999 by Ord. No. O-99-182; 2-27-2007 by Ord. No.
O-07-78; 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-21; 3-22-2011 by Ord. No.
O-11-50]
A. The order of business for regular meetings of the Board of Aldermen
shall be as follows:
(1) Aldermanic President calls assembly to order;
(2) Prayer to be offered by the City Clerk;
§ 5-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-14
1:27
(3) Aldermanic President or his designee leads in the pledge to the
flag;
(4) Roll call by the City Clerk;
(5) Remarks by the Mayor;
(6) Response to the Mayor's remarks;
(7) Recognition of a City employee or employees, citizen(s) or
organization(s) by the Board's President commended to the Board
by the Mayor, the Board's President or Vice President, or any
member; [Amended 2-13-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-002]
(8) Reading of minutes of previous meeting and public hearings.
Without objection, such minutes shall be accepted and placed on
file and the reading waived; [Amended 2-13-2018 by Ord. No.
O-18-002]
(9) Communications requiring only procedural actions of the Board
and written reports from liaisons, read by title only. Without
objection, such communications shall be accepted and placed on
file. [Amended 2-13-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-002]
(9a) A period not to exceed 15 minutes for the acceptance of orally
presented communications or comments from the public or others
relative to resolutions, ordinances, or communications to be
accepted in Subsection A(9b) upon which final action is expected to
be taken at the meeting. If there is a reasonable expectation by the
President of the Board that final action shall be taken on such an
item not on the agenda, the President shall allow comment on that
item of business. [Added 2-13-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-002]
(9b) Communications requiring final approval by the Board of
Aldermen, including but not limited to awards of contracts and
expenditure of funds; [Added 2-13-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-002]
(10) Petitions presentation and disposal thereof. Without objection,
petitions shall be accepted, placed on file and, if appropriate,
referred to a committee of the Board and scheduled for any
required public hearing; [Amended 2-13-2018 by Ord. No.
O-18-002]
(11) Such nominations, appointments and elections as may be in order;
(12) Reports of committees. Without objection, reports requiring no
nonprocedural action of the Board shall be accepted and placed on
file; [Amended 2-13-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-002]
(13) Confirmation of the Mayor's appointments, which shall be
approved without objection upon a unanimous recommendation of
the Committee; [Amended 2-13-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-0024]
§ 5-14 NASHUA CODE § 5-14
1:28
§ 5-15. Motions. [NRO 1975, T. 3, § 205; NRO 1987, § 2-39]
(14) Business unfinished at the previous meeting;
(15) New business, which may be introduced by any member;
(16) Communications, to include a period not to exceed 15 minutes for
the acceptance of orally presented communications or comments
from the public or others;
(17) Remarks by the Aldermen;
(18) Adjournment.
B. Meetings of standing committees of the Board of Aldermen shall
include the following:
(1) Public comment at the beginning of the meeting, for a period not to
exceed five minutes per presentation;
(2) Public comment at the end of the meeting, for a period not to
exceed five minutes per presentation; and
(3) Remarks by the Aldermen.
A. Each motion shall be reduced to writing if the President of the Board of
Aldermen so directs.
B. When a question is under debate, the following motions may be
received:
(1) Adjourn;
(2) Lay on the table;
(3) Previous question;
(4) Postpone to a certain time;
(5) Commit or refer;
(6) Amend;
(7) Postpone indefinitely; which several motions shall have precedence
in the order in which they stand arranged.
C. All motions, debatable or nondebatable, shall be subject to inquiry in
accordance with Mason's Manual of Legislative Procedure, Section 85.
[Amended 12-11-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-110]
4. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection A(13), Written reports and
liaisons, and renumbered former Subsection A(14) through (19) as Subsection A(13)
through (18), respectively.
§ 5-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-16
1:29
§ 5-16. Disposition of questions. [NRO 1975, T. 3, § 206; NRO 1987,
§ 2-40]
After a question is stated or read by the Chair, it shall be deemed in the
possession of the Board of Aldermen and shall be disposed of by vote.
However, a question may be withdrawn by the mover at any time before
amendment or decision.
§ 5-17. Votes; division; recordation. [NRO 1975, T. 3, § 207; NRO
1987, § 2-41; amended 3-14-1995 by Ord. No. O-94-78]
§ 5-18. Reconsideration of votes. [NRO 1975, T. 3, § 208; NRO 1987,
§ 2-42; amended 2-11-1997 by Ord. No. O-96-108; amended
12-28-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-66]
A. All questions shall be put by the President, and each Alderman shall be
required to vote thereon by signifying an assent or dissent by
announcing yea or nay. If the President doubts, or a division is called
for, the Aldermen shall divide, and the President shall then state the
decision of the Board.
B. On request of any member, the yeas and nays on any question shall be
taken and entered upon the journal.
C. A member may abstain from voting only if he declares a conflict of
interest or potential conflict of interest relative to the question being
voted on. In such case the member shall be considered absent for the
purpose of disposition of the question. The member shall declare his
intention to abstain prior to the vote, and his reason for abstaining shall
be entered upon the journal.
A. No vote shall be reconsidered by the Board of Aldermen unless the
motion for reconsideration is made by a member who voted with the
majority and such motion is made at the same or at the next regular
meeting of the Board. A vote is successfully reconsidered on the
affirmative majority vote of those members present and voting. The
provisions of this section may not be suspended under § 5-23.
B. When a vote is successfully reconsidered, that vote is cancelled as
though it had never been taken, and opens a reconsidered measure to a
vote to pass, or amend followed by a vote to pass or table or refer to
committee; or reject, or indefinitely postpone, or table, or refer to
committee. [Amended 2-26-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-07]
C. After reconsideration, a measure that is amended as to present a
substantially different proposition, upon passage, may be reconsidered
by the full Board in the same manner as a new measure.
D. Reconsideration in committee is subject to the same rules as the Board
of Aldermen, except a committee may reconsider its recommendation
on a measure at any time before the full Board of Aldermen votes to
§ 5-16 NASHUA CODE § 5-18
1:30
§ 5-19. Necessary procedure for passage. [NRO 1975, T. 3, § 209;
NRO 1987, § 2-43; amended 8-15-1977 by Ord. No. O-77-205;
11-28-1977 by Ord. No. O-77-252; 4-12-1978 by Ord. No. O-78-23;
12-14-1978 by Ord. No. O-78-144; 3-12-1996 by Ord. No. O-96-09;
3-13-2001 by Ord. No. O-00-69; 5-13-2003 by Ord. No. O-03-161]
consider the measure, and reconsideration of a vote may be moved by
any member of the committee.
A. Every ordinance, order or resolution shall be passed through first
reading, second reading, passage to be recorded, before it shall be
considered as having received the final action of the Board of Aldermen.
B. Following the first reading of a resolution or ordinance, the President of
the Board of Aldermen, following any debate, shall refer such resolution
or ordinance to its proper committee without a motion from the floor.
C. All ordinances and resolutions shall be voted on and passed by title
reading only.
D. All committee reports shall be accepted and placed on file without a
motion from the floor unless objected to by a member of the Board of
Aldermen.
E. The sponsor(s) shall authorize the introduction of ordinances and
resolutions no later than 5:00 p.m. on the Wednesday prior to the
Board's regular meetings. A member may be an endorser only if the
member signs the legislation. Additional endorsements can be made
upon first reading of the legislation, but not subsequent to that time.
F. All ordinances and resolutions shall be prepared or reviewed by the City
Solicitor/Corporation Counsel before they shall be endorsed.
G. All resolutions and ordinances which involve the expenditure of funds
shall specify in the body of the legislation the amount and the source of
the funds to be expended.
H. Upon request by an employer board, the financial division shall prepare
a cost analysis of a collective bargaining agreement for the employer
board’s review and consideration. [Added 9-22-2009 by Ord. No.
O-09-705]
I. No resolution to approve the cost items of a collective bargaining
agreement shall be introduced without an attached cost analysis of the
collective bargaining agreement. This provision shall be waived if the
cost analysis has not been completed within 21 days of the submission
of the collective bargaining agreement to the office of City Solicitor/
Corporation Counsel. Furthermore, all resolutions to approve the cost
items of a collective bargaining agreement shall include both a marked-
5. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections H
through J as Subsections I through K.
§ 5-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-19
1:31
up copy of the collective bargaining agreement showing all additions
and deletions to the agreement, as well as a clean copy of the proposed
collective bargaining agreement. [Added 2-27-2007 by Ord. No.
O-06-70; amended 9-15-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-20]
J. No resolution that transfers or appropriates money from any reserve
account, expendable trust fund, or undesignated fund balance shall be
introduced without an attached account analysis showing the impact of
the proposed resolution on the account, and the direct financial impact
to any other accounts. For the purposes of this section, an analysis is
defined as the process of breaking down a complex topic or substance
into smaller parts to gain a better understanding of it. [Added
11-12-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-31; amended 1-25-2011 by Ord. No.
O-10-39]
K. If the Mayor vetoes any ordinance, resolution or vote, or part thereof,
pursuant to Section 47 of the City Charter, the following procedure
shall be followed:
(1) The City Clerk shall place the veto message on the agenda for the
next aldermanic meeting under the section designated
"Communications."
(2) The City Clerk shall also, under the appropriate section of old
business, set down as the last item of that section the ordinance,
resolution or vote or portion thereof, which has been vetoed by the
Mayor.
(3) Upon reaching the vetoed item of old business:
(a) The Board may take action by a motion to reconsider, made by
a member who voted with the prevailing side on the original
vote. A vote to reconsider shall be effective on a simple
majority vote of those members present and voting.
(b) If no motion to consider is made, or if a motion to reconsider
fails, the vetoed item shall not take effect. A failed vote to
reconsider may be reconsidered at the next regular meeting of
the Board, but not following that meeting's adjournment.
[Amended 3-27-2007 by Ord. No. O-06-50]
(c) If a vote to reconsider prevails the Board may, upon motion of
any member, vote to override the Mayor's veto, or amend
followed by a vote to pass or table or refer to committee; or
reject, or indefinitely postpone, or table or refer to committee.
[Amended 3-27-2007 by Ord. No. O-06-50]
(d) If the Mayor's veto is overridden by affirmative roll call vote of
at least 10 members of the Board, final passage over the veto
shall become effective. [Amended 3-27-2007 by Ord. No.
O-06-50]
§ 5-19 NASHUA CODE § 5-19
1:32
§ 5-20. Rejection of bill. [NRO 1975, T. 3, § 210; NRO 1987, § 2-44]
A bill may be rejected by the Board of Aldermen at any stage of its progress
but may not pass through all its stages in one day.
§ 5-20.1. Appointments and reappointments. [Added 3-22-2011 by
Ord. No. O-11-54]
§ 5-21. Conversation prohibited. [NRO 1975, T. 3, § 212; NRO 1987,
§ 2-45]
No member of the Board of Aldermen shall hold conversation with another
during the reading of the journal, while a paper is being read, a member is
speaking in debate or a question is being stated by the Chair.
§ 5-22. Rules transgressed; call to order; appeal. [NRO 1975, T. 3,
§ 213; NRO 1987, § 2-46]
If any member shall transgress the rules of the Board of Aldermen, the
President shall, or any member may, call him to order. In such case, the
(e) If the vote to override fails, the Board may then vote to amend
followed by a vote to pass or table or refer to committee; or
reject, or indefinitely postpone, or table or refer to committee.
[Amended 3-27-2007 by Ord. No. O-06-50]
(f) A prevailing vote to substantially amend and pass the vetoed
item cancels all previous action and the amended item is
treated as a new measure, subject to the Mayor's veto in its
amended form. [Amended 3-27-2007 by Ord. No. O-06-50]
(g) The option to override the Mayor's veto following a successful
vote to reconsider is unaffected by the vetoed item being either
tabled at the full Board or referred to committee and is
preserved until the item is finally disposed of by the Board of
Aldermen, either by override, or amendment and passage, or
rejection or indefinite postponement. [Added 3-27-2007 by
Ord. No. O-06-50]
A. All requests for approval of appointments and reappointments shall be
accompanied by a brief description of the relevant board, commission,
committee, or position, and, if a reappointment, the number of terms
and years that the candidate has served in that position.
B. All initial appointments or appointments from alternate to regular
membership shall be interviewed in public by the appropriate
aldermanic committee. Reappointments shall only be interviewed in
public by the appropriate aldermanic committee at the request of any
member of the Board of Aldermen. [Amended 5-13-2014 by Ord. No.
O-14-014]
§ 5-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-22
1:33
member so called to order shall take his seat, and the Board may decide the
question on appeal.
§ 5-23. Suspension of rules. [NRO 1975, T. 3, § 214; NRO 1987,
§ 2-47; amended 2-13-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-003]
Unless suspended by a majority vote of the members of the Board of
Alderman present for a specific purpose, the rules and orders set out in this
division shall be observed in all cases.
§ 5-24. Other applicable rules. [NRO 1975, T. 3, § 215; NRO 1987,
§ 2-48; amended 10-25-1977 by Ord. No. O-76-7; 3-14-1995 by Ord.
No. O-94-78]
§ 5-25. Bylaws as ordinances; enacting clause. [NRO 1975, T. 3,
§ 216; NRO 1987, § 2-49]
All bylaws passed by the Board of Aldermen shall be termed ordinances, and
the enacting style shall be: "The City of Nashua ordains."
§ 5-26. Effective date of ordinances, etc. [NRO 1975, T. 3, § 217;
NRO 1987, § 2-50]
A. Except in cases covered by the City Charter or other ordinances of the
City, the rules in Mason's Manual of Legislative Procedure, 2000
Edition, shall govern the proceedings of the Board of Aldermen.
[Amended 1-26-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-02]
B. Action previously taken by the Board may be rescinded only when the
proposal to rescind is placed on the Board's agenda by communication,
resolution or ordinance, as appropriate. Passage of a motion to rescind
previous action by the Board within the same two-year term of the
Board shall require an affirmative vote of eight members of the Board of
Aldermen. [Added 1-23-2007 by Ord. No. O-06-74]
C. The originating (first-listed) aldermanic sponsor of legislation before a
standing or ad hoc committee of the Board of Aldermen who is not a
member of that committee may introduce and debate amendments to
this legislation, but shall have no vote on the committee. [Added
1-27-2009 by Ord. No. O-08-51]
D. Any recommendation made to the Board of Aldermen by City staff as
part of their employment shall include the names and job titles of the
City staff that participated in producing the recommendation and the
reasons for the recommendation. [Added 8-10-2010 by Ord. No.
O-10-17]
E. The presiding officer of the Board or a committee may request of the
Board or committee that any procedural motion be accepted in the
absence of objections by members of the Board or committee. [Added
2-13-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-004]
§ 5-22 NASHUA CODE § 5-26
1:34
§ 5-27. Dating, signing, recording, publication and printing of
ordinances. [NRO 1975, T. 3, § 218; NRO 1987, § 2-51]
§ 5-28. Public hearings. [Added 9-23-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-326]
Public hearings shall be conducted as follows, unless another procedure is
required by statute or ordinance:
A. Unless otherwise provided therein, each ordinance, resolution or order
passed by the Board of Aldermen as to which the Mayor does not have a
negative shall take effect upon its passage.
B. A vote, ordinance or resolution or any part thereof as to which the
Mayor has a negative shall take effect either upon signing and approval
by him, or upon the failure of the Mayor to act, upon the expiration of
seven days from its passage.
C. If a vote, ordinance or resolution or any part thereof is vetoed by the
Mayor and upon reconsideration is passed over such veto by an
affirmative vote of not less than 10 Aldermen on roll call, it shall take
effect on its passage unless otherwise provided therein.
A. Each ordinance shall bear the date of its passage, as attested by the
City Clerk and the President of the Board of Aldermen and, if necessary,
the date of its approval by the Mayor or of its reconsideration or
enactment by the Board of Aldermen notwithstanding the objection of
the Mayor.
B. All ordinances which are enacted shall be recorded by the City Clerk in
the order in which they were passed.
C. The City Clerk shall cause all ordinances passed by the Board of
Aldermen to be published by title one day in a newspaper of local
circulation; but whenever the City shall make a general revision of all
its ordinances, no publication of such revised ordinances shall be
required in any newspaper. [Added 9-23-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-32]
D. Immediately after the passage of any ordinance, the City Clerk shall
cause the same to be printed upon sheets uniform in size and style as
the Code, and sufficient in number to meet the public needs. [Added
9-23-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-32]
A. An explanation of the subject of the hearing shall be presented to the
public by the sponsor(s) of the measure being heard or by
administrative or professional staff under prior arrangement with the
chair of the board or committee holding the public hearing.
B. Following the presentation set forth in Subsection A, the chair shall
recognize members of the public to testify in favor, followed by
6. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 5-28, Publication of ordinances,
adopted NRO 1975, T. 3, § 219; NRO 1987, § 2-52, as amended.
§ 5-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-28
1:35
§ 5-29. Pennichuck Corporation sole shareholder voting.7 [Amended
10-22-2013 by Ord. No. 13-037]
§ 5-30. City bonds and tax anticipation notes. [NRO 1975, T. 3,
§ 221; NRO 1987, § 2-54]
The issuance of bonds or tax anticipation notes by the City shall be
authorized by a resolution of the Board of Aldermen, passed by at least 2/3
of all the members of the Board. All such bonds and notes shall be signed by
the Mayor and countersigned by the City Treasurer, and shall have the City
Seal affixed thereto.
members of the public opposed and shall allow an opportunity for
rebuttal by members of the public.
C. The chair of the board or committee holding the hearing may allow
questions from the public and recognize sponsors or staff to respond to
those questions.
D. The public hearing shall not be limited in duration nor may members of
the public be denied the opportunity to speak, but the chair may set or
extend time limits for each member of the public speaking, subject to
motion and affirmative vote by members of the board or committee
holding the hearing.
A. Upon receipt of the notice of the annual shareholder meeting and the
proxy card, these materials shall be submitted for approval to the Board
of Aldermen.
B. All decisions necessary to enter the City's shareholder vote by proxy at
the Pennichuck Corporation Annual Meeting of the Sole Shareholder
shall be made by vote of the Board of Aldermen and the City shall
submit its vote via proxy card mailed to the Pennichuck Board of
Directors.
C. All individual proposals listed on the proxy card for the Annual Meeting
of the Sole Shareholder shall be separately raised and discussed by the
full Board of Aldermen.
D. For the election of directors for the Board of Directors, the qualification
of each nominee shall be reviewed and discussed individually.
E. The Board of Aldermen shall authorize the Mayor to submit the proxy
card, if the Mayor is not a member of the Board of Directors of the
corporation, and shall otherwise authorize the president of the Board of
Aldermen to submit the proxy card.
7. Editor's Note: Former § 5-29, Printing ordinances for public distribution, adopted NRO
1975, T. 3, § 220; NRO 1987, § 2-53, was repealed 9-23-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-32. For
current provisions, see § 5-27.
§ 5-28 NASHUA CODE § 5-31
1:36
§ 5-31. Code of conduct. [NRO 1987, § 2-55; amended 10-22-2002
by Ord. No. O-02-105; 3-25-2003 by Ord. No. O-03-141]
A. Members shall treat each other with respect and courtesy and as equals
entitled to the same rights.
B. In order to best serve the citizens of Nashua, members must provide
assistance and support to one another, and work together to accomplish
their common goals.
C. Debate is an essential feature of democratic government and, as such,
requires clarity and honesty on the part of each speaker and
attentiveness on the part of all members.
D. Indecent, vulgar or disorderly language is always inappropriate and
demeans the entire Board.
E. While it is always proper to question or condemn the nature or
consequences of a proposed measure, it is never proper to question the
motives or good faith of that measure's proponents or opponents.
F. Each member is responsible for the behavior of his or her fellow
members, since inappropriate behavior which goes unchallenged
reflects badly on the entire Board.
G. Members shall address his or her colleague by title followed by
surname or title and the district/ward he or she represents.
H. Members of the public attending or participating at meetings and
hearings shall be treated with respect and courtesy in accordance with
this section.
§ 5-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-31
1:37

Part 3
Administrative Code
ARTICLE IV
Generally
§ 5-32. Purpose. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 101; NRO 1987, § 2-71;
amended 4-30-1979 by Ord. No. O-78-149]
This Part 3 is established in accordance with Paragraph 49-a of the City
Charter for the purpose of "providing for the division of the administrative
service of the City into departments, divisions and bureaus, and defining the
functions and duties of each."
§ 5-33. Administrative divisions; officers and employees. [NRO
1975, T. 4, § 102; NRO 1987, § 2-72; amended 4-30-1979 by Ord. No.
O-78-149; 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. O-84-17; 9-8-1998 by Ord. No.
O-98-63; 4-13-1999 by Ord. No. O-99-107; 9-16-2003 by Ord. No.
O-03-197; 9-12-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-27; 2-26-2008 by Ord. No.
O-08-07; 3-25-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-11]
A. The Mayor is the chief administrative officer of the City. The Mayor
shall appoint division directors and department heads as provided by
Section 42 of the Charter, for indefinite terms, on the basis of merit and
fitness to perform their duties. The Mayor may appoint interim
directors for the Divisions of Community Development and Community
Services for a period of no more than 120 days before obtaining
approval of those appointments by the Board of Aldermen as provided
elsewhere in this Part 3. Division directors, interim directors and/or
department heads may be removed by the Mayor for misconduct or
inefficiency. All employees of the administrative divisions of the City
(other than those represented by unions) shall be employed and
compensated in accordance with the City's merit plan.
B. The administrative services of the City shall consist of the following
divisions:
(1) Community Development Division.
(2) Public Works Division.
(3) Division of Public Health and Community Services.
(4) Information Technology Division.
C. Posted on the City of Nashua's website shall be either information on
the education and work experience of division directors and
department heads or an indication that such information is available for
review in the Human Resources Department. [Added 3-22-2011 by
Ord. No. O-10-19]
§ 5-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-34
1:39
§ 5-34. Powers and duties of division directors. [NRO 1975, T. 4,
§ 103; NRO 1987, § 2-73; amended 4-30-1979 by Ord. No. O-78-149]
§ 5-35. Aldermanic investigations. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 104; NRO
1987, § 2-74; amended 4-30-1979 by Ord. No. O-78-149]
Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit the powers of the Board
of Aldermen to conduct investigations into the conduct of any officer or
department, or any matter relating to the welfare of the City, and delegating
to such committees powers of inquiry as the Board of Aldermen deem
necessary.
A. Each division director shall be responsible for the efficient operation of
his division. He shall perform all the duties and exercise all the powers
conferred upon his office by applicable laws, ordinances and
resolutions.
B. Division directors may prescribe divisional rules and regulations not
inconsistent with general law, the City Charter, this article and the
provisions of the merit plan, for the administration of their various
divisions, the conduct of their employees, and the proper performance
of the division's business.
C. Division directors, with the approval of the Mayor, may establish such
departments and subunits as may be deemed desirable in the interest of
economy and efficiency, and in accordance with sound administrative
principles and practices.
D. Each division director shall be responsible for satisfactory custodial
maintenance and care of all City property and buildings assigned to his
division.
E. Each division director shall be responsible for maintaining the
operations of his division on a basis of cooperation with other divisions.
F. Each division director shall be responsible for preparing and submitting
both routine and special reports on the operation of his division to the
Mayor, or to any state or federal agency, as required.
G. At such time as may be requested by the Mayor, each division director
shall submit an itemized estimate of the expenditures for the next fiscal
year for his division for use in preparation of the proposed budget for
that year.
H. All division directors shall be responsible for following the provisions of
Article XVII of this chapter, with respect to purchases and contracts for
their divisions.
I. The division directors shall have the right to dismiss department heads
and other personnel within their divisions for cause, in accordance with
procedures established in the merit system.
J. Salaries of division directors shall be as outlined in the merit plan.
§ 5-34 NASHUA CODE § 5-36
1:40
§ 5-36. Powers of trustees. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 105; NRO 1987,
§ 2-75; amended 4-30-1979 by Ord. No. O-78-149]
Nothing in this article shall be construed as to alter the powers of any
trustee or Board of Trustees established by law or under any will or other
trust document.
§ 5-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-36
1:41

ARTICLE V
Office of the Mayor
§ 5-37. General duties; administrative assistants. [NRO 1975, T. 4,
§ 111; NRO 1987, § 2-91; amended 4-30-1979 by Ord. No. O-78-149]
The Mayor shall supervise the administrative affairs of the City and shall
carry out the policies enacted by the Board of Aldermen. He shall perform
those duties prescribed by the City Charter (see Section 45) and he shall
have such other powers and duties as are not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Charter. The Mayor shall appoint an administrative
assistant who shall perform such duties as the Mayor shall determine
and whose term in office shall coincide with that of the Mayor. The
administrative assistant can be removed by the Mayor for good cause. The
Mayor shall appoint such administrative staff as he deems necessary to
support the functions performed in his office.
§ 5-38. Staff; powers and duties. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 112; NRO 1987,
§ 2-92; amended 4-30-1979 by Ord. No. O-78-149; 11-15-1979 by
Ord. No. O-79-233; 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. O-84-17; 9-10-1986 by
Ord. No. O-86-84; 9-12-1995 by Ord. No. O-94-74]
The Mayor's staff shall consist of those individuals as he shall determine
necessary to perform the following functions:
A. Legal. The City Solicitor/Corporation Counsel shall be the same person
and shall be chief legal officer of the City. The City Solicitor/Corporation
Counsel shall be appointed as specified in the City Charter, Section 42.
The individual appointed shall have been admitted to, and be in good
standing as an attorney and counsellor of all courts, both state and
federal, sitting in the state. This individual shall be responsible for the
satisfactory performance of all the legal work of the City. The City
Solicitor/Corporation Counsel is responsible for keeping current with
respect to all laws and regulations affecting the City. There shall be a
Deputy City Solicitor/Corporation Counsel, who shall assist the City
Solicitor/Corporation Counsel in the performance of his duties and
perform such other duties as assigned by the City Solicitor/Corporation
Counsel or the Mayor. The Deputy City Solicitor/Corporation Counsel
shall be appointed by the Mayor, in consultation with the City Solicitor/
Corporation Counsel, and shall be confirmed by the Board of Aldermen.
The City Solicitor/Corporation Counsel may hire such other
professional and administrative staff as deemed necessary, and the
Mayor shall have final approval on all personnel to be hired.
B. Emergency. The office of the Mayor shall be responsible for the
emergency preparedness function.8
8. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 2-93, adopted 12-11-1991 by Ord. No. O-91-88 which
pertained to the Intergovernmental Relations Committee and immediately followed this
section, was repealed 6-10-1997 by Ord. No. O-97-138.
§ 5-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-38
1:43
§ 5-38.1. Direct reports to Mayor. [Added 3-25-2008 by Ord. No.
O-08-11]
C. Economic development. The mission of the Mayor's economic
development function is to promote a diversified, sustainable and
vibrant economic base that maintains a high quality of life for Nashua
residents and businesses. The Mayor shall appoint, with the consent of
the Board of Aldermen, a Director of Economic Development. The
Director of Economic Development shall report to the Mayor. He/she
shall have overall responsibility for developing programs to enhance
the economic vitality of the City, including maintenance of strong
communications between the business community and the City;
fostering opportunities for job retention and existing business
expansion; promoting expansion of the labor force; promoting
employment diversity and growth through new business recruitment;
encouraging the continued enhancement and vitality of downtown
Nashua as the focal point of the community and a desirable place to
live, work, shop and conduct social discourse; and oversight and
management of public parking lots, garages and meters and parking
enforcement. In addition the Director shall also undertake such special
studies, projects, and other related duties as may be assigned by the
Mayor to promote economic development; undertake or assist in the
development and implementation of intermediate and long-range plans
for the economic development and improvement of the City; and
maintain up-to-date statistics on the economic conditions of the City.
[Added 6-26-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-104; amended 6-14-2016 by
Ord. No. O-16-012; 10-24-2017]
A. City Clerk. The mayor shall appoint a City Clerk in accordance with
Section 42 of the City Charter. The City Clerk shall report directly to the
mayor and shall perform those duties prescribed by law, the City
Charter and ordinances, to include the proper maintenance of voter
registration files and voter registration procedures (as delegated by the
Board of Registrars), the recording and maintenance of vital statistics
which the City is responsible for maintaining, the maintenance of City
ordinances and resolutions, and the preparation of agendas and
minutes of the Board of Aldermen as the Board may direct. The City
Clerk shall perform such other duties as may be directed by the mayor.
Within 10 days after assuming office, the City Clerk shall give bond as
specified by state law.
B. Human Resources Department. The mayor shall appoint a Human
Resources Manager who shall be the head of this department and who
shall report to the mayor. The human resources manager shall have the
responsibility and duties described in Article III, Employment of New
Personnel, in Chapter 50, Personnel. In addition, the human resources
manager's duties shall include the maintenance of the City's selfinsurance
programs for unemployment, health/dental benefits and life
insurance programs. The department head shall perform such other
related duties as requested by the mayor.
§ 5-38 NASHUA CODE § 5-38.1
1:44
ARTICLE VI
Cable Television Advisory Board
[Added 3-25-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-119]
§ 5-39. (Reserved)
§ 5-40. (Reserved)
9. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 5-39, Director, and § 5-40,
Department, included in NRO 1975, T.4, §§ 121 and 122, respectively, and NRO 1987,
§§ 2-106 and 2-107, respectively, as amended.
§ 5-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-40
1:45

ARTICLE VII
Community Development Division
§ 5-41. Director. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 131; NRO 1987, § 2-121;
amended 4-30-1979 by Ord. No. O-78-149]
§ 5-42. Departments. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 132; NRO 1987, § 2-122;
amended 4-30-1979 by Ord. No. O-78-149; 2-14-1995 by Ord. No.
O-95-90; 4-10-2001 by Ord. No. O-01-115; 12-26-2001 by Ord. No.
O-01-221; 5-14-2002 by Ord. No. O-02-39]
The Community Development Division shall be comprised of the following
departments:
A. The Mayor shall, with the consent of the Board of Aldermen, appoint a
Director of Community Development, who shall have overall
responsibility for the satisfactory performance of the functions assigned
to his Division. The Director shall be responsible to the Mayor.
B. The Director shall coordinate the activities of the division with the
Zoning Board of Adjustment and the Planning Board, to include the
Capital Improvements Committee. The Director shall be the official
liaison between the City and the Nashua Housing Authority.
A. Planning Department. The mission of the Planning Department is to
provide the regulatory framework and leadership to guide the City in
the process and maintenance of its vision and support of its respective
boards and commissions. The department head shall be appointed by
the Mayor in consultation with the Director of the Community
Development Division, and shall be responsible to the Director. The
head of the Planning Department shall be responsible for the
satisfactory performance of the functions of his Department, which
shall include creating a structure for updating existing plans,
developing new plans, and promoting those plans so they are broadly
used as the basis for all future decisionmaking; recommend land use
regulations that will bring the City toward its vision; aggressively
pursue opportunities consistent with the vision; through outreach to the
community, lead the City to a higher level of understanding and
commitment to the City's potential. The Planning Department shall
provide technical assistance to the Planning Board, the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, the Conservation Commission, and the Capital
Improvements Committee. The department head shall perform such
other duties as requested by the Mayor and/or the director of the
Community Development Division.
B. Department of Building Safety. The mission of the Department of
Building Safety is to assure that the built environment meets the
adopted codes. The department head shall be appointed by the Mayor
in consultation with the Director of the Community Development
Division, and shall be responsible to the Director. The head of the
Department of Building Safety shall be responsible for the satisfactory
§ 5-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-42
1:47
performance of the functions of his or her Department, which shall
include providing an efficient system to issue and monitor building
projects in the City; educate the citizens regarding building issues;
develop and implement ongoing programs to assure that buildings
in the City are safe. The department head shall perform such other
duties as requested by the Mayor and/or the Director of the Community
Development Division. The department head will also serve as the
Building Official and shall be responsible for the satisfactory
performance of assigned duties, including the development,
maintenance, implementation and enforcement of the Building,
Plumbing, Electrical, and Fire Codes adopted by the City.
C. Code Enforcement Department. The mission of the Code Enforcement
Department is to assure compliance with Zoning and Housing Codes.
The Mayor shall appoint a department head in consultation with the
Director of the Community Development Division. The department head
shall be responsible to the Director for the satisfactory performance of
assigned duties, which shall include, but not be limited to enforcement
of the Zoning and Housing Codes adopted by the City; providing an
efficient system to receive and respond to complaints; developing and
implementing ongoing programs to encourage increased compliance.
The department head shall perform such other duties as may be
requested by the Mayor and/or the Director of the Community
Development Division.
D. Urban Programs Department. The mission of the Urban Programs
Department is to provide financial and technical resources to
individuals and local groups to improve living conditions and access to
jobs and services, primarily for those of lower income and those with
disabilities and to assist the community in the identification of needs
and strategies affecting individuals and neighborhoods of lower
income; competently obtain and administer federal, state, local, and
private resources directed to these needs; and assess the effectiveness
of outcomes. The Mayor shall appoint a department head in
consultation with the Director of the Community Development Division.
The department head shall be responsible to the director for the
satisfactory performance of assigned duties, which shall include the
development of, monitoring, and implementing the CDBG program;
administration and coordination of grants which the City has received
or may receive in the future which are related to the functions of the
Community Development Division, including the functions of grant
search, application and coordination; and the implementation of various
community development, economic development and housing
assistance programs which the City has ongoing. The department head
shall perform such other duties as may be requested by the Mayor and/
or the Director of the Community Development Division.10 [Amended
9-22-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-71]
10.Editor's Note: Original Subsection (5), Office of Economic Development, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 6-26-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-104.
§ 5-42 NASHUA CODE § 5-42
1:48
§ 5-42.1. Citizens Advisory Commission for Community Grants.
[NRO 1987, § 2-153; added 9-22-1987 by Ord. No. O-87-158;
amended 2-22-2000 by Ord. No. O-00-10; 2-27-2007 by Ord. No.
O-07-79; 3-26-2013 by Ord. No. O-12-018; 12-13-2016 by Ord. No.
O-16-02111; 9-26-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-044]
E. Transportation Department. The mission of the Transportation
Department is to manage, coordinate, promote and develop
transportation resources in the community. The Mayor shall appoint a
department head in consultation with the Director of the Community
Development Division. The department head shall be responsible to the
Director for the satisfactory performance of assigned duties, which
shall include, but not be limited to, oversight and management of the
transit program and rail service. The department head shall also
improve the coordination of all modes of transportation. The
department head shall perform such other duties as requested by the
Mayor or the Director of the Community Development Division. [Added
9-22-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-71; amended 6-14-2016 by Ord. No.
O-16-012]
A. Citizens Advisory Commission for Community Grants established.
There is hereby created a Citizens Advisory Commission for Community
Grants (CAC), which shall evaluate the funding requests of local human
services agencies, meet with representatives of the agencies as needed,
vote on a recommended funding level and suggest conditions to be met
by the agency receiving the funds. The Citizens Advisory Commission
for Community Grants will forward its final recommendations to the
Mayor and Board of Aldermen.
B. Membership of Commission.
(1) Composition. The Citizens Advisory Commission for Community
Grants shall consist of seven members.
(a) Four members shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed
by the Board of Aldermen.
(b) Two members shall be appointed by the President of the Board
of Aldermen and confirmed by the Board of Aldermen.
(c) One aldermanic member, who is on the Human Affairs
Committee, shall be appointed by the President of the Board of
Aldermen and confirmed by the Board of Aldermen.
(2) Qualifications. In determining the qualifications of a member of the
Commission, the Mayor and Board of Aldermen shall take into
consideration the individual's demonstrated interest and ability to
understand, appreciate and promote the purposes of this section.
11.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided for redesignating former § 5-46 as this § 5-42.1.
§ 5-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-42.1
1:49
All members shall be residents of the City. Potential members must
fully disclose all potential or real conflicts of interest.
(3) Terms. The members of the Commission shall be appointed for
three-year terms. Initial appointments shall be staggered so that
subsequent appointments shall not occur at the same time. The
Aldermanic Human Affairs Committee member shall serve
concomitantly with his or her term of office. The term of the
Chairman of the Commission shall be for one year. A Chairman
shall serve no more than three consecutive terms.
(4) Vacancies. If a vacancy is created, an interim appointment for the
remainder of the term shall be made in accordance with the
procedures hereinbefore described.
C. Organization, meetings and rules of Commission.
(1) The Citizens Advisory Commission for Community Grants shall
annually elect a Chairman and Secretary from among the
appointed members and create and fill such other offices as it may
deem necessary to fulfill its work. The Chairman shall not be the
Aldermanic Commissioner. Elections shall take place at the last
meeting of the application evaluation cycle. The Commission shall
meet at the call of the Chairman, and at such other time as the
Commission may determine, and shall adopt rules for the orderly
conduct of meetings. Minutes of all meetings shall be kept, and all
records and meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public
in accordance with New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated
Chapter 91-a.
(2) In order for the Commission to take any action, at least four
members shall be present to constitute a quorum. A simple majority
of the quorum shall be sufficient to approve or deny any motion to
come before the Commission.
D. Procedures.
(1) Prior to November 1 of each budget year, the Chairman of the
Commission shall coordinate with the Urban Programs Department
to draft a schedule that aligns with the development of the City's
HUD Annual Action Plan.
(2) Prior to December 1 of each budget year, the Chairman of the
Commission shall provide a schedule to the Board of Aldermen. At a
minimum, the schedule shall include:
(a) An orientation session for the members with the Mayor, Human
Affairs Committee and the Urban Programs Department to
review the City's Consolidated Plan and annual funding
priorities;
(b) Posting date of application;
§ 5-42.1 NASHUA CODE § 5-42.1
1:50
(c) Submission deadline for applications;
(d) Meeting dates of the Commission to evaluate applications
received. These meetings may include question-and-answer
sessions to allow agencies to speak on behalf of their
applications, as well as meetings to allow the members to
evaluate applications as a Commission; and
(e) The Chairman shall also provide a recommended clerical
support funding budget for the subsequent year.
(3) The Citizens Advisory Commission for Community Grants funding
application and worksheet, including annual updates or changes,
shall be approved by the Human Affairs Committee prior to use.
(4) Applications will be submitted through the Urban Programs
Department and posted to the City's website following the
application deadline.
(5) Prior to May 15 of each budget year, the Chairman will provide
completed evaluation worksheets to the Urban Programs
Department for posting to the City's website. The worksheets will
include recommendations based on consistent criteria, scoring and
guidelines as defined in the published application.
(6) At least once per Aldermanic term, the Chairman of the Aldermanic
Human Affairs Committee shall invite the Citizens Advisory
Commission for Community Grants to a joint meeting. The meeting
will serve as a review of the procedures of the Commission.
(7) The Urban Programs Department will provide administrative
assistance to the Commission.
§ 5-42.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-42.1
1:51

ARTICLE VIII
Public Works Division
§ 5-43. Director; duties. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 141; NRO 1987, § 2-136;
amended 4-30-1979 by Ord. No. O-78-149; 7-9-1985 by Ord. No.
O-85-163; 2-14-1995 by Ord. No. O-95-89; 12-26-1995 by Ord. No.
O-95-148; 4-8-1997 by Ord. No. O-97-119; 9-9-1997 by Ord. No.
O-97-163; 3-24-1998 by Ord. No. O-98-63, O-98-09; 7-1-2002 by
Ord. No. O-02-70]
A. The Director of the Public Works Division, and all other employees of
this Division, shall be employed/appointed in accordance with Section
61 of the City Charter.
B. The Director shall be responsible to the Mayor and the Board of Public
Works for the satisfactory performance of the duties and functions
assigned to his division. These duties shall be comprised of the
following functional areas and such other duties as may be assigned by
the Mayor and/or the Board of Public Works:
(1) Sewage treatment. The director is responsible for the satisfactory
operation of the sewage treatment facilities operated by the City or
which may be operated by the City in the future. The Director is
authorized to delegate this responsibility to a qualified engineer
who shall manage the treatment plants of the City and who shall be
responsible to the Director.
(2) Civil engineering. There shall be appointed, in accordance with
Section 61 of the City Charter, a City Engineer, who shall perform
those duties and functions prescribed by law, the City Charter, and
City ordinances. (See §§ 5-64 through 5-68.) The City Engineer
shall be responsible to the director and shall perform such
additional functions/duties as may be prescribed by the Director,
the Mayor and/or the Board of Public Works.
(3) Traffic engineering. There shall be appointed, in accordance with
Section 61 of the City Charter, a Traffic Engineer, who shall
perform the traffic engineering functions required by the City. The
Traffic Engineer shall also be responsible for the construction and
erection of traffic signs (in cooperation with the appropriate
aldermanic committee), the maintenance and operation of traffic
signals, as well as the coordination of federally funded traffic
improvement and signalization projects with the state and federal
highway departments and other traffic-related operations. The
Traffic Engineer shall be responsible for the satisfactory
completion of his assigned functions to the Director of the Public
Works Division. The Traffic Engineer shall provide liaison to the
appropriate aldermanic committee. The Traffic Engineer shall also
perform such duties/functions as may be assigned by the Director
of the Public Works Division, the Mayor and/or the Board of Public
Works. [Amended 9-22-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-71]
§ 5-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-43
1:53
(4) Streets and equipment maintenance. The Director of the Public
Works Division shall be responsible for the maintenance of the
Division's equipment and the maintenance and repair of the
streets, sewers and drains of the City. The Director shall also be
responsible for the satisfactory provision of sanitation services. The
Director may delegate this authority to a Superintendent of the
Streets Department, who shall be appointed in accordance with
Section 61 of the City Charter and who shall be responsible for the
satisfactory performance of his duties to the Director. He shall also
perform such duties/functions as may be assigned by the director,
the Mayor and/or the Board of Public Works.
(5) Parks and Recreation Department. The Director shall be
responsible for the maintenance of City parks and for the
development and implementation of recreation activities. Such
authority and duties may be delegated to a Park Superintendent
and/or Recreation Director appointed in accordance with Section
61 of the City Charter. The control of City parks by the Public Works
Division shall be limited to the improvement and maintenance of
City parks. Purchase and designation of City land for recreational
use shall remain the function of the Board of Aldermen acting by
the Lands and Buildings Committee. This legislation shall be
implemented upon the physical relocation of the Recreation
Department to the proposed Greeley Park addition.
(a) There shall be no construction at Greeley Park except for
construction approved by a majority of the Board of Aldermen
by ordinance after a public hearing. "Construction," as used in
this section, shall be construed broadly, including but not
limited to any new construction of any type of structure,
monument, and/or renovation or rehabilitation of an existing
structure. This subsection is not intended to prohibit the Parks
and Recreation Department from repairing, maintaining or
otherwise servicing structures fully constructed and
operational as of December 31, 2006. If applying for any
building permit or demolition permit which would come within
the scope of review of the Historic District Commission for that
part of Greeley Park deemed applicable in § 190-2, the Board of
Aldermen shall first seek an advisory opinion of the Historic
District Commission as provided for in § 190-22C. [Amended
11-28-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-47; 10-24-2017 by Ord. No.
O-17-039]
(b) The Parks and Recreation Department shall be responsible for
operating all youth sports programs in the City with funds
allocated for the programs by the Board of Aldermen.
(c) Public bathrooms will be constructed and located on the east
side of Greeley Park. A new gazebo will be purchased and
installed in Greeley Park. [Amended 7-8-2008 by Ord. No.
O-08-27]
§ 5-43 NASHUA CODE § 5-43
1:54
(d) The City shall not sell any contiguous part of the Holman
Stadium parcel (Assessor’s Map 63, Lot 52, as of July 1, 2010).
In the alternative, if the City does ever sell any noncontiguous
part of the Holman Stadium parcel, the abutter(s) to the
property to be sold will have a first right of refusal to purchase
the property. [Added 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-24]
(6) The Director of the Public Works Division shall be responsible for
the satisfactory operation of the City's sanitary landfill, the
collection of municipal solid waste and any other related solid
waste operations and duties. The Director may delegate this duty to
a Superintendent of Solid Waste, who shall be appointed in
accordance with Section 61 of the City Charter and who shall be
responsible for the satisfactory performance of his/her duties to the
Director. He/she shall also perform such duties/functions as may be
assigned by the Director, the Mayor and/or the Board of Public
Works.
(7) Liaison functions. The Director of the Public Works Division shall
be the official liaison between the City and the Cemetery Trustees
in all areas regarding maintenance/improvements to the City's
cemeteries.
§ 5-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-43
1:55

ARTICLE IX
Division of Public Health and Community Services
§ 5-44. Director. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 151; NRO 1987, § 2-151;
amended 4-30-1979 by Ord. No. O-78-149; 9-8-1998 by Ord. No.
O-98-62; 9-16-2003 by Ord. No. O-03-197]
§ 5-45. Departments. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 152; NRO 1987, § 2-152;
amended 4-30-1979 by Ord. No. O-78-149; 9-9-1998 by Ord. No.
O-98-63; 9-16-2003 by Ord. No. O-03-197]
The division of public health and community services shall be comprised of
the following departments:
A. The Mayor shall, with the consent of the Board of Aldermen, appoint a
Director of the Division of Public Health and Community Services, who
shall have overall responsibility for the satisfactory completion of the
duties/functions assigned to the Division.
B. The Director of the Division of Public Health and Community Services
shall be the official liaison between the administrative services of the
City and (1) the Board of Education and the employees of the School
Department, (2) the trustees and employees of the public libraries, and
(3) the commissioners and employees of the Nashua Airport Authority
in all areas except budget preparation/submission, personnel
administration, and financial and payroll procedures; and shall be the
official liaison with human services providers operating in the City, such
as the Nashua Community Council, the Nashua Youth Council, the
Visiting Nurses Association, and similar private nonprofit agencies.
A. Environmental Health Department. This Department shall be headed by
the Health Officer, who shall be selected by the Board of Health, in
consultation with the Mayor, in accordance with Section 80 of the City
Charter. In addition to the duties assigned to the Health Officer by
Section 80 of the City Charter, the Health Officer shall be responsible
for the enforcement of all laws and ordinances dealing with the
environmental health of the City and its residents. Specifically, the
Health Officer shall be responsible for the enforcement of air and water
quality regulations, the approval of requests for private waste disposal
systems, inspection and licensing of food-service establishments and
such other environmental concerns which impact on the residents of
the City. The Health Officer shall report to the Director of the Division of
Public Health and Community Services, and shall perform such other
duties as assigned by the Director of the Division of Public Health and
Community Services, the Mayor and/or the Board of Health.
B. Community Health Department. This Department shall be headed by
the Chief Public Health Nurse, who shall be appointed by the Mayor in
consultation with the Director of the Division of Public Health and
Community Services, and the Board of Health. The Public Health Nurse
is responsible to the Director of the Division of Public Health and
§ 5-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-45
1:57
§ 5-46. (Reserved)12
Community Services for the satisfactory performance of the duties/
functions assigned to the department. This department shall be
responsible for the development and implementation of the personal
health programs of the City. Programs will be developed in consultation
with the Board of Health, the Mayor and the Director of the Division
of Public Health and Community Services. Under the purview of this
department is the evaluation of the City's ambulance services, whether
private, public or contract, with a view toward assuring the provision
of adequate, inexpensive emergency medical services. The Chief Public
Health Nurse shall also be responsible for the enforcement of the
personal health rules and regulations required by law or ordinance, or
requested by the Board of Health, the Mayor and/or the Director of the
Division of Public Health and Community Services.
C. Welfare Department. The Mayor shall appoint a Welfare Officer in
consultation with the Director of the Division of Public Health and
Community Services, and in accordance with Section 42 of the City
Charter. The Welfare Officer shall be responsible to the Director of the
Division of Public Health and Community Services for the satisfactory
administration of City welfare in accordance with all applicable laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations. The Welfare Officer shall also
perform such duties/functions as assigned by the Mayor and/or the
Director of the Division of Public Health and Community Services.
12.Editor’s Note: Former § 5-46, Review and Comment Commission, was moved 12-13-2016
by Ord. No. O-16-021. See now Art. VII, Community Development Division, § 5-42.1,
Citizens Advisory Commission for Community Grants.
§ 5-45 NASHUA CODE § 5-46
1:58
ARTICLE X
Safety and Enforcement Division
§ 5-47. Merit plan. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 161; NRO 1987, § 2-166;
amended 4-30-1979 by Ord. No. O-78-149; 2-28-1984 by Ord. No.
O-84-17]
Except as provided by law or management/union agreements, all
nonuniformed employees of the three safety and enforcement departments
(fire, police and probation) shall fall under the merit plan of the City.
§ 5-48. Officers. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 162; NRO 1987, § 2-167;
amended 4-30-1979 by Ord. No. O-78-149; 2-28-1984 by Ord. No.
O-84-17]
There shall be no Director of the Safety and Enforcement Division. Unless
otherwise prescribed by law, Charter or ordinance, the Police Chief and the
Fire Chief shall have the same powers and duties as those prescribed for
division directors in this Part 3.
§ 5-49. Functions. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 163; NRO 1987, § 2-168;
amended 4-30-1979 by Ord. No. O-78-149; 2-28-1984 by Ord. No.
O-84-17]
The departments described in this article shall have the duties and
responsibilities prescribed by law, City Charter and ordinance.
§ 5-50. Police Department.13 [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 164; NRO 1987,
§ 2-169; amended 4-30-1979 by Ord. No. O-78-149; 2-28-1984 by
Ord. No. O-84-17]
The Police Department, in addition to the duties and responsibilities
prescribed by law or ordinance, shall be responsible for the enforcement of
the animal control ordinances of the City.
13.Editor's Note: See Ch. 55, Police Department.
§ 5-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-50
1:59

ARTICLE XI
Financial Services Division
§ 5-51. Director. [NRO 1987, § 2-170; amended 7-9-2002 by Ord. No.
O-02-66; 3-25-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-11]
§ 5-52. Comptroller. [NRO 1987, § 2-171; amended 7-9-2002 by Ord.
No. O-02-66]
A. The mayor shall appoint a chief financial officer to be director of the
financial services division. The chief financial officer shall report
directly to the mayor. The chief financial officer shall oversee all the
operations, management and functions of the Comptroller and
Treasurer/Tax Collector as prescribed in the City Charter.
B. The Chief Financial Officer may hold either the office of Comptroller or
that of Treasurer/Tax Collector, but not both.
C. The Director of the financial services division shall have the
responsibility to administer the programs and functions of the division
and ensure that the functions delineated in this division are carried out
efficiently and completely so that the fiscal responsibilities and the
statistical responsibilities of the division are met. The Director shall
also perform such other duties as assigned by the mayor. The Director
shall also be responsible for the maintenance and repair of all City
buildings, other than schools, not accomplished by the custodial staffs
of the respective departments, including the hiring of necessary
personnel, and shall make recommendations for and coordinate all
necessary capital improvements to those buildings with the Capital
Improvements Committee and the Board of Aldermen.
D. The Chief Financial Officer shall also be responsible for:
(1) Reviews and investigations of financial activities of all departments
and evaluation of related internal controls.
(2) Long-range financial planning.
(3) Advice to elected officials concerning status of city debt.
(4) Analysis, coordination, and negotiation of all new debt instruments.
(5) Development of fiscal performance measurements.
(6) Performance of other tasks as may be assigned by the Mayor.
A. Pursuant to Charter Sections 50, 50-b, and 56, the Comptroller shall be
responsible for the fiscal management functions of the City, including:
(1) A system of accounts in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles as they apply to municipalities to show the
financial condition and financial operations of the City in all its
departments.
§ 5-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-52
1:61
§ 5-53. Treasurer/Tax Collector. [NRO 1987, § 2-172; amended
7-9-2002 by Ord. No. O-02-66]
(2) An encumbrance system of budget operation for expenditures only
upon written requisition, for the preaudit of all claims and demands
against the City prior to payment and for the control of all
payments out of any public fund by individual warrants for each
payment to the official having custody thereof.
(3) Assistance to the Mayor in budget preparation.
B. The Comptroller shall also perform such other duties as are assigned by
the Chief Financial Officer.
A. Pursuant to Charter Section 82, 83, and 84, the Treasurer/Tax Collector
shall have the following responsibilities:
(1) Collecting all moneys due to the City except as otherwise provided
by law.
(2) Custody of and payment of all moneys belonging to the City.
(3) Keeping proper accounts of all sums received into and paid from
the treasury.
(4) Proper investment of City funds.
(5) Control and investment of trust funds placed in the Treasurer's
care.
(6) Reporting of financial transactions.
(7) All other duties required by law of City Treasurers and Tax
Collectors.
B. The Treasurer/Tax Collector shall also perform the City's vehicle
registration functions and Traffic Violations Bureau functions and any
other tasks assigned by the Chief Financial Officer.
C. Pursuant to RSA 261:92 and RSA 231:130-a, the Tax Collector/
Treasurer shall maintain a record containing a list of all residents who
have outstanding parking violations incurred in municipalities which
have adopted the provisions of RSA 231:130-a. The Tax Collector/
Treasurer shall notify the Clerk of any other municipality which has
adopted RSA 231:130-a of any outstanding parking violations incurred
by residents of such municipality within the City. The Tax Collector/
Treasurer shall notify the Clerk of any municipality which has adopted
the provisions of RSA 231:130-a of the payment of any outstanding
parking violations incurred by residents of such municipality within the
City. Such action shall be taken within 10 days of the payment of the
outstanding violation. The Tax Collector/Treasurer shall update and
keep readily available to residents the records list described above.
§ 5-52 NASHUA CODE § 5-53
1:62
§ 5-53.1. Additional departments. [Added 3-25-2008 by Ord. No.
O-08-11]
The Financial Services Division shall be comprised of the following
additional departments:
D. The Treasurer/Tax Collector shall also perform such other duties as are
assigned by the Chief Financial Officer.
A. Purchasing Department. The Mayor shall appoint a Purchasing
Manager in consultation with the Director of Financial Services. The
Purchasing Manager shall be responsible for the satisfactory
completion of the functions of the Purchasing Department and shall be
the head of this Department. The Purchasing Manager shall report
directly to the Director of Financial Services. The functions of the
Purchasing Manager and the Purchasing Department shall be as
specified in Article XVII of Part 4 of this chapter.
(1) City Messenger. The Purchasing Manager shall also be responsible
for the City Messenger, who shall perform the following duties:
deliver and execute messages, summonses and notices from the
Mayor and the Board of Aldermen, and other duties as prescribed
by the Purchasing Manager, the Director of Financial Services and/
or the Mayor.
(2) Custodial services. The Purchasing Manager shall also be
responsible for the custodial staff, whose duties include the repair,
heating, maintenance and upkeep of the City Hall, its grounds, and
the comfort stations located thereon.
B. Insurance Department. The Director of Financial Services shall appoint
an Insurance Manager who shall be responsible for the daily operations
of the City's commercial and self-insurance programs to include
workers' compensation, long-term disability, and vehicle accident;
management of the safety and loss prevention programs; and property
and personal liability insurance programs. The department head shall
perform such other related duties as requested by the Mayor or the
Director of the Financial Services division.
C. Assessors department. The Director of Financial Services shall be
responsible for the assessing duties as delegated by the Board of
Assessors (see City Charter, Section 42 and Sections 69 through 71),
which duties shall be performed by the First Assistant Assessor, who
shall perform such other related duties as requested by the Director of
the Financial Services division and/or the Mayor.
§ 5-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-53.1
1:63

ARTICLE XII
Information Technology Division
[Added 9-12-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-27]
§ 5-54. Director.
The Mayor shall appoint an Information Technology Division Director, who
shall have overall responsibility for the satisfactory performance of the
functions and duties assigned to the Division. The Director shall be
responsible to the Mayor.
§ 5-55. Duties.
The Information Technology Division shall assess the City's data processing
needs and shall develop and implement the data processing capabilities
required.
§ 5-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-55
1:65

Part 4
Officers And Employees
ARTICLE XIII
Generally
§ 5-56. Hunt Memorial Building (Library Hill) Board of Trustees.
[NRO 1987, § 2-186; amended 11-12-1996 by Ord. No. O-96-77;
3-14-2000 by Ord. No. O-00-12; 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-005]
A. A Board of Trustees for the Hunt Memorial Building is hereby
established. The Board shall have full control of the Hunt Memorial
Building, formerly known as the Hunt Memorial Library, which is to be
used as, but not limited to, a community building, a museum and a
space for any other appropriate use approved by the Board of Trustees.
B. The Hunt Memorial Building Board of Trustees shall consist of nine
members, the majority of whom are either residents of Nashua or
employed in Nashua. The Mayor of Nashua or the Mayor's designated
representative shall be a member of the Board of Trustees, and the
Mayor of Nashua shall appoint the remaining members of the Board of
Trustees, subject to confirmation by the Board of Aldermen. The initial
Board of Trustees, except the Mayor or the Mayor's designated
representative, shall hold office according to the following timetable:
one to hold office for one year; one to hold office for two years; two to
hold office for three years; two to hold office for four years; and two to
hold office for five years. After the initial Board of Trustees terms have
expired the term of office for each Trustee shall be five years. Vacancies
will be filled by the Mayor and confirmed by the Board of Aldermen. The
Board of Trustees shall meet at least annually on the first Monday in
February. Five members shall constitute a quorum for the exercise of
power and performance of duties. The Trustees shall receive no
compensation for their services.
C. The Hunt Memorial Building Board of Trustees shall manage the
property and all business affairs of the building including but not
limited to overseeing expenditures. The Board of Trustees may employ
such personnel as it deems necessary to operate and maintain the
facility. The Board of Trustees may also apply and accept for the benefit
of the Hunt Memorial Building grants, gifts, devises and bequests, as
may be made to it or to the City for the purpose of increasing or
improving the Hunt Memorial Building. The Board of Trustees is also
authorized to take and hold any grant, gift, bequest or devise of
property upon trust, real properties excluded, to apply the principal or
the income thereof in any manner it sees fit in accordance with its best
judgment and which will promote the purpose for which the building is
established e.g., community spirit; all, however, to be in accordance
with the terms and/or conditions of such grant, gift, bequest or devise.
§ 5-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-56
1:67
§ 5-57. Auditorium Commission. [NRO 1987, § 2-187; amended
12-9-1997 by Ord. No. O-97-69; 10-13-1998 by Ord. No. O-98-69]
§ 5-58. (Reserved)14
D. The Hunt Memorial Building Board of Trustees shall make and execute
all such rules and regulations for its government, the preservation of
property under its charge and the use and management thereof, as it
may from time to time deem necessary or expedient.
E. The Hunt Memorial Building Board of Trustees shall present an annual
report to the Mayor and Board of Aldermen including but not limited to
a listing of all receipts and expenditures, a statement of any
unexpended balance of money it may have, and of grants, gifts,
bequests or devises it may have received and is holding on behalf of the
City. Any disposal of real estate shall be governed by the Mayor and
Board of Aldermen.
A. An Auditorium Commission is hereby established. The Commission
shall be responsible for making recommendations to the Board of
Education for the improvement and maintenance of the Edmund Keefe
Auditorium. Expenditures for proposed improvement to the auditorium
will be through resolution approved by the Board of Aldermen. The
Commission shall also make recommendations to the Board of
Education concerning the use of the auditorium including, but not
limited to, scheduling, rentals, and the determination of rental fee(s).
[Amended 6-28-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-90; 10-24-2006 by Ord.
No. O-06-41]
B. The Commission shall consist of eight members. Two members shall be
appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Board of Aldermen. Two
members shall be appointed by the President of the Board of Alderman
and confirmed by the Board of Aldermen. Four members shall be
appointed by the Board of Education.
C. Two members shall be from the arts community, each of whom must be
currently affiliated with a registered music or theater group. One of the
members to be appointed by the Mayor, and one by the President of the
Board of Aldermen. Two members from the Nashua community at large
with an interest in the arts. One member will be appointed by the Mayor
and one by the President of the Board of Aldermen.
D. Members of the Commission will serve for three-year terms. Initially,
the terms will be staggered. The first two appointments by the Mayor
will be for three-year terms. The first two appointments by the
President of the Board of Aldermen will be for two-year terms and
remaining four members will be appointed for one-year terms. The
members of the Commission will serve without compensation. They
shall elect a Chairperson by majority vote and adopt bylaws as
necessary to regulate their affairs.
§ 5-56 NASHUA CODE § 5-59
1:68
§ 5-59. Joint Employee/Administration Health Insurance Advisory
Committee. [Added 5-22-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-101]
A. A Joint Employee/Administration Health Insurance Advisory Committee
is hereby established as a cooperative venture to identify innovative
strategies that will allow the City to continue to maintain quality health
care insurance, while containing future growth in health plan costs. The
Committee shall be responsible for making recommendations to the
Mayor and the Board of Aldermen for the development of the health
benefits program structure, including health and prescription benefit
designs, and the City's wellness/education programs.
B. The Committee shall consist of 21 members as follows: Mayor or
designee; the Risk Manager or designee; the City Solicitor/Corporation
Counsel or designee; the Chief Financial Officer or designee; the
Human Resource Manager or designee; the Superintendent of Schools
or designee; and the presidents of each of the City's collective
bargaining units (15 units) or designees. [Amended 1-26-2010 by
Ord. No. O-10-03]
14.Editor's Note: Former § 5-58, 14 Court Street Commission, added 10-24-2006 by Ord. No.
O-06-41, as amended, was repealed 3-11-2014 by Ord. No. O-14-002.
§ 5-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-59
1:69

ARTICLE XIV
Mayor
§ 5-60. Charter officers. [NRO 1987, § 2-196; amended 6-28-1994 by
Ord. No. O-94-22]
In accordance with Section 42 of the City Charter, the Mayor shall establish
the compensation of the Charter officers enumerated therein from time to
time within funds available in the City budget as approved annually and
consistently with the merit system.
§ 5-61. Mayoral salary. [NRO 1987, § 2-197; added 12-14-1999 by
Ord. No. O-9-176; amended 4-22-2003 by Ord. No. O-03-153;
7-12-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-93; 2-26-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-07;
1-25-2011 by Ord. No. O-10-22]
On July 1 of each following year, the Mayor's salary shall change by a factor
equal to the average of the changes in the Consumer Price Index—Urban
(CPI-U) of the preceding three calendar years as published by the U.S.
Bureau of Labor Statistics. However, for FY2011, the Mayor's salary shall
remain at the same amount as FY2010. For FY2012 the Mayor's salary shall
be calculated on the Mayor's FY2011 salary based on the three-year CPI-U
average change.
§ 5-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-61
1:71

ARTICLE XV
City Clerk
§ 5-62. Records. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 402; NRO 1987, § 2-206;
amended 4-14-1981 by Ord. No. O-81-126]
A. To the same extent as Town Clerks are required to do, unless otherwise
prescribed by law or ordinance, the City Clerk shall keep a record of:
(1) All votes required by law to be returned to him from the different
wards;
(2) All proceedings relating to the laying out of highways, division of
fences, sale of land for taxes, general meetings of the inhabitants;
(3) All other documents and proceedings necessary and proper to be
recorded; and
(4) A copy of all minutes of all meetings of public bodies in the City of
Nashua subject to NH RSA Chapter 91-A (the "Right-to-Know
Law"), which will be forwarded to the City Clerk by each public
body. [Added 8-9-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-79]
B. The City Clerk shall keep in his possession all contracts, agreements,
deeds, easements and other legal documents with which the City or any
of its boards or commissions becomes involved.
C. The Mayor or his designee, the City Clerk, Treasurer/Tax Collector and
the Chairman of the Board of Assessors shall constitute a Municipal
Records Committee pursuant to RSA 33-A who shall govern the
disposition of City records in accordance with the provisions of state
law.
D. The City Clerk shall administer the records management program for
the minutes of all public bodies and their subcommittees in the City of
Nashua subject to NH RSA Chapter 91-A (the "Right-to-Know Law"). In
this regard, the City Clerk may, in consultation with the City Solicitor/
Corporate Counsel: [Added 8-9-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-79]
(1) Develop and circulate such instructions as may be necessary and
proper to implement and maintain the proper management of
public minutes;
(2) Advise and assist City divisions relative to the creation,
management and retention of public minutes within each division's
responsibility; and
(3) Maintain a management system to track the public minutes.
E. A copy of all minutes of all public bodies and their subcommittees in the
City of Nashua subject to NH RSA Chapter 91-A (the "Right-to-Know
Law") shall be stored, and public access provided, as follows: [Added
8-9-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-79]
§ 5-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-62
1:73
(1) Board of Assessors minutes shall be managed by the Assessing
Department.
(2) Board of Education and Joint Special School Building Committee
minutes shall be managed by the Nashua School District.
(3) Board of Fire Commissioners and SARA/Local Emergency
Preparedness Committee minutes shall be managed by the Nashua
Fire Department.
(4) Board of Health and Childcare Advisory Committee minutes shall
be managed by the Division of Public Health and Community
Services.
(5) Board of Public Works, Board of Public Works Pension Trustees,
Mine Falls Park Advisory Committee, Mohawk Tannery Steering
Committee, and Park and Recreation Advisory Committee minutes
shall be managed by the Public Works Division.
(6) Board of Building and Fire Codes, Business and Industrial
Development Authority, Conservation Commission, Historic District
Commission, Land Conservation Committee, Nashua Transit
Advisory Committee, Planning Board, and Zoning Board of
Adjustment minutes shall be managed by the Community
Development Division. [Amended 12-13-2016 by Ord. No.
O-16-02615]
(7) Capital Reserve Equipment Fund minutes shall be managed by the
Financial Services Division.
(8) Edgewood Cemetery Trustee minutes shall be managed by
Edgewood Cemetery.
(9) Library Trustee minutes shall be managed by the Nashua Public
Library.
(10) Police Commission minutes shall be managed by the Nashua Police
Department.
(11)Woodlawn Cemetery Trustees minutes shall be managed by
Woodlawn Cemetery.
(12) All minutes of all other public bodies in the City of Nashua, not
listed above and covered by this section, shall be forwarded to the
City Clerk.
F. Division directors shall establish and maintain an active, continuing
program for the economical and efficient management of the minutes
for all boards, commissions, or committees for which they are
15.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that all members of the existing Building
Code Board of Appeals and Board of Fire Prevention Code Appeals must be appointed and
confirmed to this new Board of Building and Fire Codes Appeals and designated as a
member or alternate member.
§ 5-62 NASHUA CODE § 5-62
1:74
§ 5-63. Deputy City Clerk. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 404; NRO 1987,
§ 2-207; amended 12-11-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-133]
A Deputy City Clerk shall be appointed by the Mayor in consultation with
the City Clerk and shall be responsible to the City Clerk. In case of the City
Clerk's absence by reason of sickness, resignation or otherwise, the Deputy
City Clerk shall perform all the duties of the City Clerk.
responsible for, as listed above, or for which the division may become
responsible for, by statute or ordinance. Division directors shall, among
other things: [Added 8-9-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-79]
(1) Develop management controls for the creation, maintenance, and
storage of minutes created in the normal course of business;
(2) Ensure that retention schedules established under state statutes,
state administrative rules, or City ordinances for minutes of public
bodies shall be complied with;
(3) Ensure protection of those minutes in their custody against natural
or other disasters; and
(4) Designate departmental records administrator(s) and alternate(s)
to coordinate with the City Clerk's office for:
(a) Providing notice to the City Clerk as to where the minutes are
housed and who is to be contacted within the division for
access to those minutes;
(b) Processing public records requests; and
(c) Maintaining an inventory of minutes on file within the division.
G. Notwithstanding Subsection E above, the City Clerk may agree to
accept custody of, and management for, the minutes of public bodies
listed herein and currently managed by other divisions or departments,
in accordance with transfer guidelines developed by the City Clerk.
[Added 8-9-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-79]
§ 5-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-63
1:75

ARTICLE XVI
City Engineer
§ 5-64. Duties. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 2301; NRO 1987, § 2-221]
The City Engineer, in addition to such duties as may be prescribed by the
Board of Public Works, shall:
§ 5-65. Deputy City Engineer. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 2302; NRO 1987,
§ 2-222]
§ 5-66. Plans of streets, sewers, main drains and public grounds.
[NRO 1975, T. 4, § 2303; NRO 1987, § 2-223]
A. Be consulted on all matters relating to public improvements of any kind,
where the advice of a civil engineer would be of service.
B. Unless otherwise specially provided, take charge of the construction of
all public works of the City which properly come under the direction of
a civil engineer.
C. Perform all engineering services and make all examinations and
prepare all statements, plans, specifications and contracts which any
department may need in the discharge of its duties; however, such
contracts shall be submitted to the City Solicitor/Corporation Counsel
for his approval.
D. When required by the Mayor, or by any officer in charge of any
department, measure the work done by contract for the City.
E. When contracts have been made, stake out the proposed improvement
and see that the contractor conforms to the established grade.
A. The Board of Public Works shall elect and employ as a Deputy City
Engineer a person who is a civil engineer with a bachelor of science
degree from an accredited school, or who is a professional civil
engineer duly certified as such by this state.
B. The Deputy City Engineer shall assist the City Engineer and perform
such duties as may be assigned to him by the City Engineer. If the City
Engineer is unable to perform his duties, or if the office of the City
Engineer becomes vacant, then the Deputy City Engineer shall perform
all the duties of the engineer as prescribed by law.
A. The City Engineer shall assemble and file in his office, for the City,
accurate plans showing:
(1) All the streets of the City now or hereafter laid out;
(2) Plans of all sewers, main drains and public grounds presently
existing or hereafter laid out; and
§ 5-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-66
1:77
§ 5-67. Street profiles and grades. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 2304; NRO
1987, § 2-224]
The City Engineer shall make or cause to be made complete and accurate
profiles of all existing public streets and any which may hereafter be laid
out, and shall draw lines on the profiles to represent the grade of sidewalk
on each side of the streets. The grade, when approved by the Board of
Public Works, shall become the established grade for the streets and shall
not be changed, except by the Board. Hereafter, all abutters making
improvements or building sidewalks within the limits of the streets shall
cause the same to conform to the established grade.
§ 5-68. Maps and memoranda. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 2305; NRO 1987,
§ 2-225]
All maps, plans, profiles, surveys, books, notes, notebooks and other
memoranda made and used by the City Engineer or his assistants shall be
the property of the City and shall be kept in a safe and proper place, and
together with all property of the City in charge of the City Engineer, shall
be turned over by him to his successor.
(3) All entrances thereto and estates abutting thereon, with their
frontage and owners' names.
B. When changes or improvements are made in streets, sewers, main
drains and public grounds, complete and accurate plans of the same
shall be made and kept on file in his office.
C. The City Engineer shall, by himself or his assistants, make all such
surveys, estimates, measurements and levels and perform such other
duties as may be required of him by the Mayor, the Board of Aldermen
or any committee thereof, or the Board of Assessors.
§ 5-66 NASHUA CODE § 5-68
1:78
ARTICLE XVII
Purchasing Manager
§ 5-69. Position established; supervision. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 1601;
NRO 1987, § 2-236; amended 11-26-1977 by Ord. No. O-77-278;
4-30-1979 by Ord. No. O-78-149; 4-22-1986 by Ord. No. O-86-50;
6-28-1988 by Ord. No. O-88-43; 3-25-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-11]
The Purchasing Manager shall report to the Director of the Financial
Services Division.
§ 5-70. Duties. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 1602; NRO 1987, § 2-237;
amended 11-26-1977 by Ord. No. O-77-278; 4-22-1986 by Ord. No.
O-86-50; 6-28-1988 by Ord. No. O-88-43; 10-26-1999 by Ord. No.
O-99-139]
A. The City Purchasing Manager shall be the head and have general
supervision of the purchases of the City. The Manager shall perform all
duties required of a department head by law, and shall have the powers
and duties prescribed by this article.
B. The Manager shall be appointed by the Mayor according to § 5-53.1.
[Amended 3-25-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-11]
C. The Manager shall have the power and duty to purchase or contract for
all supplies and contractual services needed by any using agency which
derives its support wholly or in part from the City, in accordance with
purchasing procedures as prescribed by this article and such rules and
regulations as the Manager shall adopt for the internal management
and operation of the Department of Purchasing. Said procedures, rules
and regulations shall be collected in a Purchasing Manual, which shall
be reviewed annually and updated as necessary, and then provided to
the Finance Committee. [Amended 4-13-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-15]
D. The authority of the Manager to negotiate all purchases for all using
agencies shall not be abridged by excepting any particular using
agency, but he may delegate his authority in the best interests of the
City.
E. Except as herein provided, it shall be unlawful for any City officers to
order the purchase of any supplies or make any contract within the
purview of this chapter other than through the Department of
Purchasing, and any purchase ordered or contract made contrary to the
provisions hereof shall not be approved by the City officials, and the
City shall not be bound thereby.
F. In addition to the purchasing authority conferred in Subsection C of this
section and in addition to any other powers and duties conferred by this
article the Manager shall:
§ 5-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-70
1:79
(1) Minimum expenditure. Act to procure for the City the highest
quality in supplies and contractual services, most advantageous to
the City;
(2) Encourage competition. Discourage uniform bidding and endeavor
to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases
and sales;
(3) Rules and regulations. Establish, and amend when necessary, all
rules and regulations authorized by this chapter and any other
necessary to its operation;
(4) Purchasing analysis. Keep informed of current developments in the
field of purchasing, prices, market conditions and new products,
and secure for the City the benefits of research done in the field of
purchasing by other governmental jurisdictions, national technical
societies, trade associations having national recognition, and by
private businesses and organizations;
(5) Forms. Prescribe and maintain such forms as he shall find
reasonably necessary to the operation of this article;
(6) Standard nomenclature. Prepare and adopt a standard purchasing
nomenclature for using agencies and suppliers;
(7) Vendors' catalog file. Prepare, adopt and maintain a vendors'
catalog file. The catalog file shall be filed according to materials
and shall contain descriptions of vendors' commodities, prices and
discounts;
(8) Bulk purchases. Exploit the possibilities of buying in bulk so as to
take full advantage of discounts;
(9) Tax exemptions. Act so as to procure for the City all tax exemptions
to which it is entitled;
(10) Cooperation with Chief Financial Officer. Cooperate with the Chief
Financial Officer so as to secure for the City the maximum
efficiency in budgeting and accounting;
(11) Disqualification of bidders. Have the authority to declare vendors
who default on their quotations, irresponsible bidders, and to
disqualify them from receiving any business from the municipality
for a stated period of time;
(12) Planning and review. Provide advice and assistance to City
departments in the planning and review of contract specifications,
terms and conditions, performance schedules, and other applicable
contractual matters;
(13) Review of major purchasing actions. Establish and review
procedures and guidelines for annual review of major ongoing
purchasing actions.
§ 5-70 NASHUA CODE § 5-71
1:80
§ 5-71. Environmental concerns; required language. [NRO 1987,
§ 2-237.1; added 4-11-1989 by Ord. No. O-89-116]
§ 5-72. Standardization and specifications. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 1603;
NRO 1987, § 2-238; amended 11-26-1977 by Ord. No. O-77-278;
4-22-1986 by Ord. No. O-86-50; 6-28-1988 by Ord. No. O-88-43]
The Purchasing Manager is responsible for organizing and directing joint
action by City departments and subdivisions to develop standardization,
specification, inspection and testing policies and procedures as appropriate.
Maximum use will be made of existing standards and specifications as
available from public and private sector standards writing bodies.
§ 5-73. Encumbrance of funds. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 1604; NRO 1987,
§ 2-239; amended 11-26-1977 by Ord. No. O-77-278; 4-22-1986 by
Ord. No. O-86-50; 6-28-1988 by Ord. No. O-88-43]
Except in cases of emergency, the Purchasing Manager shall not issue
any order for delivery on a contract or open market purchase until the
Chief Financial Officer shall have certified, after preaudit, that there is
to the credit of the using agencies concerned a sufficient unencumbered
A. Solicitations utilized by the City or any agency thereof, including the
School Department, for the purpose of soliciting bids, proposals, price
quotations, or providing instructions to bidders, shall contain the
following language:
"The City of Nashua supports the concept of purchasing products
which are biodegradable, can be or have been recycled, or are
environmentally sound. Due consideration will be given to the
purchase of such products. If you are bidding on any such products
which qualify, please so indicate in a cover sheet by item number and
description."
B. Purchase order forms and requisition forms utilized by the City or any
agency thereof, including the School Department, shall contain the
following language:
"The City of Nashua supports the concept of purchasing products
which are biodegradable, can be or have been recycled, or are
environmentally sound. Due consideration will be given to such
products."
C. The City further ordains that the above language shall be included on
all indicated forms which are printed, ordered or obtained subsequent
to the date of enactment of this section. The City Purchasing Manager
and the business administrator of the School Department may continue
to use current, on-hand supplies of forms until said supply is exhausted,
or until replacement forms containing the above language are received,
whichever occurs first.
§ 5-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-73
1:81
appropriation balance, in excess of all unpaid obligations, to defray the
amount of such order.
§ 5-74. Availability of funds and multiyear contracts. [NRO 1987,
§ 2-239.1; amended 10-26-1999 by Ord. No. O-99-139]
§ 5-75. Prohibition of interest. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 1605; NRO 1987,
§ 2-240; amended 11-26-1977 by Ord. No. O-77-278; 4-22-1986 by
Ord. No. O-86-50; 6-28-1988 by Ord. No. O-88-43; 10-26-1999 by
Ord. No. O-99-139]
A. The City shall be obligated to pay for goods or services only to the
extent that funds have been appropriated and encumbered for such
purpose. The contractor in turn shall be obligated only so long as funds
are available to pay for the goods and services it supplies. If the
contractual agreement extends through one fiscal year of the City into
the next year, the City's obligations thereunder shall be specifically
limited to and shall be conditioned upon the appropriations for such
following year. If the contractual agreement extends through one fiscal
year of the City into the next year, the City's obligations thereunder
shall be specifically limited to and shall be conditioned upon the
appropriations for such following year. [Amended 2-26-2008 by Ord.
No. O-08-07]
B. A contract that extends from the current fiscal year into succeeding
fiscal year(s) in which no funds have been appropriated nor otherwise
designated for this purpose shall be approved by the full Board of
Aldermen before the contract shall become binding on the City. [Added
12-28-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-64]
A. Any purchase order or contract within the purview of this article in
which the Purchasing Manager or any officer or employee of the City is
financially interested, directly or indirectly, shall be void, except that
before the execution of a purchase order or contract the Finance
Committee shall have the authority to waive compliance with this
section when it finds such action to the best interests of the City.
B. The agent and every officer and employee of the City are expressly
prohibited from accepting, directly or indirectly, from any person to
which any purchase order or contract is, or might be awarded, any
rebate, gift, money or anything of value whatsoever, except where given
to and for the benefit of the City as provided for elsewhere in the
statutes.
C. Use of City resources or special pricing offered to the City for the
personal benefit of City employees or officials is prohibited.
§ 5-73 NASHUA CODE § 5-76
1:82
§ 5-76. Small purchases (less than $5,000). [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 1606;
NRO 1987, § 2-241; amended 11-26-1977 by Ord. No. O-77-278;
4-22-1986 by Ord. No. O-86-50; 6-28-1988 by Ord. No. O-88-43;
2-10-2016 by Ord. No. O-16-001]
Where the total price of a purchase is less than $5,000 it shall be the
responsibility of the Purchasing Manager, after adequate inquiry, to make
the purchase on the basis of price and quality.
§ 5-77. Small purchases ($5,000 to $10,000). [NRO 1975, T. 4,
§ 1607; NRO 1987, § 2-242; amended 11-26-1977 by Ord. No.
O-77-278; 4-22-1986 by Ord. No. O-86-50; 10-26-1999 by Ord. No.
O-99-139; 5-8-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-85; 2-10-2016 by Ord. No.
O-16-001]
Where the total price is greater than $5,000 but less than $10,000 purchase
shall be made on the basis of evaluation of written price or rate quotations
from an adequate number of suppliers. Such price and rate quotations
shall be forwarded on suppliers' letterhead. A copy of the written bid
specification from the requesting department must accompany the
requisition for purchase and the quotation package. The Purchasing
Manager shall have the authority to award contracts based on information
received or to reject the requisition and require a public bidding process.
§ 5-78. Major purchases (greater than $10,000). [NRO 1975, T. 4,
§ 1608; NRO 1987, § 2-243; amended 11-26-1977 by Ord. No.
O-77-278; 4-22-1986 by Ord. No. O-86-50; 6-28-1988 by Ord. No.
O-88-43; 10-26-1999 by Ord. No. O-99-139]
A. All supplies and contractual services, except as otherwise provided
herein, when the estimated cost thereof shall exceed $10,000 shall be
purchased by formal, written contract from the lowest responsible
bidder, after due notice inviting bids. All sales of personal property
which has become obsolete or unusable, when the estimated value shall
exceed $5,000, shall be sold by formal written contract to the highest
responsible bidder, after due notice inviting bids. [Amended 5-8-2007
by Ord. No. O-07-85]
B. Notice inviting bids shall be posted in two appropriate places, one of
which shall be on the City’s Internet website or by publication in at
least one official newspaper in the City and at least five days preceding
the last day set for the receipt of bids. The website or newspaper notice
required herein shall include a general description of the articles to be
purchased or sold. The Manager shall also advertise all pending
purchases or sales by a notice posted on the public bulletin board in the
City Hall. [Amended 10-9-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-022]
(1) For all pending purchases or sales by sealed bids, the notice shall
state where bid blanks and specifications may be secured, and the
time and place for opening bids. The Manager shall also solicit
sealed bids from all responsible prospective suppliers who have
§ 5-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-78
1:83
requested their names to be added to a bidders list, which the
Manager shall maintain, by sending them a copy of such newspaper
notice or such other notice as will acquaint them with the proposed
purchase or sale. In any case, invitations sent to the vendors on
the bidders list shall be limited to commodities that are similar in
character and ordinarily handled by the trade group to which the
invitations are sent.
(2) For all online sales of surplus stock authorized under § 5-88, the
notice shall provide the website name and web address of the firm
conducting the online auction on behalf of the City. Prior to an item
being released to the winning bidder, the Manager will ensure that
the winning bidder or his agent has signed a bill of sale.
C. When deemed necessary by the Manager, bid deposits shall be
prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Unsuccessful bidders
shall be entitled to return of surety where the agent has required such.
A successful bidder shall forfeit any surety required by the Manager
upon failure on the bidder's part to enter a contract within 10 calendar
days after the award.
D. Sealed bids shall be submitted to the Manager and shall be identified as
bids on the envelope. Bids shall be opened in public at the same time
and place stated in the public notices. A tabulation of all bids received
shall be available for public inspection. [Amended 10-9-2012 by Ord.
No. O-12-022]
E. The Manager shall have the authority to reject all bids, parts of all bids,
or all bids for any one or more supplies or contractual services included
in the proposed contract, when the public interest will be served
thereby.
F. The Manager shall not solicit a bid from a contractor who is in default
on the payment of taxes, licenses or other monies due the City.
G. The Manager shall have the authority to award contracts within the
purview of this article. Contracts shall be awarded to the lowest
responsible bidder. In determining lowest responsible bidder, in
addition to price, the Manager shall consider:
(1) The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract
or provide the service required;
(2) Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service
promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or
interference;
(3) The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and
efficiency of the bidder;
(4) The quality of performance of previous contracts or services;
§ 5-78 NASHUA CODE § 5-78
1:84
§ 5-78.1. Local preference. [Added 6-10-2014 by Ord. No. O-14-021]
(5) The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and
ordinances relating to the contract or service;
(6) The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder
to perform the contract or provide the services;
(7) The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies, or
contractual services to the particular use required;
(8) The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service
for the use of the subject of the contract;
(9) The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid; and
(10) The amount of total direct and indirect costs which would accrue to
the City on account of the bid.
H. When the award is not given to the lowest bidder, a full and complete
statement of the reasons for placing the order elsewhere shall be
prepared by the Manager and filed with the other papers relating to the
transactions.
I. If all bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality
and service being equal, the contract shall be awarded to a local bidder.
In the event identical bids are submitted by local vendors, the Manager
shall award the contract to one of the bidders by drawing lots in public.
Local preference for bidders or products may be given only when there
is no sacrifice or loss in quality, performance, or service. [Amended
6-10-2014 by Ord. No. O-14-021]
J. The Manager shall have the authority to require a performance bond,
before entering a contract, in such amount as he shall find reasonably
necessary to protect the best interest of the City.
K. No contract or purchase shall be subdivided to avoid the requirements
of this section.
L. Contracts for rental, leases, and lease/purchase shall be subject to the
regular requirements for competition.
M. The requesting department and the Purchasing Manager shall have the
authority to competitively purchase brand name product(s) and
product(s) produced by a single manufacturer, by sealed bid. The
Purchasing Manager shall submit a statement of justification for
purchasing a brand name product or a product produced by a single
manufacturer together with the recommendation for award of the
purchase. Where a particular brand name product or a product
produced by a single manufacturer is required but cannot be
competitively bid, the special purchase procedures of § 5-84 shall apply.
[Added 5-8-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-85]
§ 5-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-78.1
1:85
§ 5-79. Construction projects; prequalification of bidders. [NRO
1975, T. 4, § 1609; NRO 1987, § 2-244; amended 11-26-1977 by Ord.
No. O-77-278; 4-22-1986 by Ord. No. O-86-50]
A. Application of preferences.
(1) A local preference may be applied to all requests for bids, requests
for proposals, and requests for quotes for the purchase of goods or
services or for the award of concession contracts, provided that the
exercise of a local preference does not apply to a bid that is more
than 105% of the lowest qualified bid, if the lowest qualified bid is
less than $10,000; or more than 103% of the lowest qualified bid, if
the lowest qualified bid is $10,000 or more.
(2) A local preference shall not be applied to any solicitation for a
purchase or concession contract when the expenditure of federal
funds designated for the contract is involved, or when state funds
are expended and State of New Hampshire laws or rules regarding
the expenditure of state funds designated for the contract do not
allow such preference.
(3) Nothing in this section shall create a requirement to give a local
preference if, in the opinion of the City Purchasing Manager
quality, performance, or service would be sacrificed by the exercise
of such preference.
B. "Local" as used in this ordinance shall mean any business that conducts
substantial business from a location in the City of Nashua, or employs a
substantial number of residents of the City of Nashua, or is principally
owned by residents of Nashua, or is otherwise believed to bring
substantial benefit to the local economy of the City of Nashua.
C. Eligibility for preferences.
(1) To qualify for a local preference, the bidder must submit verifiable
information certified by the bidder with its offer, unless an
alternative method of pre-offer certification is established by the
City Purchasing Manager, that the bidder is local.
(2) If necessary the City Purchasing Manager may seek additional
information or proof to verify the bidder's eligibility. The bidder
must timely provide any requested information to be eligible for the
preference.
(3) The principal bidder, or a subcontractor whose portion of the bid
exceeds 50% of the value of the contract, may qualify an offer for a
preference.
A. In the case of contracts for the construction, reconstruction, alteration,
repair or refurbishing of real property a determination of the
responsibility of interested contractors may precede the issuance of
invitations to bid. Invitations to bid shall be issued only to firms which
§ 5-78.1 NASHUA CODE § 5-79
1:86
§ 5-80. Negotiations after competitive sealed bidding. [NRO 1975,
T. 4, § 1610; NRO 1987, § 2-245; amended 11-26-1977 by Ord. No.
O-77-278; 4-22-1986 by Ord. No. O-86-50]
The purchasing agency shall reserve the right to reject any and all bids
together with the right to negotiate with the lowest responsible bidder for a
lower bid price.
§ 5-81. Competitive proposals. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 1611; NRO 1987,
§ 2-246; amended 11-26-1977 by Ord. No. O-77-278; 4-22-1986 by
Ord. No. O-86-50; 10-26-1999 by Ord. No. O-99-139]
In cases where competitive sealed bidding is not practical, the Purchasing
Manager may authorize that a purchase be made on the basis of the
evaluation of competitive proposals and resultant competitive negotiations.
The determination by the Purchasing Manager that the use of sealed
have, in the City's sole determination, been prequalified. The
department or agency involved shall establish rules and regulations
which govern prequalification of bidders. Such rules and regulations
shall take into consideration the following:
(1) The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract
or provide the service required;
(2) Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service
promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or
interference;
(3) The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and
efficiency of the bidder;
(4) The quality of performance of previous contracts or services;
(5) The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and
ordinances relating to the contract or service;
(6) The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder
to perform the contract or provide the service;
(7) The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies or
contractual services to the particular use required;
(8) The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service
for the use of the subject of the contract;
(9) The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid; and
(10) The amount of total direct and indirect costs which would accrue to
the City on account of the bid.
B. These rules and regulations may also include other special
considerations as may be authorized by law.
§ 5-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-81
1:87
bidding is not practical shall be in writing and consider factors such as the
following:
§ 5-82. Procedures on competitive proposals. [NRO 1975, T. 4,
§ 1612; NRO 1987, § 2-247; amended 11-26-1977 by Ord. No.
O-77-278; 4-22-1986 by Ord. No. O-86-50; 6-28-1988 by Ord. No.
O-88-43; 10-26-1999 by Ord. No. O-99-139; 12-10-2002 by Ord. No.
O-02-100]
A. Whether the cost to develop formal technical bid specifications
sufficient to ensure open competitive bids would make the total cost of
the procurement excessive;
B. Whether the proposed purchase is to be accompanied by land
development, or other related economic transactions, so that the bid
price may not accurately reflect the total economic effect of the
purchase;
C. Whether the product or service is specialized or custom-produced, and
the development of terms, conditions, specifications, and other
provisions specifically defining and governing the procurement
requires interaction with prospective suppliers; or
D. Whether any responsible bidder has submitted a bid in response to an
invitation to bid.
A. On determination by the Purchasing Manager that competitive sealed
bidding is not practical and that the purchase should be made on the
basis of the evaluation of competitive proposals and competitive
negotiations the Purchasing Manager and using agency shall:
(1) Develop general terms and conditions and specifications for the
product or service required.
(2) Indicate in the request for proposals the relative importance of
price and other significant evaluation factors which shall be
considered.
(3) Provide adequate public notice as in the case of competitive sealed
bids.
(4) Require submittal of cost or pricing data and conduct evaluation of
such data necessary to negotiation of a final price.
B. After evaluation of competitive proposals, written or verbal
negotiations may be conducted with one or more parties who have
submitted proposals. Such negotiations are designed to achieve terms
and conditions most favorable to the City. Such negotiations need not
be conducted where time constraints preclude additional negotiations
or where acceptance of an initial offer without discussion would result
in fair and equitable prices and further negotiations would not result in
terms and conditions substantially more favorable to the City. Purchase
§ 5-81 NASHUA CODE § 5-82
1:88
§ 5-83. Professional services. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 1613; NRO 1987,
§ 2-248; amended 11-26-1977 by Ord. No. O-77-278; 4-22-1986 by
Ord. No. O-86-50; 6-28-1988 by Ord. No. O-88-43; 3-10-1998 by Ord.
No. O-98-05; 10-26-1999 by Ord. No. O-99-139]
requirements with a final negotiated price exceeding $10,000 shall be
presented to the Finance Committee for approval prior to contract
award pursuant to § 5-90B and C.
A. In the purchase of accounting, architectural, auditing, engineering,
legal, medical and ambulance services and purchases of independent
professional consultant services for personnel, data processing,
actuarial, planning, management and other comparable purchases
competitive bidding shall not be required. Competitive bidding is
required in the procurement of insurance agents and consultants. The
Finance Committee, upon recommendation of the Purchasing Manager
and using agency, shall award the contract after considering the
following:
(1) Price;
(2) Specific experience with similar projects; or earlier phases of the
same project; [Amended 2-27-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-75]
(3) Evidence of accreditation and good standing in a professional
standards association overseeing the discipline necessary to
perform the work; [Amended 2-27-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-75]
(4) Background and experience of staff members who would be
assigned to the job;
(5) Availability;
(6) Locality of firm;
(7) Ability to communicate ideas;
(8) Ability to supply all of the major disciplines necessary to perform
the work;
(9) Qualifications of subcontractors;
(10) Conceptual design;
(11) Accuracy of the firm in estimating time and cost requirements.
B. Private sector architects, engineers, designers, and drafters preparing
specifications for public contracts shall adhere to the requirements for
open and nonrestrictive specifications to allow full competition during
the construction or production phase.
C. Professional services shall be solicited with a written statement that
includes at a minimum, the services required and the schedule of
performance. Responses to solicitations shall contain, at a minimum,
§ 5-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-83
1:89
§ 5-84. Special purchase procedures. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 1614; NRO
1987, § 2-249; amended 11-26-1977 by Ord. No. O-77-278;
4-22-1986 by Ord. No. O-86-50; 6-28-1988 by Ord. No. O-88-43;
10-26-1999 by Ord. No. O-99-139; 12-10-2002 by Ord. No.
O-02-100]
the services to be provided, the schedule of performance, the hourly
rate(s), and/or a not-to-exceed (NTE) contract price as appropriate,
and any exceptions to the solicitation. The Purchasing Manager shall
submit both documents to the Finance Committee together with the
recommendation for award of the contract. [Added 3-27-2007 by Ord.
No. O-07-87]
D. When design services and construction services are to be by separate
contracts, private sector consultants and contractors who prepare
designs and specifications for architectural, engineering, information
technology and construction products and services shall be prohibited
from bidding on and providing those products and services. Such
consultants and contractors may participate in the construction,
production or implementation phases including inspection, integration,
field testing, acceptance testing, documentation, training and
maintenance and in the management oversight over those services.
[Added 5-8-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-96]
A. The competitive bidding process shall not apply to the following special
purchases:
(1) Purchases required in the event of any emergency as defined in
§ 5-90 which necessitates the immediate purchase of goods or
services. [Amended 12-11-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-146]
(2) Purchases where the cost of the service is fixed by law.
(3) Purchases which can be procured through cooperative
intergovernmental purchase agreements with other government
jurisdictions.
(4) Sole-source procurements, where the proposed purchase is
manufactured by only one company.
(5) Purchases from a sole manufacturer, where it is determined to be
more efficient and economical to reduce costs of maintenance of
additional repair parts, supplies or services.
(6) Purchases which have been preceded by competitive sealed
bidding, where no responsible bidder has responded.
(7) Purchases under extensions of contracts when no price increase
exceeds 10% per year.
§ 5-83 NASHUA CODE § 5-84
1:90
§ 5-85. Insurance. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 1615; NRO 1987, § 2-250;
amended 11-26-1977 by Ord. No. O-77-278; 4-22-1986 by Ord. No.
O-86-50; 3-10-1998 by Ord. No. O-98-05]
(8) Purchases under intergovernmental agreements or contracts
which require use of procurement procedures inconsistent with the
provisions of this section.16
(9) Purchases of undercover vehicles, excluding marked and unmarked
police cruisers, and similar equipment items whose identity and
source if disclosed could endanger Police Department personnel,
shall be considered only in nonpublic session pursuant to NH RSA
91-A. The purchase request and Finance Committee agenda shall
identify the purchase as "Special Police Department Purchase,"
identify only the price, and shall be authorized in writing by the
Chief of Police whose authorization shall be submitted to the
Finance Committee together with the Purchasing Manager's
request for approval. [Added 5-8-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-92]
(10) Commodity items which are generally available for a publicly
advertised price in national or online sources, and are not
customized by the vendor for individual purchasers. [Added
3-24-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-044]
B. The purchasing file shall be documented to provide justification for use
of the above exceptions. Additionally, within 10 working days of any
such purchase exceeding $10,000, the Purchasing Manager or using
agency shall give written notice to the Finance Committee.
A. Where the purchase is of insurance, a prequalification process shall be
undertaken inviting agents and brokers to submit a questionnaire
regarding their experience and qualifications. Only firms which are, in
the City's sole determination, qualified, shall be selected for the bid
process. Once an agent or broker is prequalified, they shall remain
prequalified for five years, unless that prequalification is revoked by the
City. When the City seeks to purchase insurance, it shall select at least
three agents or brokers from the qualified bidders list. Each firm
selected to bid shall submit common specifications to their assigned
insurance carriers. The City reserves the right to assign carriers to
qualified bidders for this purpose. Once submitted, bids shall, wherever
practicable, be a coverage period of three years. All renewals of
insurance policies and new insurance policies shall be subject to this
competitive bid process. The City may purchase insurance through a
qualified bidder without receiving competitive bids if it is in the best
interests of the City or if the coverage sought is available only from
limited markets or lines of coverage.
16.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(9), which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 12-11-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-146. This ordinance also renumbered former
Subsection A(10) as A(9), respectfully.
§ 5-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-85
1:91
§ 5-86. Price agreement contract procedure. [NRO 1975, T. 4,
§ 1616; NRO 1987, § 2-251; amended 11-26-1977 by Ord. No.
O-77-278; 4-22-1986 by Ord. No. O-86-50; 6-28-1988 by Ord. No.
O-88-43]
The head of any using agency shall have the authority to submit requisitions
to the Manager for supplies available under the terms of a price agreement
contract made by the Purchasing Manager.
§ 5-87. Inspection and testing. [NRO 1975, T. 4, 1617; NRO 1987,
§ 2-252; amended 11-26-1977 by Ord. No. O-77-278; 4-22-1986 by
Ord. No. O-86-50; 6-28-1988 by Ord. No. O-88-43]
§ 5-88. Surplus stock. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 1618; NRO 1987, § 2-253;
amended 11-26-1977 by Ord. No. O-77-278; 4-22-1986 by Ord. No.
O-86-50; 6-28-1988 by Ord. No. O-88-43]
B. Where the purchase is of self-insured claims administration services the
City may retain the successful bidder for as long as services and fees
remain favorable to the City before any renewal of the bidding process
is required. In determining the lowest responsible bidder within the
bidding procedure, the City may take into consideration any costs of
conversion involved.
A. The Purchasing Manager shall inspect or supervise the inspection of all
deliveries of supplies or contractual services to determine their
conformance with the specifications set forth in the order or contract.
B. The Manager shall have the authority to authorize using agencies
having the staff and facilities for adequate inspection to inspect all
deliveries made to such using agencies under rules and regulations
which the Manager shall prescribe.
C. The Manager shall have the authority to require chemical and physical
tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries which
are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with the
specifications. In the performance of such tests, the Manager shall have
the authority to make use of laboratory facilities of any agency of the
City government or of any outside laboratory.
A. All using agencies shall submit to the Purchasing Manager, at such
times and in such form as he shall prescribe, reports showing stocks of
all supplies which are not longer used or which have become obsolete,
worn out or scrapped.
B. The Manager shall have the authority to transfer surplus stock to other
using agencies. The Manager shall have the authority to sell, by sealed
bid or online auction, all supplies which have become unsuitable for
public use, or to exchange the same for, or trade in the same on, new
supplies. [Amended 10-9-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-022]
§ 5-85 NASHUA CODE § 5-88
1:92
§ 5-89. Cooperative purchasing. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 1619; NRO 1987,
§ 2-254; amended 11-26-1977 by Ord. No. O-77-278; 4-22-1986 by
Ord. No. O-86-50; 6-28-1988 by Ord. No. O-88-43]
The Purchasing Manager shall have the authority to join with other units
of government in cooperative purchasing plans when the best interest of
the City would be served thereby. He shall also have the authority to
establish the conditions and terms under which supplies, materials and
services are acquired from federal, state, school and prison sources, and
from workshops of the blind and other handicapped, and to negotiate the
prices of such purchases.
§ 5-90. Authority of Finance Committee. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 1620;
NRO 1987, § 2-255; amended 11-26-1977 by Ord. No. O-77-278;
4-22-1986 by Ord. No. O-86-50; 10-26-1999 by Ord. No. O-99-139;
12-10-2002 by Ord. No. O-02-100; 1-9-2007 by Ord. No. O-06-36;
11-30-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-48; 12-11-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-146]
C. Sales by sealed bid or online auction under this section shall be made to
the highest responsible bidder and in conformance with § 5-78.
[Amended 10-9-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-022]
D. With approval of the Finance Committee, the Purchasing Manager may
donate, barter, gift or otherwise dispose of surplus material, stock or
equipment which has failed to be sold, exchanged or traded pursuant to
Subsection B. [Added 12-11-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-150]
A. The requirements of this article are intended to benefit the City and not
to vest in any individual or enterprise any right to do business with the
City or create any cause of action based thereon. The Finance
Committee, for contracts that do not exceed $1,000,000, and the Board
of Aldermen, for contracts that exceed $1,000,000, may waive
compliance with any of the provisions of this article when the best
interests of the City would be served thereby. The approval of any
contract or payment by the Finance Committee or the Board of
Aldermen shall constitute a waiver as herein provided.
B. The recommendation for award of a bid or proposal submitted by the
Purchasing Manager shall include the number of firms solicited, a
summary of the prices offered, the recommended firm to receive the
award with appropriate rationale and the fund account to be used.
C. Finance Committee approval shall be obtained prior to the award of
contracts exceeding $10,000. This does not preclude the Purchasing
Manager from seeking Finance Committee approval or providing
advisement to the committee for purchase awards less than $10,000
when considered appropriate. Approval of a bid or contract award by
the Finance Committee or Board of Aldermen generally shall be
complete and final.
§ 5-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-90
1:93
§ 5-91. Amendment to contracts. [NRO 1987, § 2-256; amended
2-25-2003 by Ord. No. O-03-140; 12-11-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-146;
5-27-2014 by Ord. No. O-14-01]
For any contract previously approved by the Finance Committee, the Mayor
shall inform the Finance Committee within 10 business days of any
amendment to the contract terms, scope of work, or sums payable to the
contractor, or if the contract was terminated. No contract may be amended
as to its scope of work or so as to increase sums payable to the contractor,
without Finance Committee approval for amendment amounts exceeding
$10,000; and without the Board of Aldermen approval for amendment
D. Finance Committee approval authority shall not be evaded for items
that have been disapproved by the Finance Committee by subsequent
segmentation, partitioning, phasing or reduction into increments below
the value stated in Subsection C. The Finance Committee shall retain
approval authority for any purchase of goods or services that have been
previously disapproved by the Finance Committee.
E. Approval by the Finance Committee of a contract award in excess of
$1,000,000 shall be submitted to the full Board of Aldermen at its next
regularly scheduled meeting for final approval prior to award of the
contract.
F. Unless specifically directed by the Finance Committee to withhold
issuance until passage by the full Board of Aldermen, the purchase
order or other such contractual agreement in an amount not exceeding
$1,000,000 may be issued immediately following the approval of award
by the Finance Committee. The purchase order or other such
contractual agreement in an amount exceeding $1,000,000 may be
issued following the period for reconsideration under the Board of
Aldermen’s rules.
G. The Mayor may determine that an immediate contract award is
necessary to protect the public health or safety or to avoid substantial
financial loss to the City and that the circumstances do not permit the
convening of a special meeting of the Finance Committee or the Board
of Aldermen in time to deal with the emergency. The written finding,
specifying in detail the reason for the contract, the need for immediate
action, and the contract terms and amounts, shall be addressed to the
Board of Aldermen and filed with the City Clerk, in which event award
of the contract may be made immediately by the Mayor without
aldermanic approval, and shall be presented to the Finance Committee
at its next meeting for review.
H. For the sealed bids of a major purchase submitted in accordance with
§ 5-78, the requesting department shall provide the Purchasing
Manager with the tabulated comparison between the solicited
specifications and the specifications offered by the recommended
bidder(s), noting differences, if any, and submit with the purchase
request to the Finance Committee for approval.
§ 5-90 NASHUA CODE § 5-91
1:94
amounts exceeding $1,000,000, except that the Mayor may approve
changes in the scope of work and/or sums payable to a contractor if all of
the following conditions are met:
§ 5-92. Information Technology Division participation in purchasing
process. [Added 12-12-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-45; 8-10-2010 by Ord.
No. O-10-26]
For major purchases and contracts solicited in accordance with § 5-78
which include computers or communications equipment or related
software, including but not limited to workstations, servers, surveillance
equipment and wired and wireless transmission equipment, the Information
Technology Division shall participate in the purchasing process, providing
advice, input, and recommendations, which will be so noted on the
purchasing memorandum.
A. The Mayor determines an emergency exists as defined in § 5-90G that
requires immediate award of an amendment to an existing contract,
and follows the notification procedure prescribed in that subsection;
B. The increased sums authorized are available from existing
appropriations and do not exceed $100,000; and
C. The Mayor makes a written finding that an immediate contract
amendment is required to protect the public health or safety or to avoid
substantial financial loss to the City and that the circumstances do not
permit the convening of a special meeting of the Finance Committee in
time to deal with the crisis. The written finding, specifying in detail the
reason for the change, the need for immediate action, and the changed
contract terms and amounts, shall be immediately filed with the City
Clerk, and shall be presented to the Finance Committee at its next
meeting for review.
§ 5-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-92
1:95

Part 5
Conduct Regulations
ARTICLE XVIII
Ethics Rules
§ 5-93. Definitions. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 3401; NRO 1987, § 2-271;
amended 12-28-1993 by Ord. No. O-93-26]
In this article the following words, unless a different meaning is required by
the context or is specifically prescribed, shall have the following meanings:
COMPENSATION — Any money, thing of value or economic benefit
conferred on or received by any person in return for services rendered or to
be rendered by himself or another.
COMPETITIVE BIDDING — All bidding, given and tendered to a municipal
agency in response to an open solicitation of bids from the general public by
public announcement or public advertising, where the contract is awarded
to the lowest responsible bidder.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY — The employee and his spouse, and their parents,
children, brothers and sisters.
MUNICIPAL AGENCY — Any department or office of the City and any
council, division, board, bureau, commission, institution, tribunal or other
instrumentality thereof or thereunder.
MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEE — A person performing services for or holding an
office, position, employment or membership in a municipal agency, whether
by election, appointment, contract of hire or engagement, and whether
serving with or without compensation, on a full-time, regular, part-time,
intermittent or consultant basis. Municipal employees shall include but not
be limited to members of the Board of Aldermen, Board of Education, Board
of Public Works, Fire Commission, Board of Assessors, Zoning Board of
Adjustment and Planning Board.
OFFICIAL ACT — Any decision or action in a particular matter or in the
enactment of legislation.
OFFICIAL RESPONSIBILITY — The direct administrative or operating
authority, whether intermediate or final, and either exercisable alone or
with others, and whether personal or through subordinates, to approve,
disapprove or otherwise direct agency action.
PARTICIPATE — Participate in agency action or in a particular matter
personally and substantially as a municipal employee, through approval,
disapproval, decision, recommendation, the rendering of advice,
investigation or otherwise.
PARTICULAR MATTER — Any judicial or other proceeding, application,
submission, request for a ruling or other determination, contract lien,
controversy, charge, accusation, arrest, decision, determination or finding.
§ 5-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-93
1:97
PERSON WHO HAS BEEN SELECTED — Any person who has been
nominated or appointed to be a municipal employee or has been officially
informed that he will be so nominated or appointed.
SPECIAL MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEE — Special municipal employee is one
so designated in § 5-94. All other employees are municipal employees
designated in § 5-93. All employees of the City wherein no such
classification has been made shall be deemed to be municipal employees,
and shall be subject to all of the provisions of this article with respect
thereto without exception.
§ 5-94. Designation of special municipal employees. [NRO 1975, T.
4, § 3401a; NRO 1987, § 2-272; amended 7-8-1980 by Ord. No.
O-80-41; 10-14-1980 by Ord. No. O-80-60; 12-28-1993 by Ord. No.
O-93-26]
The following persons are designated special municipal employees pursuant
to the provisions of the definition of "special municipal employee" in § 5-93
of this article:
A. Any municipal employee spending no more than 100 hours per fiscal
year on municipal business.
B. All members of the following boards and commissions, other than fulltime
City employees: [Amended 12-28-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-44]
(1) Auditorium Commission, together with any ad hoc committee
having a term not to exceed two years.
(2) Capital Equipment Reserve Fund.
(3) Capital Improvements Committee.
(4) Board of Trustees of Edgewood, Suburban and Woodlawn
Cemeteries.
(5) Conservation Commission.
(6) Council on Elderly Affairs.
(7) Ira F. Harris Fund Trustees.
(8) Board of Health.
(9) Housing Advisory Committee.
(10) Housing Appeals Board.
(11) Hunt Legacy Trustees.
(12) Nashua Industrial Development Authority.
(13) Insurance Commission.17
(14) Personnel Advisory Board.
§ 5-93 NASHUA CODE § 5-94
1:98
§ 5-95. Standards of conduct for municipal employees. [NRO 1975,
T. 4, § 3402; NRO 1987, § 2-273; amended 6-13-1974 by Ord. No.
O-74-31; 12-28-1993 by Ord. No. O-93-26]
In addition to the other provisions of this article, and in supplement thereto,
the following are established as standards of conduct for all municipal
employees, for the violation of which appropriate administrative or legal
action as is warranted may be taken by the appropriate City officer or by the
head of a municipal agency. No officer or employee of a municipal agency
shall:
(15) Board of Trustees of Board of Public Works Retirement Fund.
(16) Regional Planning Commission.
(17) Board of Registrars.
(18) Historic District Commission.
(19) Library Trustees.
(20) Police Commissioners.
A. Accept other employment which will impair his independence of
judgment in the exercise of his official duties.
B. Accept employment or engage in any business or professional activity
which will require him to disclose confidential information which he has
gained by reason of his official position or authority.
C. Improperly disclose confidential information acquired by him in the
course of his official duties or use such information to further his
personal interests.
D. Use or attempt to use his/her official position to secure unwarranted
privileges or exemptions for himself/herself or others. The municipal
employee shall not take any official action that he knows or should have
known at the time of the action taken which would primarily benefit in
matters of financial interest his or her immediate family, business or
employer.
E. By his conduct give reasonable basis for the impression that any person
can improperly influence him or unduly enjoy his favor in the
performance of his official duties, or that he is unduly affected by the
kinship, rank, position or influence of any party or person.
F. Pursue a course of conduct which will raise suspicion among the public
that he is likely to be engaged in acts that are in violation of his trust.
17.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(14), listing the Parks and Recreation Advisory
Commission, was repealed 2-25-2014 by Ord. No. O-14-001. This ordinance also provided
for the renumbering of Subsections B(15), (16), (17), (18), (19), (20) and (21) as
Subsections B(14), (15), (16), (17,) (18), (19) and (20).
§ 5-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-96
1:99
§ 5-96. Outside compensation in relation to certain matters; acting
as attorney in such matters. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 3403; NRO 1987,
§ 2-274]
A. No municipal employee shall, otherwise than as provided by law for the
proper discharge of official duties, directly or indirectly receive or
request compensation from anyone other than the City or municipal
agency in relation to any particular matter in which the City is a party
or has a direct and substantial interest.
B. No person shall knowingly, otherwise than as provided by law for the
proper discharge of official duties, directly or indirectly give, promise
or offer such compensation.
C. No municipal employee shall, otherwise than in the proper discharge of
his official duties, act as agent or attorney for anyone other than the
City or municipal agency in prosecuting any claim against the City, or as
agent or attorney for anyone in connection with any particular matter in
which the City is a party or has a direct and substantial interest.
Whoever violates this section shall be punished as provided in § 5-105.
D. A special municipal employee shall be subject to Subsections A and C of
this section only in relation to a particular matter in which he has at any
time participated as a municipal employee, or which is pending in the
municipal agency in which he is serving. Subsection C of the preceding
sentence shall not apply in the case of a special municipal employee
who serves no more than 60 days during any period of 365 consecutive
days.
E. This section shall not prevent a municipal employee from taking
uncompensated action, not inconsistent with the faithful performance
of his duties, to aid or assist any person who is the subject of
disciplinary or other personnel administration proceedings with respect
to those proceedings.
F. This section shall not prevent a municipal employee, including a special
employee, from acting, with or without compensation, as agent or
attorney for or otherwise aiding or assisting members of his immediate
family or any person for whom he is serving as guardian, executor,
administrator, trustee or other personal fiduciary except in those
matters in which he has participated or which are the subject of his
official responsibility, provided that the official responsible for
appointment to his position approves.
G. This section shall not prevent a present or former special municipal
employee from aiding or assisting another person for compensation in
the performance of work under a contract with or for the benefit of the
City, provided that the head of the special municipal employee's
department or agency has certified in writing that the interest of the
City requires such aid or assistance and the certification has been filed
with the Clerk of the City. The certification shall be open to public
inspection.
§ 5-96 NASHUA CODE § 5-96
1:100
§ 5-97. Acting as attorney or agent in certain matters. [NRO 1975,
T. 4, § 3404; NRO 1987, § 2-275]
A 1) former municipal employee who knowingly acts as agent or attorney
for or receives compensation, directly or indirectly, from anyone other than
the City in connection with any particular matter in which the City is a party
or has a direct and substantial interest and in which he participated as a
municipal employee while so employed, or 2) former municipal employee
who, within one-year after his last employment has ceased, appears
personally before any agency of the City as agent or attorney for anyone
other than the City in connection with any particular matter in which the
City is a party or has a direct and substantial interest and which was under
his official responsibility as a municipal employee at any time within a
period of two years prior to the termination of his employment, or 3) partner
of a former municipal employee who knowingly engages, during a period of
one-year following the termination of the latter's employment by the City, in
any activity in which the former municipal employee is himself prohibited
from engaging by Clause 1 of this section, or 4) partner of a municipal
employee who knowingly acts as agent or attorney for anyone other than
the City in connection with any particular matter in which the City is a party
or has a direct and substantial interest and in which the municipal employee
participates or has participated as a municipal employee or which is the
subject of his official responsibility, shall be punished as provided in § 5-105.
If a partner of a former municipal employee or of a special municipal
employee is also a member of another partnership in which the former or
special employee has no interest, the activities of the latter partnership in
which the former or special employee takes no part shall not thereby be
subject to Clause 3 or 4 of this section.
§ 5-98. Participation in certain matters in which employee has
financial interest. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 3405; NRO 1987, § 2-276;
amended 8-8-2000 by Ord. No. O-00-44]
H. This section shall not prevent a municipal employee from giving
testimony under oath or making statements required to be made under
penalty for perjury or contempt.
A. Except as permitted by Subsection B of this section, a municipal
employee who participates as such an employee in a particular matter
in which to his knowledge he, his immediate family or partner, a
business organization in which he is serving as officer, director, trustee,
partner or employee, or any person or organization with whom he is
negotiating or has any arrangement concerning prospective
employment, has a financial interest, shall be punished as provided in
§ 5-105.
B. It shall not be a violation of this section 1) if the municipal employee
first advises the official responsible for appointment to his position of
the nature and circumstances of the particular matter and makes full
disclosure of such financial interest, and receives in advance a written
§ 5-96 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-98
1:101
determination made by that official that the interest is not so
substantial as to be deemed likely to affect the integrity of the services
which the municipality may expect from the employee, or 2) if, in the
case of an elected municipal official making demand bank deposits of
municipal funds, such official first files, with the Clerk of the City, a
statement making full disclosure of such financial interest, or 3) if, by
statute, the financial interest has been exempted from the requirements
of Clause 1 of this subsection as being too remote or too
inconsequential to affect the integrity of municipal employee's services.
C. Subsections A and B shall not apply to questions voted on by the Board
of Aldermen, Board of Education, Board of Public Works, Board of fire
Commissioners, Finance Committee, Joint Special School Building
Committee and committees and subcommittees of such boards and
committees, which shall instead be governed by the following
standards:
(1) As to matters, including but not limited to collective bargaining
agreements, changes to the merit system, or contracts, coming
before the board or committee, no member may vote or participate
in discussion on a question in which the member has a direct
personal and pecuniary interest. [Amended 10-23-2007 by Ord.
No. O-07-121]
(2) In addition, as to matters in which the board or committee acts in a
judicial or quasi-judicial capacity, no member may vote or
participate in discussion if the member has a personal bias or has
prejudged the facts of the matter.
(3) For purposes of this Subsection C, a personal and pecuniary
interest includes the interest of the member and immediate family
as defined in § 5-93. [Amended 10-23-2007 by Ord. No.
O-07-121]
(4) For purposes of this Subsection C, a judicial or quasi-judicial
matter is one in which the board or committee hears interested
parties, considers evidence and makes a decision that affects a
specific person or persons and not the public generally.
(5) On June 1 of each year, any office holder will inform the City Clerk's
office of any position as a board trustee or the like that he or she is
involved in. [Amended 3-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-59]
(6) Whoever violates this section shall be punished as provided in
§ 5-105. [Added 10-23-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-121]
D. Subsections A, B and C shall not apply to the Mayor's veto power under
Section 47 of the Nashua City Charter; provided, however, that at the
time of exercising those powers the Mayor shall file with the Board of
Aldermen and the City Clerk a written public disclosure of the nature
and circumstances of any financial, personal or pecuniary interest of
§ 5-98 NASHUA CODE § 5-98
1:102
§ 5-99. Financial interest in contracts made by municipal agencies.
[NRO 1975, T. 4, § 3406; NRO 1987, § 2-277]
§ 5-100. Offering anything of substantial value to, or acceptance
thereof by, municipal employees; penalties. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 3407;
NRO 1987, § 2-278]
Whoever otherwise than as provided by law for the proper discharge of
official duty, directly or indirectly, gives, offers or promises anything of
substantial value to any present or former municipal employee or to any
person selected to be such an employee for or because of any official act
performed or to be performed by such an employee or person selected to
be such an employee; or being a present or former municipal employee,
or person selected to be such an employee, otherwise than as provided
by law for the proper discharge of official duty, directly or indirectly, asks,
the type identified in this section. [Added 1-22-2008 by Ord. No.
O-08-03]
A. A municipal employee who has a financial interest, directly or indirectly,
in a contract made by a municipal agency of the City, in which the City
is an interested party of which financial interest he has knowledge or
has reason to know, shall be punished as provided in § 5-105. This
section shall not apply if such financial interest consists of the
ownership of less than 1% of the stock of a corporation.
B. This section shall not apply to:
(1) A municipal employee who in good faith and within 30 days after he
learns of an actual or prospective violation of this section makes
full disclosure of his financial interest to the contracting agency
and terminates or disposes of the interest; or
(2) A municipal employee who does not participate in or have official
responsibility for any of the activities of the contracting agency, if
the contract is made through competitive bidding and his direct
and indirect interests and those of his immediate family in the
corporation or other commercial entity with which the contract is
made do not in the aggregate amount to 10% of the total
proprietary interests therein; or
(3) A special municipal employee who does not participate in or have
official responsibility for any of the activities of the contracting
agency and who files with the Clerk of the City a statement making
full disclosure of his interest and the interests of his immediate
family in the contract; or
(4) A special municipal employee who files with the Clerk of the City a
statement making full disclosure of his interest and the interests of
his immediate family in the contract, if the Board of Aldermen
approve the exemption of his interest from this section.
§ 5-98 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-100
1:103
demands, exacts, solicits, seeks, accepts, receives or agrees to receive
anything of substantial value for himself for or because of any official act or
act within his official responsibility performed or to be performed by him,
shall be punished in accordance with § 5-105.
§ 5-101. Members of municipal commission or board not to be
elected or appointed by other members to certain positions. [NRO
1975, T. 4, § 3408; NRO 1987, § 2-279]
Except as hereinafter provided, no member of a municipal commission or
board shall be eligible for appointment or election by the members of such
commission or board to any office or position under the supervision of such
commission or board. No former member of such commission or board shall
be so eligible until the expiration of 30 days from the termination of his
service as a member of such commission or board.
§ 5-102. Advisory opinions of officials relative to duties. [NRO 1975,
T. 4, § 3409; NRO 1987, § 2-280]
Any municipal employee shall be entitled to the opinion of the City Solicitor/
Corporation Counsel upon any question arising under this Part 5 relating to
the duties, responsibilities and the interests of such employee. All requests
for such opinions by a subordinate municipal employee shall be made in
confidence directly to the chief officer of the municipal agency in which
he is employed, who shall in turn request in confidence such opinion of
the City Solicitor/Corporation Counsel or on behalf of such subordinate
municipal employee, and all constitutional officers and chief officers or
heads of municipal agencies may make direct confidential requests for such
opinions on their own account. The City Solicitor/Corporation Counsel shall
file such opinion in writing with the City Clerk and such opinion shall be a
matter of public record; however, no opinion will be rendered by the City
Solicitor/Corporation Counsel or except upon the submission of detailed
existing facts which raise a question of actual or prospective violation of any
provision of this Part 5.
§ 5-103. Disclosures and certifications to be in writing and open to
public inspection. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 3410; NRO 1987, § 2-281;
amended 12-28-1993 by Ord. No. O-93-26]
All disclosures and certifications provided for in this Part 5and made in
accordance with its provisions shall be made in writing and, unless
otherwise specifically provided in this Part 5, shall be kept open to
inspection by the public by the official with whom such disclosure has
been filed. In addition, all elected officials shall, upon taking office, receive
a copy of the Code of ordinances, and a copy of the financial disclosure
legislation. They shall sign a statement, provided by the City Clerk, that
such documents have been received.
§ 5-100 NASHUA CODE § 5-103
1:104
ARTICLE XIX
Administration and Enforcement
§ 5-104. Suspension; notice; effect; reinstatement. [NRO 1975, T. 4,
§ 3411; NRO 1987, § 2-282]
§ 5-105. Penalties and remedies. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 3412; NRO
1987, § 2-283; amended 3-12-1985 by Ord. No. O-84-79; 12-28-1993
by Ord. No. O-93-26]
A. An officer or employee of the City, or of any department, board,
commission or agency thereof may, during any period such officer or
employee is under charges for misconduct in such office or employment
or for misconduct in any elective or appointive public office, trust or
employment at any time held by him, be suspended by the appointing
authority, whether or not such appointment was subject to approval in
any manner. Notice of such suspension shall be given in writing and
delivered in hand to the person or his attorney, or sent by registered
mail to the person at his residence, his place of business, or the office or
place of employment from which he is being suspended. Such notice so
given and delivered or sent shall automatically suspend the authority of
such person to perform the duties of his office or employment until he is
notified in like manner that his suspension is removed. A copy of any
such notice together with an affidavit of service shall be filed with the
City Clerk.
B. Any person suspended shall not receive any compensation or salary
during the period of suspension, nor shall the period of his suspension
be counted in computing his sick leave or vacation benefits or seniority
rights, nor shall any person who retires from service while under such
suspension be entitled to any pension or retirement benefits,
notwithstanding any contrary provisions of law, but all contributions
paid by him into a retirement fund, if any, shall be returned to him.
C. A suspension under this section shall not, in any way, be used to
prejudice the rights of the suspended person either civilly or criminally.
D. During the period of any suspension, the appointing authority may fill
the position of the suspended officer or employee on a temporary basis,
and the temporary officer or employee shall have all the powers and
duties of the officer or employee suspended. A temporary officer or
employee who is appointed as a member of a board, commission or
agency may be designated as Chairman.
E. If the criminal proceedings against the person suspended are
terminated without a finding or verdict of guilty on any of the charges
on which he was indicted, his suspension shall be forthwith removed,
and he shall receive all compensation or salary due him for the period of
his suspension, and the time of his suspension shall count in
determining sick leave, vacation, seniority and other rights, and shall
be counted as creditable service for purposes of retirement.
§ 5-104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-105
1:105
§ 5-106. Ineligibility of elected Board members for nomination to
certain paid City positions. [NRO 1987, § 2-285; amended
10-23-2001 by Ord. No. O-01-193]
No incumbent member of the Board of Aldermen, Board of Public Works,
Board of Education, or Board of Fire Commissioners shall be eligible for
nomination or appointment to any position requiring confirmation by the
Board of Aldermen if such position pays a salary or other emolument.
§ 5-107. Management of Pennichuck Water System. [NRO 1987,
§ 2-286; added 9-17-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-124]
Any person that held an elective office in the City of Nashua after January
2002, until the creation of such an authority or division for a period of five
years shall be ineligible for any position to operate the water system under
City ownership or the ownership of any entity in which the City exercises a
controlling interest. Any contract to operate or consult on the system that
the city is party to shall include a provision that is similarly prohibited.
§ 5-108. Contracts with former mayoral employers. [NRO 1987,
§ 2-287; added 9-17-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-123]
The City shall not enter into any contract with a person or entity which
employed the Mayor within the year before the Mayor took office. The
continuation or renewal of existing contracts is permitted.
A. Any municipal employee who violates any provision of §§ 5-95 through
5-100 shall upon conviction be subject to punishment as provided in
§ 1-12 of the City Code and may be subject to discharge or removal from
office as provided by law.
B. In addition to any other remedies provided by law, any violation of
§§ 5-95 through 5-100 which has substantially influenced the action
taken by any municipal agency in any particular matter shall be
grounds for avoiding, rescinding or canceling the action on such terms
as the interest of the City and innocent third persons require.
C. The City may bring a civil action against any person who has acted to
his economic advantage in violation of §§ 5-95 through 5-100 and may
recover damages in the amount of such economic advantage or $500,
whichever is greater. If there has been no final criminal judgment of
conviction or acquittal of the violation, the City may in the discretion of
the court recover additional damages in an amount not exceeding twice
the amount of the economic advantage or $500, whichever is greater,
and a judgment for such damages shall bar any criminal prosecution for
the same violation.
§ 5-105 NASHUA CODE § 5-108
1:106
Part 6
Board Of Education And Board Of Public Works
ARTICLE XX
Board of Education
§ 5-109. Compensation of members. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 3301; NRO
1987, § 2-701; amended 1-18-1977 by Ord. No. O-76-119; 8-11-1992
by Ord. No. O-92-07; 6-23-1998 by Ord. No. O-98-13; 8-8-2000 by
Ord. No. O-00-43; 8-8-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-31; 3-27-2007 by Ord.
No. O-07-88; 8-14-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-115]
Each member of the Board of Education shall receive as compensation the
sum of $4,000 per year, payable quarterly.18
18.Editor's Note: Original § 2-702, Aldermanic approval of School Department salaries, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 3-27-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-88.
§ 5-109 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-109
1:107

ARTICLE XXI
Board of Public Works
§ 5-110. Compensation. [NRO 1975, T. 6, § 1; NRO 1987, § 2-716;
amended 1-13-1977 by Ord. No. O-76-119; 6-23-1998 by Ord. No.
O-98-13; 8-8-2000 by Ord. No. O-00-43; 8-8-2006 by Ord. No.
O-06-31; 8-14-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-115]
Each member of the Board of Public Works, exclusive of the Mayor, shall
receive as compensation the sum of $2,000 per year, payable quarterly.
§ 5-111. Public Works Inspector. [NRO 1975, T. 6, § 3; NRO 1987,
§ 2-717]
The Board of Public Works shall elect and employ a public works inspector,
a civil engineer with a bachelor of science degree from an accredited school
or a professional civil engineer duly certified as such by the state, who shall
work directly under the City Engineer and represent the Board of Public
Works and the City Engineer in the supervision and control of construction
preparation and maintenance of all records of encumbrances in public ways
as outlined in §§ 285-7 to 285-20 of the City Code.
§ 5-112. Compliance with Water Supply Protection District. [NRO
1987, § 2-718; amended 12-9-1998 by Ord. No. O-98-46]
A. The Department of Public Works shall develop a comprehensive list of
stormwater management locations that should be investigated for
possible remediation. A quarterly report shall be prepared detailing
locations to be investigated, status of investigations and
recommendations for remediation.
B. Standards shall be developed by the Board of Public Works, and
adopted with amendments if necessary, by the Planning Board with
regard to sanding and salting on public and private property in the
Water Supply Protection District.
§ 5-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-112
1:109

Part 7
Taxation And Finance
ARTICLE XXII
Generally
§ 5-113. Real estate taxes. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 1501; NRO 1987,
§ 2-731; amended 10-11-1983 by Ord. No. O-83-142; 2-26-2008 by
Ord. No. O-08-07]
Taxes upon real estate shall be paid in two payments each year. The first
payment shall be due on July 1 and shall be equal to 1/2 of the previous
year's tax rate multiplied by the current assessment The second payment
shall be due in December and shall be equal to the tax assessed against
the real estate on April 1 on that year, minus the amount due in the first
payment. Interest charged upon taxes under this section shall be in the
amount and as prescribed in RSA 76: 13 and 76:15-a. The Collector of Taxes
shall state on the tax bill the date from which interest will be charged and
such date shall be determined by the day the Collector sends out the last
bill on his list. The Collector shall notify the Tax Commission in writing of
the date on which the last tax bill was sent.
§ 5-114. Report of tax collections. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 1502; NRO
1987, § 2-732; amended 10-11-1983 by Ord. No. O-83-142]
In addition to the duties prescribed in the Charter and by ordinance or other
law, the Collector of Taxes shall, each month during his term of office and
while his list of taxes shall remain uncollected as to the City, make a return
to the Chief Financial Officer of all sums of money collected as principal and
interest during the month next prior. If no such sum of money shall have
been received by the Collector it shall be the duty of the Collector, each
month, to make a return of the fact to the Chief Financial Officer.
§ 5-115. Real estate tax liens. [NRO 1987, § 2-732.1; amended
11-24-1987 by Ord. No. O-87-175; 2-26-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-07]
The City of Nashua hereby adopts the provisions RSA 80:58 et seq., as it
may be amended from time to time, relative to real estate tax liens and
municipal tax sale practices. The Collector of Taxes should be responsible
for carrying out the requirements of said provisions of state law.
§ 5-116. Disposition of tax-deeded property. [NRO 1975, T. 4,
§ 1505; NRO 1987, § 2-733; amended 11-29-1978 by Ord. No.
O-78-129; 10-11-1983 by Ord. No. O-83-142; 7-12-1994 by Ord. No.
O-94-36]
A. Upon conveyance of real estate to the City by execution of a tax deed
for nonpayment of taxes, the Board of Aldermen shall, by majority vote,
either retain and hold the property for public use, or authorize the
§ 5-113 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-116
1:111
§ 5-117. Adoption of state law regarding election not to assess, levy
and collect residence tax. [NRO 1987, § 2-734; amended 7-8-1986
by Ord. No. O-86-79]
The City hereby adopts the provisions of RSA 72:1-c, which authorizes the
City to elect not to assess, levy and collect a residence tax.
§ 5-118. Current use taxation; conservation fund. [NRO 1987,
§ 2-737; amended 2-28-1989 by Ord. No. O-88-69]
The provisions of New Hampshire RSA 79-A: 25(II) are hereby adopted by
the City in order that 100% of all revenues or payments collected pursuant
to RSA 79-A, plus any real estate tax assessed upon land on the current
use list, as amended from time to time, after the effective date of this
section, shall be placed in the City Conservation Fund in accordance with
RSA 36-A:5(III). Said revenue shall be deposited in the conservation fund
at the time of collection, and said fund is hereby authorized and created
in accordance with RSA 36-A:5. Monies deposited in said fund may be
expended by the Conservation Commission in accordance with applicable
law and ordinances, subject to the approval of the Board of Aldermen.
§ 5-119. Retention of funds. [NRO 1987, § 2-738; amended
7-10-1990 by Ord. No. O-90-37]
All delinquent taxes, charges or fees due to the City from any person or
business shall, in all cases, be deducted from any money that may become
due such person or business from the City, and such person or business shall
receive the balance over and above the amount due for such delinquent
taxes, charges or fees.
Mayor to convey such property according to one of the following
methods:
(1) Convey by deed subsequent to an advertised public auction.
(2) Convey by deed subsequent to the acceptance of advertised sealed
bids.
(3) Dispose of the property as justice may require.
B. Under methods in Subsection A(1) and (2), the Mayor shall have the
power to establish the minimum amount for which the property is to be
sold, and the terms and conditions of the sale.
C. Under method in Subsection A(2), the Board of Aldermen shall review
and approve the bid recommended by the Mayor prior to its
acceptance.
D. Under method in Subsection A(3), the Board of Aldermen shall, by
resolution, determine the manner of disposition and authorize the
Mayor to dispose of the property accordingly.
§ 5-116 NASHUA CODE § 5-119
1:112
ARTICLE XXIII
Board of Assessors
§ 5-120. Compensation. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 801; NRO 1987, § 2-751;
amended 2-26-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-07]
Each member of the Board of Assessors shall serve on a part-time basis and
shall be paid for his or her services as determined and approved by the
Board of Aldermen through the annual budget process. All salaries shall be
paid monthly.
§ 5-121. Alternate member. [NRO 1987, § 2-752; added 11-12-1996
by Ord. No. O-96-93]
An alternate member to the three member Board of Assessors shall be
appointed by the Mayor and approved by the Board of Aldermen. The tenure
of this office shall be for a three-year term.
§ 5-120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-121
1:113

ARTICLE XXIV
Finance Committee
§ 5-122. Composition; duties. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 1001; NRO 1987,
§ 2-766; amended 2-13-2001 by Ord. No. O-01-125]
A. The finances and accounts of the City shall be under the supervision of
a Finance Committee composed of the Mayor and three Aldermen at
Large and three ward Aldermen. The three ward Aldermen and three
Aldermen at Large shall be appointed by the President of the Board of
Aldermen and the Mayor shall act as Chairman.
B. The Finance Committee shall meet on the first and third Wednesday of
every month, unless this date falls on a holiday, in which case the
meeting shall be held on the first regular business day following the
holiday. The Mayor may change the date of the Finance Committee
meeting if the warrant is the only item on the agenda or call a special
meeting of the Finance Committee, duly noticed. The Committee shall
supervise the finances and accounts of the City. The Committee shall
carefully examine and audit all accounts and demands properly laid
before it to determine that they were charged to appropriate funds and
accounts. [Amended 11-28-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-46; 8-12-2008
by Ord. No. O-08-22; 9-27-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-85]
C. The Finance Committee shall approve, in advance and by separate vote,
any payment made to a City employee or former City employee on
account of said employee's separation from service to the City, if such a
payment includes any amount other than wages or salary for work
actually performed and accrued benefits owed.
D. The Finance Committee shall function as standing committee of the
Board of Aldermen and shall be subject to the same rules of procedure
as the Board of Aldermen for its administrative review and approval of
all purchases and contracts, as designated by the Board of Aldermen.
[Added 12-11-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-146]
E. The Finance Committee shall function as an independent body and
adopt its own rules of procedure for supervising the finances and
accounts of the City, as provided for under the City Charter. [Added
12-11-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-146]
§ 5-122 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-122
1:115

ARTICLE XXV
Trustees of Trust Funds and Capital Reserve Funds
§ 5-123. Membership; term of office. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 1201; NRO
1987, § 2-781]
There shall be five trustees of trust funds and capital reserve funds
consisting of the Mayor, the President of the Board of Aldermen, the
Finance Officer and two other members to be appointed by the Mayor
subject to the approval of the Board of Aldermen. The appointed members
shall hold office for a period of two years. Each trustee shall hold office until
his successor is appointed and qualified unless sooner removed.
§ 5-124. Duties. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 1202; NRO 1987, § 2-782]
The trustees of trust funds and capital reserve funds shall perform the
duties prescribed by RSA Chapter 34.
§ 5-125. Street and roadway savings plan established. [NRO 1987,
§ 2-783; added 11-26-1985 by Ord. No. O-85-198]
Pursuant to the provisions of RSA chapter 34, the Board of Aldermen may
from time to time raise and appropriate money or transfer money from
surplus funds to the street and roadway savings plan/capital reserve fund
hereby established for the purpose of financing all or part of the cost of
the study, design or construction of new or expanded streets, roadways or
intersections intended to increase traffic flow, provide greater accessibility
or otherwise improve the road network within the City, and not to be
expended for ordinary maintenance or upkeep.
§ 5-126. Expenditures and disbursements. [NRO 1987, § 2-784;
added 11-26-1985 by Ord. No. O-85-198]
Expenditures and disbursements from the street and roadway savings plan/
capital reserve fund shall be made in accordance with RSA Chapter 34 and
Section 77-a of the City Charter.
§ 5-127. Land acquisition capital reserve fund. [NRO 1975, T. 4,
§ 1205; NRO 1987, § 2-785; amended 8-12-1986 by Ord. No.
O-86-87]
Pursuant to the provision of New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated,
Chapter 34, the Board of Aldermen may from time to time raise and
appropriate money or transfer money from surplus funds to the land
acquisition capital reserve fund hereby established for the purpose of
financing future acquisition of land necessary for municipal purposes and
including expenditure for any preliminary studies, surveys, designs or tests.
Expenditures and disbursements from the land acquisition capital reserve
fund shall be made in accordance with NHRSA Chapter 34 and, where
applicable Section 77-a of the City Charter.19
§ 5-123 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-127.1
1:117
§ 5-127.1. Capital Equipment Reserve Fund. [Added 6-9-2015 by
Ord. No. O-14-025]
A. The City has a Capital Equipment Reserve Fund under RSA Chapter 34,
originally established by resolution in 1968. The purpose of the Capital
Equipment Reserve Fund is to provide a means of systematically
replacing all City capital equipment without having to appropriate
money from current expenses.
B. The administration shall maintain an ongoing list of equipment
intended to be covered by and replaced from the Capital Equipment
Reserve Fund. This list shall include the estimated replacement value of
the equipment and the purpose for which the equipment is used along
with other vehicle specific details.
C. Annually, as part of the budget resolution, the Board of Aldermen will
approve the proposed equipment to be purchased through the Capital
Equipment Reserve Fund during the budget year under review.
D. During that fiscal year, the City may purchase that equipment, or
equipment that will serve the same stated purpose as the listed
equipment, as long as the price does not vary by more than 10% of the
estimated replacement value. All purchases from the Capital
Equipment Reserve Fund must comply with the City's purchasing
approval process. Any other requests to use funds from the Capital
Equipment Reserve Fund must be approved by the Board of Aldermen.
19.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 2-786, School buildings and construction capital reserve
account, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 7-12-2005 by Ord. No.
O-05-76.
§ 5-127.1 NASHUA CODE § 5-127.1
1:118
ARTICLE XXVI
Accounts and Warrants
§ 5-128. Certification of accounts or claims. [NRO 1975, T. 4,
§ 1551; NRO 1987, § 2-796; amended 10-11-1983 by Ord. No.
O-83-142; 9-27-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-85]
No accounts or claims against the City shall be examined or audited by
the Finance Committee unless such accounts or claims are accompanied
by a certification that the same is correct. The Chief Financial Officer
shall preaudit all accounts and claims against the City and prepare the
certification which shall be signed by the Mayor and the Chief Financial
Officer.
§ 5-129. Record of accounts or claims allowed. [NRO 1975, T. 4,
§ 1552; NRO 1987, § 2-797; amended 10-11-1983 by Ord. No.
O-83-142; 9-27-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-85]
The Chief Financial Officer shall keep a record of expenditures, in which he
or she shall enter:
§ 5-130. Appropriation accounts; loans to City. [NRO 1975, T. 4,
§ 1553; NRO 1987, § 2-798; amended 10-11-1983 by Ord. No.
O-83-142; 6-11-1996 by Ord. No. O-96-12; 3-14-2000 by Ord. No.
O-00-11; 6-27-2000 by Ord. No. O-00-36; 1-13-2003 by Ord. No.
O-02-99; 6-24-2003 by Ord. No. O-03-183]
A. The amount and date paid of every account or claim to be examined and
audited the Finance Committee.
B. The name of the person to whom the account or claim was allowed.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the name of the person or entity to
whom the account or claim was allowed may be redacted in the
following situations: [Amended 8-9-2016 by Ord. No. O-16-015]
(1) Wage garnishments;
(2) Workers' compensation payments; and
(3) Payments where disclosure could endanger or compromise Police
Department personnel. Redactions in this situation may be
overridden by a vote of the Finance Committee.
C. The fund or appropriation from which the account or claim was allowed.
D. The certificate of the Finance Committee examination and audit of the
account or claim.
A. Under the direction of the Finance Committee, the Chief Financial
Officer shall keep suitable records for the purpose of accounting for the
various appropriations made by the Board of Aldermen. The
appropriations shall be entered under their proper heading and the
§ 5-128 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-130
1:119
different charges against them shall be promptly entered therein. For
this purpose, an appropriation shall be the object of expenditure line
item designating the general purpose of the expenditure within the
departmental budget.
B. Whenever any appropriation has been exhausted the Chief Financial
Officer shall immediately give notice thereof to the Mayor, the Board of
Aldermen and the Finance Committee.
C. No account or claim shall be chargeable to any appropriation which has
been expended, and unless authorized by special action of the Board of
Aldermen, no funds from an appropriation or money raised by loan for a
specific purpose shall be diverted to and used for another purpose
except by an authorized transfer of funds. Except as otherwise
provided, the Board of Aldermen may transfer any unencumbered
appropriation balance or any portion thereof from one department,
fund or agency to another. Except as otherwise provided, the Chief
Financial Officer is authorized to transfer any unencumbered
appropriation balance or any portion thereof from one object of
expenditure appropriation account to another within the same
department or fund.
D. No funds shall be transferred from any appropriated nonpayroll
account to any payroll account within the same department, fund or
agency, or from one department, fund or agency to another, unless
authorized by special action of the Board of Aldermen.
E. The Chief Financial Officer shall open an account with the City
Treasurer charging him with:
(1) The amount of all loans to the City;
(2) All sums of money paid to him on behalf of the City by the Collector
or other officers or agents of the City, or by any person in any way
indebted to the City;
(3) All bonds, notes, mortgages or other securities in the hands of the
Treasurer and belonging to the City.
F. All City employees' salaries shall be budgeted and funded within the
department in which that position is located except as approved
through the annual budget process or by action of the Board of
Aldermen.
G. Except as provided herein, for encumbrances and escrow, all
appropriations shall terminate at the conclusion of each fiscal year and
no account or claim shall thereafter be chargeable thereto.
(1) Funds may be encumbered, thereby reserving a portion of an
appropriation, prior to the conclusion of a fiscal year to provide for
the payment of obligations which shall come due in accordance
with existing purchase orders, contracts, or salary commitments
§ 5-130 NASHUA CODE § 5-130
1:120
§ 5-131. Payments from City treasury. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 1554; NRO
1987, § 2-799; amended 10-11-1983 by Ord. No. O-83-142;
9-27-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-85]
§ 5-132. Money received; payment to Treasurer; receipts; payment
by credit or debit card. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 1555; NRO 1987, § 2-800;
amended 10-11-1983 by Ord. No. O-83-142]
chargeable to an appropriation. Consistent with the foregoing, the
Financial Services Division may establish policies and procedures
limiting the amounts and setting forth the manner in which
municipal agencies may encumber funds.
(2) The Board of Aldermen may by resolution escrow any and all of an
unexpended appropriation for purposes set forth in said resolution.
(3) Municipal agencies, in accordance with policies and procedures
which may be established by the Financial Services Division, may
escrow unexpended appropriations only to provide for payment of
charges which will come due following the end of the fiscal year for
goods, equipment, or services contemplated by the original
appropriation and which do not constitute general ongoing
ordinary expenditures of the agency.
H. Except for resolutions to escrow unexpended appropriations under
Subsection G(2), when proposed legislation to transfer or reappropriate
a particular appropriation or portion thereof has had its first reading,
such funds shall not be expended or transferred while the legislation is
pending. [Amended 6-26-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-119]
A. Money shall be drawn out of the City treasury only after the proper
approvals are received according to financial operating procedures as
determined by the Chief Financial Officer. A record of expenditures
from the Mayor, addressed to the Treasurer, countersigned by the Chief
Financial Officer shall be submitted to the Finance Committee prior to
their examination and audit.
B. The Mayor shall not pay for any service rendered or any material
furnished for any department beyond the sum appropriated therefor by
the Board of Aldermen.
A. The Treasurer shall give a receipt for all payments of money made to
the City treasury to the person making the payment and, within one
week, shall file a duplicate in the Chief Financial Officer's office.
[Amended 2-24-2009 by Ord. No. O-08-56]
B. Except as otherwise provided, all officers and agents receiving money
on behalf of the City shall pay the money to the Treasurer daily or
weekly as required by the Treasurer, shall submit reports to the
Treasurer setting out in detail the amounts they have received, and
§ 5-130 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-132
1:121
§ 5-133. Treasurer's books; fiscal year. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 1556;
NRO 1987, § 2-801; amended 10-11-1983 by Ord. No. O-83-142]
§ 5-133.1. Financial policies. [Added 4-26-2011 by Ord. No.
O-11-61]
The Chief Financial Officer shall prepare and maintain a collection of
financial policies based on city ordinances and accepted municipal financial
practices. Said policies shall be reviewed by the Chief Financial Officer at
least annually and updated as necessary. Said policies shall be available online
and a current copy will be available in the Legislative Services office
and available in the City Clerk's office upon request.
shall file a duplicate of such reports in the Chief Financial Officer's
office.
C. The City of Nashua and its divisions and departments may apply for,
accept and expend unanticipated money of less than $25,000 from the
state, federal or other governmental unit or a private source which
becomes available during the fiscal year, consistent with the provisions
of RSA 31:95-b. The Board of Aldermen shall include notice of the funds
on the agenda of any regular board meeting and shall record the notice
and discussion in the minutes of that meeting. [Added 11-12-2008 by
Ord. No. O-08-44]
D. The City of Nashua may accept gifts of personal property, other than
money, with a value of $1,000 or less, offered to the City for any public
purpose, consistent with the provisions of RSA 31:95-e. The Board of
Aldermen shall include notice of the gift on the agenda of any regular
board meeting and shall record the notice and discussion in the minutes
of that meeting. Receipt of the gift may occur before the date of the
meeting when discussion occurs. [Added 11-12-2008 by Ord. No.
O-08-44]
E. The Treasurer is authorized, but not required, to accept payment of
local taxes, charges generated by the sale of utility services or all other
fees by use of a credit or debit card. The City will add to the amount
due, in addition to any penalties and interest payable, a service charge
for the acceptance of the card. The City, at the time of the billing, shall
disclose the amount of the service charge. [Added 2-24-2009 by Ord.
No. O-08-56; amended 9-12-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-040]
A. The City Treasurer shall, under the direction of the Finance Committee,
keep an accurate and true account of all his receipts and payments on
behalf of the City. Such accounts shall conform in mode of entry as
nearly as may be with the accounts kept by the Chief Financial Officer.
B. The City Treasurer shall make up his accounts to the close of business
on the last day of June; and the fiscal year shall begin the first day of
July in each year and close on the last day of June next ensuing.
§ 5-132 NASHUA CODE § 5-134
1:122
§ 5-134. Financial reports. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 1557; NRO 1987,
§ 2-802; amended 10-11-1983 by Ord. No. O-83-142; 1-13-2003 by
Ord. No. O-02-99]
§ 5-135. Maintaining adequate undesignated general fund balance.
[NRO 1987, § 2-803; added 8-18-1994 by Ord. No. O-94-55;
A. The Chief Financial Officer's office shall prepare and present monthly to
the Mayor and Board of Aldermen financial reports showing the
financial condition of the City, an analysis of revenue received in
relation to budgeted revenue, and an analysis of expenditures and
encumbrances in relation to appropriations. Special reports shall be
prepared on request of the Mayor or the Finance Committee.
B. The Chief Financial Officer's office shall prepare and present, on or
about September 1 and December 31 of each year, to the Mayor and
Board of Alderman an accounts analysis, showing comparisons with the
past several fiscal years of the City's various reserve accounts,
expendable trust funds, and undesignated fund balance. An accounts
analysis shall also be submitted to the Board of Aldermen with the
Mayor's annual budget, which shows the impact of the Mayor's budget
on the City's various reserve accounts, expendable trust funds, and
undesignated fund balance. For the purposes of this section, an analysis
is defined as the process of breaking down a complex topic or substance
into smaller parts to gain a better understanding of it. [Added
11-12-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-3120; amended 1-25-2011 by Ord.
No. O-10-39]
C. On or before May 15 of each year, the Financial Services Division shall
report to the Board of Aldermen the status of all uncompleted projects.
The report shall state for each project the percentage of completion, the
amount of funds expended, the budgeted amount, the source of
funding, and the amount of funding needed to finish the project. For
purposes of this subsection, a "project" shall be any endeavor requiring
expenditure in excess of $50,000 or, or any of the following:
(1) The purchase, construction, replacement or rehabilitation of any
physical facility, including but not limited to roads, buildings,
bridges, and sewerage, with an anticipated life in excess of 10
years;
(2) The acquisition of tangible personal property with an anticipated
life in excess of 10 years;
(3) The acquisition of land or any interest in land;
(4) Surveys or studies relative to the aforementioned categories;
(5) Contractual services provided to the City.
20.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection B as Subsection C.
§ 5-134 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-135
1:123
6-24-1997 by Ord. No. O-97-131; 12-30-1997 by Ord. No. O-97-175;
12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-125; 2-12-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-02]
§ 5-136. Maintaining adequate overlay. [NRO 1987, § 2-804, added
12-27-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-125]
Prior to September 1 of each year, the Mayor shall provide, in writing, to
the Board of Aldermen, the estimated amount which the City intends to
establish as an overlay account in accordance with RSA 76:6. That amount
shall be sufficient to cover the anticipated current year tax abatements. The
Mayor shall also report the related reserve accounts set for prior year tax
abatements, which shall be in an amount sufficient to cover the anticipated
prior year tax abatements.
A. It is the policy of the Board of Aldermen to maintain an undesignated
general fund balance as of each June 30 equal to a minimum of 10% of
the municipality's fiscal year appropriations, plus the statewide
enhanced education amount, the local school net tax commitment, and
the county appropriation.
B. Prior to September 1 of each year, the Mayor shall provide, in writing,
to the Board of Aldermen, the estimated amount of anticipated
undesignated general fund balance which the Mayor proposes to use to
reduce the anticipated tax rate. In order to use funds for that purpose,
the Board of Aldermen must approve that action by a resolution
adopted by 10 members of the Board of Aldermen on or before the
Board's second meeting in September. If that approval is not given,
undesignated general fund balance shall not be used to reduce the
anticipated tax rate.
C. If the Board of Aldermen votes to use an amount of undesignated
general fund balance to reduce the anticipated tax rate which reduces
the undesignated general fund balance below the minimum amount
required by Subsection A, then it is the policy of the Board of Aldermen
to restore the minimum undesignated general fund balance within a
three-year period.
§ 5-135 NASHUA CODE § 5-136
1:124
ARTICLE XXVII
Contracts and Loans
§ 5-137. Sale of bonds or notes. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 1571; NRO 1987,
§ 2-816; amended 10-11-1983 by Ord. No. O-83-142; 2-27-1996 by
Ord. No. O-96-08]
The Mayor and City Treasurer may sell any or all bonds and notes currently
or hereafter authorized by the Board of Aldermen on a competitive basis
and award the bonds to the bidder(s) offering the lowest net or true interest
cost to the City, as determined by those officers, provided that the sale of
bonds or notes on any other basis shall require the prior approval of this
Committee.
§ 5-138. Contracts. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 1572; NRO 1987, § 2-817;
amended 10-11-1983 by Ord No. O-83-142; 12-11-2007 by Ord. No.
O-07-146]
All contracts and amendments to contracts, regardless of value, in which
the City becomes involved or engaged shall be reviewed by the City
Corporation Counsel, all contracts and amendments in excess of $10,000
shall be reviewed and approved by the Finance Committee prior to award,
and all contracts and amendments in excess of $1,000,000 shall be reviewed
and approved by the Finance Committee and approved by the Board of
Aldermen prior to award, except for emergency situations as defined in
§§ 5-90 and 5-91.
§ 5-139. Responsibility for permit fees and charges under contract
work. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 1573; NRO 1987, § 2-818; amended
10-11-1983 by Ord. No. O-83-142]
Notwithstanding any other provisions of the Nashua ordinances to the
contrary, no department of the City or person or firm performing work
under contract to the City shall be liable for building permit fees, sewer
permit fees or any other like charges imposed thereunder by reason of the
performance of such work.
§ 5-140. Bonds and insurance certificates. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 1574;
NRO 1987, § 2-819; amended 7-18-1977 by Ord. No. O-77-161;
10-11-1983 by Ord. No. O-83-142]
All bonds, insurance certificates and other evidence of insurance required
by ordinance, contract or other law or vote of the City or any of its
constituent bodies shall be countersigned by a resident insurance agent in
the state.
§ 5-137 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-141
1:125
§ 5-141. Closeout of bond accounts. [NRO 1975, T. 4, § 1575; NRO
1987, § 2-820; amended 3-14-1979 by Ord. No. O-79-168;
10-11-1983 by Ord. No. O-83-142]
At the close of the full fiscal year next following the date of occupancy and/
or acceptance by the City of any project funded by bond proceeds, the funds
then remaining in the project bond account shall be escrowed for specific
uncompleted capital items related to the subject project, transferred to
another open capital project account, or applied to the bond issue used to
provide the project proceeds, all in accordance with applicable state law.
§ 5-141 NASHUA CODE § 5-141
1:126
Part 8
Budgeting And Planning
ARTICLE XXVIII
Municipal Budget Control
[Added 3-28-1995 by Ord. No. O-94-76]
§ 5-142. Authority.
This Part 8 is adopted pursuant to Referendum Question No. 1 adopted by
the voters of Nashua on November 2, 1993, reference Section 56-c through
Section 56-f of the City Charter.
§ 5-143. Purpose.
The purpose of this Part 8 is to further define certain terms appearing
in City Charter Sections 56-c through 56-f pertinent to municipal budget
control.
§ 5-144. Definitions.
As used in this Part 8, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPROPRIATE — To set apart from the public revenue of a municipality a
certain sum for a specified purpose and to authorize the expenditure of that
sum for that purpose.
APPROPRIATION — An amount of money appropriated for a specified
purpose by the legislative body.
BUDGET — A statement of recommended appropriations and anticipated
revenues submitted to the legislative body.
§ 5-145. Preparation of combined annual municipal budget and use
of Gross Domestic Product Implicit Price Deflator for State and
Local Government Consumption Expenditures and Gross
Investment.21 [NRO 1987, § 2-838; amended 5-8-2007 by Ord. No.
O-07-99; 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-20]
A. The combined annual municipal budget, prepared in accordance with
Section 56-c of the City Charter, shall consist of accounts and line items
of the City of Nashua annual municipal budget, to include all
departmental revenue and department expenditures, contingency
accounts, bonded debt service, capital reserve accounts, capital
improvement accounts, and the solid waste management enterprise
funds. [Amended 9-27-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-86; 4-11-2017 by
Ord. No. O-17-031]
21.Editor’s Note: This section title was amended 4-11-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-031.
§ 5-142 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-145
1:127
§ 5-146. Current fiscal year expenditures defined.
The total expenditures of the combined annual municipal budget for the
current fiscal year shall consist of the sum of all approved appropriations of
the combined annual municipal budget for the current fiscal year.
§ 5-147. Next fiscal year expenditures defined.
The total expenditures of the combined annual municipal budget for the
next fiscal year shall consist of the sum of all proposed appropriations of the
combined annual municipal budget for the next fiscal year.
§ 5-148. Limitation on spending increases; mandated and
unmandated programs.
All federal and state mandated and unmandated programs and accounts
shall be subject to the limitation of Section 56-c of the City Charter, except
that in the event the proposed expenditures for the next fiscal year exceed
B. The combined annual municipal budget for purpose of Section 56-c of
the City Charter does not include the following: the fund balance
account, the special revenue funds, all prior-year escrow accounts,
Hillsborough County taxes, the overlay assessment, all capital projects
funded by bonds, the wastewater system fund (sewer fund), the capital
reserve, conservation and trust funds, the reserve fund established
pursuant to Section 56-e of the City Charter, and the public capital
facilities impact fee accounts. [Amended 9-27-2011 by Ord. No.
O-11-86; 4-11-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-031]
C. When calculating the limitation on budget increases under Section 56-c
of the City Charter, the Gross Domestic Product Implicit Price Deflator
for State and Local Government Consumption Expenditures and Gross
Investment shall be used. [Amended 4-11-2017 by Ord. No.
O-17-031]
D. The Mayor's proposed annual budget and the adopted annual budget,
prepared and adopted according to City Charter Sections 56 et seq.,
shall state the sum of all appropriations of the combined annual
municipal budget, to include the accounts and line items enumerated
under Subsection A of this section. The dollar amount under or above
the limit established by City Charter Section 56-c shall also be stated.
[Added 6-9-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-64]
E. Resolutions to adopt the annual budget, and resolutions to supplement
the budget, shall state the accumulated sum of all appropriations of the
combined annual municipal budget and also state the dollar amount
under or above the limit established by City Charter Section 56-c. If the
dollar amount is above the allowed limit, requiring an exemption under
City Charter Section 56-d, the maximum dollar amount eligible for
exemption under City Charter Section 56-d shall also be stated. [Added
6-9-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-64]
§ 5-145 NASHUA CODE § 5-148
1:128
this limit, the unmandated programs and accounts shall be reduced to
bring the combined annual municipal budget for the next fiscal year within
the expenditure limit while leaving the mandated programs appropriately
funded.
§ 5-148 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-148
1:129

ARTICLE XXIX
Statement of Policy and Strategic Plan
[Added 3-26-1996 by Ord. No. O-96-03]
§ 5-149. Purpose and intent.
§ 5-150. Process for adoption of plan. [NRO 1987, § 2-1001;
amended 6-26-2001 by Ord. No. O-01-161; 3-12-2002 by Ord. No.
O-02-04]
A. It is the purpose and intent of this article that the Mayor and the Board
of Aldermen of the City of Nashua establish strategic planning as a
continuous and ongoing governmental function in order to promote and
facilitate the adoption of a long-range plan for the development of the
infrastructure of the City of Nashua and the delivery of services by the
City.
B. It is further the purpose of this article to provide for the development of
a strategic plan which shall provide a recording of the policies and longrange
plans of the City in a permanent fashion, and to provide for and
facilitate the periodic revision of such plans.
A. A Strategic Planning Committee is hereby established.
(1) The Committee shall consist of the following members:
(a) The Chairman of the Aldermanic Planning and Economic
Development Committee, who shall serve as Chair of the
Strategic Planning Committee;
(b) The Chairman of the Aldermanic Budget Review Committee,
who shall serve as Vice Chairman of the Strategic Planning
Committee; [Amended 12-13-2016 by Ord. No. O-16-017]
(c) The Chairman of the Aldermanic Infrastructure Committee;
[Amended 12-13-2016 by Ord. No. O-16-017]
(d) The Mayor or the Mayor's designee, who shall be an employee
of the City; [Amended 3-24-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-04022;
12-13-2016 by Ord. No. O-16-017]
(e) The President of the Board of Education, or an elected member
of the Board of Education designated by the Board of
Education; [Added 3-24-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-040]
(f) The Chairman of the Police Commission, or a member of the
Police Commission designated by the Police Commission;
[Added 3-24-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-040]
22.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection A(1)(d) through (g) and
redesignated former Subsection A(1)(h) as Subsection A(1)(d).
§ 5-149 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-150
1:131
(g) The Chairman of the Fire Commission, or an elected member
of the Fire Commission designated by the Fire Commission;
[Added 3-24-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-040]
(h) The Vice Chairman of the Board of Public Works, or an elected
member of the Board of Public Works designated by the Board
of Public Works; [Added 3-24-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-040]
(i) The Chairman of the Library Board of Trustees, or a member of
the Library Board of Trustees designated by the Library Board
of Trustees; and [Added 3-24-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-040]
(j) The Chairman of the Airport Authority, or a member of the
Airport Authority designated by the Airport Authority. [Added
3-24-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-040]
(2) All members shall be ex officio, and their terms upon the committee
shall be coincident with their terms of office or employment in the
stated positions.
(3) The vice chairmen of the Aldermanic Planning and Economic
Development, Budget, and Infrastructure Committees shall serve
as alternates for each of the respective chairmen but shall not
serve as alternates with respect to Chairman and Vice Chairman of
the Strategic Planning Committee. [Added 12-13-2016 by Ord.
No. O-16-017]
(4) The Mayor shall designate an alternate member, who must be an
employee of the City. This member shall only serve as an alternate
to the Mayor or the Mayor's primary designee. [Added
12-13-2016 by Ord. No. O-16-017]
(5) Each named committee, board, commission, or authority shall also
designate an alternate representative to the Committee. The
alternate must meet the same qualifying criteria as the principal
member. These alternates shall only serve as alternates to the
primary member from the named committee, board, or authority.
[Added 12-13-2016 by Ord. No. O-16-017]
B. The Mayor and the Strategic Planning Committee shall develop and
maintain an official statement of policy and strategic plan for the City of
Nashua. This plan shall be developed in a manner determined by the
Committee and approved by the Board of Aldermen. The Committee
may review and revise the plan from time to time, but shall do so at
least once in each term of the Board of Aldermen.
C. The Mayor and the Strategic Planning Committee shall develop and
maintain annually an operating plan which shall provide for the
implementation of the policies set forth in the strategic plan. This plan
shall, at a minimum, detail the projected operating requirements as far
into the future as is foreseeable. This plan shall be developed in a
§ 5-150 NASHUA CODE § 5-150
1:132
§ 5-151. Vision and mission statement. [NRO 1987, § 2-1002; added
3-13-2002 by Ord. No. O-02-03]
manner determined by the Committee and approved by the Board of
Aldermen.
A. Vision statement. Nashua is a proud, vibrant, and welcoming
community. Nashua offers its people opportunities for personal growth,
prosperity, education, culture, heritage, and recreation. Nashua is a
City responsive to the needs of its citizens, continuously examining its
processes to enable efficient delivery of services that enrich the quality
of life.
B. Mission statement. Nashua City Government, while recognizing fiscal
limitations, shall:
(1) Develop and allocate sufficient resources to improve the quality of
its public education, recreation, safety services, parks, public
works, social services, and cultural offerings;
(2) Promote the growth of business and economic opportunity without
sacrificing quality of life; and
(3) Develop and execute long-range plans that make the vision a
reality.
§ 5-150 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-151
1:133
Chapter 12
BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS
§ 5-151 NASHUA CODE § 5-151
1:134
ARTICLE I
Conservation Commission
[NRO 1975, T. 14, §§ 201 and 203 (Secs. 15-31 to 15-33 of the 1987
Code)]
§ 12-1. Establishment.
A Conservation Commission is hereby established according to RSA Chapter
36-A.
§ 12-2. Powers. [Amended 3-29-1979 by Ord. No. O-79-175]
The Conservation Commission shall have the power, on vote of its
membership in accordance with its rules, to accept on behalf of the City
conservation easements over land within the City limits. All other
acquisitions shall be authorized only by resolution duly passed by the Mayor
and Board of Aldermen.
§ 12-3. Compensation. [Added 12-26-2001 by Ord. No. O-00-98;
amended 11-9-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-85]
Each regular or alternate member of the Conservation Commission shall
receive compensation for each regular or special meeting at which they
are in attendance, payable quarterly as provided in the annual City budget.
Such compensation shall not be paid for site visitation.
§ 12-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-3
1:135

ARTICLE II
Nashua Transit Advisory Committee.
[Added 6-12-1990 by Ord. No. O-90-32]
§ 12-4. Establishment; membership; terms. [Amended 11-26-1996
by Ord. No. O-96-94]
A. There is hereby established a Nashua Transit Advisory Committee
(hereinafter referred to as the "Committee"). The Committee shall
consist of five members selected as set forth herein, who shall serve for
terms of three years and shall serve without compensation.
B. The Committee shall consist of:
(1) The Director of the City's Community Development Division;
(2) A member of the Board of Aldermen, to be appointed by the
President of the Board of Aldermen;
(3) A senior citizen representative, to be appointed by the Mayor and
confirmed by the Board of Aldermen;
(4) A representative of the private sector or business community, to be
appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Board of Aldermen;
and
(5) A citizen member to be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by
the Board of Aldermen.
C. The Committee members listed in Subsection B(2) shall be appointed as
follows so as to provide for staggered terms:
(1) The aldermanic member shall be appointed for a term
conterminous with the biennial term of the Board of Aldermen.
(2) The senior citizen representative shall be initially appointed for a
one-year term. Subsequent appointments or reappointments shall
be for a three-year term.
(3) The private sector or business community representative shall be
initially appointed for a two-year term. Subsequent appointments
or reappointments shall be for a three-year term.
(4) The citizen member shall be initially appointed for a three-year
term. Subsequent appointments or reappointments shall be for a
three-year term.
D. The members of the Commission shall serve without compensation. The
Commission shall annually elect one of its members Chairperson, and
may elect other officers as it deems necessary.
E. The Committee shall meet at least six times per year at regular
intervals. Three members shall constitute a quorum necessary for the
§ 12-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-4
1:137
§ 12-5. Functions and duties. [Amended 3-12-1996 by Ord. No.
O-96-09]
The Committee shall be responsible for making recommendations to the
Mayor regarding operation of the City's transit system (including the fixedroute
bus transportation program and the handicapped person/dial-a-ride
program, but excluding school buses) and general transit functions.
§ 12-6. Staff. [Amended 3-12-1996 by Ord. No. O-96-09; 9-22-2009
by Ord. No. O-09-71]
The Transportation Department Manager in the Community Development
Division shall serve as staff to the Committee, subject to the direction of
the Divisions's Director, and shall provide regular and timely reports to the
aldermanic infrastructure committee on all transit matters.
conduct of any business, and a majority vote of those present at any
meeting shall be sufficient for any action taken by the Committee.
§ 12-4 NASHUA CODE § 12-6
1:138
ARTICLE III
Cultural Connections Committee23
[Added 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. O-97-122; amended 9-8-1998 by Ord.
No. O-98-63; 5-22-2001 by Ord. No. O-01-151; 4-22-2003 by Ord.
No. O-03-139; 9-16-2003 by Ord. No. O-03-197]
§ 12-7. Establishment; purpose. [Amended 10-14-2014 by Ord. No.
O-14-028]
A Cultural Connections Committee is hereby established. The purpose of
the Committee is to facilitate communication between the ethnic community
and City government.
§ 12-8. Membership.
A. The Committee shall consist of the following elected officials and
municipal employees: [Amended 5-8-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-95]
(1) The Mayor or his/her designee;
(2) The President of the Board of Aldermen or his/her designee;
(3) The Police Chief or his/her designee;
(4) The Library Director or his/her designee;
(5) The President of the Interfaith Council or his/her designee;
(6) The Superintendent of Schools or his/her designee;
(7) The City Clerk or his/her designee; and
(8) The Director of Public Health and Community Services or his/her
designee.
B. The Committee shall also consist of the following members, who shall
be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Board of Aldermen:
[Added 5-8-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-95]
(1) Three representatives of the private sector with at least two
representing ethnic business constituencies within the community;
and
(2) A minimum of seven and a maximum of 15 community members
representing as broad a spectrum of racial, cultural, religious and
ethnic diversity as exists in the Nashua community. Additionally,
there shall also be an attempt to include other elements of the
community that may be coincidental within its ethnic composition
yet include but not be limited to areas such as health care, arts and
culture, and/or recreation.
23.Editor's Note: The former title of Art. III, Ethnic Awareness Committee, was amended
10-14-2014 by Ord. No. O-14-028.
§ 12-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-8
1:139
§ 12-9. Chairperson; bylaws; meetings. [Amended 5-8-2007 by Ord.
No. O-07-95]
The Committee shall elect a Chairperson from among its members. The
Committee shall establish its bylaws and establish regular times for
meetings and the orderly conduct of business.
§ 12-10. Compensation.
The members of the Committee shall serve without compensation.
C. Members of the Committee, nominated and appointed under
Subsection B will serve for three-year terms. [Amended 5-8-2007 by
Ord. No. O-07-95]
§ 12-8 NASHUA CODE § 12-10
1:140
ARTICLE IV
Mine Falls Park Advisory Committee
[Adopted 12-30-1997 by Ord. No. O-97-158 (Sec. 15-70 of the 1987
Code); amended 2-24-1998 by Ord. No. O-98-06; 4-22-2003 by Ord.
No. O-03-151; 2-26-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-07]
§ 12-11. Establishment.
The Mine Falls Park Advisory Committee for the City of Nashua is hereby
established to promote the use, appreciation and upkeep of Mine Falls Park.
It shall advise the Mayor and Superintendent of Parks and Recreation as to
the maintenance and development of Mine Falls Park.
§ 12-12. Membership; terms.
The Mayor shall appoint, subject to the approval of the Board of Aldermen,
an advisory committee to be known as the Mines Falls Park Advisory
Committee. The Committee shall consist of a minimum of seven members,
and shall have no limit as to the maximum number of members. The
Committee shall have a quorum when four members are present. Two
members will be appointed for the length of their tenure on the
Conservation Commission and Nashua River Watershed Association,
respectively, and the remaining members will be appointed at large and will
serve for three-year terms. No member of the advisory committee shall be
a member of the Board of Aldermen or any employee of the Board of Public
Works/Parks and Recreation Department.
§ 12-13. Chairperson; bylaws; compensation; terms.
The Committee shall elect a Chairperson from among its members, chosen
from one of the citizen representatives. The Committee shall establish its
bylaws and establish regular times for meetings and the orderly conduct of
business. The members of the Committee shall serve without compensation.
Each member of the Committee shall hold office until his/her successor is
appointed and approved, unless sooner removed.
§ 12-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-13
1:141

ARTICLE V
Environment and Energy Committee24
[Adopted 12-13-2016 by Ord. No. O-16-022]
§ 12-14. Purpose.
There shall be an Environment and Energy Committee. The purpose of the
Committee is to further sustainability and livability in Nashua by promoting
environmental stewardship and renewable energy, encouraging energy
conservation and energy efficiency, reducing environmental impacts, and
encouraging green initiatives both within the municipality and beyond to
reach businesses and residents. The Committee is particularly encouraged
to recommend municipal energy and energy efficiency projects that would
result in cost savings for the City. The Committee will advise the Mayor and
Board of Aldermen on environmental and energy issues.
§ 12-15. Membership.
§ 12-16. Chair; bylaws; meetings.
The Committee shall elect a Chair from among its members. The Committee
shall establish bylaws and regular times for meetings.
A. The Committee shall consist of the following elected officials and city
employees:
(1) The Mayor or his or her designee;
(2) The President of the Board of Aldermen or his or her designee;
(3) The Public Works Division Director or his or her designee;
(4) The Community Development Division Director or his or her
designee; and
(5) The Waterways Manager.
B. The Committee shall also consist of the following members, who shall
be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Board of Aldermen:
(1) Three representatives from the private business sector, each with a
personal interest or expertise in environmental or energy issues;
and
(2) Three community members, each with an interest or expertise in
environmental or energy issues.
C. Members of the Committee appointed and confirmed under Subsection
B will serve for three-year terms.
24.Editor's Note: Former Art. V, Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee, added 10-14-1997
by Ord. No. O-97-60, as amended, was repealed 2-25-2014 by Ord. No. O-14-001.
§ 12-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-17
1:143
§ 12-17. Administrative support.
The Community Development Division, through the Waterways Manager,
shall provide administrative support to the Committee.
§ 12-17 NASHUA CODE § 12-17
1:144
ARTICLE VI
Cable Television Advisory Board
[Amended 4-24-2001 by Ord. No. O-01-155 (Sec. 2-108 of the 1987
Code); 6-26-2001 by Ord. No. O-01-162; 12-23-2002 by Ord. No.
O-02-121]
§ 12-18. Establishment; responsibilities.
There shall be a Cable Television Advisory Board (CTAB) to the City of
Nashua. The functions of CTAB shall include the following responsibilities:
§ 12-19. Funding. [Amended 8-8-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-23;
7-8-2008 by O-08-25]
Funding for CTAB and operation of the public, educational and
governmental (PEG) access channels shall be appropriated by the Mayor
and the Board of Aldermen from accounts designated for this purpose. The
Mayor will submit a budget for the PEG access channels as part of the
annual budget. For Fiscal Year 2009, the Mayor will submit a budget for the
PEG access channels via resolution by July 31, 2008.
§ 12-20. Membership. [Amended 8-8-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-23;
9-12-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-27; 3-27-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-86]
CTAB will consist of 15 members total. The six members who are appointed
by the Mayor shall serve for three-year terms. The members are as follows:
A. Report to the Mayor and the Board of Aldermen.
B. Define the mission and objectives of CTAB.
C. Develop municipal channel and future Nashua access channel policies.
D. Oversee the performance of the City's franchise agreement(s) for the
delivery of cable television and any related services.
E. Review existing and future franchise agreements and provide
recommendations to the Mayor and the Board of Aldermen.
F. Examine the subject of municipal regulation of cable television
services, internet service, and any related services in New Hampshire
and the United States.
G. Coordinate activities between the City of Nashua and the franchisee.
H. Explore and cultivate available programming sources.
I. Monitor and evaluate existing programs and recommend changes to the
franchisee for technical, programming and fee structure improvements.
J. Examine relevant emerging technologies and other telecast options for
municipal meetings, such as internet broadcasts.
§ 12-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-20
1:145
§ 12-21. Chairman and clerk.
The Committee shall nominate and elect its own Chairman and clerk.
§ 12-22. Meetings.
The Committee shall meet on an ad hoc basis.
§ 12-23. Municipal access channels. [Added 8-8-2006 by Ord. No.
O-06-23]
Employees and/or contractors who provide services for the implementation
and operation of the municipal access channels will consult with and
respond to CTAB requests on functional matters, including reports, budgets,
technical acquisitions and implementations and other information as
requested. They may be required to attend meetings and actively
participate on subcommittees. The PEG Manager reports to the Mayor or
his/her designee.
§ 12-24. Government channel programming. [Added 6-14-2005 by
Ord. No. O-05-80; amended 10-24-2005 by Ord. No. O-06-39;
10-24-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-40; 8-14-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-118]
A. One member representing the Board of Aldermen who will also serve as
liaison between CTAB and Board of Aldermen, appointed by the
president of the Board of Aldermen.
B. Corporation counsel or his or her designee.
C. The Director of the Nashua Public Library or his or her designee.
D. The Chief of the Fire Department or his or her designee.
E. The Chief of the Police Department or his or her designee.
F. The Superintendent of the School Department or his or her designee.
G. The Director of the Information Technology Division or his or her
designee.
H. One member of the Nashua business community, appointed by the
Mayor and approved by the Board of Aldermen.
I. Four members who are Nashua residents, appointed by the Mayor and
approved by the Board of Aldermen.
J. The Director of the Public Works Division or his or her designee.
K. The Mayor or his or her designee.
L. One member representing emergency management, appointed by the
Mayor and approved by the Board of Aldermen.
§ 12-20 NASHUA CODE § 12-24
1:146
A. The order of priority of meetings to be shown live, taped, played, and
replayed on the government channel shall be as listed below, except
that the PEG Program Director can override this order, if necessary, in
conformance with his or her programming responsibilities assigned by
the CTAB policies and procedures manual:
(1) Board of Aldermen.
(2) Committee of the Whole/Special Board of Aldermen meetings.
(3) Board of Education.
(4) Budget Review Committee.
(5) Finance Committee.
(6) Planning Board.
(7) Zoning Board of Adjustment.
(8) Planning and Economic Development Committee.
(9) Infrastructure Committee.
(10) Ad Hoc Committees / Pennichuck Water Special Committee.
(11) Board of Public Works.
(12) Personnel and Administrative Affairs Committee.
(13) Human Affairs Committee.
(14) Joint Special School Building Committee.
(15) School Construction Projects Committee.
(16) Cable Television Advisory Board.
B. The PEG Program Director shall also establish and maintain a
procedure to use the government channel to broadcast all job postings
that the Human Resources Department deems appropriate for external
posting.
§ 12-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-24
1:147

ARTICLE VII
(Reserved)25
§ 12-25. (Reserved)
25.Editor's Note: Article VII, Government Channel Programming Committee, was repealed
2-26-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-07.
§ 12-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-25
1:149

ARTICLE VIII
(Reserved)26
§ 12-26. through § 12-29. (Reserved)
26.Editor's Note: Former Art. VIII, Green Team, adopted 6-13-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-09, was
repealed 3-11-2014 by Ord. No. O-14-003.
§ 12-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-26
1:151

ARTICLE IX
Ethics Review Committee.
[Amended 5-28-1996 by Ord. No. O-96-01; 11-26-1996 by Ord. No.
O-96-78; 5-22-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-90]
§ 12-30. Composition.
§ 12-31. Rules of Procedure.
A. There shall be a municipal committee known as the Ethics Review
Committee (hereafter referred to as the "Committee"), the purpose of
which is to hear complaints solely of violation of Part 5 of Chapter 5,
Administration of Government, § 5-93 et seq., and not any state conduct
statute. It is comprised of five regular members and three alternate
members, appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Board of
Aldermen.
B. The regular members shall elect a Chairperson who shall preside over
all meetings of the Committee. Alternate members shall only
participate and vote in the absence of a regular member, as determined
in descending order of seniority of their appointment.
C. Regular and alternate members shall serve a three-year term.
Reappointments shall be permitted, but members not confirmed shall
not hold office three months past expiration of their term. Alternate
members may be reappointed as regular members.
D. Regular and alternate members of the Committee shall not be regular
or special municipal employees nor have immediate family members
who are regular or special municipal employees.
A. The Committee shall review, modify as necessary and adopt the Rules of
Procedure, by majority vote of members present and voting, and make
those rules a public record by placing them on file with the City Clerk.
No hearings on the complaint shall proceed until the Rules of Procedure
have been adopted. Upon confirmation of the appointment of a new
Committee member, the Committee shall convene a meeting for the
purpose of introducing the new member to the Rules of Procedure and
to clarify the role and conduct of the Committee.
B. The following shall comprise the Rules of Procedure, subject to
modification by the Committee, under advise of legal counsel for the
City, to promote fair and orderly proceedings:
(1) Except as otherwise adopted or modified by the Rules of Procedure,
proceedings shall adhere to Robert's Rules of Order.
(2) All Committee meetings shall be conducted consistent with the
adopted Rules of Procedure and RSA 91-A.
(3) Hearings and all Committee meetings shall be audio-recorded, and
verbatim minutes shall be transcribed from the recording.
§ 12-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-31
1:153
(4) Minutes of hearings and all Committee meetings shall be reviewed
and corrected for transcription errors by Committee members,
accepted and placed on file. Minutes shall be released to the City
Clerk and available to the public in accordance with RSA 91-A:2 for
public and RSA 91-A:3 for nonpublic meetings.
(5) Any person may attend and make recordings of the public
proceedings.
(6) Only regular members of the Committee, alternate member(s)
serving in the absence of regular member(s), counsel for the City,
the complainant party and its counsel, the defendant party and its
counsel and witnesses called by the parties shall participate in the
hearing.
(7) No member of the Committee whose participation would be a
conflict of interest shall participate in the hearing, except when
called as a witness. The following, based on the RSA 500-A:12 jury
standard, shall be criteria for recusal of a Committee member upon
request by either party, concurred by the Committee based on
evidence, that a member:
(a) Expects to gain or lose upon the disposition of the case;
(b) Is related to either party;
(c) Has advised or assisted either party with respect to the case
after the Committee receives the complaint;
(d) Has given his opinion or has formed an opinion with respect to
the case;
(e) Is employed by or employs any party in the case;
(f) Is prejudiced to any degree regarding the case; or
(g) Employs any of the counsel appearing in the case.
(8) The complainant and defendant parties may, but need not, be
represented by counsel. Fees and expenses for counsel shall be
borne by the respective parties, not by the City, irrespective of
finding and recommendation(s) of the Committee.
(9) Barring good cause shown, failure of the complainant to appear at
the scheduled hearing shall constitute failure to prosecute the
complaint, and the complaint shall be dismissed with prejudice.
(10) Barring good cause shown, failure of the defendant to appear at the
scheduled hearing shall result in the defendant waiving his/her
right to defend against the allegations contained in the complaint.
(11) The complainant has the burden of proof by a preponderance of the
evidence.
§ 12-31 NASHUA CODE § 12-31
1:154
§ 12-32. Complaint.
(12) Strict rules of evidence shall not apply, but the Committee may
exclude hearsay and irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious
evidence.
(13) Evidence shall be offered in the following order:
(a) Complainant's witnesses and documentary evidence.
(b) Defendant's witnesses and documentary evidence.
(c) Rebuttal by complainant.
(d) Rebuttal by defendant.
(14) Testimony shall be under oath or affirmation.
(15) Opposing parties and their counsel may cross-examine witnesses,
and the party or party's counsel who called the witness may
reexamine the witness concerning matters raised in cross
examination. The Chairman shall prohibit badgering of the parties
or witnesses, disruptive behavior and profanity.
(16) Members of the Committee may question witnesses for the purpose
of clarifying their testimony, but shall remain impartial and not
accusatory.
(17) Documentary evidence will be accepted when authenticated and its
relevancy established, as determined by the Committee:
(a) Under Rule 901 of NH Rules of Evidence, the requirement of
authentication or identification "is satisfied by evidence
sufficient to support a finding that the matter in question is
what its proponent claims."
(b) Under Rule 401 of NH Rules of Evidence, relevant evidence is
defined as "evidence having any tendency to make the
existence of any fact that is of consequence to the
determination of the action more probable or less probable
than it would be without the evidence."
(18)No recommendation(s) shall be approved by less than three
members.
(19) Findings and recommendation(s) during deliberations shall require
a majority vote on roll-call of the Committee members present and
voting, and shall be recorded in the minutes. Only those members
participating in the hearing shall vote on finding(s),
recommendations and the contents of the advisory report.
(20) Proceedings conducted and records produced in nonpublic session
may be sealed as authorized under NH RSA 91-A:3.
§ 12-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-32
1:155
A. Any individual having information that a municipal employee, as
defined in Chapter 5, Administration of Government, § 5-93, is engaged
in improper activities or has a conflict of interest under Part 5 (Conduct
Regulations) of Chapter 5, Administration of Government, of the City
Code, may file his or her complaint with the City Solicitor/Corporation
Counsel, who shall forthwith submit said complaint to the Ethics
Review Committee. The Committee Chairperson may respond to
questions regarding strictly procedural or scheduling matters. Motions
by parties shall be filed through the City's legal office and then
forwarded to the Committee.
B. The complaint shall be in writing, containing specific allegations of
conduct violation(s) under Part 5 (Conduct Regulations) of Chapter 5,
Administration of Government, of the City Code, based on firsthand
personal knowledge and shall be accompanied by a statement, under
oath by the person making the complaint, swearing or affirming the
truth of the statements made. A completed complaint shall be sealed
and available only to Committee members, counsel for the City and the
parties until such time as the complaint is unsealed at the request of the
defendant or as the result of action taken by the Committee consistent
with RSA 91-A.
C. The defendant may request that the complaint be unsealed and that the
hearing be held in public in accordance with RSA 91-A. In this event,
the complaint, the hearing and the audio-recorded minutes and the
verbatim transcribed minutes of the hearing shall be open and
accessible to the public.
D. The first Committee meeting with the complaint on the agenda shall
constitute the Committee's receipt of the complaint. The Committee
shall review the complaint to determine if said complaint contains
sufficient specific alleged facts to allege a violation of Part 5 (Conduct
Regulations) of Chapter 5, Administration of Government, of the City
Code, and that the complaint is under oath. If the Committee
determines that the complaint is sufficient, it shall provide notice as
provided herein and proceed with the hearing. If the Committee finds
that said complaint is insufficient, it shall notify the complainant of such
deficiency and allow the complainant to amend and resubmit said
complaint.
E. The Committee shall not have jurisdiction over any complaint if, prior to
the acts alleged in the complaint, the defendant has obtained an
advisory opinion under § 5-102 and has acted in accordance with that
opinion.
F. The Committee shall provide notice of the hearing location, time and
date for the complaint, in accordance with RSA 91-A, and served in
hand or by certified mail with return notice of receipt, to the
complainant and to the defendant. Copies of the complaint and the
Rules of Procedure, adopted by the Committee pursuant to § 12-31 shall
be provided to the parties with the hearing notice.
§ 12-32 NASHUA CODE § 12-33
1:156
§ 12-33. Hearing.
§ 12-34. Reporting.
A. The Committee shall hold a hearing which shall be conducted pursuant
to the adopted Rules of Procedure. The hearing shall be held within 30
days of the Committee's receipt of the complaint, unless a continuance
is granted for good cause.
B. Counsel for the City may attend the hearing in an advisory capacity on
issues of law and procedure, but shall not otherwise participate in the
questioning of witnesses or deliberations.
C. The public shall have the right to attend any public hearing in
accordance with RSA 91-A:2. The Committee may conduct the hearing
and deliberate upon its findings and recommendation(s) in nonpublic
session in accordance with RSA 91-A:3.
A. The Committee shall report its findings and recommendation(s) in a
written report mailed not later than 30 days after the conclusion of the
hearing, to the Mayor, the Board of Aldermen and respective employer
board, commission or agency as may be appropriate. The report shall
contain a copy of the complaint. A copy of the Committee's report shall
be sent to each party by certified mail.
B. Only regular members or alternate member(s) serving in the absence of
regular member(s) shall deliberate and vote on the finding and
recommendation(s).
C. The Committee shall vote to seal or release the report to the public
subject to RSA 91-A and subject to City policy regarding dissemination
of personnel information.
D. The Committee shall file its report with the City Clerk for archiving.
E. The Committee's recommendation(s) shall be advisory and shall not
bind the Mayor, Board of Aldermen, or other boards, commissions,
agencies or officials, who may take such action on the Committee's
finding and recommendation(s) as authorized by law.
§ 12-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-34
1:157

ARTICLE X
(Reserved)27
§ 12-35. through § 12-36. (Reserved)
27.Editor's Note: Former Art. X, Services Advisory Committee for Central Business Service
District, adopted 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-65, was repealed 2-25-2014 by Ord. No.
O-14-001.
§ 12-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-35
1:159

ARTICLE XI
Nashua Arts Commission28
[Adopted 11-23-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-36]
§ 12-37. Establishment; purpose.
A Nashua Arts Commission is hereby established. The purpose of the
Nashua Arts Commission is to serve the community as Nashua's cultural
resource which facilitates, advocates, coordinates and educates on behalf of
the arts and cultural assets of the City of Nashua.
§ 12-38. Responsibilities.
The Nashua Arts Commission shall propose policies to the Mayor and Board
of Aldermen that support the ongoing efforts of arts organizations in the
development of arts programs and projects in Nashua. The Commission
shall also make recommendations to the Mayor and the Board of Aldermen
concerning the support of arts education in schools, promoting awareness
of the value of the arts in the community, and recommending annual budget
appropriations for arts and culture. The Commission may review and
comment on proposals from community-based organizations, and work with
various building commissions that host arts-related events. The Commission
will make recommendations to the Mayor and Board of Aldermen or the
appropriate board or commission relative to city-owned arts and cultural
facilities. The Commission may advise the Mayor and Board of Aldermen in
the development of the arts and cultural plan portion of the City's strategic
plan and its related programs. The Commission may recommend to the
City administration appropriate grants to apply for and assist other cultural
organizations with grants and funding sources.
§ 12-39. Membership; terms.
The Nashua Arts Commission shall consist of a minimum of seven members
and a maximum of 13 members, who shall serve for three-year terms. The
initial appointments shall be made for terms of one, two, and three years so
that the members' terms will be staggered. Appointments shall be made by
the Mayor and confirmed by the Board of Aldermen following an application
process.
§ 12-40. Chairperson; compensation.
The Commission shall annually elect one of its members Chairperson and
may elect other officers as it deems necessary. The members of the
Commission shall serve without compensation.
28.Editor's Note: This article was adopted as Art. X, §§ 12-35 through 12-38, but was
renumbered to avoid duplicate numbering in the chapter.
§ 12-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-40
1:161
Chapter 23
ELECTIONS AND CAMPAIGNS
§ 12-40 NASHUA CODE § 12-40
1:162
ARTICLE I
General Voting Procedures
[NRO 1975, T. 2, §§ 1 to 7 (Secs. 7-1 to 7-7 of the 1987 Code)]
§ 23-1. Voting machines. [Amended 6-21-1977 by Ord. No.
O-77-192; 9-14-1977 by Ord. No. O-77-218; 9-28-1979 by Ord. No.
O-79-226; 1-8-1985 by Ord. No. O-84-111; 6-23-1987 by Ord. No.
O-87-151; 12-23-1991 by Ord. No. O-91-114; 3-11-1997 by Ord. No.
O-97-117; 6-26-2001 by Ord. No. O-01-156]
§ 23-2. Signs and handbills. [Amended 8-14-2012 by Ord. No.
O-12-012]
§ 23-3. Disqualifications of certain persons as election officials;
exceptions. [Amended 9-22-1987 by Ord. No. O-87-166; 12-8-1987
by Ord. No. O-87-184]
A. The City hereby adopts the provisions of RSA 656:40 pursuant to
Resolution R-70131 approved January 15, 1971, by the Mayor and
Aldermen and authorizing the use of voting machines for all elections in
the City to the extent provided by law.
B. The City Clerk shall assume all duties provided by law as custodian of
all voting machines owned by the City.
A. During the voting hours on all election days, no person who is a
candidate for office or who is representing or working on behalf of a
candidate, party, political organization, initiative, or ballot question for
any election, shall be allowed to hold or carry any signs or handbills,
distribute any handbills, post any political signs, or gather signatures in
front of the entrance to the polling places in each ward and for a
distance of 100 feet on each side of such entrance and/or exit.
B. In accordance with § 320-64, during the voting hours on election days,
no person shall park a vehicle in front of the entrance to the polling
place in each ward, for a distance of 100 feet on each side of the
entrance, except for the purpose of voting.
C. During the voting hours on election days, no person shall park a trailer
or vehicle with campaign signs that are mounted, attached or painted
on said trailer or motor vehicle in the public parking lots of the school
properties where voting is held, except for the purpose of voting.
D. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $20.
A. Any person whose name appears on a ballot for an elective position,
other than a position of an election official, shall be disqualified from
performing duties as an election official in that election. A person so
disqualified shall not be considered to have vacated any office but
§ 23-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-3
1:163
§ 23-4. Compensation of election officials. [Amended 3-12-1980 by
Ord. No. O-80-19; 4-9-1985 by Ord. No. O-85-130; 9-14-1993 by Ord.
No. O-93-24; 1-26-1999 by Ord. No. O-98-89; 4-22-2008 by Ord. No.
O-08-14]
rather only to be absent therefrom. A temporary replacement shall be
appointed as provided in RSA 658:19 through 658:22.
B. Notwithstanding Subsection A of this section, any person may serve as
an election official even if he appears on the ballot as a candidate for an
elective position other than election official if he is an unopposed
candidate, or if he is one of the candidates for the elective position for
which the total number of candidates on the ballot does not exceed the
number of persons to be elected to that elective position at that
election.
C. Members of the immediate family of the candidate and spouse (wife,
husband, children, mother, father, sisters, brothers) whose name
appears on the ballot in that ward or who has acknowledged and
accepted a write-in candidacy shall be disqualified from performing the
duties of an election official in that election.
A. Election officials appointed or elected pursuant to state or local law
shall be compensated as follows for all duties performed in connection
with their respective offices, for each election held in the wards of the
City: [Amended 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-006; 7-12-2016 by
Ord. No. O-16-013]
(1) Moderators and clerks, per election: $225.
(2) Selectmen, per election: $190.
(3) Ballot inspectors, assistant election officials and voter registrars,
per election: $175.
B. For a presidential primary election or a state general election at which
votes will be cast for the President of the United States, said
compensation shall be provided for the number of inspectors of election
(ballot inspectors) authorized under RSA 658:2 in each ward. Said
appointments shall be equally divided between the two political parties
which cast the largest number of votes for Governor in the state at the
last previous general election. For all other elections, said
compensation shall be provided to four inspectors of election (ballot
inspectors) in each ward, two each for the two political parties which
cast the largest number of votes for Governor in the state at the last
previous general election. Any additional inspectors appointed by the
two political parties pursuant to RSA 658:2 shall not be compensated by
the City but may be compensated in the amount provided herein by the
political party requesting the inspector.
C. Moderators, ward clerks, selectmen, ballot inspectors, and voter
registrars shall be compensated as outlined herein. To receive full
§ 23-3 NASHUA CODE § 23-4
1:164
§ 23-5. Compensation of Board of Voter Registrars.
The members of the Board of Voter Registrars shall be paid in full for
their services in the following amounts, and at such times as hereinafter
specified: The Clerk of such board shall receive annually $400, the other
two members each $300 annually, all payable quarterly.
§ 23-6. Examination of returns. [Amended 2-26-2008 by Ord. No.
O-08-07]
The Board of Aldermen shall meet the Tuesday next following each
municipal election at 8:00 p.m. The City Clerk shall enter upon the records
the number of votes given in each ward for each person voted for as Mayor
or persons voted for as members of the Board of Education, Board of Public
Works, Board of Fire Commissioners, Board of Aldermen, and Aldermen at
Large and shall lay before the meeting his records of such returns. The
Board of Aldermen shall examine the same and declare the result and shall
cause those elected to be notified of their election.
§ 23-7. Absentee ballots.
compensation, such officials shall participate in a scheduled training
session to be provided by the City Clerk and perform their respective
duties at the polling place of the ward. Officials shall be compensated
for the percentage of time spent performing their respective duties.
Officials not attending a training session shall be paid half of the
compensation they otherwise would have been entitled to as outlined
herein.
A. Each absentee ballot issued by the City Clerk shall be mailed or
delivered in hand by the City Clerk or his duly appointed deputy to each
individual voter who requests such a ballot and is duly qualified to vote
in the election for which such ballot is issued.
B. It shall be a requirement that absentee ballots be returned to the City
Clerk by the voter requesting the ballot either via United States mail or
by causing it to be delivered to the City Clerk or his duly appointed
deputy. No other method will be accepted.29
29.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 7-8, adopted 3-28-2000 by Ord. No. O-00-13, which
immediately followed this section and pertained to the boundaries of Ward 7, was
superseded by a Charter amendment approved at an election held 11-4-2003.
§ 23-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-7.1
1:165
§ 23-7.1. City wards. [Added 7-12-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-7330]
The City of Nashua is hereby divided into the following nine wards:
A. Ward 1: Beginning at the intersection of the F.E. Everett Turnpike and
Amherst Street and running in a northwesterly direction along the
center line of Amherst Street to Airport Road; thence, turning and
running southerly along the center line of Airport Road to the
intersection of the Boston & Maine Railroad tracks; thence running in a
northwesterly direction along the tracks to the Merrimack town line;
thence, turning and running along the Nashua/Merrimack, thence
Nashua/Hollis, lines in a southerly direction to the intersection of the
Nashua River; thence turning and running in a northeasterly direction
along the center line of the Nashua River to the intersection of the F.E.
Everett Turnpike; thence, turning and running in a northerly direction
along the center line of F.E. Everett Turnpike to the point of beginning.
B. °Ward 2: Beginning at the intersection of Cushing Avenue and Amherst
Street and running in a northwesterly direction along the center line of
Amherst Street to Airport Road; thence, turning and running southerly
along the center line of Airport Road to the intersection of the Boston &
Maine Railroad tracks; thence running in a northwesterly direction
along the tracks to the Merrimack town line; thence, turning northerly
and following the Nashua City boundary generally in a northerly then
easterly direction to the center line of the F. E. Everett Turnpike;
thence, turning and running in a southerly direction along the center
line of the F.E. Everett Turnpike to the intersection of Tinker Road;
thence, turning and running in an easterly direction along the center
line of Tinker Road to the intersection of Monza Road; thence turning
and running in a southerly direction along the center line of Monza
Road to the intersection of Century Road; thence turning and running in
an easterly direction along the center line of Century Road to the
intersection of Catalina Lane; thence turning and running in a
southeasterly direction along the center line of Catalina Lane to the
intersection of Deerhaven Drive; thence turning and running in an
easterly direction along the center line of Deerhaven Drive to the center
line of Manchester Street; thence, turning and running in a southerly
direction along the center line of Manchester Street to the intersection
of Cushing Avenue; thence, turning and running along the center line of
Cushing Avenue to the point of beginning.
C. Ward 3: Bound by a line beginning at the intersection of the center line
of the F.E. Everett Turnpike and the Nashua City/Merrimack town line;
30.Editor's Note: This ordinance also stated the following: "Notwithstanding any changes in
the ward boundaries, the City and Ward officers serving in office, or elected to office, at
the time of passage of this resolution shall continue in said offices until the end of the
terms for which they were elected. Any elections to fill vacancies in the General Court
shall be held on the basis of the ward lines as they existed for the election of November
18, 2010, until the effective date of the NH General Court’s redistricting following the
2010 U.S. Census. Any State Representative or State Senator in office on the effective date
of this act does not lose his or her eligibility for that office because of the changes in ward
boundaries made by this ordinance."
§ 23-7.1 NASHUA CODE § 23-7.1
1:166
thence running southerly along the center line of the F.E. Everett
Turnpike to the intersection of Tinker Road; thence, turning and
running in an easterly direction along the center line of Tinker Road
to the intersection of Monza Road; thence turning and running in
a southerly direction along the center line of Monza Road to the
intersection of Century Road; thence turning and running in an easterly
direction along the center line of Century Road to the intersection of
Catalina Lane; thence turning and running in a southeasterly direction
along the center line of Catalina Lane to the intersection of Deerhaven
Drive; thence turning and running in an easterly direction along the
center line of Deerhaven Drive to the center line of Manchester Street;
thence, turning and running in a southerly direction along the center
line of Manchester Street to the intersection of Cushing Avenue;
thence, turning and running along the center line of Cushing Avenue
to the center line of Amherst Street; thence, turning and running
in a southerly direction along the center line of Amherst Street to
the intersection of Fairmount Street; thence, turning and running in
a southerly, then southwesterly, direction along the center line of
Fairmount Street to the intersection of the railroad tracks; thence
turning and running along the railroad tracks in an easterly direction
to the intersection of the power lines at Terrace Street; thence turning
and running along the power lines in a westerly direction to the center
line of the Nashua River; thence, turning and running in an easterly
direction along the center line of the Nashua River; to the center line
of the Merrimack River; north along the center line of the Merrimack
River to the intersection of the Nashua City/Merrimack town line;
westerly along the Nashua City/Merrimack town line to the point of
beginning.
D. Ward 4: Beginning at the intersection of Amherst Street and the F.E.
Everett Turnpike and running in a southerly direction along the center
line of said F.E. Everett Turnpike to the intersection of West Hollis
Street; thence, turning and running in an easterly direction along the
center line of West Hollis Street to the intersection of Badger Street;
thence, turning and running in a southerly direction along the center
line of Badger Street to the intersection of Kinsley Street; thence,
turning and running in an easterly direction along the center line of
Kinsley Street to the intersection of Ash Street; thence, turning and
running in a southerly direction along the center line of Ash Street to
the intersection of Nevada Street; thence, turning and running in an
easterly direction along the center line of Nevada Street to the
intersection of Vine Street; thence, turning and running in a southerly
direction along the center line of Vine Street to the intersection of Lake
Street; thence, turning and running in an easterly direction along the
center line of Lake Street to the intersection of Main Street; thence,
turning and running northerly along the center line of Main Street to
the intersection of Bowers Street; thence, turning and running in an
easterly direction along the center line of Bowers Street to the
intersection of Harbor Avenue; thence, turning and running northerly
along the center line of Harbor Avenue to the intersection of East Hollis
§ 23-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-7.1
1:167
Street; thence, continuing to run northerly across East Hollis Street
and along the center line of Spruce Street to Temple Street and the
intersection of the railroad tracks; thence, northerly along the railroad
tracks to the center line of the Nashua River; thence, turning and
running in a westerly direction along the center line of the Nashua
River to the power lines extending from the Millyard Technology Park
toward Terrace Street; thence turning and running along the power
lines in an easterly direction to the intersection of the railroad tracks;
thence turning and running along the railroad tracks in a westerly
direction to the intersection of Fairmount Street; thence, turning and
running in an easterly, then northerly direction along the center line of
Fairmount Street to the intersection of Amherst Street; thence, turning
and running in a westerly direction along the center line of Amherst
Street to the point of beginning.
E. Ward 5: Beginning at the intersection of the Nashua River and the F.E.
Everett Turnpike; and running in a southerly direction along the center
line of the F.E. Everett Turnpike to the intersection of the Main
Dunstable Road; thence, turning and running in a southwesterly
direction along the center line of Main Dunstable Road to the
intersection of Conant Road; thence, turning and running in a southerly
direction along the center line of Conant Road to the intersection of
Yarmouth Drive; thence, turning and running in an easterly direction
along the center line of Yarmouth Drive to the intersection of Holbrook
Drive; thence, turning and running in a southerly direction along the
center line of Holbrook Drive to the intersection of South London Drive;
thence, turning and continuing in a southerly direction along the center
line of South London Drive to the intersection of Elaine Drive; thence,
turning and running in a southwesterly direction along the center line
of Elaine Drive to the intersection of Flintlocke Drive; thence, turning
and running in a southereasterly direction along the center line of
Flintlocke Drive to the intersection of Rocky Hill Drive; thence, turning
and running in a southwesterly direction along the center line of Rocky
Hill Drive to the intersection of Moe Street; thence, turning and
running in a westerly direction along the center line of Moe Street to
the intersection of Conant Road; thence, turning and running in a
southerly then southwesterly direction along the center line of Conant
Road to the intersection of Main Dunstable Road; thence, turning and
running in a southerly direction along the center line of Main Dunstable
Road to the intersection of Buck Meadow Road; thence, turning and
running in a southeasterly direction along the center line of Buck
Meadow Road to the intersection of Buck Meadow Road, Ridge Road
and Winn Road; thence, following the center line to Winn Road in a
southeasterly direction to the New Hampshire/Massachusetts state
line; thence, turning and running along the New Hampshire/
Massachusetts state line in a westerly direction to the Nashua City/
Hollis town line; thence, turning and running in a northerly direction
along the Nashua City/Hollis town line to the Nashua River; thence,
following the Nashua River in a northeasterly direction to the point of
beginning.
§ 23-7.1 NASHUA CODE § 23-7.1
1:168
F. Ward 6: Beginning at the intersection of Main Street and Lake Street
and running in a westerly direction along the center line of Lake Street
to the intersection of Vine Street; thence, turning and running in a
northerly direction along the center line of Vine Street to the
intersection of Nevada Street; thence, turning and running in a
westerly direction along the center line of Nevada Street to the
intersection of Ash Street; thence, turning and running in a northerly
direction along the center line of Ash Street to Kinsley Street; thence,
turning and running in a westerly direction along the center line of
Kinsley Street to the intersection of Badger Street; thence, turning and
running in a northerly direction along the center line of Badger Street
to the intersection of West Hollis Street; thence, turning and running in
a westerly direction along the center line of West Hollis Street to the
intersection of the F.E. Everett Turnpike; thence, turning and running
in a southeasterly direction along the center line of the F.E. Everett
Turnpike to Main Dunstable Road; thence, running southwesterly along
the center line of Main Dunstable Road to Northeastern Boulevard;
thence, running easterly along the center line of Northeastern
Boulevard to Harris Road and continuing easterly along the center line
of Harris Road to East Dunstable Road; thence running northerly along
the center line of East Dunstable Road to the F.E. Everett Turnpike;
thence turning and running in a southeasterly direction along the
center line of the F.E. Everett Turnpike to the intersection of the Daniel
Webster Highway, Exit 3, southbound off ramp; thence, turning and
running in an easterly direction along the center line of the Exit 3,
southbound off ramp to the Daniel Webster Highway; thence, turning
and running in a northerly direction along the center line of the Daniel
Webster Highway to Main Street; thence, turning and running in a
northerly direction along the center line of Main Street to the point of
beginning.
G. Ward 7: Beginning at the intersection of U.S. Route 3 and the New
Hampshire/Massachusetts border and running northerly along the
center line of the highway to Spit Brook Road; thence, turning easterly
along the center line of Spit Brook Road to Daniel Webster Highway;
thence, turning in a northerly direction along the center line of the
Daniel Webster Highway to the Sagamore Bridge and the
Circumferential Highway; thence turning and running westerly along
the center line of the Circumferential Highway to U.S. Route 3; thence,
turning and running in a northerly direction along the center line of the
F.E. Everett Turnpike to the intersection of the Daniel Webster
Highway, Exit 3, southbound off ramp; thence, turning and running in
an easterly direction along the center line of the Exit 3, southbound off
ramp to the Daniel Webster Highway; thence, turning and running in a
northerly direction along the center line of the Daniel Webster Highway
to the point where it intersects with Main Street and South Main Street;
thence, continuing in a northerly direction along the center line of Main
Street to the intersection of Main Street and Bowers Street; thence,
running in an easterly direction along the center line of Bowers Street
to Harbor Avenue; thence, turning and running in a northerly direction
§ 23-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-7.1
1:169
along the center line of Harbor Avenue to East Hollis Street; thence,
continuing in a northerly direction along the center line of Spruce
Street to Temple Street and continuing northerly to the intersection
of the railroad tracks; thence continuing northerly along the railroad
tracks to the Nashua River; thence, following the center line of the
Nashua River to the Nashua City/Hudson town line; thence, turning and
running southerly along the Nashua City/Hudson town line to the New
Hampshire/Massachusetts border; thence, turning westerly along the
New Hampshire/Massachusetts border to the point of beginning.
H. Ward 8: Beginning at the intersection of Main Street, South Main Street
and the Daniel Webster Highway and running in a southerly, then
westerly direction along the center line of the Daniel Webster Highway
to the intersection of the F.E. Everett Turnpike; thence, turning and
running in a southerly direction along the center line of the F.E. Everett
Turnpike to the intersection of the Circumferential Highway; thence,
turning and running easterly along the center line of the
Circumferential Highway to the center line of the Daniel Webster
Highway; thence, turning and running southerly along the center line of
the Daniel Webster Highway to Spit Brook Road; thence, turning
westerly along the center line of Spit Brook Road to U.S. Route 3;
thence, turning south and running along the center line of U.S. Route 3
to the New Hampshire/Massachusetts state line; thence, turning and
running in a westerly direction along the New Hampshire/
Massachusetts state line to East Dunstable Road; thence, turning and
running in a northerly direction along the center line of East Dunstable
Road to Lamb Road; thence, turning westerly and continuing along the
center line of Lamb Road to Searles Road and continuing westerly along
the center line of Searles Road to the intersection of Salmon Brook;
thence, turning northerly and continuing along the center line of
Salmon Brook to the intersection of New Searles Road; thence, turning
northeasterly along the center line of New Searles Road to the
intersection of East Dunstable Road; thence, continuing northerly along
the center line of East Dunstable Road to the F.E. Everett Turnpike;
thence, turning and running in an easterly direction along the center
line of the F.E. Everett Turnpike to the Daniel Webster Highway;
thence, turning and running north along the center line of the Daniel
Webster Highway to the point of beginning.
I. Ward 9: Beginning at the intersection of Harris Road and East
Dunstable Road and running in a southerly direction along the center
line of East Dunstable Road to New Searles Road; thence, turning
southwesterly along the center line of New Searles Road to the
intersection of Salmon Brook; thence, continuing along the center line
of Salmon Brook to the intersection of Searles Road; thence, turning
easterly along the center line of Searles Road to the intersection of
Lamb Road; thence, continuing westerly along the center line of Lamb
Road to the intersection of East Dunstable Road; thence, continuing
southwesterly, then southerly, along the center line of East Dunstable
Road to the Massachusetts state line; thence, turning and running in a
§ 23-7.1 NASHUA CODE § 23-7.1
1:170
westerly direction along the New Hampshire/Massachusetts state line
to the intersection of Winn Road; thence, turning and running along
the center line of Winn Road in a northerly direction to the intersection
of Winn Road, Buck Meadow Road and Ridge Road; thence, turning
and running in a northwesterly direction along the center line of Buck
Meadow Road to the intersection of Main Dunstable Road; thence,
turning and running in a northerly direction along the center line
of Main Dunstable Road to the intersection of Conant Road; thence,
turning and running in a northeasterly and northerly direction along
the center line of Conant Road to the intersection of Moe Street;
thence, turning and running in an easterly direction along the center
line of Moe Street to the intersection of Rocky Hill Drive; thence,
turning and running in a northeasterly direction along the center line
of Rocky Hill Drive to the intersection of Flintlocke Drive; thence,
turning and running in a northwesterly direction along the center
line of Flintlocke Drive to the intersection of Elaine Drive; thence,
turning and running in a northerly direction along the center line
of Elaine Drive to the intersection of South London Drive; thence,
turning and running in a northwesterly direction along the center line
of South London Drive to the intersection of Holbrook Drive; thence,
turning and continuing in a northwesterly direction along the center
line of Holbrook Drive to the intersection of Yarmouth Drive; thence,
turning and running in a westerly direction along the center line of
Yarmouth Drive to the intersection of Conant Road; thence, turning and
running in a northerly direction along the center line of Conant Road to
Main Dunstable Road; thence, turning and running in a northeasterly
direction along the center line of Main Dunstable Road to Northeastern
Boulevard; thence, turning and running in a southeasterly direction
along the center line of Northeastern Boulevard to Harris Road, then
continuing easterly along Harris Road to East Dunstable Road and the
point of beginning.
§ 23-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-7.1
1:171

ARTICLE II
Precepts and Warrants
[NRO 1975, T. 2, §§ 201 to 207 (Secs. 7-21 to 7-27 of the 1985
Code)]
§ 23-8. Precepts to selectmen.
Whenever for any purpose there shall be occasion for a meeting of the legal
voters of the City in their several wards, the Board of Aldermen shall issue
their precept to the Selectmen of the respective wards directing them to
issue their warrants calling meetings of the voters in their wards.
§ 23-9. Form of precept.
The precepts of the Board of Aldermen shall state the time, place and
purpose for which the meeting is to be called and shall be in substance as
follows:
STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
To the selectmen of ward no. _________ in the City of Nashua:
You are hereby required in the name of (L.S.) the State of New Hampshire
to issue your warrant directed to the inhabitants of said ward, qualified to
vote for senators, notifying them to appear at ___________________ in said
ward, on ___________ the _____ day of _____, at six o'clock in the forenoon for
the following purposes;
1st To bring in their votes for governor, councillor, senator, sheriff,
county solicitor, county treasurer, register of probate, register of
deeds and three county commissioners.
2nd To bring in their votes for representative to congress for the
second congressional district in said state.
3rd To bring in their votes for one or more persons to represent said
ward in the general court of said state the ensuing two years.
4th To bring in their votes for a Mayor, aldermen at large, ward
aldermen, and members of the board of education, public works,
and fire commissioners.
5th To choose a moderator, three selectmen, a clerk of said ward
for the ensuing two years and any other officers required to be
chosen. And you are required to cause a copy of your warrant by
you attested to be posted at the place of meeting, and a like copy
at one other public place in said ward, 15 days before the day of
meeting, and make return thereof upon said warrant to the ward
clerk.
§ 23-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-9
1:173
You are also required to cause the votes given in at said meeting for
state and county officers to be recorded, certified and returned to the
secretary of state and to the superior court for the county of Hillsborough,
respectively, according to law; you are also required to cause the votes
given in for all city officers to be recorded, certified and returned to the
city clerk within 24 hours after such meeting.
Given under our hands and the seal of said City this _____ day of __________,
20_____.
Board of Aldermen
City Clerk
§ 23-10. Service of precepts.
Precepts shall be served either by giving one attested copy to two of the
Selectmen in each ward or by leaving such copies at their usual place of
abode.
§ 23-11. Issuance of warrant.
Upon the service of the precept the Selectmen of each ward shall issue their
warrants to the voters thereof, notifying them to appear at the time, place
and for the purpose mentioned in the precept.
§ 23-12. Blanks for warrants, record and returns.
The Board of Aldermen shall cause suitable blanks for such warrants, and
for the record and return of all votes or elections, to be furnished to the
Selectmen and clerks of the several wards at the time of issuing their
precepts.
§ 23-13. Form of warrant.
The warrant of the selectmen shall be substantially as follows:
STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
To the inhabitants of ward no. _____ in the City of Nashua qualified to vote
for senators in said state:
You are hereby required to meet at _________________ in (L.S.) said ward
on _____, the _____ day of _________ at 6:00 o'clock in the forenoon for the
following purposes:
§ 23-9 NASHUA CODE § 23-13
1:174
1st To bring in your votes for governor, councillor, sheriff, county solicitor,
county treasurer, register of probate, register of deeds and three
county commissioners.
2nd To bring in your votes for representative to Congress for the second
congressional district in said state.
3rd To bring in your votes for one or more persons to represent said ward
in the general court of said state for the ensuing two years.
4th To bring in your votes for a mayor, aldermen at large, ward aldermen,
and members of the board of education, public works, and fire
commissioners.
5th To choose a moderator, three selectmen, and a clerk of said ward for
the ensuing two years, and any other officers required to be chosen.
Given under our hands and seals of said City this _____ day of _____ A.D.
20_____.
Selectmen
Ward no.
in the
City of Nashua
§ 23-14. Variances.
The articles inserted in the precepts and warrants may be varied by striking
out or inserting new ones as occasion may require.
§ 23-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-14
1:175

ARTICLE III
Referendum Questions
[NRO 1975, T. 2, § 401 (Sec. 7-41 of the 1987 Code)]
§ 23-15. Information and arguments.
Whenever a measure is submitted to a vote by the qualified voters of
the City pursuant to Sections 98 through 108 of the City Charter, the
City Solicitor/Corporation Counsel shall prepare, and the City Clerk shall
publish, information and arguments pro and con upon each measure. Such
information and arguments shall, prior to publication, be approved by 2/
3 of the Board of Aldermen, and publication shall be accomplished by the
printing of such information and arguments in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City not less than seven days prior to the day the measure
is to be voted upon. The City Clerk may also take such steps as he shall
deem appropriate to give such information and arguments as wide a
distribution among the voters as possible.
§ 23-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-15
1:177

ARTICLE IV
Campaign Contributions
[NRO 1975, T. 2, §§ 601 to 604 (Secs. 7-56 to 7-59 of the 1985
Code)]
§ 23-16. Applicability. [Amended 10-18-1977 by Ord. No. O-77-199;
4-22-1986 by Ord. No. O-86-19A; 12-26-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-128]
§ 23-17. Definitions. [NRO 1975, T. 2, § 602; 10-18-1977 by Ord. No.
O-77-199; 12-26-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-128]
Certain words and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meaning
given in this section:
BALLOT MEASURE — Any Charter amendment or question which is
submitted or intended to be submitted to a popular vote at a municipal
election.
CANDIDATE — Any duly nominated person, any person announcing as a
write-in candidate and for whom votes are sought in that election, or any
person who has knowingly and willingly taken affirmative action, including
but not limited to solicitation of funds, for the purpose of seeking
nomination for or election to municipal office.[Amended 6-9-2015 by Ord.
No. O-15-049]
COMMUNICATION — Includes, but is not limited to, publication in any
newspaper or other periodical or on any Internet site, broadcasting on
radio, television, or over any public address system, transmission by
telephone or facsimile, placement on any billboards, outdoor facilities,
window displays, posters, cards, pamphlets, leaflets, flyers, or other
circulars, or in any direct mailing.
ELECTION — Any special, regular or run-off municipal election.
EXPLORATORY COMMITTEE — Any organization of two or more persons
formed solely for the purpose of determining the feasibility of an individual's
candidacy for office. The activities of exploratory committees may include
polling, travel, and telephone calls to determine whether the individual
should become a candidate. Certain activities, however, indicate that an
individual has decided to become a candidate and is not merely determining
the feasibility of candidacy for office, including, but not limited to: raising
funds in excess of amounts reasonably required for exploratory activity
A. This article is enacted in order to promote open and fair elections, to
safeguard the integrity of the electoral process, to provide the
electorate with information regarding the distribution of capital
affecting candidates or issues in a campaign, and/or to deter actual or
perceived corruption by exposing the source of large expenditures.
B. The provisions of this article shall apply to of the offices of Mayor,
Alderman at Large, Ward Alderman, Board of Education, Fire
Commission and Board of Public Works, and to municipal ballot
measures.
§ 23-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-17
1:179
or amassing funds to be used after candidacy is established; conducting
activities over a protracted period of time or shortly before the election;
using public political advertising to publicize his or her intention to
campaign; making or authorizing statements that refer to him or her as
a candidate; or seeking ballot access.[Added 6-9-2015 by Ord. No.
O-15-049]
ITEMS OF VALUE — Any service or property, real or personal, being of a
tangible nature, except the personal services or labors of volunteers who
are not compensated therefor.
PERSON — Includes a natural person, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, organization, society, labor union, business trust, trust,
financial institution, or any other group, organization or entity of any
nature.
POLITICAL COMMITTEE — Any organization of two or more persons to
influence elections or ballot measures.
§ 23-17.1. Registration of political committee. [Added 12-26-2007
by Ord. No. O-07-128]
A political committee shall register with the City Clerk not later than
24 hours before making or contracting for any expenditure relative to
the municipal election for which the political committee is organized. The
committee shall file with the City Clerk a statement of the purpose of the
political committee and a statement of the name, address, occupation and
principal place of business, of its chairman, treasurer and other officers.
§ 23-17.2. Registration of exploratory committee. [Added 6-9-2015
by Ord. No. O-15-049]
An exploratory committee shall register with the City Clerk not later than
24 hours after accepting any contributions or making or contracting for any
expenditure relative to the purpose for which the exploratory committee
is organized. The exploratory committee shall file with the City Clerk a
statement of the purpose of the committee and a statement of the name,
address, occupation and principal place of business, of the individual whose
feasibility of candidacy is being explored, its chairman, treasurer and other
officers.
§ 23-18. Publication. [NRO 1975, T. 2, § 603; 10-18-1977 by Ord.
No. O-77-199; 4-22-1986 by Ord. No. O-86-19A; 12-26-2007 by Ord.
No. O-07-128; 2-24-2009 by Ord. No. O-08-49]
A. Each political committee that receives contributions or makes
expenditures for the purpose of influencing the election of any
candidate, and each person or political committee that receives
contributions or makes expenditures for the purpose of influencing any
ballot measure or referendum question shall file statements with the
City Clerk detailing each receipt and expenditure, covering both the
amount and source thereof, including dates, names and addresses of
§ 23-17 NASHUA CODE § 23-18
1:180
contributors. In cases where receipts from any one person total $10 or
less, the receipt will be entered by amount only. [Amended 5-26-2009
by Ord. No. O-09-60]
B. Each candidate shall file statements with the City Clerk detailing each
receipt and expenditure, covering both the amount and source thereof,
including dates, names and addresses of contributors. In cases where
receipts from any one person total $10 or less, the receipt will be
entered by amount only. In cases where there are no receipts or
expenditures, the filing shall state that fact.
C. Statements of receipts and expenditures relative to a municipal election
shall cover the period expiring two days prior to the filing of the
statements, which shall be filed 20 days prior to the election, and again
on October 1 following a mayoral primary election held on the second
Tuesday of September under Charter Section 5a; on December 1
following a municipal election held on the first Tuesday following the
first Monday in November; or 30 days following a special municipal
election. [Amended 3-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-59]
D. Funds received and spent by exploratory committees are considered to
be receipts and expenditures and will be reportable when the candidate
files his or her first report required under this section and in the
manner required by this section. On June 1 and December 1 of each
calendar year, an individual for whom an exploratory committee was
formed who has not included all receipts and expenditures on a report
required under Subsection B, herein, shall file an informational report
on behalf of the exploratory committee. In the event an individual, for
whom an exploratory committee was formed, chooses not to become a
candidate for office, the surplus contributions may be used or disposed
of in accordance with § 23-18.1, and the semiannual information report
required of exploratory committees shall continue to be filed until such
time as all outstanding surplus has been deleted and reported. [Added
6-9-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-04931]
E. Any office holder who during the year shall have received any item of
value, not a campaign receipt, shall file a statement with the City Clerk
detailing each such receipt, including the value, date, and name and
address of the contributor thereof, in accordance with Chapter 23,
Article VI, Gifts, Testimonials, Honorariums. [Amended 3-22-2011 by
Ord. No. O-11-59]
F. Filings shall be in a form determined by the City Clerk. Filings may be
submitted electronically, including by electronic mail, facsimile
transmission or any other method approved by the City Clerk. However,
electronic filers are responsible for ensuring that the City Clerk has
received such reports within the time required.
31.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections D through F as
Subsections E through G, respectively.
§ 23-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-18
1:181
§ 23-18.1. Surplus campaign contributions. [Added 12-26-2007 by
Ord. No. O-07-128]
Surplus campaign contributions may be used after a general or special
election for fund raising activities and for other politically related activity
sponsored by the candidate, or for donations to charitable organizations.
Such surplus campaign contributions, however, shall not be used for
personal purposes.
§ 23-18.2. Continued filings required. [Added 3-22-2011 by Ord. No.
O-11-59]
Any political committee or candidate which has any outstanding debt,
obligation, or surplus following the second campaign receipt and
expenditure report for a municipal election shall file reports by June 1 and
December 1 of each year following said election in the same form as in
§ 23-18E until the obligation or indebtedness is entirely satisfied or surplus
deleted, at which time a final report shall be filed; provided, however, that
a political committee or candidate may amend, update, or submit a final
report at additional times other than those required under this section.
§ 23-19. Violations and penalties. [NRO 1975, T. 2, § 604;
10-18-1977 by Ord. No. O-77-199; 12-26-2007 by Ord. No.
O-07-128]
G. Statements shall become public information immediately upon filing.
Copies may be furnished on request, and upon payment of reproduction
costs to the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall post a copy of the
statements required under Subsections A through D on the Internet
within three business days of the filing deadline, for a period of no less
than four years. [Amended 6-9-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-049]
A. It shall be unlawful for any candidate, person, or political committee to
try to circumvent the filing of an item of value larger than $10 by any
means. Any candidate, person, or political committee having been
found guilty of such a circumvention shall be guilty of failing to comply.
B. Any candidate, person, or political committee failing to comply with the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a violation,
and fined not more than $100 for each day that lack of compliance
exists. Each day that lack of compliance exists shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 23-18 NASHUA CODE § 23-19
1:182
ARTICLE V
(Reserved)32
§ 23-20. (Reserved)
§ 23-21. (Reserved)
32.Editor's Note: Article V, Receipts and Expenditures to Influence Ballot or Referendum
Questions, was repealed 12-26-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-128.
§ 23-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-21
1:183

ARTICLE VI
Gifts, Testimonials, Honorariums
[Adopted 9-13-2000 by Ord. No. O-00-18 (Secs. 7-66 to 7-68 of the
1985 Code)]
§ 23-22. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ELECTED OFFICIAL — That the provisions of this article shall apply to
the holders of the offices of Mayor, Alderman at Large, Ward Alderman,
Board of Education, Fire Commissioner and Public Works Commission and
to candidate for any of these offices.
GIFT — Any money or thing of value received in excess of $50. "Gift" shall
not include contributions as defined in NRO Article IV; a commercially
reasonable loan made in the ordinary course of business; meals and
beverages consumed in the course of official business; ceremonial gifts
or awards which have insignificant monetary value; unsolicited gifts of
nominal value or trivial items of informational value; reasonable expenses
for food, travel and lodging for an in-state meeting at which the elected
official participates in a panel or a speaking engagement; gifts of tickets
or free admission extended to an elected official to attend charitable or
political events, if the purpose of such gift or admission is a courtesy
customarily extended to the office; gifts that are purely private and personal
in nature; or gifts from relatives by blood or marriage, or a member of the
same household.
HONORARIUM — A payment in excess of $50 to an elected official for
services on which no fee is set or legally obtainable.
TESTIMONIAL — An affair of any kind of nature including, but not limited
to, receptions, breakfasts, luncheons, dinners, dances, or picnics intended
to raise funds on behalf of an elected official.
§ 23-23. Disclosure required. [Amended 3-22-2011 by Ord. No.
O-11-59]
Every elected official shall file a statement semiannually with the City Clerk
by June 1 and December 1, on a form adopted by the Clerk, showing any
income received by the official during the calendar year from testimonials,
gifts, honorariums, donations, or any other source, when the receipt of such
income is attributable to the office held by the official. This report shall not
include campaign contributions, income received by the official in his or her
regular course of employment or business or salary, mileage, or expense
payments made to the official by the City for performance of official duties
for the calendar year. The statement shall give in alphabetical order the
full name, post office address, occupation, and principal place of business
if any, of all contributors who gave an individual or an aggregate total of
more than $50 of such income and the date received. The statement shall
§ 23-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-23
1:185
be a public record under RSA 91-A. For the purpose of this section, "income
attributable to the office held by the official" means any gift, honorarium,
or testimonial income which is received by an official in his or her official
capacity, and which would not have been received by the official but for the
office he or she holds.
§ 23-23.1. Continued filings required. [Added 3-22-2011 by Ord. No.
O-11-59]
Any elected official who has any outstanding debt, obligation, or surplus
following a filing required by this article shall continue to file reports by
June 1 and December 1 of each subsequent year in the same financial
disclosure form as required under this article until the obligation or
indebtedness is entirely satisfied or surplus deleted, at which time a final
report shall be filed; provided, however, that an election official may amend,
update, or submit a final report at additional times other than those
required under this section.
§ 23-24. Information required on financial disclosure form.
A. Each elected official shall disclose any gift or honorarium the official
received in excess of $50 and the nature and value of such gift. Each
elected official shall disclose income received from an individual
contributor through gifts and honorariums or, through gifts or
honorariums which exceeds that individual contributor's aggregate
total of $50.
B. For testimonials, each elected official shall disclose the total amount of
income received, the expenses of holding the testimonial, and the
testimonial net income raised after paying those expenses. Each
elected official shall also disclose income received from individual
contributors in excess of $50, and shall follow the disclosure
requirements of § 23-23.
§ 23-23 NASHUA CODE § 23-24
1:186
Chapter 30
FUNDS
§ 23-24 FUNDS § 23-24
30:187

ARTICLE I
Hunt Fund
[Adopted NRO, T. 14, §§ 601 to 604 (Secs. 15-46 to 15-49 of the
1987 Code)]
§ 30-1. Lectures.
§ 30-2. Board of Trustees. [Amended 5-8-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-89]
§ 30-3. Rules and regulations.
The Board of Trustees of the Hunt Fund may establish such rules and
regulations as it may think proper for the care and proper management
of the Hunt Fund and Hunt lectures. Such rules and regulations shall not
conflict or be inconsistent with the conditions upon which the Hunt Fund
was given.
§ 30-4. Annual report.
At the end of each year, the Board of Trustees of the Hunt Fund shall make a
detailed report of their activities for that year to the Board of Aldermen. The
report shall be published with the report of other municipal departments.
A. Regular courses of free, popular and scientific lectures shall be given
annually within the City. Such lectures shall be open to all citizens of
Nashua and its vicinity. All political subjects of a partisan character, and
all theological subjects of a sectarian nature, shall be carefully excluded
from lectures.
B. All expenses incurred for lectures shall be defrayed out of the income
realized from the Hunt Fund, as set forth in an instrument purporting to
be the last will and testament of Moses Hunt, of Boston, in the County
of Suffolk and State of Massachusetts, deceased, a copy of which is on
file at the Register of Probate for the County of Hillsborough.
C. The lectures shall be given at some suitable and convenient place,
located in a central part of the City, and shall be known as and called
the "Hunt Lectures."
A. The Hunt Fund shall be under the management and control of a Board
of three Trustees, who shall serve without pay.
B. The members of the Board of Trustees shall be the Mayor, or his or her
designee, and two persons chosen by the Board of Aldermen. Of the
persons chosen by the Board of Aldermen, one shall hold office until
January 1, 1917, and the other shall hold office until January 1, 1918. At
the expiration of their respective terms, and annually thereafter, the
Board of Aldermen shall choose a member of the Board of Trustees who
shall hold office for two years and until another person is elected and
qualified in his place. No person shall be a Trustee and a member of the
Board of Aldermen at the same time.
§ 30-1 FUNDS § 30-4
30:189

ARTICLE II
Harris Lecture Course Fund
[Adopted NRO 1975, T. §§ 801- to 803 (Secs. 15-61 to 15-63 of the
1987 Code); amended 5-8-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-89]
§ 30-5. Board of Trustees.
§ 30-6. Duties of Trustees; rules and regulations.
The Board of Trustees shall have the general management and supervision
of the Ira F. Harris Lecture Course Fund and shall perform its duties
in accordance with the provisions of the fifth clause of the will of Mary
Proctor Harris, which is on file at the Registry of Probate for the County
of Hillsborough. The Board of Trustees may establish such rules and
regulations as it thinks proper for the care and proper management of
the fund. Such rules and regulations, however, shall not conflict or be
inconsistent with the conditions upon which the fund was given.
§ 30-7. Annual report.
At the end of each year, the Board of Trustees of the Harris Lecture Course
Fund shall make a detailed report of its activities for that year to the
Board of Aldermen. The report shall be published with the report of other
municipal departments.
A. There shall be a Board of Trustees of the Ira F. Harris Lecture Course
Fund, consisting of three members who shall serve without pay.
B. The members of the Board of Trustees shall be the Mayor, or his or her
designee, as Chairman, and two persons chosen by the Board of
Aldermen. Of the persons chosen by the Board of Aldermen, one shall
hold office until January 1, 1939, and the other shall hold office until
January 1, 1940. At the expiration of their respective terms, and
annually thereafter, the Board of Aldermen shall choose a member of
the Board of Trustees who shall hold office for two years. Appointments
to fill a vacancy shall be only for the unexpired term. No person shall be
a trustee and a member of the Board of Aldermen at the same time.
§ 30-5 FUNDS § 30-7
30:191

ARTICLE III
Solid Waste Disposal Fund and Solid Waste Equipment Reserve
Fund
[Adopted 2-22-2000 by Ord. No. O-00-02 (Secs. 10-70 to 10-71 of
the 1987 Code)]
§ 30-8. Purpose.
This article provides for a Solid Waste Disposal Fund as a municipal
enterprise and a legal and accounting entity to continue the activities
and accounting system of the Solid Waste Disposal Fund established by
Resolutions R-87-225 and R-88-39.
§ 30-9. Solid Waste Disposal Fund.
The Solid Waste Disposal Fund shall be a legal and accounting entity of
the City. All related revenues from solid waste fees will be credited to this
fund, and all expenditures for the operation and maintenance of the system
and other obligations of the system, including capital replacements and
improvements, will be charged to this fund. The earnings and other reserves
of the system will be retained in this fund. Current-year surplus (inclusive
of excess revenues and/or unexpended appropriations) and accumulated
retained earnings will not be used for any purpose other than those
specified above without the prior approval of the Board of Public Works.
§ 30-10. Solid Waste Equipment Reserve Fund.
There is also established a Solid Waste Equipment Reserve Fund as part
of the Solid Waste Disposal Fund. Custody of the fund shall be under the
control of the Trustees of trust funds, which shall hold the fund in trust for
the Board of Public Works. The Board of Public Works shall be responsible
for all expenditures from the fund.
§ 30-11. Administration by Director of Public Works.
The administration of the provisions of this article shall be the responsibility
of the Director of Public Works.
§ 30-12. Responsibilities of Division of Financial Services.
The Division of Financial Services shall be responsible for the preparation
of monthly and quarterly bills, the receipt and care of all funds, and the
maintenance of general and operating account records required to show the
results of operations and the financial condition of the fund.
§ 30-8 FUNDS § 30-12
30:193

ARTICLE IV
School Building, Construction, Additions and Renovations Capital
Reserve Fund
[Adopted 7-12-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-77]
§ 30-13. Establishment; expenditures.
A. A Capital Reserve Fund is established under RSA 34 for financing costs
of school building, construction, additions and renovations.
B. Expenditures from said fund shall be as directed by resolution adopted
by majority vote of the Board of Aldermen.
§ 30-13 FUNDS § 30-13
30:195

ARTICLE V
Expendable Trust Fund for School Department Athletic Expenses
[Adopted 8-9-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-103]
§ 30-14. Establishment; agent.
Pursuant to NH RSA 31:19-a, an Expendable Trust Fund is hereby
established for the purpose of accepting donations, contributions and gifts,
including charitable advertising and sponsorship payment, for school
department athletic expenses, and the Board of Education is appointed as
the agent to expend under RSA 31:19-a.
§ 30-15. Disposition of unexpended balance.
Any balance remaining in this Expendable Trust Fund at fiscal year end
will not lapse or be closed out to the general fund but will remain in this
Expendable Trust Fund for future school-related programs and activities.
§ 30-14 FUNDS § 30-15
30:197

ARTICLE VI
Athletic Fee and Gate Receipts Special Revenue Fund
[Adopted 8-9-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-103]
§ 30-16. Establishment.
Pursuant to RSA 47:1-b, a Special Revenue Fund to restrict revenues from
school department student athletic fees and gate receipts to expenditures
for school department athletic supplies and equipment, team transportation
costs and game official expenses is established.
§ 30-17. Procedure for establishing fund.
The procedure for establishing the Special Revenue Fund pursuant to RSA
47:1-c is by majority affirmative vote on the following question:
"Shall we adopt the provisions of RSA 47:1-b to restrict revenues from
school department sports-related student fees and gate receipts to
expenditures for the purpose of funding school department athletic
supplies and equipment, team transportation costs and game official
expenses? Such revenues and expenditures shall be accounted for in a
special revenue fund to be known as the school department student athletic
fee and gate receipt special revenue fund, separate from the general
fund. Any surplus in such fund shall not be deemed part of the general
fund accumulated surplus and shall be expended only after a vote by
the legislative body to appropriate a specific amount from said fund for
a specific purpose related to the purpose of the fund or source of the
revenue."
§ 30-18. Transfer of existing fund balance.
Any balance in the School Athletic Enterprise Fund under Resolutions
R-94-29 and R-97-153 at the end of Fiscal Year 2005 shall be transferred to
the Special Revenue Fund created by this article.
§ 30-16 FUNDS § 30-18
30:199

ARTICLE VII
Reclamation Trust Fund
[Adopted 9-12-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-25]
§ 30-19. Establishment; purpose.
A City Reclamation Trust Fund is established under RSA 261:153V and
149-M:18 to be used to pay the fees for the collection and disposal of the
City's motor vehicle waste.
§ 30-20. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOTOR VEHICLE WASTE — Used residential motor oil, residential motor
vehicle batteries, and tires from residential motor vehicles.
RESIDENTIAL MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle registered in the
City.
§ 30-21. Use of excess funds.
The City may use any money in this fund in excess of such fees for the
recycling and reclamation of other types of solid waste.
§ 30-19 FUNDS § 30-21
30:201
Chapter 45
PENSION AND RETIREMENT SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel — See Ch. 50.
§ 30-21 NASHUA CODE § 30-21
30:202
ARTICLE I
Pension Account
[NRO 1975, T. 4, § 4601 (Sec. 2-601 of the 1987 Code)]
§ 45-1. Creation of account.
There is created a special account on the books of the City, to be known as
the pension account, against which account all pensions paid on and after
January 1, 1939, are to be charged.
§ 45-2. Closing of account; return of surplus.
Such pension account is to be closed at the end of every fiscal year and any
surplus returned to the general government account.
§ 45-1 FUNDS § 45-2
30:203

ARTICLE II
State Retirement System
[NRO, T. 4, §§ 4801 to 4802 (Secs. 2-616 to 2-617 of the 1987 Code)]
§ 45-3. Membership.
§ 45-4. Municipal pensions.
A. All employees of the City who are not now covered under any
contributory or funded pension plan, and who are eligible and desirous
of securing a pension upon retirement, shall make application, pay the
contributions required thereafter, and retain membership in, any New
Hampshire state retirement system of which he or she is now qualified
to become a member, by August 14, 1974. The City shall pay all
contributions required by reason of service performed prior to the date
of membership by each employee.
B. All persons becoming employed by the City after August 14, 1973, who
are not eligible to participate in any contributory or funded pension
plan shall also obtain and retain membership in the state retirement
system.
C. No retirement pension benefits shall be payable to any person retiring
after December 26, 1973, until the City employee or official who is
eligible for such benefits has terminated his or her employment with the
City and is no longer receiving remuneration from City funds. This
section shall not apply to appointed officials who receive remuneration
of not more than $1,000 per annum, nor shall it apply to elected
officials.33
A. All municipal pensions for employees granted and approved prior to
August 14, 1973, and in full force and effect as of that date, shall be
continued when approved annually in accordance with the provisions of
the present laws governing the granting and payment of the same.
B. No application for a pension made in accordance with the provisions of
existing local pension acts shall be considered or approved if submitted
by an employee of the City who is eligible for membership in the state
retirement system and who neglects to retain membership in such
system on or before the expiration date for such purpose in the act
governing the operation of such retirement system.
33.Editor's Note: See document at end of chapter.
§ 45-3 FUNDS § 45-4
30:205

ARTICLE III
Teachers' Pensions
[NRO T. 4, §§ 5201 to 5204 (Secs. 2-661 to 2-664 of the 1987 Code)]
§ 45-5. Eligibility; membership.
All teachers of the City who are eligible and are desirous of securing
a pension upon retirement shall make application, pay the required
contributions and retain membership in the state teacher's retirement
association of which he or she is qualified to become a member.
§ 45-6. Benefits.
Any teacher of the City who retains membership in the state teacher's
retirement association at the time of his or her retirement and whose
annual benefits therefrom at retirement do not amount to a sum equal to
1/2 of the basic annual salary for the municipal fiscal year next preceding
retirement shall, when annually recommended and approved in accordance
with the provisions of present existing pension laws by the respective
boards now having jurisdiction in such matters, receive annually thereafter
and if necessary, from the City, a supplemental pension in an amount which,
when added to the annual benefits received from the retirement system,
will equal but not exceed 1/2 of the basic annual salary received for the
municipal fiscal year next preceding retirement.
§ 45-7. Annual approval of municipal pensions.
All municipal pensions for teachers granted and approved prior to
December 31, 1945, and in full force and effect as of that date, shall be
continued when approved annually in accordance with the provisions of the
present laws governing the granting and payment of the same.
§ 45-8. Disqualification.
No application for a pension made in accordance with the provisions of
existing local pension acts shall be considered or approved if submitted by
a teacher of the City who is eligible to membership in the state teacher's
retirement association and who neglects to attain membership in that
system.
§ 45-5 FUNDS § 45-8
30:207

ARTICLE IV
Board of Public Works Retirement System
[Adopted 10-13-1987 by Ord. No. O-87-157 (Secs. 2-631 to 2.652 of
the 1987 Code)]
§ 45-9. Definitions.
Unless a different meaning is required by the context, the following words
and phrases shall have the following meaning within this article:
ACCUMULATED CONTRIBUTIONS — The sum of the amounts deducted
from the compensation of an employee.
BENEFICIARY — Any person receiving a service retirement benefit or other
benefit.[Amended 6-8-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-16]
CREDITABLE SERVICE — Prior service plus employee's service.
EMPLOYEE — Any regular employee of the Board of Public Works, whether
for salary or for wages. In all cases of doubt, the Board of Trustees shall
determine whether any person is an employee as defined herein.
EMPLOYER — The Board of Public Works of the City of Nashua.
FISCAL YEAR — The 12 months from July 1 to June 30, both dates inclusive.
MEMBER — Any employee included in the membership of the retirement
system.
NORMAL RETIREMENT DATE — The first day of the month coinciding with
or next following a member reaching the earlier of age 60 and 10 years of
creditable service or the completion of 25 years of continuous service, or 30
years of continuous service if hired on or after July 1, 2010, for the Board of
Public Works.[Amended 6-8-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-16]
PRIOR SERVICE — Service rendered prior to the date of establishment of
the retirement system.
REGULAR INTEREST — The interest at the rate determined from time to
time by the Board of Trustees. Interest paid shall be calculated as simple
interest paid on the current accumulated contribution amount at the time of
termination of employment, death or retirement. Interest shall be credited
on such amounts only on and after July 1, 1987.[Amended 2-27-2007 by
Ord. No. O-07-80]
RETIREMENT — Withdrawal from active service with a service retirement
benefit granted under the provisions hereof.34[Amended 6-8-2010 by Ord.
No. O-10-16]
RETIREMENT SYSTEM — The employees' retirement system of the Board
of Public Works of the City of Nashua.
SERVICE — Service as an employee which is paid for by an employer.
34.Editor’s Note: The former definition of "retirement allowance," which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 6-8-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-16.
§ 45-9 FUNDS § 45-10
30:209
§ 45-10. Name; status of funds.
The retirement system shall have the powers, privileges and immunities of
a corporation, and shall be known as the Board of Public Works retirement
system; and by such name; all of its business shall be transacted, all of its
funds invested, and all of its cash, securities and other property held in trust
for the purpose for which received.
§ 45-11. Appointment, term and compensation of Board of Trustees.
§ 45-12. Quorum and votes.
Each Trustee shall be entitled to one vote on the Board of Trustees. Three
Trustees shall constitute a quorum in the transaction of any business.
Three votes shall be necessary for any resolution or action by the Board of
Trustees at any meeting.
§ 45-13. Records and reports.
A. The administration of this system is vested in a board of five Trustees,
one representing the Commissioners of the Board of Public Works, two
representing the employees of the Department of Public Works, one
representing the Board of Aldermen, and one to be selected from the
financial and investment community of the City. The Trustee
representing the Commissioners of the Board of Public Works shall be
selected by the Board at a meeting duly called for such purpose. The
employee representatives shall be members of the retirement system
chosen at a meeting called for that purpose by the Board of Public
Works. The Trustee representing the Board of Aldermen shall be
nominated by the president and confirmed by the Board. The Trustee
selected from the financial and investment community of the City shall
be nominated by the Mayor and confirmed by the Board of Aldermen.
B. Except as otherwise provided, the Trustees shall be appointed for a
term of three years and shall serve until their successors are appointed
and qualified. For the first appointments of the original or any
additional Trustees, the Trustees representing the employees shall be
appointed for the term of one year, the Trustee representing the Board
of Aldermen shall be appointed for two years, the Trustee representing
the Board of Public Works shall be appointed for a term of three years,
and the Trustee selected from the financial and investment community
shall be appointed for a term of one year. Their successors shall be
appointed for a term of three years.
C. The Trustees shall serve in an honorary capacity and shall receive no
compensation for their services except reimbursement for expenses
incurred in connection with their duties.
A. The Board of Trustees shall keep a record of all its proceedings and
annually make a report to the Board of Aldermen showing:
§ 45-10 NASHUA CODE § 45-13
30:210
§ 45-14. Rules and regulations.
The Board of Trustees shall establish such rules and regulations as it deems
necessary for the proper administration of this article.
§ 45-15. Clerical work.
The clerical work in connection with this article shall be executed by some
person or persons designated by the Commissioners of the Board of Public
Works.
§ 45-16. Time of payments. [Amended 6-8-2010 by Ord. No.
O-10-16]
All service retirement benefits shall be payable in equal weekly installments
which shall cease with the last weekly payment prior to death.
§ 45-17. Contributions to system. [Amended 12-26-1990 by Ord. No.
O-90-31]
(1) The fiscal transactions of the retirement system for the preceding
fiscal year;
(2) The amount of accumulated cash and securities of the system;
(3) The last balance sheet showing the balance of the financial
condition of the system.
B. The Treasurer's statement of condition at the close of each fiscal year
shall be displayed on all bulletin boards with the Public Works Division.
A. The rates of contribution to the retirement system by employee
members of the system are as follows:
(1) The rate of contribution for all employees will be 9.15% of regular
salary or wages.
(2) In any pay period for which an employee is paid for less than 40
hours, the deduction for that pay period will be based on the
normal weekly salary or wages for 40 hours and each employee will
be deemed to consent to the deductions as a condition of
membership.
B. The Board of Trustees shall certify to the employer, and the employer
shall cause to be deducted from the base wage or salary of each
employee on each and every payroll, the amounts set by them under
Subsection A above. The employer shall certify to the Board of Trustees
on each and every payroll, or in such manner as the Board may
prescribe, the amounts deducted. Such amount, when deducted, shall
be paid to the retirement system. The City Treasurer shall draw from
the City pension fund an amount equal to the amount deducted from the
base wage or salary of the employee on each and every payroll. Such
§ 45-13 FUNDS § 45-17
30:211
§ 45-18. Membership.
amount, when deducted shall be paid to the retirement system. The
contribution from the City of Nashua shall correspond with the payroll
deductions of the employees who are members of the retirement
system.
C. With respect to all employees of the employer, such employer may pick
up the employee contributions required by this section for all
compensation earned after July 1, 1987, and the contributions so picked
up shall be treated as employer contributions in determining federal tax
treatment under the United States Internal Revenue Code; however,
each employer shall continue to withhold federal income tax based
upon these contributions until the Internal Revenue Service, or the
federal courts, rule that, pursuant to Section 414(h) of the United
States Internal Revenue Code (1986), as amended, these contributions
shall not be included as gross income of the employee until such time as
they are distributed or made available. The employer shall pay these
employee contributions from the same source of funds which is used in
paying earnings to the employee. The employer may pick up these
contributions by a reduction in the cash salary of the employee.
Employee contributions picked up shall be treated for all purposes of
the retirement system in the same manner and to the same extent as
employee contributions made prior to the date picked up.
D. The City Treasurer shall be custodian of all funds of the retirement
system.
E. The deductions provided herein shall be made notwithstanding the
amount of wage or salary earned by the employee during any one week
and every member shall be deemed to consent to the deduction herein
provided as a condition of their membership. [Amended 6-8-2010 by
Ord. No. O-10-16]
A. Any person who becomes an employee of the Board of Public Works
must become a member of the retirement system.
B. The Board shall obtain, from the Department of Public Works, such
information relative to name, title, compensation, date of birth and
length of service of each of its employees as the Board may deem
necessary.
C. A member shall cease to be a member if:
(1) Absent from service for more than one year, unless such absence
was or is due to an injury arising out of and in the course of
employment, or is otherwise due to the member's disability;
(2) They withdraw their accumulated contributions; [Amended
6-8-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-16]
§ 45-17 NASHUA CODE § 45-18
30:212
§ 45-19. Prior service credit. [Amended 6-8-2010 by Ord. No.
O-10-16]
With respect to service rendered prior to August 1, 1947, the date of
establishment of the retirement system, each employee in service on the
date of establishment who becomes a member within one year thereafter
shall file with the Board of Trustees, on a form approved by the Board,
a detailed statement of all service rendered by them prior to the date
of establishment for which they claim credit. The Board shall fix and
determine, by appropriate rules and regulations, how much service in any
year is equivalent to one year of service. However, no more than one year
of service shall be creditable for all service of one calendar year. Service
rendered for the full, normal, working year shall be equivalent to one year's
service, subject to the foregoing restrictions, and to such other rules and
regulations as the Board may adopt. The Board shall verify as soon as
practicable after the filing of such statements the service therein claimed.
Upon verification of the statements of service, the Board shall certify to
each member the length of service with which they are credited on the basis
of their statement of service. Such finding shall be final and conclusive for
retirement purposes as to such service; provided, that any member may
within one year from the date of such certification request the Board to
modify or correct said finding. When membership ceases, any prior service
credit shall become void. Should the employee again become a member,
they shall enter the retirement system as a new member not entitled to prior
service credit.
§ 45-20. Military service. [Amended 10-13-1987 by Ord. No.
0-87-157; 6-8-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-16]
Any member who terminated their employment in order to enter directly
into the armed forces of the United States shall be entitled to prior service
credit for their service rendered prior to the termination of their
employment, together with the time spent in the armed forces of the United
States, provided they again become an employee within one year after
the termination of such armed service without intervening employment
elsewhere, and elect to become a member of the retirement system within
one year after they again become an employee.
§ 45-21. Service retirement benefits. [Amended 12-26-1990 by Ord.
No. O-90-31; 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. O-97-136]
(3) They become a beneficiary. [Amended 6-8-2010 by Ord. No.
O-10-16]
D. No benefit under the retirement system, other than a death benefit as
provided in § 45-25 or a return of contributions as provided in § 45-27 of
this article, shall become payable to or on account of any member
unless said member was in service as an employee at the time of
becoming eligible for benefits hereunder.
§ 45-18 FUNDS § 45-21
30:213
§ 45-22. Disability retirement benefits. [Amended 12-26-1990 by
Ord. No. O-90-31; 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. O-97-136]
A. Any member in the employ of the Board of Public Works may apply, in
writing, for retirement on service retirement benefit. The application
shall be submitted to the Board of Trustees and shall set forth the date
the applicant wishes to be retired. No person shall be retired on service
retirement benefit unless at the time specified for their retirement they
shall either have attained 60 years of age with a minimum of 10 years'
creditable service or have had 25 years of continuous service, or 30
years of continuous service if hired on or after July 1, 2010, for the
Board of Public Works upon such date. [Amended 6-8-2010 by Ord.
No. O-10-16]
B. Upon service retirement, the member shall receive a service retirement
benefit which shall consist of:
(1) A sum no greater than 65% of the regular salary or wages earned
by the member during the last full year of service.
(2) If the employee has less than 25 years of creditable service, or 30
years of credible service if hired on or after July 1, 2010, but has
reached the age of 60 with a minimum of 10 years of creditable
service, the employee shall receive a benefit equal to such portion
of 65% of the regular salary or wages earned during the last full
year of service as the number of years of creditable service bears to
25 years, or 30 years if hired on or after July 1, 2010. [Amended
6-8-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-16]
C. A member disabled by sickness or injury for an extended period, and
who has not made weekly contributions to the system during that
period, may voluntarily make up the contributions not paid during such
absence by lump sum payment, plus regular interest, as the Trustees
may determine and allow. [Amended 6-8-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-16]
D. Any member in the employ of the Board of Public Works who has
attained the age of 50 with a minimum of 10 years of creditable service,
and was hired prior to July 1, 2010, may apply in writing to the Board of
Trustees for retirement on an early service retirement benefit setting
forth the date the applicant wishes to be retired. Upon such early
retirement the member shall receive an early service retirement benefit
equal to 65% of the regular salary or wages earned by the member
during the last full year of creditable service as the number of
creditable years of service bears to 25 years, reduced by 0.555% for
each full month between the member's normal retirement date and the
member's early retirement date. [Amended 6-8-2010 by Ord. No.
O-10-16]
E. In addition to all other benefits, retired members shall receive a $3,000
death benefit payable to the retiree's beneficiary upon death after
retirement.
§ 45-21 NASHUA CODE § 45-22
30:214
A. Disability retirement. [Amended 6-8-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-16]
(1) Ordinary disability retirement. Any member in service who has 10
or more years of creditable service may apply for ordinary
disability retirement to the Board of Trustees within six months
from the date of disability. The Board will act on the application no
sooner than 30 days, no more than 90 days, after the application is
filed. The Board may retire such member after a medical
examination shall establish, and the Board shall find, that they are
mentally or physically incapacitated for the further performance of
duty, that such incapacity is likely to be permanent and that they
should be retired.
(2) Accidental disability retirement.
(a) Generally. Any member in service may apply for accidental
disability retirement to the Board of Trustees within six months
from the date of disability. A member in service who has been
totally and permanently incapacitated for duty as the natural
and proximate result of an accident occurring while in the
actual performance of their duties, at some definite time and
place, without willful negligence or actions on their part, may
be retired by the Board of Trustees on an accidental disability
service retirement benefit after a medical examination shall
establish, and the Board shall find, that they are mentally or
physically incapacitated for the further performance of duty
and that such incapacity is likely to be permanent.
B. Limitations. Any amounts which may be paid or payable to or on
account of any member or retired member on account of any disability
to which the City of Nashua has made contributions under the
provisions of any workers' compensation or similar law or plan shall, in
such manner as the Board of Trustees shall determine, be offset against
and payable in lieu of any disability service retirement benefit on
account of the same disability. The combined benefit from workers'
compensation and the member's accidental benefit allowance will not
be less than the benefit payment the member is eligible to receive as
provided for herein. Members are required to notify the public works'
administrative office whenever benefits from workers' compensation
begin or are modified. Such notice, to be made in writing, must be made
within 14 days after the member becomes aware of the receipt of
benefits or any change in benefits. If a member fails to notify the public
works' administrative office of the start of workers' compensation
benefits or any chance thereof, the Board shall have the authority to
recover from any member or retired member who is a disability
recipient over-payments made to the member under this section.
[Amended 6-8-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-16]
(1) If the member receiving disability retirement benefits becomes 60
years of age while receiving said retirement benefits, they shall
receive, in place of the disability retirement benefit, the amount
§ 45-22 FUNDS § 45-22
30:215
they would have received upon a service retirement. The period
of time the member received disability retirement benefits shall
not be included in the calculation of the regular service retirement
benefit.
(2) If the Board of Trustees finds that any disability beneficiary is
engaged in or is able to engage in a gainful occupation no further
benefits shall be paid to them under this section.
C. Amount of benefit. [Amended 6-8-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-16]
(1) Ordinary disability retirement.
(a) If the member is age 60 years old or older, with a minimum of
10 years of service, they shall receive a service retirement
allowance benefit.
(b) If the employee has at least 10 years of creditable service and
is at least 50 years of age, but has not attained the age of 60,
then the employee shall receive a benefit equal to such portion
of 60% of the employee's regular salary or wages earned
during the last full year of creditable service, as the years of
creditable service bears to 25 years, or 30 years if hired on or
after July 1, 2010.
(c) If the employee has at least 10 years of creditable service, but
has not attained the age of 50, then the employee shall receive
a benefit equal to such portion of 50% of the employee's
regular salary or wages earned during the last full year of
creditable service, as the years of creditable service bears to
25 years, or 30 years if hired on or after July 1, 2010.
(2) Accidental disability retirement.
(a) If the member is age 60 years old or older, with a minimum of
10 years of service, they shall receive a service retirement
benefit.
(b) If the employee has at least 10 years of creditable service, and
is at least 50 years of age, but has not attained the age of 60,
then the employee shall receive a benefit equal to such portion
of 60% of the employee's regular salary or wages earned
during the last full year of creditable service, as the years of
creditable service bears to 25 years, or 30 years if hired on or
after July 1, 2010.
(c) If the employee has at least 10 years of creditable service, but
has not attained the age of 50, then the employee shall receive
a benefit equal to such portion of 50% of the employee's
regular salary or wages earned during the last full year of
creditable service, as the years of creditable service bears to
25 years, or 30 years if hired on or after July 1, 2010.
§ 45-22 NASHUA CODE § 45-22
30:216
§ 45-23. Restoration of disabled beneficiary to service. [Amended
6-8-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-16]
If a disabled beneficiary is restored to service, their service retirement
benefit shall cease. Such beneficiary shall again become a member of
the retirement system, and shall contribute thereafter at the then-existing
rate. Anything in this article to the contrary notwithstanding, any credit
for membership service and any prior service on the basis of which their
creditable service was computed at the time of their former retirement
shall be restored to full force and effect. Upon subsequent retirement, they
shall receive a service retirement allowance benefit based on their service
as a member since their last restoration to membership, plus a service
retirement benefit equal to the service retirement benefit on which they
were retired at the time of their last retirement.
§ 45-24. Accidental death benefits. [Amended 12-26-1990 by Ord.
No. O-90-31; 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. O-97-136]
D. Cessation of benefits.
(1) At least once each year following the retirement of a member on
ordinary or accidental disability service retirement benefit, the
Board of Trustees may, and upon the member's application shall,
require a member who has not attained the age of 60 years to
undergo a medical examination, by a physician or physicians
designated by the Board. Should the member refuse such
examination, then their disability retirement benefits may be
discontinued by the Board until their withdrawal of such refusal. If
their refusal continues for more than one year, then all their rights
in and to their retirement may be revoked by the Board. Benefits
may be restored at the discretion of the Board upon completion of a
qualifying medical examination. However, disability retirement
benefits shall not be paid to the member for the period of time the
member refused said medical examination, unless for good cause
shown as determined solely by the Board. A member's failure to
undergo a medical examination within one month of the Board's
request to do so shall be deemed as refusal by the member.
[Amended 6-8-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-16]
(2) If a medical examination shows that the member is able to work
again, no further benefits shall be paid under the provisions of this
section. Should the disability reoccur, the member may reapply for
disability retirement in accordance with this section.
(3) At no time shall a beneficiary under this section be employed in any
City department for compensation.
A. Should the Board of Trustees determine that the death of a member
occurred as the natural and proximate result of an accident occurring
at a definite time and place while the member was engaged in the
performance of their duties as an employee, and was not caused by
§ 45-22 FUNDS § 45-24
30:217
§ 45-25. Death benefits prior to retirement.
§ 45-26. Payment of retirement benefits. [Amended 6-8-2010 by
Ord. No. O-10-16]
willful negligence on the part of the employee, the following
survivorship benefits shall be payable: [Amended 6-8-2010 by Ord.
No. O-10-16]
(1) To the surviving spouse, until death or remarriage an annual
survivorship benefit equal to 65% of the regular salary or wage
earned during the last full year of service.
(2) If there is no surviving spouse or if the spouse remarries before the
youngest child reaches the age of 18, then the child or children
under such age shall receive an annual survivorship benefit equal
to 65% of the regular salary or wages earned by the member during
the last full year of service.
(3) If there is no surviving spouse or child under the age of 18 at the
time of the death of the member, then the member's dependent
father or dependent mother, as determined by the Board of
Trustees, shall receive an annual survivorship for life equal to 65%
of the member's regular salary or wages earned during the
member's last full year of service.
(4) In the event that the deceased member is not survived by a spouse,
children or dependent father or mother, then no benefits shall be
payable under this section.
B. Any amounts which may be paid or payable under the provisions of any
workmen's compensation or a similar law or plan on account of the
death of any member shall, in such manner as the Board of Trustees
shall determine, be offset against any benefits payable under this
section on account of such death.
A. In the event of the death of a member, including members who have
terminated with a vested deferred benefit and not elected a cash
refund, prior to actual retirement and at a time when accidental death
benefits in accordance with § 45-24 are not payable, the spouse will be
eligible to receive benefits for life. The benefit payable to the spouse
will be 50% of the service retirement or early service retirement benefit
the member would have been entitled to have had the member retired
on the date of death. [Amended 6-8-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-16]
B. Upon the death of a member without a surviving spouse, the member's
accumulated contributions together with regular interest will be paid to
the person, if any, designated by the member by a written designation
filed with the Board, if such person survives the member, otherwise to
the member's estate.
§ 45-24 NASHUA CODE § 45-26
30:218
A. Unless the member elects an optional form of benefit as outlined below,
the service allowance to the member will be paid during their lifetime.
Upon the member's death, the amount of accumulated contributions
with regular interest shall be paid to the person, if any, designated by
the member by a written designation filed with the Board, if such
person survives the member, otherwise to the member's estate equal to
the excess, if any, of the member's accumulated contributions with
regular interest, over the sum of all service allowances made to the
member.
B. Optional forms of payment shall be as outlined below:
(1) Contingent annuitant option. Instead of the normal monthly
retirement benefit provided above, a member may elect a
contingent annuitant option providing for actuarially reduced
monthly retirement benefits payable to them during their lifetime
after retirement and for the continuance of such payments, or a
part of them 66 2/3%, 50% specified by the member, to such
contingent annuitant for their life after the death of a retired
member. Such election may be made by a member at any time prior
to this retirement date. A member who has elected this option may
revoke or modify such option prior to actual retirement; provided,
however, that the death of the contingent annuitant at any time
prior to the member's retirement date shall automatically revoke
such election; and further provided, that if the contingent
annuitant is the spouse of the member, a divorce granted to either
spouse at any time prior to the member's retirement date shall
automatically revoke such election.
(a) If a member who has elected this option dies before their
actual retirement date, no benefits under this option shall be
payable to the contingent annuitant.
(b) If the member dies after their actual retirement date, the
contingent annuitant shall receive for life, commencing on the
first day of the calendar month coinciding with or next
following the retired member's death, the benefits specified by
the retired member for the contingent annuitant.
(c) If the contingent annuitant dies before the member's
retirement date, the monthly retirement benefit normally
provided under this plan shall be payable to the retired
member as if the option had not been elected.
(d) If the contingent annuitant dies after the member's retirement
date, the amount of the payments which the retired member is
then receiving or is entitled to receive will at the time (with no
provision for retroactive payments) revert to what it would
have been at the member's retirement date and will cease upon
the retired member's death.
§ 45-26 FUNDS § 45-26
30:219
§ 45-27. Termination of employment benefits. [Amended 6-8-2010
by Ord. No. O-10-16]
(2) Ten-year certain option. Each member shall have the option, which
shall be exercised by a written direction to the Board, to elect to
have actuarially reduced monthly retirement benefits payable for
10 years certain and for life thereafter. Such election may be made
by a member at any time prior to their eligible retirement date.
Upon the death of a retired member after their eligible retirement
date, but before 120 monthly payments have been paid to the
retiree, payments shall be made to such beneficiary (for the
balance of the 120 months) as they shall have most recently
designated in a written instrument signed by them in the presence
of one subscribing witness and filed with the Board either before or
after their retirement. If no such designation is on file with the
Board at the time of death, or is defective for any reason, or if such
beneficiary shall predecease the retired member, then the estate of
such retired member shall receive the commuted value of such
benefit payable in a lump sum. If the beneficiary, having survived
the retired member, dies before all of said 120 payments have been
made, then the commuted value of the balance of said payments
shall be paid in a lump sum to the beneficiary's estate. If the
member dies before their retirement date, no benefits shall be
payable under this option.
A. Nonvested termination. Any member whose employment is terminated
prior to the completion of 10 years of service and who is not entitled to
a disability retirement pension shall receive a refund of their
contributions together with regular interest thereon to date of their
termination of employment, and such refund shall be in lieu of all other
rights and benefits of the member under this plan.
B. Vested deferred benefits. Any member whose employment is
terminated prior to the normal retirement date and after the
completion of at least 10 years of service, and who is not entitled to an
early retirement pension or a disability retirement pension, and who
does not elect to receive a cash refund or their member’s contribution
together with regular interest, will be entitled to receive, commencing
on the normal retirement date, an annual pension equal to their
accrued normal pension computed in accordance with the provisions of
§ 45-21 of this article based on their service to date of their termination
of employment.
C. Cash refund in lieu of deferred vested pension. A member who is
entitled to a deferred vested pension in accordance with the provisions
of Subsection B above may, in lieu of all other rights and benefits under
this plan, elect to receive a cash refund of their member contributions
together with regular interest thereon to the date of their termination
of employment.
§ 45-26 NASHUA CODE § 45-28
30:220
§ 45-28. Repayment of refund. [Amended 6-8-2010 by Ord. No.
O-10-16]
§ 45-29. Protection against fraud. [Amended 6-8-2010 by Ord. No.
O-10-16]
Any person who knowingly makes false statements or shall falsify, or permit
to be falsified, any record or records of the retirement system in any
attempt to defraud the system shall, in the discretion of the Trustees, lose
all their rights thereunder.
§ 45-30. Exemption from legal process.
Employee retirement benefits under this article shall be exempt from any
executions, Trustee process, attachments or any other processes
whatsoever, legal or equitable.
A. A reemployed member who received a refund of their accumulated
contributions with regular interest as provided in § 45-27 may repay to
the Board at any time prior to their normal retirement date an amount
equal to the cash refund they received in accordance with such section
plus regular interest thereon from the date of election of refund to the
date repayment is made. Upon payment of this amount, there shall be
restored to the member a yearly retirement pension equal to their
accrued benefit as determined on their termination of employment. This
payment must be received prior to the member’s reemployment date.
B. If a reemployed member has a yearly retirement pension restored to
them as provided above, and their prior service is counted for vesting
purposes, then, upon the participant's subsequent termination of
employment or retirement, the yearly retirement income shall be
determined on the basis of all the participant's service prior to such
date.
§ 45-28 FUNDS § 45-30
30:221
Chapter 50
PERSONNEL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pension and retirement systems — See Ch. 45.
§ 45-30 NASHUA CODE § 45-30
30:222
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 50-1. Term defined.
Where the term "City" is used in this chapter, it shall mean the management
structure within the division involved, subject to the approvals specified in
this chapter and the City Charter, resolutions and ordinances.
§ 50-2. Administration by Mayor.
It shall be the duty of the Mayor to administer the merit system.
§ 50-3. Amendments.
§ 50-4. Personnel covered.
§ 50-5. Gifts and gratuities.
No employee, either individually or as a member of a group, may directly
or indirectly ask, accept or receive any gift, favor, service, loan or
entertainment which might reasonably be interpreted as tending to
influence the performance of the employee's official duties, from any person
whom the employee may reasonably expect to be affected by the
performance of the employee's official duties, or with whom the employee
has had or reasonably may expect to have official relations. Any such gifts or
gratuities which may be tendered shall be returned forthwith to the sender,
with an expression of thanks and an explanation of the City's policy. The
only exceptions to this policy shall be gifts or gratuities for advertising
purposes, which have negligible commercial value and are distributed to
A. The Mayor may submit revisions of the merit plan to the Board of
Aldermen from time to time as changes in conditions and circumstances
in the City service justify.
B. The merit system may from time to time be amended or changed by
ordinance. Prior to the introduction of such amendments or changes by
the Mayor, division directors and department heads shall have the
opportunity to comment on such changes or amendments. For all
amendments or changes introduced by the Board of Aldermen, the
views of the Director of the Financial Services Division, the Human
Resources Department and the Personnel Advisory Board with the
Mayor shall be sought with respect to each amendment or change.
A. This chapter shall be applied to all personnel employed by the City and
not covered by a collective bargaining agreement and may
subsequently be incorporated into collective bargaining agreements, as
feasible.
B. Persons holding elective office are exempt from the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 50-1 FUNDS § 50-5
30:223
or available to the general public or other municipal employees without
charge.
§ 50-6. Merit system for personnel administration pursuant to
Charter § 86-a.
A. The "City of Nashua Unaffiliated Employees Personnel Policies," dated
January 1, 2018, are hereby adopted.35 These personnel policies are the
merit system for personnel administration required by Charter § 86-a.
B. The Mayor and Board of Aldermen shall review the "City of Nashua
Unaffiliated Employees Personnel Policies" every three years from the
date of final passage.
35.Editor's Note: The City of Nashua Unaffiliated Employees Personnel Policies are on file in
the City offices.
§ 50-5 NASHUA CODE § 50-6
30:224
ARTICLE II
Personnel Advisory Board
§ 50-7. Established; membership; compensation.
§ 50-8. Duties.
A. A Personnel Advisory Board is hereby established, consisting of three
persons appointed by the Mayor, one to serve a one-year term, one to
serve a two-year term, and one to serve a three-year term. The term of
each initial member shall begin on the date of appointment, and
thereafter the terms of succeeding members shall be for a period of
three years, beginning on the expiration date of the term each
individual succeeds. There shall also be an alternate member of the
Personnel Advisory Board who shall serve for a three-year term.
B. Appointments shall be made by the Mayor on the basis of qualifications
in the areas of industrial relations, personnel administration, general
business and/or law.
C. The board members shall serve without pay.
A. The purpose of the Personnel Advisory Board shall be to provide the
Board of Aldermen with professional advice in employee relations,
human relations, personnel policies and related matters. The Board
shall be nonpolitical and advisory in its capacity and render its
recommendations on a fair and just basis with due concern for the
welfare of the City and the City's employees. All recommendations
concerning new policies shall be subject to the approval of the Mayor
and Board of Aldermen.
B. The Board may be called upon to assist in other related matters as
determined by the Mayor and Board of Aldermen.
§ 50-7 FUNDS § 50-8
30:225

ARTICLE III
Employment of New Personnel
§ 50-9. Human Resources Department and Human Resources
Manager.
A. The responsibility for recruiting (including advertising), screening,
testing, referring and reference checking candidates for employment
shall rest with the Human Resources Department.
B. The City is an equal opportunity employer, and the Human Resources
Manager shall serve as the City's equal employment opportunity officer
and shall assure compliance with all state and federal statutes related
thereto.
C. The Human Resources Manager, with the approval of the Mayor, shall
issue policies needed to implement this chapter.
§ 50-9 FUNDS § 50-9
30:227

ARTICLE IV
Self-Insurance Funds
§ 50-10. Self-insurance funds.
A. Two self-insurance funds are hereby created:
(1) Employee benefits fund for employee benefit programs, including
long-term disability programs; and
(2) Property and casualty fund for property, liability, bond, automobile,
unemployment compensation, workers' compensation, and other
commercial or self-insurance insurance programs that may be
lawfully implemented in a manner consistent with state statutes
and regulations. These shall be expendable trust funds pursuant to
RSA 31:19-a, and the Risk Manager is appointed as agent to
expend.
B. The self-insurance funds shall be funded by any combination of the
following:
(1) The Board of Aldermen shall appropriate the Insurance - Employee
Benefits budget (Insurance - Policy Costs), except unemployment
compensation, directly into the Employee Benefits Expendable
Trust Fund.
(2) Further, the receipt of monies as a result of judgments,
subrogations, and any other returns that occur as a result of claims
or other demands previously made on, or related to, the fund shall
return to the fund without further specific appropriations.
C. The employee benefits fund shall be managed by the human resources
department and the property and casualty fund shall be managed by the
risk management office. The financial affairs division shall provide audit
and financial services to both funds. Administration of the funds shall
be based upon actuarial determinations of the amounts needed for selfinsurance
purposes to include a financial reserve for outstanding
claims, contingencies, unforeseen expenses and random claim
fluctuation and shall also include a sufficient appropriation to provide
payments for self-funded or commercially contracted programs, as the
insurance needs of the City may be met from time to time. Retained
earnings, under generally accepted accounting principles, will be
reviewed annually by the Human Resource Manager, Risk Manager and
Chief Financial Officer. The Risk Manager shall be authorized to settle
claims for liability against the City, its officers, employees or agents,
either before litigation or while litigation is pending, by payment of
sums not exceeding $15,000 per occurrence. The authorization of the
finance committee shall be required for settlement of any such claim by
payment of a sum in excess of $15,000 per occurrence.
§ 50-10 FUNDS § 50-10
30:229

ARTICLE V
Grievance Procedures for Handicapped Persons
§ 50-11. Basis of grievance procedure.
The City hereby adopts an internal grievance procedure providing for
prompt and equitable resolution of complaints alleging any action
prohibited by the Office of Revenue Sharing's (ORS) regulations [31CFR
51.55(d)(2)] implementing Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as
amended [29 U.S.C. § 794]. Section 504 states, in part, that "no otherwise
qualified handicapped individual . . . shall, solely by reason of his handicap,
be excluded from the participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be
subjected to discrimination under any program or activity receiving federal
financial assistance. . . ."
§ 50-12. Filing of complaints.
§ 50-13. Investigation of complaints.
An investigation, as may be appropriate, shall follow the filing of a
complaint pursuant to this chapter. The investigation will be conducted by
the Section 504 Coordinator or his designated representative. These rules
contemplate informal but thorough investigations, affording all interested
persons and their representatives, if any, an opportunity to submit evidence
relevant to a complaint. Under 31 CFR 51.55(d)(2) the City need not process
complaints from applicants for employment or from applicants for
admission to postsecondary educational institutions.
§ 50-14. Resolution of complaints.
A written determination as to the validity of the complaint under this
chapter and a description of the resolution, if any, shall be issued by the
Section 504 Coordinator and a copy forwarded to the complainant no later
than 30 days after its filing.
A. A complaint pursuant to this chapter shall be filed in writing, contain
the name and address of the person filing it, and briefly describe the
alleged violation of the regulations. Any individual having difficulty in
making a complaint in writing may contact the Section 504 Coordinator
for assistance.
B. Complaints shall be addressed to the Section 504 Coordinator,
Community Services Division, City of Nashua, 18 Mulberry Street,
Nashua, NH 03060, telephone (603) 880-3357, who has been
designated to coordinate Section 504 compliance efforts.
C. A complaint shall be filed within 10 working days after the complainant
becomes aware of the alleged violation. The Section 504 Coordinator
may waive the ten-day requirement when in the exercise of his
discretion he concludes that any delay was justified and not in bad faith
and that justice will be served thereby.
§ 50-11 FUNDS § 50-15
30:231
§ 50-15. Appeal procedure.
A complainant under this chapter can request a reconsideration of the case
in instances where he or she is dissatisfied with the resolution. The request
for reconsideration shall be made within 10 days to the Mayor of the City.
§ 50-16. Recordkeeping.
The Section 504 Coordinator shall maintain the files and records of the City
relating to complaints filed under this chapter.
§ 50-17. Rights of individuals.
A. The right of a person to a prompt and equitable resolution of the
complaint filed under this chapter shall not be impaired by the person's
pursuit of other remedies such as the filing of a Section 504 complaint
with the Office of Revenue Sharing, United States Department of the
Treasury. Utilization of this grievance procedure is not a prerequisite to
the pursuit of other remedies.
B. These rules shall be construed to protect the substantive rights of
interested persons, to meet appropriate due process standards and to
assure that the City complies with Section 504 and the ORS regulations.
§ 50-15 NASHUA CODE § 50-17
30:232
Chapter 55
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 5, § 5-50.
§ 55-1. Compensation of Commissioners and clerk.
Each City Police Commissioner shall receive a salary of $100 per annum.
The clerk of the Police Commission shall receive a salary of $150 per
annum.
§ 55-2. Traffic lights; maintenance, purchase. [Amended 12-26-1995
by Ord. No. O-95-148]
The appropriate aldermanic committee may transfer control of traffic lights
to the Police Department and the Police Department may use revenues from
the parking meters to pay for the maintenance, repair and improvement
of the traffic lights. Any contemplated purchase by the Police Department
of $200 or more shall require the approval of an appropriate aldermanic
committee.
§ 55-3. Analysis of traffic accident reports.
The Police Department shall tabulate and analyze all accident reports and
shall publish annually, or at more frequent intervals, statistical information
based thereon as to the number of traffic accidents.
§ 55-4. Emergency police assistance agreements.
A. The Chief of Police or, if no Chief, the head of the City Police
Department is hereby authorized to act pursuant to the provisions of
RSA 106-C, as enacted and as may be amended.
B. Without limiting the generality of Subsection A of this section, the Chief
or head of the Department may:
(1) Extend assistance in time of emergency to any county or
municipality in the state in accordance with the provisions of RSA
106-C; and
(2) Enter into agreements with counties and municipalities within the
state concerning the methods by which emergency police
assistance will be rendered.
C. The Chief or head of the Department is constituted the duly authorized
representative of the Police Department for the purpose of making
claims under RSA 106-C:5, provided that the Chief or head of the
§ 50-17 FUNDS § 55-4
30:233
§ 55-5. Disposition of personal property received. [Amended
10-13-1977 by Ord. No. O-77-222; 10-14-1986 by Ord. No. O-86-99;
1-22-2013 by Ord. No. O-12-030]
Department may in his discretion donate services to a county or
municipality in accordance with the provisions of RSA 106-C:8.
A. All property or money taken under suspicion or with knowledge of its
having been lost or stolen or illegally obtained, and all property lost or
abandoned, which may come into possession of any member of the
Police Department, shall be delivered to a person designated by the
Chief of Police. The Chief's designee shall enter or cause to be entered
in a record to be kept by the Department for that purpose a detailed
description of the same, together with the name of the person or
persons from whom received, the name of any claimants thereto, the
time of the seizure and the final disposition thereof.
B. When any person arrested shall be adjudged innocent of the offense
charged, by a court of competent jurisdiction, which shall adjudge
property or money belongs to such person, the Chief of Police's
designee shall thereupon deliver such property or money to him
personally, and not to his attorney or agent, and take his receipt
therefor. If the accused is held for trial or examination, such money or
property shall remain in the custody of the Chief of Police's designee
until discharge or conviction of the person accused or as ordered by the
court. After such discharge or conviction or court order, all such
property then remaining in the custody of the Chief's designee shall, if
the same is of the type described in Subsection E of this section, be
disposed of in accordance with that subsection and, if it is not so
described, either returned to such person or disposed of in accordance
with the provisions of Subsections C and D of this section.
C. The Chief of Police, or such person as shall be designated by the Chief,
shall retain all unclaimed money or property that has been in custody
for a period of 180 days. If the property is not claimed by the owner, it
shall be returned to the finder if the finder is known. If the finder is not
known, the Chief of Police or such person as shall be designated by the
Chief shall sell at public auction all unclaimed property that has been in
custody for a period of 180 days. It shall be within the discretion of the
Chief of Police whether to hold a public auction at a designated location
or by use of an online auction service (e.g. eBay.com or
PropertyRoom.com). The Chief of Police or the Chief's designee shall fix
a day upon which the sale shall take place, and give notice therof by
publication in a daily newspaper at least five days before the sale. Such
notice shall state the day and the hour when such sale shall commence
and shall contain a general description of the property to be sold, or
shall refer to a list thereof on file with the Chief of Police. The notice
shall be signed by the Chief of Police or by the person designated by the
Chief to conduct the public auction. If an online auction service is used,
the Department shall adhere to the policies of the service used. The
§ 55-4 NASHUA CODE § 55-5
30:234
proceeds of such sale(s), after deducting the cost of storage,
advertising, selling and other expenses incident to the handling and
selling of such property shall, together with all money unclaimed for
a period of 180 days, be paid into the City treasury. Money which
has been found, as distinguished from money that has been stolen or
illegally obtained, will be turned over to the finder if unclaimed for a
period of 180 days. If the finder is not known it shall be paid into the
City treasury. In no case shall any property be sold or disposed of until
the necessity for thereof as evidence has ceased.
D. If any property seized or taken possession of by the Police Department
shall be of a perishable nature, or so bulky or of such nature as to make
it dangerous or inadvisable to retain possession thereof for the length
of time specified in Subsection C of this section, the Chief of Police or
the Chief's designee shall petition the court to have the property
disposed of or sold and set forth the reasons why such property should
not be retained.
E. None of the provisions of this section shall apply to contraband,
materials adjudicated as being obscene, or weapons or other objects
which in the opinion of the Chief of Police would constitute danger to
public health, safety, welfare or morals should the same be returned to
their respective owners or sold at public auction. All of such objects
which shall come into the possession of the Chief of Police, except
weapons which the Chief of Police shall deem to be of use to the Police
Department, shall forthwith be destroyed under the direction of the
Chief of Police or the Chief's designee.
F. Bicycles.36
(1) Bicycles lost or abandoned which may come into possession of any
member of the Police Department shall be retained for a period of
90 days. Said bicycles shall be delivered to the Chief of Police's
designee, who shall enter or cause to be entered in a record kept by
the Department for that purpose, a detailed description of the
same, together with the name of the person or persons from whom
received, the name of any claimants thereto, the time and date that
it was received by the Police Department and the final disposition
thereof.
(2) In the event the bicycle is not claimed by the owner, it shall be
returned to the finder if the finder is known. If the finder is not
known, the Chief of Police or such person as shall be designated by
him shall sell at public auction all bicycles that have been in
custody for 90 days. It shall be within the discretion of the Chief of
Police whether to hold a public auction at a designated location or
by use of an online auction service as referenced in Subsection C.
Where not consistent with this Subsection F, the provisions of
Subsection C above shall apply.
36.Editor's Note: See Ch. 98, Bicycles, Skateboards and Roller Blades.
§ 55-5 FUNDS § 55-5
30:235
Chapter 66
SEAL
(3) Proceeds from the sale of unclaimed bicycles will be paid to an
account within the Nashua Police Department to support the
Department's bicycle safety program, in accordance with RSA
471-C:13.
§ 55-5 NASHUA CODE § 55-5
30:236
ARTICLE I
Description and Custody
[NRO 1975, T. 1, §§ 401 and 402 (Sec. 1-8 of the 1987 Code)]
§ 66-1. Description.
The Seal of the City shall be as follows: a circular disc, upon the outer
edge of which shall be inserted the words "TOWNSHIP OF DUNSTABLE,
1673," and upon the lower edge or bottom of the disc the words "CITY
OF NASHUA, 1853." In the foreground shall be represented an anvil and
hammers, a plough, a bale of goods, a regulator, and a horn of plenty; across
the center of the disc shall be represented a bridge and a train of railroad
cars; in the background shall be represented a cotton mill, iron foundries,
etc.; and upon the top of the disc shall be represented two clasped hands;
the whole being according to the design below.
§ 66-2. Custody.
The City Clerk shall have custody of the City Seal.
§ 66-2.1. Use of Seal. [Added 6-9-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-050]
A. The City Seal shall be the property of the City of Nashua. The City Seal
shall be used only by the City, its officials and employees in an official
capacity on City stationery, printed materials, vehicles, clothing and
other articles or for official City functions or events sponsored or cosponsored
by the City.
B. No person or group shall place any imitation of the City Seal, nor any
derivation, rendering, version, expression, logo, stamp or reproduction
thereof, on any written, printed or electronic material that is designed,
intended or likely to confuse, deceive or mislead the public or cause the
reader of such material to believe it to be an official City publication.
C. No person or group shall place any imitation of the City Seal, nor any
derivation, rendering, version, expression, logo, stamp or reproduction
thereof, on any written, printed or electronic material in favor of or
§ 66-1 FUNDS § 66-2.1
30:237
against any ballot measure or in favor or against any candidate for
public office.
D. No person shall manufacture, sell, expose for sale, or have in
possession for sale any article or substance, being an article of
merchandise or receptacle of merchandise or article or thing for
carrying or transporting merchandise, or sell, expose for sale, give
away, or have in possession for sale or to give away or for any purpose
any article or thing to advertise or promote services, upon which shall
have been printed, painted, attached, or otherwise placed a
representation or likeness of the City Seal, without first obtaining the
express written permission of the City Clerk.
E. The violation of any provision of this article shall be punishable by a fine
of not less than $100 for a first offense and not less than $500 for each
subsequent offense. Each act of violation and every day upon which any
such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 66-2.1 NASHUA CODE § 66-2.1
30:238
ARTICLE II
Use on City-Owned Vehicles
[Adopted 1-12-2005 by Ord. No. O-04-64 (Sec. 2-1005 of the 1987
Code)]
§ 66-3. Identification with City Seal.
All City-owned and -leased vehicles will have a facsimile of the City Seal
affixed to such vehicle, except for vehicles used by the Nashua Police
Department and those vehicles deemed appropriate by the Nashua Fire
Rescue Chief.
§ 66-4. Placement specifications.
The City Seal shall be permanently affixed to the front driver- and
passenger-side doors and shall be centered in the panel. Vehicles of dark
color will have a white facsimile of the City Seal, and vehicles of light color
will have a dark facsimile of the City Seal. The facsimile of the City Seal
shall be no less than nine inches in diameter, so that it may be clearly and
proudly displayed. The City shall add/identify each department by adding
the name below each Seal.
§ 66-3 FUNDS § 66-4
30:239
Chapter 72
ABUTTER NOTIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use — See Ch. 190.
§ 72-1. Individuals to be notified.
In any case where notice of a hearing or other action must be sent to
abutters of any real property in the City of Nashua, notification shall also be
sent to all of the following individuals:
§ 72-2. Extension of limits.
The department may, at its discretion, extend the one-thousand-foot limit in
§ 72-1 above if the activity involved is deemed to warrant same.
§ 72-3. Removal of names from list.
Thirty days after notice is delivered to anyone notified via this list of intent
to do so, the department may remove names from the list of persons who
have not positively responded that they wish to remain on the list.
§ 72-4. Hearings otherwise sufficient.
No hearing which is otherwise sufficient shall be deemed insufficient due to
failure to notify individuals whose right of notification derives solely from
this chapter.
§ 72-5. Right of notification only.
This chapter entitles persons to a right of notification only and does not
convey to those persons any other rights as abutters.
A. Those individuals who have informed the appropriate City department,
in writing, that they wish to receive abutter notification of the subject
property, provided that they reside at the address at which notification
is requested and that at least one point on the property at such address
is located within 1,000 feet of a point on the property for which the
notification is requested.
B. Those individuals who have informed the appropriate City department,
in writing, that they wish to receive copies of all abutter notifications
sent to one or more of the addresses of abutters, provided that they are
a resident of the property of that address who would not otherwise be
notified.
§ 66-4 NASHUA CODE § 72-6
72:240
§ 72-6. Form of notification.
Notification under the terms of this chapter may be in any written form,
including but not limited to certified mail, first class mail, or bulk mail, for
which a reasonable expectation of timely notification exists.
Chapter 74
ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT
§ 74-1. Citation authority.
City departments or officials charged with the responsibility for enforcing
the ordinances and codes of the City are hereby authorized to issue citations
for any violation of the ordinances or codes that they are responsible for
enforcing. The enforcement authority provided hereby is provided for in
RSA 31:39-c and is in addition to the authority for ordinance and code
enforcement that currently exists.
§ 74-2. Citation defined.
A citation is a written and/or printed notice describing a specific violation
of a City ordinance or code which is served on the person responsible for
the violation. Each day on which a violation exists or occurs is a separate
offense, and a citation may be issued for each offense. A citation shall
be served in the manner described in this chapter, and shall contain the
following information:
A. A clear and concise description of the violation.
B. The location of the violation and the date and time on which it was
observed.
C. The name and address of the person responsible for the violation.
D. The penalty for the violation as provided for in this chapter.
E. A statement or table describing the penalties for future occurrences of
the same violation.
F. A statement as to whether the citation is being issued for a first, second,
or subsequent offense.
G. The name and address of the office to which the payment of the penalty
may be made.
H. The time period during which a reduced penalty may be paid in full
satisfaction of the citation.
I. Notification that failure to pay the penalty may result in court action.
J. The signature and printed name and department of the individual
issuing the citation.
§ 72-6 ABUTTER NOTIFICATION § 74-3
72:241
§ 74-3. Service of citation.
§ 74-4. Citation penalties.
A. Any citation shall be served by the official issuing it in any one of the
following ways:
(1) In hand to the person responsible for the violation; or
(2) By certified, registered or U.S. Postal Service first-class mail, to the
last known address of the person responsible for the violation, or as
listed with the NH Division of Motor Vehicles.
B. The official serving the citation shall maintain a record of the date,
time, and manner of service of the citation, including the post office
receipt if service was accomplished by registered or certified mail.
A. Table 4-1.
(1) The penalties for any offense relating to the following ordinances
for which a citation has been issued shall be as follows:
Table 4-1
NRO
First
Offense
Second
Offense
Third
Offense Description
§ 182-28 $50 $100 $250 Exterior
standards
§ 182-29 $50 $100 $250 Interior
standards
§ 182-30 $50 $100 $250 Premises and
accessory
structure
standards
§ 182-31 $50 $100 $250 Emergency and
Code
Enforcement
Department
information
§ 182-32 $50 $100 $250 Standards
§ 182-33 $50 $100 $250 Sanitary facilities
§ 182-34 $50 $100 $250 Mechanical
requirements
§ 182-35 $50 $100 $250 Electrical
requirements
§ 182-36 $50 $100 $250 Means of egress
standards
§ 182-37 $50 $100 $250 Lodging units
§ 74-3 NASHUA CODE § 74-4
72:242
Table 4-1
NRO
First
Offense
Second
Offense
Third
Offense Description
§ 182-38 $50 $100 $250 Number of
exitways
§ 182-39 $50 $100 $250 Egress doors
§ 182-40 $50 $100 $250 Fire escapes and
ladders
§ 182-41 $50 $100 $250 Smoke detectors/
alarm devices
§ 182-42 $50 $100 $250 Fire suppression
systems
§ 170-2 $100 $250 Court
appearance
FS license
required
§ 170-5 He-P
2303.01 +
.02(a)-(o)
$100 $250 $500 CV 01-Food
source, condition,
spoilage
§ 170-5 He-P
2304.04-22
$100 $250 $500 CV 03-Food
protection-PHF
meets temp
requirements
§ 170-5 He-P
2304.23+24
$100 $250 $500 CV 04-Food
protectionfacilities
maintain
product temps
§ 170-5 He-P
2304.29-35
$100 $250 $500 CV 07-Food
protectionunwrapped
+
PHF not reserved
§ 170-5 He-P
2305.01-05
$100 $250 $500 CV 11-Personnel
with infections
restricted
§ 170-5 He-P
2305.06-08
$100 $250 $500 CV 12-Personnelhands
washed
and good
hygienic
practices
§ 170-5 He-P
2310.03
$100 $250 $500 CV 20-Food
equip. + utensilssanitized,
etc.
§ 170-5 He-P
2311
$100 $250 $500 CV 27-Water
source-hot and
cold
§ 74-4 ABUTTER NOTIFICATION § 74-4
72:243
Table 4-1
NRO
First
Offense
Second
Offense
Third
Offense Description
§ 170-5 He-P
2312
$100 $250 $500 CV 28-Sewage
and waste water
disposal
§ 170-5 He-P
2313.02
$100 $250 $500 CV 30-Plumbingcross
connection,
backflow, etc.
§ 170-5 Plu 700
+ He-P
2314.01-03
$100 $250 $500 CV 31-Toilet +
hand washing
facilities
§ 170-5 He-P
2316
$100 $250 $500 CV 35-Insect,
rodent animal
control
§ 170-5 He-P
2321
$100 $250 $500 CV 41-Other
operations-toxic
items
Chap. 105 Art.
II
$50 $100 $200 Building violation
Chap. 105 Art.
III
$50 $100 $200 Mechanical
violation
Chap. 105 Art.
IV
$50 $100 $200 Plumbing
violation
Chap. 105 Art.
V
$50 $100 $200 Electrical
violation
§ 190-146 $200 $400 Court
appearance
Site plan
violation
§ 190-135 $200 $400 Court
appearance
Subdivision plan
violation
§ 190-15 $100 $200 Court
appearance
Zoning use
violation
§ 190-16 $100 $200 Court
appearance
Zoning
dimensional
violation
Chap. 190, Art.
X
$100 $200 Court
appearance
Sign violation
Chap. 190, Art.
XI
$100 $200 Court
appearance
Wetlands
violation
Chap. 190, Art.
VII
$100 $200 Court
appearance
Floodplain
violation
§ 74-4 NASHUA CODE § 74-4
72:244
§ 74-5. Violations and penalties.
Whenever any person fails to pay any penalty imposed pursuant to a citation
issued under the authority granted by this chapter, § 1-12 or § 1-13, such
person shall be guilty of a violation and shall, upon conviction, be punished
Table 4-1
NRO
First
Offense
Second
Offense
Third
Offense Description
Chap. 156 Art.
IV NFPA 1
$200 $400 Court
appearance
Exceeding
occupancy
capacity of the
posted place of
assembly permit
Chap. 156 Art.
IV NFPA 17A
$100 $200 Court
appearance
Failure to
maintain kitchen
hood suppression
system
Chap. 156 Art.
IV NFPA 96
$100 $200 Court
appearance
Failure to
maintain cooking
hood and
ventilation
system
Chap. 156 Art.
IV NFPA 25
$150 $300 Court
appearance
Failure to
maintain the
building's waterbased
fire
protection system
Chap. 156 Art.
IV NFPA 72
$150 $300 Court
appearance
Failure to
maintain the
building's fire
alarm system
(2) If any penalty set forth in Table 4-1 is not paid within 10 days of the
date the citation was issued, the penalty shall be the amount set
forth in Table 4-1 of this subsection plus $50 up to a maximum of
$1,000.
B. The penalties for any other offense for which a citation has been issued
shall be as follows:
(1) First offense: $50 if paid within 10 days; $100 thereafter.
(2) Second offense: $100 if paid within 10 days; $150 thereafter.
(3) Subsequent offense: $200 if paid within 10 days; $250 thereafter.
C. Second and subsequent offenses are offenses that occur within 12
months of the first offense.
§ 74-4 ABUTTER NOTIFICATION § 74-5
72:245
by a fine not to exceed the maximum allowed by RSA 47:17 or other
applicable law for each offense. Each citation penalty which is not paid shall
constitute a separate offense. If the administrative enforcement system
established in the Code is unsuccessful at resolving alleged violations, a
summons may be issued as otherwise provided by law, including use of the
procedure for plea by mail set forth in RSA 31:39-d.
Chapter 78
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Smoke detection/alarm devices — See Ch.
182, § 182-41.
§ 78-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings given in this section:
ALARM INSTALLATION — The design, installation, repair, alteration and
maintenance of systems causing an alarm to be sounded in the event of a
burglary or robbery.
ALARM USER — Any person on whose premises an alarm system is
maintained within the City, except for alarm systems on motor vehicles or
proprietary alarm systems.
ANSWERING SERVICE — A telephone answering service which provides
the service of receiving emergency signals from alarm systems, and
thereafter immediately relaying the message by live voice to the Police
Department.
CENTRAL ALARM STATION — Any facility which is privately owned, that
owns or leases alarm systems, whose facility is staffed by employees who
receive, record or validate alarm signals, and relay the information of such
signals to the Police Department by any means.
DIAL ALARM — An alarm system which automatically selects a telephone
line connected to the Police Department and reproduces a prerecorded
voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of an emergency
situation that the alarm system is designed to detect.
DIRECT ALARM — Any alarm system which is directly connected to the
alarm processing unit within the police monitoring facility.
EMERGENCY ALARM SYSTEM — An assembly of equipment and devices,
or a single device, arranged to signal a hazard or intrusion requiring urgent
attention and to which police are expected to respond. The term emergency
alarm system shall include terms, "dial alarm," "direct alarm" and "local
alarm," as those terms are defined in this section.
§ 74-5 NASHUA CODE § 78-1
78:246
FALSE ALARM — Any activation of an alarm system to which the police
respond which is not the result of a robbery, burglary, attempted robbery
or attempted burglary. Such terminology shall not apply to those alarms
caused by electrical storms, floods or other violent events of nature.
LOCAL ALARM — Any alarm system not connected to the police monitoring
facility or to a central station or answering service, which when activated
causes an audible and/or visual signaling device at the premises within
which the alarm system is installed.
MANUAL ALARM — Any alarm in which the activation of the alarm is
initiated by the direct action of the alarm user, his agents or employees,
and is installed to elicit a police response to a burglary, attempted burglary,
robbery or attempted robbery.
POLICE ALARM MONITORING FACILITY — The facility located within the
Police Department that is monitored by employees who receive, record and
validate alarm signals transmitted from private alarm systems.
PROPRIETARY SYSTEM — All alarm systems sounding and/or recording
alarm and supervisory signals at a control center located within the
protected premises; the control center being under the supervision of the
proprietor of the protected premises or his employees or agents. If a
proprietary alarm system includes a signal line connected directly, or by
means of a dialing device, to the police communications center, a central
station or answering service, it thereby becomes an emergency alarm
system as defined in this section.
§ 78-2. Certain systems excluded.
Fire alarm systems and alarm systems which monitor temperature,
humidity and any other condition not directly related to the detection of an
unauthorized intrusion into a premise or robbery or attempted robbery at a
premises, are specifically excluded from the provisions of this chapter.
§ 78-3. Permit required.
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to issue a permit to any owner of
property located within the City or the lessee thereof, to maintain, install
and modify an alarm system upon application to him, and subject to the
following provisions:
A. The alarm user applying for the permit shall state on the application his
name, address and telephone number, and in the case of a corporation
or legal entity, the name, address, and telephone number of the person
responsible for the upkeep, maintenance, and operation of the alarm
system, and any other information that the Chief of Police may deem
necessary.
B. The Chief of Police, upon application to him for a permit, shall, in his
sound judgment, determine whether the application conforms to the
requirements of this chapter, and that the facts stated therein are true
§ 78-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 78-3
78:247
§ 78-4. Permit fees.
§ 78-5. Maintaining or operating system without permit; penalty.
§ 78-6. Denial, suspension or revocation of permit. [Amended
3-26-2002 by Ord. No. O-02-09]
and accurate; he may cause such system to be inspected, and determine
whether such system is reasonably operational.
A. A residential permit shall include all private dwellings, individual
apartments or condominium units occupied primarily by the applicant,
for which the applicant will pay to the City a permit fee of $5 as a onetime
fee. [Amended 2-26-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-07]
B. A commercial permit shall include all businesses, corporations or
unincorporated associations for which the applicant will pay to the City
a permit fee of $15.
C. A separate commercial permit shall be required for each and every
alarm system owned or leased by a business, corporation,
unincorporated association or other legal entities, which exists at a
separate location.
D. All federal, state, county or local government agencies who operate
alarm systems shall be exempt from all permit fees and service charges
but shall comply with all other requirements of this chapter and with all
requests of the Chief of Police, as shall concern the operation of their
alarm systems.
E. All persons 65 years of age or older who are the principal occupants of
the private residence listed on the application shall also be exempt from
all permit fees, but shall comply with all other requirements of this
chapter.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or alarm user to maintain or operate
an alarm system, as defined by the terms of this chapter, without first
obtaining a permit as provided.
B. Any person or alarm user who does maintain or operate an alarm
system without a permit shall be guilty of a violation, and upon
conviction, shall be fined not less than $50.
A. Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter may
constitute grounds for the Chief of Police to deny the issuance of a
permit, or to suspend or revoke a permit issued under this chapter.
B. After the Police Department has received four false alarms within a
calendar year from any alarm user, the Chief of Police shall notify the
user in writing of such fact and require that the user submit a report,
within 10 days of such notice, describing efforts to discover and
eliminate the cause or causes of the false alarms. If the user fails to
§ 78-3 NASHUA CODE § 78-6
78:248
§ 78-7. Permit to be kept on protected premises; surrender upon
demand.
submit such a report within 10 days, the Chief of Police may suspend
the alarm user's permit, pending notice and hearing.
C. If the alarm user submits a report, as required by Subsection B above,
but the Chief of Police determines that the report is unsatisfactory or
that the alarm user has failed to show, by his report, that he has taken
or will take reasonable steps to eliminate or reduce false alarms, then
the Chief of Police may issue a written notice of his intent to revoke or
suspend the alarm user's permit.
D. Upon receipt of a notice of intent to revoke or suspend an alarm user's
permit, pursuant to this chapter, the alarm user may, within five days of
such receipt, submit a written request for a hearing before the Chief of
Police or his designee, setting forth the reasons why his permit should
not be revoked or suspended.
E. At the hearing before the Chief of Police or his designee, the holder of
the permit shall have the right to present evidence, to cross-examine
witnesses, and to be represented by counsel. Such a hearing shall be
informal and shall not be subject to the rules of evidence or formal
courtroom procedure. After the hearing, the Chief of Police or his
designee may either issue an order or of revocation, withdraw the
notice of revocation, or suspend the permit until such time that he is
satisfied that he the cause of the false alarms has been eliminated or
that the holder of the permit is in compliance with all provisions of this
chapter.
F. An alarm user whose permit has been revoked is not precluded under
this chapter from applying for a new permit. The Chief of Police,
however, shall not be required to issue a new permit unless he is
satisfied that the user's system has been properly serviced and its
deficiencies corrected. The Chief of Police may also impose reasonable
restrictions and conditions upon the user before issuing a new permit.
These restrictions and/or conditions shall appear on the permit and
shall provide for automatic revocation on the occurrence of four false
alarms in the remaining permit year.
A. All alarm users to whom a permit has been issued shall keep the permit
within the protected premises for which the permit was issued.
B. Any alarm permit issued under this chapter shall be made available for
inspection, suspension or revocation purposes, upon the demand of any
authorized police officer.
§ 78-6 ALARM SYSTEMS § 78-8
78:249
§ 78-8. Operating system after permit revocation; penalty.
Any alarm user who, after having a permit revoked and after exhausting his
right to a hearing, fails to disconnect his alarm system, shall be guilty of a
violation, and upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $100.
§ 78-9. Charge for false alarms.
§ 78-10. Appeals.
§ 78-11. Liability of City limited.
The Police Department of the City shall take every reasonable precaution to
ensure that the alarm signals and prerecorded alarm messages received by
the Police Department are given appropriate attention and are acted upon
with dispatch. Nevertheless, the Police Department shall not be liable for
any defects in the operation of alarm devices, for any failure or neglect
to respond appropriately upon receipt of an alarm from such source, nor
for the failure or neglect of any person in connection with the installation
and operation of alarm systems or their components, the transmission of
alarm signals and prerecorded messages, or the relaying of such signals
and messages. If the Police Department finds it necessary to disconnect
an alarm device after exhausting all another provisions of this chapter, the
Police Department shall incur no liability by such action.37
Chapter 83
A. Any owner or lessee of property having an alarm system on his
premises, and any user of alarm services or equipment designed and
installed with the intent of eliciting a police response, shall pay to the
City a service charge of $25 for each and every false alarm to which the
police respond in excess of the initial four false alarms in a calendar
year.
B. Any central station, answering service or proprietary system that in any
manner notifies the Police Department of an alarm signal from an alarm
system of an alarm user who does not possess an alarm user's permit,
or whose permit has been suspended, revoked or denied, shall be
charged $25 for each notification made to the Police Department.
A. Any alarm user, owner or lessee who possesses an alarm user's permit
may appeal false alarm service charges in writing to the Chief of Police
within 10 days after receipt of the notice of penalty.
B. The Chief of Police or his designee may waive assessment of the service
charge when, in his judgment, reasonable attempts are being taken to
discover and eliminate the cause of the false alarms.
37.Editor's Note: Original § 17-42, Records, which immediately followed this section, was
deleted 2-26-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-07.
§ 78-8 NASHUA CODE § 78-11
83:250
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Food-service establishments — See Ch. 170.
§ 78-11 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 78-11
83:251

ARTICLE I
Public Consumption; Open-Air Cafes
[NRO 1975, T. 15, § 601 (Sec. 3-1 of the 1987 Code); amended
10-30-1980 by Ord. No. O-80-85; 5-28-1996 by Ord. No. O-96-40;
12-26-2001 by Ord. No. O-01-176]
§ 83-1. Consumption on streets and sidewalks.
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage upon
any street or sidewalk of the City.
§ 83-2. Open-air cafes.
Consumption of alcoholic beverages is authorized and licensed in any openair
cafe area operated by a food service establishment or temporary food
service establishment licensed under § 170-1 and, where applicable,
holding licenses under §§ 285-9 and 285-11. An open-air cafe license is
subject to authorization for alcohol sales from the State Liquor Commission.
§ 83-3. License required to encumber street or sidewalk area.
No open-air cafe license under § 170-1 shall be issued for part of any
street, lane, sidewalk, or other public place in the City without the applicant
first obtaining a license from some person authorized to grant a license
to obstruct or encumber such an area as provided for under §§ 285-9 and
285-11. Such license-to-encumber shall define the limits or boundaries of
the encumbrance and shall be posted in public view in every food service
establishment or temporary food service establishment for which the
encumbrance was obtained as a condition of licensure for an open-air cafe.
§ 83-4. Revocation of licenses.
Open-air cafe licenses may be revoked by the Board of Health under
Chapter 170, and licenses-to-encumber may be revoked by the Board of
Public Works under Chapter 285.
§ 83-5. Violations and penalties.
Violations of this article shall be punishable in accordance with § 1-12.
§ 83-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 83-5
83:253

ARTICLE II
Selling to Minors
[Adopted 12-26-1984 by Ord. No. O-84-109 (Sec. 3-2 of the 1987
Code)]
§ 83-6. Giving or selling to minors.
No person shall give or sell any liquor or beverage as defined by RSA 175:1
to any person under the age of 21.
§ 83-7. Violations and penalties.
Violations of this article shall be punishable in accordance with § 1-12.
§ 83-6 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 83-7
83:255

ARTICLE III
Operation of Vehicles
[Adopted 12-26-1989 by Ord. No. O-89-157 (Sec. 3-3 of the 1987
Code)]
§ 83-8. Consumption while operating vehicles.
No person shall consume any liquor or beverages, as defined by RSA 175:1,
while operating any vehicle upon a public highway or on publicly owned
lands within the geographical limits of the City.
§ 83-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating this article shall be fined a minimum of $100.
§ 83-8 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 83-9
83:257
Chapter 88
AMUSEMENTS
§ 83-9 NASHUA CODE § 83-9
83:258
ARTICLE I
Amusement Devices
[Adopted NRO 1975, T. 14, §§ 1401 to 1409 (Secs. 4-16 to 4-35 of
the 1987 Code)]
§ 88-1. Definitions. [Amended 10-10-1995 by Ord. No. O-95-128;
5-28-1996 by Ord. No. O-96-40; 11-25-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-45]
The following words and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the
meanings given in this section:
AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any mechanical or electronic machine which,
upon insertion of a coin, or any other currency, slug, token, plate or disk,
may be operated by the public generally for use as a game, entertainment
or amusement, whether or not registering a score. It shall include but
not be limited to such devices as marble machines, pinball machines, skill
ball, mechanical grab machines and all mechanical, electronic and video
games, operations or transactions similar thereto under whatever name
they may be designated or described, excepting only jukeboxes or other
coin-operated machines used solely for the reproduction of music and
amusement games of chance.
AMUSEMENT GAMES OF CHANCE — All amusement devices whose
outcome is not substantially determined by the skill of the player, including
but not limited to video poker, black jack, or similar machines or any
machine which functions as a slot machine.
PERSON — Include any person who owns any amusement device, the
person in whose place of business any amusement device is placed for use
by the public, and the person having control over any amusement device.
POOL TABLE — A rectangular table, with cushions bounding the playing
area with pockets (pool table) or without pockets (billiard table), whether it
is coin-operated or not.
§ 88-2. Operation by minors prohibited; exception. [Amended
9-11-1996 by Ord. No. O-96-55; 11-25-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-45]
No person shall permit a person under 16 years of age to play or operate
any amusement game of chance as defined in this article; provided,
however, that, the provisions of this section shall not apply to any person
under 16 years of age accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other
suitable adult person having care and custody of such minor.
§ 88-3. Gambling devices prohibited.
Nothing in this section shall in any way be construed to authorize, license or
permit any gambling devices whatsoever, or any mechanism that has been
judicially determined to be a gambling device, or any conduct contrary to
law.
§ 88-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 88-4
83:259
§ 88-4. Seizure and destruction of gambling devices. [Amended
10-10-1995 by Ord. No. O-95-129; 9-11-1996 by Ord. No. O-96-55;
11-25-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-45]
If the Chief of Police shall have reason to believe any amusement device
or amusement game of chance is used as a gambling device, the machine
may be seized by the police and impounded; if upon trial a person allowing
the operation of the device is found guilty, or pleads no contest, of allowing
it to be used as a gambling device, it shall become the lawful property of
the Police Department to, in its sole discretion, sell or destroy the device,
without compensation to the owner. If the device is sold, all proceeds
collected from said sale shall be credited to the general police fund to be
used to support police efforts to reduce gambling activities.
§ 88-5. License required; fees. [Amended 6-9-1981 by Ord. No.
O-81-136; 5-1-1983 by Ord. No. O-82-16; 3-22-1983 by Ord. No.
O-83-102; 10-10-1995 by Ord. No. O-95-148; 3-26-1996 by Ord. No.
O-96-10]
§ 88-6. Duration and display of license; separate certificate for each
address. [Amended 9-13-1979 by Ord. No. O-79-214]
Each license issued under § 88-5 shall commence on the date of issue
and shall expire on April 30 of each year. The license shall issue in the
A. Each person shall, before allowing the operation of an amusement
device on his premises, and annually on or before the first day of May
thereafter, obtain from the Board of Aldermen a license to operate the
device or devices and shall, for each license issued pursuant to this
section, pay a fee of $50 per machine for the first 10 machines and $25
per machine for each additional machine. [Amended 11-25-2008 by
Ord. No. O-08-45]
B. Each person shall, before allowing the operation of an amusement
game of chance on his premises, and annually on or before the first day
of May thereafter, obtain from the Board of Aldermen a license to
operate the device or devices and shall, for each license issued
pursuant to this section, pay a fee of $500 per machine.
C. Each person shall, before allowing the use of a pool table on his
premises and annually on or before the first day of May thereafter,
obtain from the Board of Aldermen a license to operate the pool table
and shall, for each license issued pursuant to this section, pay a fee of
$15 per table. [Added 11-25-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-4538]
D. Licenses required under this section shall be issued subject to
procedures, regulations and guidelines as established by the
appropriate aldermanic committee and filed in the office of the City
Clerk.
38.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection C as Subsection D.
§ 88-4 NASHUA CODE § 88-6
83:260
name of the owner of the machines licensed and shall be evidenced by a
certificate stating the number of machines licensed, which shall be posted
in a conspicuous location in the place where the machines are located. If
one owner has two or more addresses at which machines are located, a
separate certificate shall be issued for each address.
§ 88-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-9-1981 by Ord. No.
O-81-136; 9-11-1996 by Ord. No. O-96-55; 11-25-2008 by Ord. No.
O-08-45]
Any person who allows the operation of an amusement device or
amusement game of chance on any premises owned by him or under his
control without a license having been issued therefor under this article shall
upon conviction be fined a sum of $100 per machine.
§ 88-8. Posting of regulations. [Amended 9-11-1996 by Ord. No.
O-96-55]
The City Clerk shall have copies of this article printed and distributed
to each licensee. Each establishment operating a mechanical amusement
device or amusement game of chance shall post a copy of this article in a
conspicuous place near the device.
§ 88-9. Seizure of unlawful devices. [Amended 6-9-1981 by Ord. No.
O-81-136; 9-11-1996 by Ord. No. O-96-55; 11-25-2008 by Ord. No.
O-08-45]
The Police Department is hereby authorized to seize any amusement device
or amusement game of chance located anywhere in the City in
contravention of any of the provisions of this article. Upon such seizure
the Police Department shall notify the owner of such seizure and reason
therefor. The Police Department shall hold any such seized machines for a
period of not less than seven days from the date of the required notification
to the owner or operator of the premises. During this period the owner or
operator may redeem any such machine by correcting the violation of this
article which led to such seizure and by payment of an administrative fee
of $30 to the City Clerk. Any amusement devices or amusement games of
chance which are so seized and which are not redeemed within the sevenday
period described in this section shall become the property of the City.
Costs for transportation and storage charges will be billed to the owner/
distributor for any amusement devices or amusement games of chance
seized. The City will be held harmless for any damage occurring during the
act of confiscation, transportation and storage of each machine.
§ 88-10. Suspension and revocation of licenses. [Amended
10-10-1995 by Ord. No. O-95-115; 12-26-1995 by Ord. No. O-95-148;
9-11-1996 by Ord. No. O-96-55]
A. Upon the issuance of a criminal complaint by a court of competent
jurisdiction against any person (as defined in § 88-1) associated with
§ 88-6 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 88-10
83:261
§ 88-11. Amusement games of chance prohibited. [Added 9-11-1996
by Ord. No. O-96-51]
the license of amusement devices or amusement games of chance and
arising from the use of the licensed amusement device or amusement
game of chance, the license under which the device is permitted shall
be considered suspended. [Amended 11-25-2008 by Ord. No.
O-08-45]
B. Upon a subsequent finding of innocence or dismissal of the complaint
said license shall be reinstated, notwithstanding any other action taken
relative to said license in the intervening period.
C. Upon a subsequent finding of guilt or upon entry of a plea of guilty,
whether that plea is entered by the person of the court, said license
shall be considered revoked.
D. Such suspension or revocation shall be effective immediately upon
notification of the licensee by the office of the City Clerk.
E. Further, the City Clerk may, with approval of the appropriate
committee, suspend or revoke such licenses. Such suspension or
revocation shall be effective five days after the notification of the
licensee by the office of the City Clerk. The licensee may request a
hearing by said aldermanic committee during this period, in which case
the license shall be considered suspended but not revoked until such
time as the committee provides a hearing and takes final action.
A. Starting on the effective date of Ord. No. O-96-51, adopted on
September 11, 1996, from which this section is derived, no new license
issued under the terms of this article shall permit the operation of an
amusement game of chance as defined in § 88-1 of this article, and no
amusement game of chance shall be substituted for an existing
amusement game which is not an amusement game of chance under
any existing license after the effective date of this section. [Amended
11-25-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-45]
B. Any existing amusement game of chance which is licensed upon the
effective date of this section shall be exempted from the provisions of
this section and shall remain legally licensed as long as the existing
license continues to be renewed.
C. If said existing license is allowed to expire without renewal, or if said
existing license is revoked under the terms of § 88-10 of this article, any
new license issued to the same person or persons shall be subject to the
prohibitions of this article.39
39.Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Poolrooms and Bowling Alleys, adopted NRO 1975, T. 14,
§§ 1201a to 1204 (Secs. 4-36 to 4-40 of the 1987 Code, as amended, which immediately
followed, was repealed 11-25-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-45. This ordinance also renumbered
former Art. III as Art. II.
§ 88-10 NASHUA CODE § 88-12
83:262
§ 88-12. through § 88-16. (Reserved)
§ 88-12 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 88-12
83:263

ARTICLE II
Shows
[Adopted NRO 1975, T. 14, §§ 1001 to 1008 (Secs. 4-56 to 4-62 of
the 1987 Code)]
§ 88-17. License required. [Amended 9-13-1979 by Ord. No.
O-79-213; 5-13-1986 by Ord. No. O-86-32; 11-12-1991 by Ord. No.
O-91-109; 12-26-1995 by Ord. No. O-95-148; 5-23-2000 by Ord. No.
O-00-27; 12-26-2001 by Ord. No. O-01-184]
A. No showman, musician, entertainer, disc jockey, comedian, tumbler,
dancer, ventriloquist, magician, circus, carnival, or concert shall for pay
perform or be performed in this City, and no parade or procession upon
any public street and no open-air public meeting shall be held without a
license therefor specifying the time and object for which such license is
granted.
B. No license shall be granted until the applicant therefor shall file the
following with the City Clerk:
(1) Insurance. The applicant shall obtain and maintain the insurance
coverage that the Insurance Department deems necessary. Factors
to consider in determining the required insurance coverage
include, but are not limited to, the use of mechanical apparatus,
presence of animals, use of rides or other amusement functions,
use of vehicles, size and duration of the event, the potential
audience, the need for police or other safety services, and the
history of the applicant. The required insurance coverage may
include:
(a) Workers' compensation insurance to cover all employees. The
licensee shall also require all subcontractors to provide
workers' compensation for all employees.
(b) Personal injury and property damage insurance for all
activities of licensee and its subcontractors arising out of or in
connection with this license, written on a broad form
comprehensive general liability basis.
(c) Motor vehicle insurance to include bodily injury, property
damage, uninsured motorist, employer's nonownership
coverage, and medical payments.
(d) All policies shall be endorsed with the following specific
language:
[1] The City is named as additional insured for all liability
arising out of the operation by or on behalf of the named
insured, and this policy protects the additional insured, its
officers, agents and employees against liability for bodily
injuries, deaths, or property damage or destruction arising
§ 88-17 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 88-17
83:265
in any respect, directly or indirectly, in the performance of
the license.
[2] The inclusion of more than one insured shall not operate to
impair the rights of one insured against another insured
against insured, and the coverages afforded shall apply as
though separate policies had been issued to each insured.
[3] The insurance provided herein is primary, and no
insurance held or owned by the City shall be called upon to
contribute to a loss.
[4] The coverage provided by this policy shall not be reduced
or cancelled without 30 days written notice given to the
City.
(e) Documentation. The licensee shall submit certificates of
insurance countersigned by a state licensed agent prior to the
effective date of the license.
(2) As a condition of licensure, and at any time during the license
period, an applicant or licensee may be subject to additional
restrictions or conditions ordered by the Building, Health, Police or
Fire Department as may be warranted by any circumstances
pertaining to a specific establishment or event or to prevent any
nuisance related to or caused by the licensed activity. A nuisance,
in addition to its common law meaning, is anything that endangers
life, health or safety, gives offense to senses, violates common
standards of decency or obstructs the reasonable use, enjoyment,
or habitation of any property.
(3) Site plans and building plans evidencing compliance with any
applicable provisions of Chapters 105, 110, 123, 156, 160 and 280
and Part 2 of Chapter 190, Land Use.
(4) Recommendation of the health officer concerning adequacy of
sanitary facilities and any food-service facilities.
(5) A surety bond or other guarantee approved by the City Solicitor/
Corporation Counsel in an amount sufficient to insure payment of
the costs of any police, fire or other public officers assigned to the
event, the dismantling of any temporary structures, cleanup and
refuse disposal, and any other costs associated with the event or its
aftermath.
C. In acting upon requests for licenses the Board of Aldermen, through its
appropriate aldermanic committee, may require the applicant to meet
additional requirements or adhere to additional standards as it may
impose for the purpose of minimizing adverse effects of the licensed
activity.
§ 88-17 NASHUA CODE § 88-17
83:266
§ 88-18. Fees. [Amended 12-26-2001 by Ord. No. O-01-184]
§ 88-19. Licensing of permanent places of amusement. [Amended
12-26-2001 by Ord. No. O-01-184]
D. Upon receipt of written notification of the denial of, or pending
suspension or revocation of, a license, or for the issuance of new or
revised conditions or restrictions on the license from the office of the
City Clerk, the applicant or licensee may request, in writing, a hearing
before the personnel/administrative affairs committee of the Board of
Aldermen. The request must be made within 10 days of the date of
notification sent to the applicant/licensee. The Personnel/
Administrative Affairs Committee shall set a hearing date, notifying the
applicant or licensee of said hearing date. The hearing will be held at
the earliest possible date and the matter shall be decided within a
reasonable time. The applicant or licensee will be notified in writing of
the decision of the Committee, and the decision by the Committee to
deny, restrict, suspend, or revoke a license shall be final.
(1) A license that has been revoked shall not be subject to renewal or
restoration except that an application for a new license may be
submitted and acted upon after the expiration of at least one year
from the date of revocation.
(2) A business or activity that endangers the public health, welfare or
safety may have its license revoked immediately and prior to the
hearing process provided above where the danger to public health,
welfare and/or safety is immediate.
A. Every person shall pay for a license, for the use of the City, the following
sums:
(1) For each circus, carnival, midway, offer of attended amusement
rides, or show where feats of agility, horsemanship, sleight of hand
or rope dancing are performed, and for menageries where wild
beasts are exhibited: $50.
(2) For each band, or troupe or company of minstrels or comedians,
and for all other theatrical exhibitions, and for each show where
feats of ventriloquism, sleight of hand or jugglery are performed,
and for each panorama, mirror, stereoscopic, moving pictures or
other views: $10 for each exhibition.
(3) For each and all other shows, exhibitions, concerts or
performances: $50.
B. In addition to the fees payable pursuant to Subsection A of this section,
the licensee shall reimburse the City for any expense occasioned by
such show or exhibition.
A. 40Places of amusement of a permanent character, dance halls, or halls
or establishments which regularly provide entertainment as identified
§ 88-17 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 88-19
83:267
in § 88-17A may be licensed, for a period of 12 months from the first
day of May of each year, for $50 for each place, hall or establishment,
payable in advance. For purposes of this definition, "place of
amusement" shall include any occupied connecting rooms, space, or
area on the same level or in the same story, or in a story or stories
above or below, where entrance is common to the rooms, space or
areas; provided, however, that the license fee for a restaurant holding
a valid license under the provisions of Chapter 170, Food-Service
Establishments, shall be $10 for a period of 12 months from the first
day of May of each year.
B. Dances. This subsection shall apply to any establishment or place which
permits, or permits to occur, dancing, except the following: a public or
private school licensed by the state or the City for the purpose of
conducting dancing classes or dance courses of study as its primary,
regular and recurrent business activity; dances sponsored by an
accredited educational institution, civic or religious organization or
group which limits admission to its own members and their guests.
(1) No public dancing shall be permitted between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 7:00 a.m. any day of the week.
(2) No person conducting or operating a teen dance shall permit,
either by act or omission, any person under the age of 15 years to
enter or remain on the premises without a parent or legal guardian
present. No person conducting or operating a teen dance shall
permit, either by act or omission, any person over the age of 20
years to enter or remain upon the premises, except a parent or
legal guardian accompanying a person under the age of 18 years,
and except bona fide employees of the person or entity conducting
or operating such teen dance. For the purposes of this section "teen
dance" means any dance which permits the entry of persons under
the age of 18 years of age other than may be excepted under
Subsection B of this § 88-19.
C. No license shall be granted under this section until the applicant shall
obtain and maintain the insurance coverage that the Risk Management
Department deems necessary. Factors to consider in determining the
required insurance coverage include, but are not limited to, the use of
mechanical apparatus, presence of animals, use of rides or other
amusement functions, use of vehicles, size and duration of the event,
the potential audience, the need for police or other safety services, and
the history of the applicant. Termination of any insurance policy or bond
shall operate as a revocation of the license.
D. Police attendance at function. When it is determined by the Chief of
Police or his designee to be necessary to preserve order, protect the
health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City, or to help avoid
40.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, which provided for the licensing of theaters, was
repealed 11-25-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-45. This ordinance also redesignated former
Subsections B through G as Subsections A through F, respectively.
§ 88-19 NASHUA CODE § 88-19
83:268
§ 88-20. Approval of Board of Fire Commissioners. [Amended
11-25-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-45]
All applications for licenses for halls and places of amusement must be
accompanied by the recommendations and approval of the Board of Fire
Commissioners.
§ 88-21. Transfer of license.
If a person holding a license under this article shall desire to transfer and
carry on such business in other premises in the City, then, upon the making
and filing of a new application the board shall grant a new license, subject
to the same regulations and requirements as governed the original license.
§ 88-22. Revocation of license.
At any time after a license has been issued under this article to any person,
it may be revoked and cancelled by the licensing board if the performance
given shall violate any of the public statutes or ordinances of the City, or
is conducted in a building which does not conform to the fire statutes,
ordinances or regulations of the Board of Fire Commissioners, or the place
licensed is used for criminal purposes. Before any license is revoked or
cancelled, the holder shall be entitled to a hearing by the licensing board
and to five days' previous notice thereof in writing. Licenses of a temporary
character may be revoked at any time by the licensing board without notice
in their discretion.
traffic-related problems, public disturbance, or public nuisance, all
establishments and places required to be licensed under this article
shall be required to hire an off-duty police officer or officers during
those hours the Chief of Police or his designee deems appropriate.
The Chief of Police or his designee may suspend this requirement as
he deems appropriate, but the requirement may be reinstated at the
discretion of the Chief of Police or his designee.
E. Enforcement. The Chief of Police or his designee(s) shall have the
power to issue citations for the violation of any of the provisions of this
article and to enter public access areas of a business, free of charge,
during hours of public access or operation and at any time a license is
required by this article, and to demand the exhibition of the license for
the current term by an person engaged or employed in the transaction
of such business. If the person fails then and there to exhibit the
license, the person shall be punishable as provided for in § 1-12 of the
City Code.
F. It shall be the duty of all officers and agents of any corporation to see
that such corporation complies with the provisions of this article. All
officers or agents of any corporation required by this article to be
licensed which shall do business without having paid the license fee and
procured such license shall be punishable as provided for in § 1-12 of
the City Code.
§ 88-19 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 88-23
83:269
§ 88-23. Inspection of premises.
Any member of the licensing board or the Board of Aldermen, and any police
officer or agent, may enter upon any premises licensed under this article, at
reasonable times, to ascertain the manner in which the license is exercised,
and to preserve order.
§ 88-23 NASHUA CODE § 88-23
83:270
ARTICLE III
(Reserved)
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 88-23
83:271

ARTICLE IV
Boxing and Wrestling
[Adopted NRO 1975, T. 14, § 401 (Sec. 12-16 of the 1987 Code)]
§ 88-24. Bouts permitted.
Boxing bouts and wrestling matches may be held within the City.
§ 88-24 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 88-24
83:273
Chapter 93
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 201.
§ 88-24 NASHUA CODE § 88-24
83:274
ARTICLE I
Rules for Keeping Animals
[NRO 1975, T. 7, §§ 1101 to 1113 (Secs. 5-1 to 5-30 of the 1987
Code)]
§ 93-1. Definitions. [Amended 8-11-1998 by Ord. No. O-98-42;
amended 8-12-2003 by Ord. No. O-03-91]
As used in this article, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following
words shall have the meaning given in this section:
CAT — Any feline animal, male or female, sexed or neutered.
DOG — Any canine animal, male or female, sexed or neutered.
FERRET — Any European domestic ferret (Mustela furo), male or female,
sexed or neutered.
OWNER — Any person owning, keeping or harboring any animal.
§ 93-2. Animals at large forbidden; penalty; impoundment.
[Amended 3-12-1985 by Ord. No. O-84-79]
§ 93-3. Keeping and housing animals. [Amended 12-11-2018 by
Ord. No. O-18-019]
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether as owner, keeper or custodian,
to keep and house any animal in an accessory structure in an unsanitary
manner that presents an imminent hazard to public health, as determined
by the health officer or designee.
A. No chicken or fowl, as defined in § 190-264, sheep, swine, horses,
mules, asses, oxen, cows or other cattle shall be permitted to go at large
in any street, highway, lane, alley, common, square or other public place
within the City. [Amended 12-11-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-019]
B. Any person permitting a violation of this section shall be punished as
provided in section 1-9.
C. Any person finding any such creature going at large may either
impound and detain the same until penalty and cost of impounding shall
be paid, or may make complaint against the person permitting such
creature to go at large, and the penalty shall be imposed by the court
having jurisdiction.
D. The term "at large" means off the premises of the owner or keeper, and
not under lead, leash or other physical restraint. [Added 12-11-2018
by Ord. No. O-18-019]
§ 93-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 93-4
83:275
§ 93-4. Dog licensing and registration. [Amended 12-26-1995 by
Ord. No. O-95-148; 8-11-1998 by Ord. No. O-09-42]
All dogs kept, harbored or maintained by their owners in the City shall
be licensed as provided in RSA 466. The license fee shall be that amount
specified in RSA 466:4, plus $1, as allowed by RSA 466:39.
§ 93-5. Dogs running at large. [Amended 7-18-1977 by Ord. No.
O-77-193; 8-11-1998 by Ord. No. 0-98-42; 7-10-2007 by Ord. No.
O-07-114]
It shall be unlawful for any dog to run at large. The term "at large" means off
the premises of the owner or keeper, and not under leash or other physical
restraint of the owner or a responsible person, or not within the confines of
the fenced area of an off-leash dog park approved by the City of Nashua and
animal control officer.
§ 93-6. Impoundment of dogs, cats, ferrets and chickens found at
large. [Amended 7-18-1977 by Ord. No. O-77-193; amended
11-26-1977 by Ord. No. O-77-273A; 5-1-1978 by Ord. No. O-78-41;
7-12-1978 by Ord. No. O-78-60; 8-11-1998 by Ord. No. O-98-42;
12-11-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-019]
A. The Dog Officer or other authorized person shall take into custody and
impound:
(1) Any dog off the premises of its owner which the Dog Officer or
other authorized person has reason to believe is a stray dog;
(2) Any dog off the premises of the owner of the dog without a current
registration tag on his collar;
(3) Any female dog in heat and off the premises of the owner; and
(4) Any chicken off the premises of the owner.
B. If any dog, cat, or ferret seized wears a collar or harness to which is
attached a registration tag, or if the owner is otherwise known, the Dog
Officer or other authorized person shall forthwith serve on the owner a
notice in writing stating that the dog, cat, or ferret has been seized and
will be liable to be disposed of or destroyed if not claimed within seven
days after the serving of notice. Notice may be served either by giving it
to such person or by leaving it at the person's usual or last known place
of abode, as determined by the registration tag or other available
information.
C. No dog, cat, or ferret shall be released or removed from confinement
until the owner has provided proof that the dog, cat, or ferret is
currently vaccinated against rabies, and all applicable license, board,
and care fees have been paid. If the owner does not have proof that the
dog, cat, or ferret is currently vaccinated against rabies, then the owner
may post a $25 cash bond with the Dog Officer or other authorized
§ 93-4 NASHUA CODE § 93-6
83:276
person to secure the release of the dog, cat, or ferret in order for the
owner to obtain a rabies vaccination for the dog, cat, or ferret. If, within
72 hours of the dog, cat, or ferret's release the owner provides proof
to the Dog Officer or other authorized person of obtaining a rabies
vaccination for the dog, cat, or ferret, then the owner shall be refunded
the full bond amount.
D. When a seized dog, cat, or ferret has been detained for seven days after
seizure, with due notice given as prescribed, and the owner has not
claimed the dog, cat, or ferret, provided proof that the dog, cat, or
ferret is currently vaccinated against rabies, procured a current license
or exhibited evidence of a current license if necessary, and paid all
applicable license, board, and care fees, the Dog Officer or other
authorized person may cause the dog, cat, or ferret to be destroyed in
the least painful manner possible.
E. The Dog Officer or other authorized person may keep or cause to be
kept in confinement any dog, cat, or ferret which, in that person's
opinion, may be valuable or acceptable to new ownership, and see that
such dog, cat, or ferret is placed in a new home. In order to expedite
this alternative, the Dog Officer or other authorized person shall make
available to the public, monthly, a list by number and other reference of
dogs, cats, and ferrets available. Those persons desiring to procure said
dogs, cats, or ferrets may do so by application to the Dog Officer or
other authorized person and payment of applicable adoption and
licensing fees.
F. No dog, cat, or ferret which the Dog Officer or other authorized person
has taken into custody for a second offense shall be released unless the
person to whom the dog, cat, or ferret is released pays a penalty of $25,
as allowed by RSA 466:39, in addition to meeting all other requirements
of this section. If said penalty is not paid within seven days after the
dog, cat, or ferret is taken into custody, the dog, cat, or ferret may be
destroyed in the least painful manner possible.
G. Chickens.
(1) If any chicken seized has owner identification, a band or tag, or if
the owner is otherwise known, the Dog Officer or other authorized
person shall forthwith serve on the owner a notice in writing
stating that the chicken has been seized and will be liable to be
disposed of or destroyed if not claimed within seven days after the
serving of notice. Notice may be served either by giving it to such
person or by leaving it at the person's usual or last known place of
abode, as determined by the identification or other available
information.
(2) No chicken shall be released or removed from confinement until all
applicable board and care fees have been paid.
(3) When a seized chicken has been detained for seven days after
seizure, with due notice given as prescribed in this Subsection G,
§ 93-6 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 93-6
83:277
§ 93-7. Method of confinement.
The Mayor, with the assistance and cooperation of the Dog Officer, shall
select a suitable place of confinement for impounded animals and those held
under suspicion of rabies and after biting.
§ 93-8. Dog waste. [Added 9-11-1996 by Ord. No. O-96-51]
and the owner has not claimed the chicken and paid all applicable
fees, the Dog Officer or other authorized person may cause the
chicken to be destroyed in the least painful manner possible.
(4) The Dog Officer or other authorized person may keep or cause to be
kept in confinement any chicken which, in that person's opinion,
may be valuable or acceptable to new ownership, and see that such
chicken is placed in a new home. In order to expedite this
alternative, the Dog Officer or other authorized person shall make
available to the public, monthly, a list by number and other
reference of chickens available. Those persons desiring to procure
said chickens may do so by application to the Dog Officer or other
authorized person and payment of applicable adoption fees.
(5) No chicken which the Dog Officer or other authorized person has
taken into custody for a second offense shall be released unless the
person to whom the chicken is released pays a penalty of $25, as
allowed by RSA 466:39, in addition to meeting all other
requirements of this section. If said penalty is not paid within seven
days after the chicken is taken into custody, the chicken may be
destroyed in the least painful manner possible or placed in a new
home as described in this Subsection G.
A. Duty to dispose. It shall be the duty of each person who owns, possesses
or controls a dog to immediately remove and dispose of any feces left by
his/her dog on any sidewalk, street or other public area. It shall further
be the duty of each person who owns, possesses or controls a dog to
immediately remove and dispose of any feces left by his/her dog on any
private property neither owned nor occupied by said person, unless
said private property owner or occupant agrees otherwise.
B. Duty to possess means of removal/disposal. No person who owns,
possesses or controls such dog shall appear with such dog on any
sidewalk, street, park or other public area without the means of
removal of any feces left by such dog. Furthermore, no person who
owns, possesses or controls such dog shall appear with such dog on any
private property neither owned nor occupied by said person without the
means of removal of any feces left by said dog, unless said private
property owner or occupier agrees otherwise. Disposal of such feces
shall be in a manner consistent with all applicable laws.
C. Enforcement/fines for violation. This section shall be enforced by the
Nashua police department. Violation of this regulation shall be
§ 93-6 NASHUA CODE § 93-8
83:278
§ 93-9. Interference with Dog Officer. [Amended 5-14-1996 by Ord.
No. O-96-11]
No person shall hinder, interfere with or molest the Dog Officer or such
other persons as may be appointed as agents in the performance of any duty
enjoined by this article.
§ 93-10. Effect of state law. [Amended 5-14-1996 by Ord. No.
O-96-11]
It is the intention of the board of aldermen to include in this article not
only those state statutes specifically referred to by title and number, but to
embrace also all those others made a part of the law, and they are hereby
included under this section by reference.
§ 93-11. Dog shelters; tethering. [Amended 3-23-1999 by Ord. No.
0-98-90]
§ 93-12. Copy of Dog Ordinances to be given with licenses. [Added
3-23-1999 by Ord. No. O-98-90; amended 2-26-2008 by Ord. No.
O-08-07]
A copy of the Nashua Dog Ordinances shall be given with each dog license
issued.
§ 93-13. Noises from animals as a nuisance. [Added 8-12-2003 by
Ord. No. O-03-191]
punished as provided in § 93-14 for each occurrence. [Amended
2-26-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-07]
D. Exemption. Compliance with this regulation is not required by any
handicapped person who, by reason of his/her handicap is physically
unable to comply with this section.
A. If a dog is tied or confined outdoors under weather conditions that
could adversely affect the dog's health (wind, rain, wet ground, sleet,
snow, hail, cold, or heat), its owner or keeper shall provide it with
access to shelter adequate to protect it from possible injury.
B. The owner or keeper of a chained or tethered dog shall provide it with a
properly applied harness or buckle type collar and tether configured so
as to protect it from possible injury. Any chain or tether shall be of
sufficient length to allow the dog to be able to easily stand, sit, lie, or
turn about.
A. Noise from an animal which is sustained for periods of more than 30
minutes or which occurs between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.,
which noise would annoy or disturb a person of normal sensibilities is
found to be a nuisance.
§ 93-8 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 93-13
83:279
§ 93-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-14-1996 by Ord. No.
O-96-11; 8-11-1998 by Ord. No. O-98-42; 3-23-1999 by Ord. No.
O-98-90; 8-12-2003 by Ord. No. O-03-191]
Any owner found violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of
a violation and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in
§ 1-12 of the City Code, except that violation of an ordinance relating to
dogs shall be punished by a fine of $25.
B. The owner of any animal who fails, by appropriate action, to effectively
abate such a nuisance after being requested to do so by any person,
shall be guilty of a violation.
§ 93-13 NASHUA CODE § 93-14
83:280
Chapter 98
BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS AND ROLLER BLADES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 215.
Use of roads for recreational purposes — See
Ch. 285, Art. I.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 320.
Off-road vehicles — See Ch. 325.
§ 93-14 BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS AND ROLLER § 93-14
98:281

ARTICLE I
Bicycles
[Adopted NRO 1975, T. 12, §§ 1401, 1413 to 1419 (Secs. 13-371 to
13-379 of the 1987 Code)]
§ 98-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BICYCLE — Every pedalled vehicle propelled solely by human power, upon
which any person may ride, except a child's tricycle and similar devices.
§ 98-2. Riding on roads and bicycle paths.
§ 98-3. Riding on sidewalks.
§ 98-4. Obedience to traffic-control devices.
A. Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall have all of the
rights, and shall be subject to all of the duties, applicable to the driver
of a motor vehicle by Chapter 320, except as to special regulations in
Chapter 320 and except as to those provisions of Chapter 320 which, by
their nature, can have no application.
B. Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to
the right side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when
passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
C. Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two
abreast, except on the paths or parts of roadways set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles.
D. Wherever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a
roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the
roadway.
A. No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business
district.
B. No person 13 or more years of age shall ride a bicycle upon any
sidewalk in any district.
C. Any person under 13 years of age riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk shall
yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal
before overtaking and passing such pedestrian.
A. Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official
traffic-control devices applicable to motor vehicles, unless otherwise
directed by a police officer.
§ 98-1 BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS AND ROLLER § 98-4
98:283
§ 98-5. Parking.
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway,
parallel to the curb, or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle,
or against a building, or at the curb, in such manner as to afford the least
obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
§ 98-6. Child carriers.
§ 98-7. Duty of parents or guardians.
No parent or guardian of a minor shall authorize or knowingly permit the
child to violate any provision of this article.
§ 98-8. Prohibited acts.
B. Whenever authorized signs are erected, such as no right or left turn or
U-turn, persons operating bicycles shall obey the direction of the sign,
except where a person dismounts from the bicycle to make any such
movement, in which event such person shall then obey the regulations
applicable to pedestrians.
A. All front-mounted carriers shall have a design capacity of and be used
for the transportation of infants weighing not more than 30 pounds.
B. All rear-mounted carriers shall have a design capacity of and be used
for the transportation of infants weighing not more than 40 pounds.
C. All carriers shall be installed in accordance with manufacturer's
instructions.
D. All carriers shall be equipped with the following safety features:
(1) Webbed seat belts.
(2) Leg wells or shields to prevent injury from the front or rear wheel.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, deface, change or cause
to be removed, obliterated, defaced or changed any factory serial or
other identification number or mark on any bicycle.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle on any way
within the limits of the City during the period from 1/2 hour after sunset
to 1/2 hour before sunrise unless the operator shall display on his
bicycle a lighted lamp on the front of the bicycle and a tail light or
reflector on the rear.
C. It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of a bicycle to leave it
unattended unless locked with an effective locking device. Any bicycle
found unattended and unlocked shall be impounded by the Police
Department.
§ 98-4 NASHUA CODE § 98-8
98:284
§ 98-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-12-1985 by Ord. No.
O-84-79]
Each operator of a bicycle who violates the provisions of this article may
be given a notice of the violation by any police officer who discovers such
violation, and the operator may, on or before the closing of the next business
day following the receipt of such notice, pay to the District Court, Traffic
Violations Bureau, as a penalty for and in full satisfaction of such violation,
the sum of $3. Any operator who fails to make payment within 24 hours
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $25.
D. It shall be unlawful for more than one person to ride on a bicycle unless
it is a tandem bicycle equipped with two sets of handlebars, two
sprockets and two seats, or unless the additional rider occupies a seat.
E. No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article
which prevents him from keeping both hands upon the handlebars.
F. No person riding upon any bicycle shall attach the same or himself to
any motor vehicle upon a roadway.
§ 98-8 BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS AND ROLLER § 98-9
98:285

ARTICLE II
Skateboards and Roller Blades
[Adopted 10-14-1997 by Ord. No. O-97-147 (Secs. 13-403 to 13-405
of the 1987 Code)]
§ 98-10. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SKATEBOARD, ROLLER BLADES or OTHER SIMILAR DEVICE — Every
vehicle propelled solely by human power upon which a person may ride, and
shall include skateboards, in-line skates, roller skates, unicycles, scooters,
and all other similar devices, except bicycles, which are regulated by Article
I above, and wheelchairs, young children's tricycles, and similar devices
used to transport young children.
§ 98-11. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or ride a skateboard, roller blades
or similar device upon the following:
§ 98-12. Violations and penalties.
Each operator of a skateboard, roller blades or other similar device who
violates a provision of this article may be given a citation by any police
officer who discovers such violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $25.
A. Sidewalks and public ways within the Main Street business district
from Library Hill to Globe Plaza, including one block east and west from
Main Street.
B. Public places set forth below: Downtown parking lots, City parking
garages, City Hall Plaza, Library Plaza, 14 Court Street, the bus
terminal area, and Elm Street Junior High School.
§ 98-10 BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS AND ROLLER § 98-12
98:287
Chapter 105
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abutter notification — See Ch. 72.
Construction and demolition work — See Ch.
128.
Fences — See Ch. 150.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 156.
Housing standards — See Ch. 182.
Land use — See Ch. 190.
Noise — See Ch. 201.
Street and building identification — See Ch.
280.
Construction on streets and sidewalks — See
Ch. 285.
§ 98-12 NASHUA CODE § 98-12
98:288
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 105-1. Purpose.
The City of Nashua promulgates this chapter to establish minimum
regulations governing the design, construction, quality of materials,
erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement,
addition to, and use or maintenance of buildings and building systems in
the City, providing for the issuance of permits, collection of fees; making of
inspections; and for the enforcement of this chapter as provided by law.
§ 105-2. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is
for any reason held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter. The City hereby declares it would have passed this chapter, and
each section, subsection, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact
that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases
be declared invalid.
§ 105-3. Effect of proposed building or zoning changes. [Amended
5-27-2003 by Ord. No. O-03-169]
A. In conformity with RSA 676:12, the Building Official shall not issue any
building permit if application for such permit is made after the first
legal notice of proposed changes in the Building Code or in the Zoning
Ordinance41 has been posted as provided by law if the proposed
changes in the Building Code or the Zoning Ordinance would, if
adopted, justify refusal of such a permit. After final action has been
taken on the proposed changes in the Building Code or in the Zoning
Ordinance, the Building Official shall issue or refuse to issue a permit
which has been held in abeyance under this section pursuant to final
action under this section.
B. In the event that the Board of Aldermen does not act within 120 days
from the date of the posting of the legal notice of any proposed change,
any plan or permit affected by the operation or application of this
section will be deemed subject to passage or issuance in accordance
with RSA 676:12(V), provided that it complies with all other criteria for
approval.
C. The provisions of this section shall only apply once in any two-year
period.
D. The provisions of Subsections A, B and C of this section shall not apply
to any proposed ordinance which, if passed, would completely replace
the Zoning Ordinance of the City, and such ordinance shall take effect
41.Editor's Note: See Art. II of this chapter and Ch. 190, Land Use.
§ 105-1 BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS AND ROLLER § 105-3
98:289
§ 105-4. Conflict with other provisions.
Where applicable State of New Hampshire laws, codes, rules or regulations
are more restrictive or preempt local authority, the state requirement shall
be observed.
§ 105-5. Appeals. [Amended 12-13-2016 by Ord. No. O-16-02642]
only upon the effective date specified in the ordinance upon final
passage.
A. Any person shall have the right to appeal to the Board of Building and
Fire Codes Appeals within 20 days from the receipt of a written decision
of the Building or Fire Official (also known as the "Code Official"). An
application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of
the codes or rules legally adopted have been incorrectly interpreted,
the provisions do not fully apply, or an equivalent or better form of
construction can be used. [Amended 9-25-2018 by Ord. No.
O-18-018]
B. Application for appeals and actions upon the same shall be in
accordance with the rules of procedure adopted by the Board of
Building and Fire Codes Appeals.
C. Said Board of Building and Fire Codes Appeals shall be established in
accordance with the statutes of the State of New Hampshire and the
ordinances of the City and shall consist of five members and three
alternate members who are qualified by experience and training to rule
on matters pertaining to building construction and fire prevention.
Each member shall be a professional engineer, architect, builder,
superintendent of building construction, master plumber, master
electrician, gas fitter, fire inspector, fire investigator, or any other such
person qualified by education or experience, in the opinion of the
Building Official, Fire Official, and the Mayor, to serve as a member of
the Board. Each member shall be a resident of the City. The members
shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Board of
Aldermen. Each member shall hold office for three years or until a
replacement is appointed.
D. The statutes of the State of New Hampshire and the provisions of this
section shall take precedence, concerning appeals, over any conflicting
provision in any referenced code adopted by the City.
E. Said Board of Building and Fire Codes Appeals has no authority to
waive the requirements of the State Building Code or the State Fire
Code.
42.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that all members of the existing Building
Code Board of Appeals and Board of Fire Prevention Code Appeals must be appointed and
confirmed to this new Board of Building and Fire Codes Appeals and designated as a
member or alternate member.
§ 105-3 NASHUA CODE § 105-6
98:290
§ 105-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates a provision of this chapter or the codes adopted
thereby or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
erects, constructs, alters, or repairs a building or structure in violation of
the approved construction documents or directive of the Building Official, or
of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter or the
codes adopted thereby, shall be subject to the provisions of RSA 676:15-17b,
without limitation of any remedy available to the City at law or in equity.
§ 105-6 BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS AND ROLLER § 105-6
98:291

ARTICLE II
Building Code
§ 105-7. Short title.
This article shall be known as and may be cited as the "Building Code of the
City of Nashua, New Hampshire."
§ 105-8. Adoption of Building Code.
A certain document and referenced code on file in the office of the City
Clerk of the City of Nashua, New Hampshire, being marked and designated
as the “International Building Code, First Edition, 2000," as published by
the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted as the Building Code
of the City of Nashua, in the State of New Hampshire, for the control of
buildings and structures. The regulations, provisions, conditions and terms
of said code are hereby referred to, adopted and made part hereof as if fully
set out in this chapter, with any amendments prescribed in this article.
§ 105-9. Amendments.
A. Insert in the space provided in Section 101.1 for the "name of
jurisdiction": the City of Nashua.
B. Amend Section 106.3 by replacing it with the following paragraph:
106.3. Examination of documents. The Building Official shall
examine or cause to be examined the accompanying construction
documents and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the
construction indicated and described is in accordance with the
requirements of this code and other pertinent laws or ordinances.
The Building Official is authorized to require peer review where
applications for unusual designs or magnitude of construction are
filed, such as high-rise structures, elaborate framing systems,
extensive retaining walls and complicated foundation designs. It shall
be the Building Official's responsibility to determine when a peer
review shall be required. The applicant shall pay all fees and costs
related to the performance of a peer review.
C. Amend Section 106.3.4 by inserting the following new subsection:
§ 105-7 BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS AND ROLLER § 105-9
98:293
106.3.4.3. Architect/Engineer responsibilities during
construction. When the laws of the State of New Hampshire require
that construction documents be prepared by registered architects or
engineers, the registered architects or engineers who have prepared
plans, computations and specifications or the registered architects or
registered engineers who have been retained to perform construction
phase services shall perform the following tasks for the portion of the
work for which they are directly responsible:
(1) Review, for conformance to the design concept, shop drawings,
samples and other submittals which are submitted by the
contractor in accordance with the requirements of the
construction documents.
(2) Review and approve the quality control procedures for all coderequired
controlled materials, structural tests and special
inspections.
(3) Be present at intervals appropriate to the stage of construction
to become generally familiar with the progress and quality of the
work and to determine, in general, if the work is being performed
in a manner consistent with the construction documents and
accepted engineering practice standards.
(4) Such tasks are in addition to requirements for structural
observation or other duties specified in Section 1704, Section
1709 or elsewhere in the adopted International Building Code.
D. Amend Section 901.1, Scope, to read: The provisions of this chapter
shall specify where fire-protection systems are required and shall apply
to the design, installation, and operation of fire-protection systems. The
Chief of the Fire Department or the Chief's designee shall have full
authority to enforce and administer, in the capacity of Building Official,
the provisions of Chapter 9, Fire Protection Systems, except in regard
to detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family
dwellings (townhouses), not more than three stories high with separate
means of egress, and their accessory structures.
E. Amend Section 1612.3 by inserting in the spaces provided for the
"name of the jurisdiction" and "date of issuance": the City of Nashua;
June 15, 1979.
F. Amend Section 3409.2 by inserting in the space provided for a date:
August 13, 1973.
G. The New Hampshire Energy Code shall control such matters as
provided for by Chapter 13 and elsewhere regarding energy efficiency
as long as said energy code is in effect.
§ 105-9 NASHUA CODE § 105-9.1
98:294
§ 105-9.1. Existing Building Code. [Added 4-26-2011 by Ord. No.
O-11-64]
Repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition and relocation of existing
buildings, including historic buildings, shall comply with the International
Existing Building Code, 2009 as published by the International Code
Council, Inc. Said document and referenced code is on file in the office of
the City Clerk of the City of Nashua, New Hampshire. Said code is hereby
adopted as part of the Building Code of the City of Nashua in the State of
New Hampshire for the control of existing buildings and structures within
the scope of said code. The regulations, provisions, conditions and terms
of said code are hereby referred to, and adopted and made part hereof
as if fully set out in this chapter, with any amendments prescribed in this
chapter.
§ 105-9.2. Amendments to Existing Building Code. [Added
4-26-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-64]
A. Amend Section 101.1 by inserting "The City of Nashua."
B. Amend Section 106.3 by replacing with the following paragraph:
106.3. Examination of documents. The building official shall
examine or cause to be examined the accompanying construction
documents and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the
construction indicated and described is in accordance with the
requirements of this code and other pertinent laws or ordinances.
The building official is authorized to require peer review where
applications for unusual design or magnitude of construction are filed,
such as high-rise structures, elaborate framing systems, extensive
retaining walls and complicated foundation designs. It shall be the
Building Official's responsibility to determine when a peer review shall
be required. The applicant shall pay all fees and costs related to the
performance of a peer review.
C. Amend Section 106.6 by inserting the following new subsection:
106.6.1. Architect/Engineer responsibilities during
construction. When the laws of the State of New Hampshire require
that construction documents be prepared by registered architects or
engineers, the registered architects or engineers who have prepared
plans, computations and specifications or the registered architects or
registered engineers who have been retained to perform construction
phase services, shall perform the following tasks for the portion of the
work for which they are directly responsible:
1. Review, for the conformance to the design concept, shop drawings,
samples, and other submittals, which are submitted by the
contractor in accordance with the requirements of the construction
documents.
§ 105-9.1 BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS AND ROLLER § 105-9.2
98:295
§ 105-10. Adoption of Residential Code.
Detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family
dwellings (townhouses), not more than three stories high with separate
means of egress, and their accessory structures shall comply with the
International Residential Code, First Edition, 2000, as published by the
International Code Council, Inc. Said document and referenced code is on
file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Nashua, New Hampshire.
Said code is hereby adopted as a part of the Building Code of the City
of Nashua, in the State of New Hampshire, for the control of residential
buildings and structures within the scope of said code. The regulations,
provisions, conditions and terms of said code are hereby referred to,
adopted and made part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with any
amendments prescribed in this chapter.
§ 105-11. Amendments.
2. Review and approve of the quality control procedures for all coderequired
controlled materials, structural tests and special
inspections.
3. Be present at intervals appropriate to the stage of construction to
become generally familiar with the progress and quality of the work
and to determine, in general, if the work is being performed in a
manner consistent with the construction documents and accepted
engineering practice standards
4. Such tasks are in addition to requirements for structural
observations or other duties specified in the adopted International
Existing Building Code.
D. The New Hampshire Energy Code shall control such matters as
provided for by Chapters 3, 6, 7, 8 and elsewhere regarding energy
efficiency as long as said energy code is in effect.
E. The provisions of chapters 1, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13 and 14 shall specify
where fire protection systems are required, and shall apply to the
design, installation and operation of fire-protection systems. The Chief
of the Fire Department or the Chief's designee shall have full authority
to enforce and administer, in the capacity of Building Official, the
provisions of fire-protection systems except in regards to detached oneand
two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings
(townhouses), not more than three stories high with separate means of
egress and their accessory structures.
A. Amend section R101.1 by inserting: the City of Nashua.
B. Amend Section R102.5 by adding: Appendices G, H and K are
referenced and adopted as part of this code.
C. Amend Section R106.2 by replacing it with the following:
§ 105-9.2 NASHUA CODE § 105-11
98:296
R106.2. Plot plans. The construction documents submitted with an
application for a permit to build a detached one- or two-family dwelling
on an approved or otherwise legal lot of record shall be accompanied
by a plot plan. Such plot plan shall be drawn to scale, showing all
property lines, easements, drainage facilities, and proposed and
existing buildings with respect to location. Sufficiently detailed
information shall be provided to clearly show the location and extent of
any wetland area(s) located on or immediately adjacent to the subject
property.
D. Amend Section R106.5 by replacing it with the following:
R106.5. Certified plot plans. Upon the completion of the foundation
inspection and prior to the frame inspection, a certified plot plan shall
be filed with the Planning and Building Department. Said plan shall
be certified by a New Hampshire licensed land surveyor or engineer,
be drawn to scale, and indicate boundary locations, zoning setbacks,
and the dimensions, locations and elevation at the top of constructed
foundations. Said plan shall be accompanied by a statement from
said surveyor or engineer indicating the foundation complies with the
setback requirements of the Nashua Zoning Ordinance43 and with the
approved grading plan, if such has been required. Sufficiently detailed
information shall be provided to clearly show the location and extent of
any wetland area(s) located on or immediately adjacent to the subject
property. If construction deviates in any detail shown on said certified
plot plan, the Building Official may require submission of a revised
certified plot plan prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
E. Amend Table 301.2(1) by inserting the following design criteria into the
space provided:
Roof snow load Shall be as required by the
International Building Code
Wind speed 100 miles per hour — See Figure
301.2(4)
Seismic design category C (33%-50% g)
Weathering Severe
Frost-line depth Minimum of 48 inches
Termite Slight to moderate
Decay Slight to moderate
Winter design temperature 0°
Flood hazards Flood Insurance Rate Maps of June 15,
1979, as updated April 13, 1999, and
thereafter
43.Editor's Note: See Ch. 190, Land Use.
§ 105-11 BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS AND ROLLER § 105-11
98:297
F. The New Hampshire Energy Code shall control such matters as
provided for by Chapter 13 and elsewhere regarding energy efficiency
as long as said Energy Code is in effect.
§ 105-11 NASHUA CODE § 105-11
98:298
ARTICLE III
Mechanical Code
§ 105-12. Short title.
This article shall be known as and may be cited as the “Mechanical Code of
the City of Nashua, New Hampshire.”
§ 105-13. Adoption of Mechanical Code.
A certain document and referenced code on file in the office of the City
Clerk of the City of Nashua, New Hampshire, being marked and designated
as the "International Mechanical Code, Third Edition, 2000," as published
by the International Code Council, Inc., including the technical provisions of
the International Fuel Gas Code, 2000, is hereby adopted as the Mechanical
Code of the City of Nashua, in the State of New Hampshire, for the control
of buildings and building systems; and the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said code are hereby referred to, adopted
and made part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with any amendments
prescribed in this article.
§ 105-14. Amendments.
A. Amend Section 101.1 by inserting: the City of Nashua.
B. Amend Section 106.5.2 by changing it to read:
106.5.2. Fee schedule. The fees for mechanical work shall be as
provided for by this chapter.
C. Delete Section 106.5.3.
D. Amend Sections 108.4 and 108.5 by adding the following statement:
In place of the insertions in the model code text, it shall be clearly
understood that all violations of the adopted codes of the City of
Nashua shall be subject to the provisions of RSA 676:15-17, without
limitation of any remedy available to the City of Nashua at law or
equity.
E. Apply the New Hampshire Energy Code in place of Section 301.2 and
any other provision pertaining to energy efficiency as long as said
energy code is in effect.
§ 105-12 BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS AND ROLLER § 105-14
98:299

ARTICLE IV
Plumbing Code
§ 105-15. Short title.
This article shall be known as and may be cited as the "Plumbing Code of
the City of Nashua, New Hampshire."
§ 105-16. Adoption of Plumbing Code.
A certain document and referenced code on file in the office of the City
Clerk of the City of Nashua, New Hampshire, being marked and designated
as the "International Plumbing Code, 2000 Edition," as published by the
International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted as the Plumbing Code
of the City of Nashua, in the State of New Hampshire, for the control of
buildings and building systems; and the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said code are hereby referred to, adopted and
made part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with any amendments
prescribed in this article.
§ 105-17. Amendments.
A. Amend Section 101.1 by inserting: the City of Nashua.
B. Amend Section 106.6.2 by changing it to read:
106.6.2. Fee schedule. The fees for plumbing work shall be as
provided for by this chapter.
C. Delete Section 106.6.3.
D. Amend Sections 108.4 and 108.5 by adding the following statement:
In place of the insertions in the model code text, it shall be clearly
understood that all violations of the adopted codes of the City of
Nashua shall be subject to the provisions of RSA 676:15-17, without
limitation of any remedy available to the City of Nashua at law or
equity.
E. Amend Section 305.6.1 by inserting in the places provided, in the order
of appearance, the following:
36 inches (914.4 mm) Pertains to building sewers serving septic
systems
48 inches (1,219.2 mm) Pertains to other building sewers
F. Also amend Section 305.6.1 at the end of the section by adding the
following:
Where insulated, the Code Official may accept lesser depths of
building sewer placement.
§ 105-15 BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS AND ROLLER § 105-17
98:301
G. Delete Section 501.6 and replace with the following:
501.6. Water temperature control in piping from tankless water
heaters. The temperature of water from tankless water heaters
intended for domestic or personal hygiene use shall be a maximum
of 130° F. (55° C.). A tempering device conforming to ASSE 1017
shall be installed to control the water temperature. This provision
shall not supersede the requirements for protective shower valves in
accordance with Section 424.4.
H. Amend Section 501.8 by adding the following sentence to the end of the
section:
Water temperatures supplying faucets for domestic or personal
hygiene use shall be limited to a maximum of 130° F. (55° C.).
I. Amend Section 501 by inserting the following new subsection:
Minimum water heater temperatures.Water heaters and indirectfired
hot-water storage tanks shall be maintained at a minimum
temperature of 140° F. (60° C.) and shall be equipped with a
temperature-controlling device conforming to ASSE 1017 to provide
for maximum hot-water temperatures to faucets in accordance with
Section 501.8.
J. Amend Section 904.1 by inserting in the place provided: 12 inches; 305
mm.
K. Amend Section 1003.3.1 by adding the following sentence to the end of
the section:
Exclusive use of a grease interceptor shall be permitted where only a
minimal amount of piping is installed within the building.
§ 105-17 NASHUA CODE § 105-17
98:302
ARTICLE V
Electrical Code
§ 105-18. Short title.
This article shall be known as and may be cited as the "Electrical Code of
the City of Nashua, New Hampshire."
§ 105-19. Adoption of Electrical Code.
A certain document and referenced code on file in the office of the City
Clerk of the City of Nashua, New Hampshire, being marked and designated
as the "National Electrical Code, 1999 Edition," as published by the
National Fire Protection Association, Inc.; and the "2000 Edition of the
ICC Electrical Code — Administrative Provisions" are hereby adopted as the
Electrical Code of the City of Nashua, in the State of New Hampshire, for
the control of buildings and building systems. The regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said code are hereby referred to and
adopted and made part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with any
amendments prescribed in this article.
§ 105-20. Amendments.
Delete Section 518-4 (b) — Non-rated Construction.
§ 105-18 BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS AND ROLLER § 105-20
98:303

ARTICLE VI
Fees
§ 105-21. Permits and fees. [Amended 9-9-2002 by Ord. No.
O-02-74; 7-8-2003 by Ord. No. O-03-184; 5-24-2004 by Ord. No.
O-04-13; 9-13-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-109; 8-14-2007 by Ord. No.
O-07-106]
§ 105-22. Fee Schedule. [Amended 8-14-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-106;
12-11-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-144; 6-12-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-012]
A. A permit shall not be valid until the prescribed fees have been paid and
the permit issued. No permit to begin work for new construction,
alteration, removal, demolition or other building operation shall be
issued until the fees prescribed in this section have been paid to the
Department of Building Safety, nor shall an amendment to a permit
necessitating an additional fee because of an increase in the estimated
cost or scope of work involved be approved until the additional fee has
been paid.
(1) Where a permit has either been revoked or a project discontinued
or abandoned within six months of the issuance of such permit,
such permit may be returned to the Building Official for
cancellation. One-half of the permit fee shall be refunded by the
City Treasurer on certificate of the Building Official, except all
penalties that may have been imposed on the permit held under the
requirements of this chapter shall first be collected. If a project is
abandoned without notice being made to the Code Official before a
six-month interval has elapsed since the date such permit was
issued, no refund shall be made. Residential or nonresidential use
shall be in accordance with the intent of the Building Code of the
City of Nashua, New Hampshire.44
(2) The fees for permits shall be charged as follows: The total amount
of the permit shall be rounded to the nearest dollar (drop the total
amount due under $0.50 and increase the total amount due from
$0.50 to $0.99 to the next whole dollar).
B. The Board of Aldermen may, at its option, waive or reimburse, as the
case may be, payment of fees payable under this section, in whole or in
part, to the extent of the value of municipal public improvements and/or
land dedication which an applicant obligates itself to make over and
above impact fees and the applicant’s fair share of off-site
improvements imposed as a condition of site plan or subdivision
approval.
A. Building permit fee schedule.
44.Editor's Note: See Art. II of this chapter.
§ 105-21 BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS AND ROLLER § 105-22
98:305
(1) A nonrefundable application processing fee shall be paid at the
time of filing of any application:
(a) Building permit: $35.
(2) New buildings, additions, alterations, mobile homes, in-ground
swimming pools, basements, connecting structures, future
expansion areas and areas capable of being used as living or
occupiable space shall be included to calculate aggregate floor
area:
(a) Residential, one- and two-family and townhouses (per square
foot of area affected): $0.15.
(b) Commercial, including multifamily (per square foot of area
affected): $0.25.
(3) Structures designed and certified to LEED standards shall be
eligible for the following reduction in their building permit fee:
(a) LEED standard certification: 5%.
(b) LEED silver certification: 10%.
(c) LEED gold certification: 15%.
(d) LEED platinum certification: 20%.
(4) Alterations, repairs, fire damage:
(a) Residential (per square foot of area affected): $0.10.
(b) Commercial (per square foot of area affected): $0.15.
(5) Additional plan review for minor modifications of previously
approved drawings, including commercial tenant fit-up:
(a) Residential (per square foot of area affected): $0.05.
(b) Commercial (per square foot of area affected): $0.10.
(c) When, in the Building Official's opinion, the nature of the work
is not related to floor area, the permit fee may be based on a
construction cost of $0.60 per $100.
(6) Moving a building from lot to lot: $180.
(7) Demolition, the total removal and disposal of a structure:
(a) Up to 1,000 square feet: $30.
(b) Excess beyond 1,000 square feet (fee for each additional 100
square feet or part thereof of aggregate floor area): $3.
(8) Certificate of occupancy, existing space/owner change: $50.
§ 105-22 NASHUA CODE § 105-22
98:306
(9) Special construction, not including signs, but including and not
limited to membrane structures, temporary structures, canopies
and awnings, pedestrian walkways, radio and television towers,
radio and television antennas, elevators, commercial solar energy
systems, commercial wind energy systems and commercial (other
than asphalt roofing shingles) reroofing:
(a) Fee shall be based on a construction or installation cost of
$0.60 per $100.
(10) Retaining walls over four feet in height above grade:
(a) Residential: minimum $25 or $0.10 per linear foot (whichever
is greater).
(b) Commercial: minimum $50 or $0.25 per linear foot (whichever
is greater).
(11) Minimum fee for miscellaneous equipment (each), excluding the
application fee, where not otherwise provided for by this section
[for example: residential antennas, small sheds (less than 200
square feet), or construction trailers] or as deemed appropriate by
the Building Official or his or her designee:
(a) Residential: $20.
(b) Commercial: $45.
(12) Reinspection of the same work due to the failure to pass an initial
inspection or the unavailability of the premises at the time of initial
inspection: $75.
(13) Phased construction (foundation permits, interior demolition
permits or shell permits): Phased construction shall be charged a
25% surcharge on the original permit fee for each upgrade phase.
(14) Surcharge for permits issued after construction started without a
permit: 100% of applicable fee, but not to exceed $275
residential/$500 commercial.
(15) Expedite-service fee for special processing and after-hours service:
$75 per hour per staff member, with a minimum of $200 for
weekends or time not contiguous with normal work hours.
B. Mechanical permit fee schedule.
(1) Residential mechanical (one- and two-family and townhouses).
(a) Nonrefundable application processing fee: $30.
(b) Delivery system:
[1] Gas supply piping (base fee downstream of meter or
regulator set; test witnessed) (each):
§ 105-22 BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS AND ROLLER § 105-22
98:307
[a] Zero to 99k BTU: $25.
[b] 100k to 199k BTU: $40.
[c] 200k BTU and above: $50 plus $0.22 per 1,000 BTU.
[2] Gas supply outlets (each branch): $6.50.
[3] Installation of fuel oil storage tanks less than 499 gallons,
fuel oil (each): $15.
(c) Equipment:
[1] Furnace: $40.
[2] Water heater: $15.
[3] Refrigeration system piping, coil, or condensing unit: $15.
[4] Boiler, water or steam: $40.
[5] Boiler, water or steam, with domestic hot-water generator:
$45.
[6] Burner, conversion or replacement, oil or gas: $15.
[7] Heater, vented or unvented, floor, wall, room or gas log
(each): $25.
[8] Dryer, exhaust or ventilation fan (each): $6.
[9] Baseboard loop (each): $10.
(d) Wood or pellet stove and associated chimney: $40.
(e) Factory-built fireplace and associated chimney, gas or solid fuel
(each): $40.
(f) Masonry fireplace and associated chimney: $75.
(g) Manufactured chimney: $30.
(h) Minimum fee for miscellaneous equipment (each), excluding
the application fee, where not otherwise provided for by this
section: $35.
(i) Reinspection of the same work due to the failure to pass an
initial inspection or the unavailability of the premises at the
time of initial inspection: $75.
(j) Surcharge for permits issued after construction started
without a permit: 100% of applicable fee, but not to exceed
$275.
(2) Commercial mechanical (including multifamily).
§ 105-22 NASHUA CODE § 105-22
98:308
(a) Nonrefundable application processing fee: $30.
(b) Delivery system:
[1] Gas pipe.
[a] Zero to 100k BTU: $50.
[b] Over 100k BTU: $50 plus $0.25 per 1,000 BTU.
[2] Fuel oil pipe (per 1,000 BTU): $0.25.
[3] Installation of fuel oil storage tanks less than 499 gallons,
fuel oil (each): $15.
(c) Equipment:
[1] Furnace: $50.
[2] Water heater: $20.
[3] Boiler: $55.
[4] Single-package (includes rooftops) air handlers: $25.
[5] Chiller, evaporator, condenser or cooling tower (each):
$25.
[6] Duct work (per 10 square feet of area served): $0.40
(minimum $25).
[7] Fire and smoke dampers: $8.
(d) Chimney (masonry or metal): $75.
(e) Vented unit heater: $40.
(f) Fans: $25.
(g) Kitchen exhaust systems:
[1] Hoods (each): $75.
[2] Fans associated with hoods, replacement (each): $10.
(h) Minimum fee for miscellaneous equipment (each), excluding
the application fee, where not otherwise provided for by this
section: $35.
(i) Reinspection of the same work due to the failure to pass an
initial inspection or the unavailability of the premises at the
time of initial inspection: $75.
(j) Surcharge for permits issued after construction started
without a permit: 100% of applicable fee, but not to exceed
$500.
§ 105-22 BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS AND ROLLER § 105-22
98:309
C. Electrical permit fee schedule.
(1) Residential electrical (one- and two-family and townhouses).
(a) Nonrefundable application processing fee: $30.
Note: If the items in Subsection C(2) through (6) are included
with any other work listed in those sections, there is no
additional fee. (Example: If doing new construction, there is no
charge for the house meter.) The higher price will prevail.
(b) New construction, additions, renovations (per square feet of
habitable area): $0.075.
[1] Service entrance (new dwelling only): $30.
(c) House meter: $50.
(d) Service change:
[1] Up to two units: $50.
[2] Each additional unit: $10.
(e) Adding subpanel(s) (each): $25.
(f) Adding or relocating meter(s): $50.
(g) Pools (in-ground): $50.
(h) Temporary service (each): $45.
(i) Minimum fee for miscellaneous equipment (each), excluding
the application fee, where not otherwise provided for by this
section: $35.
(j) Reinspection of the same work due to the failure to pass an
initial inspection or the unavailability of the premises at the
time of initial inspection: $75.
(k) Surcharge for permits issued after construction started
without a permit: 100% of applicable fee, but not to exceed
$275.
(2) Commercial electrical (including multifamily).
(a) Nonrefundable application processing fee: $30.
(b) Electrical service entrance and service change (per amp):
$0.40.
(c) Temporary service (each): $45.
(d) Panels and subpanels (each): $25.
(e) Outlets:
§ 105-22 NASHUA CODE § 105-22
98:310
[1] For switches, receptacles, and fire and smoke detectors
(each): $0.95.
[2] For lighting and lighting fixtures, except as otherwise
provided (each four feet of continuous fluorescent lighting
shall be deemed a separate lighting fixture) (each): $0.95.
[3] For ranges, dryers, and similar heating devices (each): $8.
[4] For high-intensity lighting and fixtures (each) (250 watt
and above): $10.
(f) Fixed multioutlet receptacle assemblies (for each six feet): $6.
(g) Track lighting (each 10 feet): $6.
(h) Motor control centers (each), automatic transfer switches
(each), wiring of HVAC units (per unit): $32.
(i) Water heaters (each): $12.
(j) Electric baseboard heat (per unit): $8.
(k) Buss ducts (each section): $10.
(l) Transformers, generators, motors, x-ray machines (each): $22.
(m) Paging and sound systems:
[1] Per speaker: $3.
[2] Per console: $22.
(n) Signs (each): $32.
(o) Minimum fee for miscellaneous equipment (each), excluding
the application fee, where not otherwise provided for by this
section: $35.
(p) Reinspection of the same work due to the failure to pass an
initial inspection or the unavailability of the premises at the
time of initial inspection: $75.
(q) Surcharge for permits issued after construction started
without a permit: 100% of applicable fee, but not to exceed
$500.
(r) Annual permit fee: $250.
[1] In lieu of an individual permit for each alteration to an
already approved electrical installation, the Code Official
shall issue an annual permit, upon application therefor, to
any person, firm or corporation regularly employing one or
more certified electricians in the building, structure or on
§ 105-22 BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS AND ROLLER § 105-22
98:311
the premises owned or operated by the applicant for the
permit.
[2] Annual records. The person to whom an annual permit is
issued shall keep a detailed record of all alterations to an
approved electrical installation made under such annual
permit, and such records shall be accessible to the Code
Official at all times or shall be filed with the Code Official
as designated.
D. Plumbing permit fee schedule.
(1) Residential plumbing (one- and two-family and townhouses).
(a) Nonrefundable application processing fee: $30.
(b) Per fixture (tub, shower, sink, water closet, lavatory,
dishwasher, outside faucet, clothes-washing machine, backflow
preventer, etc.): $7.50.
(c) Irrigation system (includes backflow preventer): $12.
(d) Pumps and ejectors (each): $15.
(e) Water heaters (each): $15.
(f) Water pipes (per 100 feet or part thereof): $15.
(g) Sanitary sewer connection: $15.
(h) Drainage, waste and vent pipes: (per 100 feet or part thereof):
$15.
(i) Minimum fee for miscellaneous equipment (each), excluding
the application fee, where not otherwise provided for by this
section: $35.
(j) Reinspection of the same work due to the failure to pass an
initial inspection or the unavailability of the premises at the
time of initial inspection: $75.
(k) Surcharge for permits issued after construction started
without a permit: 100% of applicable fee, but not to exceed
$275.
(2) Commercial plumbing (including multifamily).
(a) Nonrefundable application processing fee: $30.
(b) Per fixture (tub, shower, sink, water closet, lavatory, floor
drain, drinking fountain, urinal, dishwasher, garbage grinder,
outside faucet, clothes-washing machine, washdown station,
etc.): $8.
(c) Pumps and ejectors (each): $30.
§ 105-22 NASHUA CODE § 105-22
98:312
(d) Grease interceptor: $25.
(e) Water heaters (each): $18.
(f) Irrigation system (includes backflow preventer): $15.
(g) Backflow preventer (each):
[1] Atmospheric vacuum breakers: $14.
[2] Pressure vacuum breakers: $14.
[3] Dual check valve: $14.
[4] Reduced-pressure principle: $14.
(h) Water pipes: (per 100 feet or part thereof): $15.
(i) Sanitary sewer connection: $15.
(j) Drainage, waste and vent pipes: (per 100 feet or part thereof):
$15.
(k) Storm (drain) sewer connection: $15.
(l) Storm piping: (per 100 feet or part thereof): $15.
(m) Roof drains (each): $15.
(n) Minimum fee for miscellaneous equipment (each), excluding
the application fee, where not otherwise provided for by this
section: $35.
(o) Reinspection of the same work due to the failure to pass an
initial inspection or the unavailability of the premises at the
time of initial inspection: $75.
(p) Surcharge for permits issued after construction started
without a permit: 100% of applicable fee, but not to exceed
$500.
§ 105-22 BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS AND ROLLER § 105-22
98:313
Chapter 110
BURNING, OPEN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 156.
§ 110-1. Permission required to kindle fire.
No person shall kindle a fire upon the land of another without permission
from the owner, his agent or his caretaker.
§ 110-2. Permits required for open fire on public or private
property.
No person shall kindle or cause to be burned any material in an open fire
on public or private property without first obtaining a permit from the Fire
Department, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
§ 110-3. Conditions for issuance of permit.
The following regulations shall govern the issuance of a permit under this
chapter:
§ 110-4. Open burning of rubbish prohibited; exceptions.
Open burning of subdivision community rubbish is prohibited with the
exception of the burning of vegetation, trash or building materials resulting
from construction and building operations, provided that such material
cannot be readily reduced in size for easy removal and provided that the
person performing the burning operations obtains a permit therefor from
the Fire Department. Permitted burning shall be performed in a manner,
A. The fire chief or his deputy shall, prior to the issuance of a permit, make
a determination that the burning contemplated will not endanger the
public safety.
B. There shall be no fire before dawn or after dusk, and all permittees shall
extinguish their fires prior to dusk.
C. All applications for permits must be submitted 24 hours prior to the
issuance of the permit.
D. Cooking fires, other than charcoal, in metal stoves and masonry
fireplaces require the issuance of a permit and shall be extinguished
prior to dusk by the person responsible.
E. No permit shall be issued for the burning of materials which would
create a violation of applicable air pollution control regulations.
§ 105-22 NASHUA CODE § 110-4
110:314
during the hours, at such time of the year, and pursuant to favorable
weather conditions as prescribed by the Fire Department.
§ 110-5. Liability for damages.
The issuance of a permit under this chapter shall in no way relieve the
person responsible for a fire of any liability for damages caused by such fire.
§ 110-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-12-1985 by Ord. No.
O-84-79]
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, for each offense,
be punished as provided in § 1-12 of the City Code.
Chapter 116
CHECKS, RETURNED
§ 116-1. Fees.
Whenever any check issued for the payment of any fee or for any other
purpose shall be returned to the City as uncollectible, the City shall charge
the fee set forth in RSA 80:56 plus all protest and bank fees, in addition to
the amount of such check, to the person presenting such check, to cover the
cost of its collection.
Chapter 123
COMMUNICATION TOWERS AND ANTENNAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Communication towers and antennas — See
Ch. 190, § 190-38.
§ 123-1. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
ANTENNA — Any structure or device used for the purpose of collecting or
transmitting electromagnetic waves, including but not limited to directional
antennas, such as panels, microwave dishes, and satellite dishes, and
omnidirectional antennas, such as whip antennas, but excluding television
and radio reception antennas, amateur radio transmission antennas, and
municipal, state, or federal emergency services antennas.
COMMUNICATIONS TOWER — Any ground- or roof-mounted pole, spire,
structure, or combination thereof higher than 50 feet freestanding or 20
feet from the tower's point of contact with a roof or water tank, including
§ 110-4 CHECKS, RETURNED § 123-1
116:315
supporting lines, cables, wires, braces, and masts, intended primarily for
the purpose of mounting an antenna, meteorological device, or similar
apparatus above grade. Television and radio reception antennas, amateur
radio transmission antennas, and municipal, state, or federal emergency
services antennas are excluded.[Amended 8-9-2011 by Ord. No.
O-10-44]
§ 123-2. Permits.
§ 123-3. Fee.
The fee to be paid is that prescribed under the permit fee schedule in
§ 150-22 of Chapter 150, Building Construction, of the City Code.
§ 123-4. Construction requirements.
All communications towers and antennas erected, constructed, or located
within the City, and all wiring thereof, shall comply with the following
requirements:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect,
construct, locate, replace, alter, extend, or repair any communication
tower or antenna without first making application to the building and
inspection department and securing a permit therefor as hereinafter
provided.
B. The applicant shall provide at the time of application sufficient
information to indicate that construction, installation, and maintenance
of the communication tower or antenna will not create a safety hazard
or damage the property of other persons.
C. Permits are not required for:
(1) Adjustment or replacement of the same or significantly similar
elements of an antenna array affixed to a communications tower or
other structure, provided that the adjustment or replacement does
not reduce the safety factor.
(2) Communications towers or antennas erected temporarily for test
purposes, for emergency communications, or for broadcast remote
pick-up operations, provided that all requirements of § 123-4 are
met. Temporary communications towers or antennas shall be
removed within 72 hours following installation.
A. All applicable provisions of this chapter.
B. Communications towers shall be certified by a qualified and licensed
professional engineer to conform to the latest structural standards and
wind loading requirements of the adopted Building Code of the City of
Nashua and the Electronics Industry Association.
§ 123-1 NASHUA CODE § 123-4
116:316
§ 123-5. Existing communications towers and antennas.
Communications towers and antennas in existence as of January 1, 1998,
which do not conform to or comply with this chapter are subject to the
following provisions:
C. With the exception of preapproved, necessary electric and telephone
service and connection lines, no part of any communications tower or
antenna nor any lines, cable, equipment or wires or braces in
connection with either shall at any time extend across or over any part
of the right-of-way, public street, highway, sidewalk, or property line.
D. Communications towers and antennas shall be designed to conform to
accepted electrical engineering methods and practices and to comply
with the provisions of the National Electrical Code.
E. All signal and remote control conductors of low energy extending
substantially horizontally above the ground between a communications
tower or antenna and a structure, or between communications towers,
shall be at least eight feet above the ground at all points, unless buried
underground.
F. Every communications tower affixed to the ground shall be protected to
discourage climbing of the tower by unauthorized persons.
G. All communications towers shall be constructed to conform to the
requirements of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
H. Metal communications towers shall be constructed of, or treated with,
corrosive resistive material. Wood poles shall be impregnated with rotresistant
substances.
I. Communications towers and antennas shall not be erected in any
residentially classed district in violation of the following restrictions:
(1) Notwithstanding any other provisions of the Nashua City Code, the
required setback from all lot lines for communications towers and
antennas shall be the greater of 400 feet from all lot lines or the
towers' height, as defined in NRO § 190-38E. [Amended 8-9-2011
by Ord. No. O-10-44]
(2) No communications tower shall be in excess of a height equal to the
distance from the base of the communications tower and antenna
to the nearest overhead electrical power line which serves more
than one dwelling or place of business, less five feet.
A. Communications towers and antennas may continue in use for the
purpose now used and as now existing but may not be replaced,
extended, or structurally altered without complying in all respects with
this chapter.
B. If such communications towers or antennas are hereafter damaged or
destroyed due to any reason or cause whatsoever, the communications
§ 123-4 CHECKS, RETURNED § 123-5
116:317
§ 123-6. Lights and other attachments.
No communications tower or antenna shall have affixed or attached to it in
any way except during time of repair or installation, any lights, reflectors,
flashers, or other illuminating device, except as required by the Federal
Aviation Agency or the Federal Communications Commission, nor shall
any tower have constructed thereon, or attached thereto, in any way, any
platform, catwalk, crow's nest, or like structure, except during periods of
construction or repair.
§ 123-7. Inspections.
All communications towers or antennas may be inspected at least once
each year by an official of the Department of Building Safety to determine
compliance with original construction standards. Deviation from original
construction for which a permit is obtained constitutes a violation of this
chapter. Notice of violations will be sent by registered mail to the owner of
the commercial wireless telecommunications service or the property owner
and he or she will have 30 days from the date the notification is issued to
make repairs. The owner will notify the Department of Building Safety that
the repairs have been made, and as soon as possible thereafter, another
inspection will be made and the owner notified of the results.
§ 123-8. Interpretation.
It is not the intention of this chapter to interfere with, abrogate, or annul
any covenant or other agreement between parties, provided, however,
where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use or premises
for communications towers or antennas than is imposed or required by
other ordinances, rules, regulations, or permits, or by covenants and
agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall govern.
§ 123-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
towers or antenna may be repaired and restored to their former use,
location, and physical dimensions upon obtaining a building permit
therefor, but without otherwise complying with this chapter; provided,
however, that if the cost of repairing the communications tower or
antenna to its former use, physical dimensions, and location would be
10% or more of the cost of a new communications tower or antenna of
like kind and quality, then the communications tower or antenna may
not be repaired or restored except in full compliance with this chapter.
§ 123-5 NASHUA CODE § 123-9
116:318
Chapter 128
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WORK
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 105. Noise — See Ch. 201.
§ 123-9 CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WORK § 123-9
128:319

ARTICLE I
Construction Noise
[Adopted 12-22-1987 by Ord. No. O-87-167 (Secs. 14-32 to 14-37 of
the 1987 Code)]
§ 128-1. Findings and determinations. [Amended 2-26-2008 by Ord.
No. O-08-07]
It is hereby determined that certain noise levels are detrimental to the
public health, welfare and safety, jeopardize the value of property, erode
the integrity of the environment, annoy or disturb a reasonable person of
normal sensibilities, disrupt the quality of life, and are contrary to the public
interest of the citizens of Nashua.
§ 128-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONSTRUCTION — Any site preparation, excavation, grading, assembly,
erection, substantial repair or alteration of any building, structures or land,
public or private, together with any associated scientific or engineering
surveys shall constitute construction. The term "construction" shall include
the operation or the causing to be operated of any equipment used in the
construction, repair, alteration or demolition work on buildings, structures,
streets, alleys or appurtenances thereto. Said equipment includes, but is not
limited to, a pile driver, shovel, hammer, derrick, hoist, tractor or roller.
DEMOLITION — Any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of
structures, surfaces or similar property, public or private. Emergency
situations under the direction of local officials are exempted, in accordance
with § 201-2 of Chapter 201, Noise, of the City Code.
DWELLING UNIT — Any building or separate portion thereof used for
residential purposes. The term shall include, but not be limited to, singlefamily
dwellings, apartments, condominiums and other distinct residential
units.
EMERGENCY WORK — Any work performed to protect, maintain or restore
safe and/or healthful conditions in the community, along with work
performed by private or public utilities when restoring utility service.
PERSON — Any individual, association, partnership or corporation, or any
other entity, public or private in nature.
§ 128-3. Hours of construction and demolition. [Amended
10-26-2004 by Ord. No. O-04-41; 2-26-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-07]
There shall be no construction or demolition in any residential zone as
defined in Chapter 190, Land Use, or within 600 feet of any dwelling
unit in the City of Nashua by any person, other than what is deemed
emergency work by the Director of the Code Enforcement Department and
§ 128-1 CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WORK § 128-3
128:321
work authorized by the Director of Public Works, between the hours of 8:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Sunday through Friday, and between the hours of
7:00 p.m. Saturday and 8:00 a.m. Sunday and holidays.
§ 128-4. Emergency work.
In the case of urgent necessity and in the interest of public health and
safety, a permit may be granted by the Director of the Code Enforcement
Department to perform such emergency work as defined in § 128-2. Said
permit shall be granted for a period not to exceed three days or for the
duration of the emergency, whichever is greater. No permit will be required
for any emergency work performed by any City department, including but
not limited to police, fire, public works or civil defense response.
§ 128-5. Enforcement.
The primary responsibility for the enforcement of the provisions of §§ 128-1
and 128-2 and § 201-2 of Chapter 201, Noise, shall be with the Nashua
Police Department. The Director of the Code Enforcement Department and
the Zoning Administrator shall also have authority to enforce these sections.
§ 128-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-9-2005 by Ord. No.
O-05-96]
A. Any person who violates any portion of this article, shall be, upon
conviction, guilty of a violation and fined not less than $100.
B. Any person who violates any portion of this article shall receive a
written order to cease or abate the noise immediately or within such
reasonable time period as the enforcing official shall order.
C. If the order to cease or abate construction is not complied with, or is
complied with and then violated again within 24 hours, the person
found in violation of any of the provisions of §§ 128-3 and 128-4 of this
article shall be guilty of a violation of these sections. Each day such
violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate offense and shall be punishable under the general penalty
provisions of § 1-12 of the City Code.
§ 128-3 NASHUA CODE § 128-6
128:322
ARTICLE II
Site Maintenance
[Adopted 8-9-1994 by Ord. No. O-94-33 (Sec. 14-39 of the 1987
Code)]
§ 128-7. Control of particle emission.
During the course of any work involving construction or demolition, earth
hauling, moving, leveling, grading or excavation suitably effective and
reasonable measures satisfactory to the Health Officer shall be employed to
control dust, dirt or other particles so that they will not be discharged in
such a manner as to violate the provisions of the City Code.
§ 128-8. Violations and penalties. [Added 2-26-2008 by Ord. No.
O-08-07]
Violations of this article shall be punishable as provided in § 1-12 of the City
Code.
§ 128-7 CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WORK § 128-8
128:323
Chapter 134
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles, skateboards and roller blades — See
Ch. 98.
Drug-free zones — See Ch. 140.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 225.
§ 134-1. Hours.
It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 16 years to be upon any
public street, or in any public place, after 9:00 p.m. unless such minor is
accompanied by a parent, guardian or by some other suitable person.
§ 134-2. Curfew signal.
Whistles which can be heard in every part of the City shall be blown, or bells
shall be rung at the appointed time, and shall be called the "curfew signal,"
after which all children under 16 years of age shall be required to be off
the street, unless accompanied by a parent, guardian or other suitable adult
person.
§ 134-3. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 140
DRUG-FREE ZONES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 134. Peace and good order — See Ch. 225.
A. For the first violation of this chapter by any child he shall be taken to his
home by the officers, and the parents or guardian shall be notified of
the penalty for any subsequent violation. Upon any subsequent
violation by any child, his parents or guardians shall be subject to the
provisions of Subsection B of this section.
B. Any parent, guardian or person having control of any minor under the
age of 16 years who shall permit any such minor to be upon any public
street or in any public place punished as provided in § 1-12 of the City
Code.
§ 128-8 NASHUA CODE § 140-1
134:324
§ 140-1. Zones enumerated.
Pursuant to RSA 47:17 XVII, the following Nashua Housing Authority
properties, designated by Assessor's Map and lot numbers, and within 1,000
feet of said Nashua Housing Authority properties, are established as drugfree
zones. Any person who violates RSA 318-B, the Controlled Drug Act,
within these drug-free zones, shall be subject to severe criminal penalties
under RSA 318-B and a penalty of up to $1,000 under RSA 47:17 XVII.
Location Map No. Lot No.
Atwood Court 42 173
42 174
Burke Street 10 45
Central Street 80 89
Eleventh Street 87 47
87 184
87 219
87 266
Fairmount Street 62 8
Flagstone Drive E 932
E 934
Forge Drive 105 80
105 81
105 82
105 83
105 84
105 89
105 104
105 105
105 106
105 107
105 108
Fossa Avenue 108 104
Lake Street 95 13
Major Drive 11 2
11 3
11 154
11 160
Pine Street 99 53
§ 140-1 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 140-1
140:325
Location Map No. Lot No.
99 54
99 65
95 8
Rochette Avenue 100 80
Temple Street 34 1
Tyler Street 30 2
30 18
30 38
30 55
Whitney Street 42 136
Chapter 150
FENCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fences — See Ch. 190, § 190-44.
§ 150-1. Barbed-wire fences.
Any fence made up in whole or part of barbed wire shall be deemed a public
nuisance unless the barbed wire is located more than six feet above the
ground or the fence is being used in connection with the operation of a farm
or public utility.
§ 150-2. Violations and penalties.
The owner of any property on which a public nuisance as defined in this
chapter is located shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in § 1-12
of the City Code.
Chapter 156
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 78.
Open burning — See Ch. 110.
Building construction — See Ch. 105.
Fireworks — See Ch. 160.
Housing standards — See Ch. 182.
§ 140-1 NASHUA CODE § 150-2
150:326
ARTICLE I
Vacant Buildings
[NRO 1975, T. 9, §§ 1106 and 1108 (Secs. 8-1 to 8-3 of the 1987
Code); amended 10-12-1978 by Ord. No. O-78-100]
§ 156-1. Vacant buildings and structures.
§ 156-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-12-1985 by Ord. No.
O-84-79]
Any person who shall fail to comply with an order of the Chief of the
Fire Department or his designee, under this chapter, shall upon conviction
thereof be subject to punishment as provided in § 1-12 of the City Code at
the discretion of the court. Every day a violation continues after due notice
has been served in accordance with Section F-105.0 of the BOCA Basic Fire
Prevention Code adopted by the City shall be deemed a separate offense.
A. Whenever the Chief of the Fire Department or his designee finds that a
structure, or any part thereof, is vacant and unsafe, he shall give notice
and order, as provided in this chapter, to the person responsible to
secure such structure or part thereof as herein provided.
B. A structure will be deemed secured when all openings, including all
doors and windows, in the exterior of the structure which are on the
first or grade floor, or which lead to any structural appurtenance, are
enclosed as provided in this section.
C. The term "enclosed" shall mean that all existing doors shall be closed
and locked and that all other openings shall be covered with plywood of
at least three-eighths-inch thickness, fitted to seal the opening, and
extending no more than 1 1/2 inches beyond all exterior edges of the
opening. This plywood shall be fastened to the building with sixpenny
(6d) cement-coated nails or one-and-one-half-inch No. 10 wood screws
at each corner and every 12 inches to prevent its removal by persons
not authorized by the landowner.
§ 156-1 FENCES § 156-2
150:327

ARTICLE II
Fire Hydrant Service Charges
[Adopted 10-22-1996 by Ord. No. O-96-81]
§ 156-3. Responsibility for expense.
Owners of private property shall bear the expense of installing, maintaining,
and servicing water supply to fire hydrants located on the owner's property,
as such hydrant may be required by the City.
§ 156-3 FENCES § 156-3
150:329

ARTICLE III
Fire Department
[NRO 1975, T. 4, §§ 2101 to 2103 (Secs. 8-16 to 8-18 of the 1987
Code)]
§ 156-4. Compensation of Commissioners. [Amended 1-13-1977 by
Ord. No. O-76-116; 6-23-1998 by Ord. No. O-98-13; 8-8-2000 by Ord.
No. O-00-43; 8-8-2006 by Ord. No. O-6-31; 8-14-2007 by Ord. No.
O-07-115]
Each City Fire Commissioner shall receive as compensation the sum of
$1,500 per year, payable quarterly.
§ 156-5. Records to be kept by Chief.
The Chief of the Fire Department shall keep on file in his office a record of
all inspections and a copy of all orders issued by him, on forms provided for
that purpose.
§ 156-6. Interference with Department activities at fires. [Amended
3-12-1985 by Ord. No. O-84-79]
If any person shall do any of the following, he shall be subject to punishment
as provided in § 1-12 of the City Code:
A. Wantonly or knowingly drive across or interfere with any hose or other
apparatus in use at any fire;
B. Place any vehicle or allow any vehicle to stand within 300 feet of any
piece of fire apparatus while it is in service;
C. Manage or control any vehicle so it will follow any moving piece of fire
apparatus, while in service, at a distance of less than 300 feet; or
D. Interfere with the movement or speed of any in-service fire apparatus;
§ 156-4 FENCES § 156-6
150:331

ARTICLE IV
Fire Prevention Code
[NRO 1975, T. 9, §§ 901 and 902 (Secs. 8-41 to 8-43 of the 1987
Code)]
§ 156-7. Adoption. [Amended 5-26-1977 by Ord. No. O-77-152;
12-8-1987 by Ord. No. O-87-170; 12-9-1998 by Ord. No. O-98-80]
The 1997 Edition of the National Fire Protection Association NFPA 1 Fire
Prevention Code is hereby adopted as the Fire Prevention Code of the City
with the additions, insertions, deletions, and changes provided in § 156-8 of
this article.
§ 156-8. Amendments. [Amended 5-26-1977 by Ord. No. O-77-152;
10-12-1982 by Ord. No. O-82-54; 12-14-1982 by Ord. No. O-82-76;
12-8-1987 by Ord. No. O-87-170; 12-9-1998 by Ord. No. O-98-80;
5-23-2000 by Ord. No. O-00-29; 2-24-2004 by Ord. No. O-04-01]
The following sections of the Fire Prevention Code adopted in this article
are hereby amended as follows:
A. Section 1-5.1 is amended to read as follows:
1-5.1 This code applies to both new and existing conditions. In various
chapters, there are specific provisions that may differ from those for
new facilities.
Exceptions:
(1) Owner-occupied one- and two-family homes.
(2) Conditions which in the opinion of the authority having jurisdiction
do not present a distinct hazard to life or property.
B. Section 1-5, Application, is amended by the addition of the following
Section 1-5.10: [Amended 12-13-2016 by Ord. No. O-16-02645]
1-5.10 The authority having jurisdiction shall have authority to
promulgate rules or standards for situations not specifically addressed
in this code. All promulgated rules prior to being effective shall be
approved by the Board of Building and Fire Codes Appeals.
C. Section 1-6.4 is amended to read as follows:
45.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that all members of the existing Building
Code Board of Appeals and Board of Fire Prevention Code Appeals must be appointed and
confirmed to this new Board of Building and Fire Codes Appeals and designated as a
member or alternate member.
§ 156-7 FENCES § 156-8
150:333
1-6.4 The authority having jurisdiction may require each application
for alternative fire protection to be filed with the authority having
jurisdiction and shall be accompanied by such evidence, letters,
statements or results of tests or other supporting information as may
be required to justify the requests.
D. Section 1-7.1 is amended to read as follows: [Amended 12-13-2016
by Ord. No. O-16-02646]
1-7.1 Board of Building and Fire Codes Appeals. There is hereby
established a Board of Building and Fire Codes Appeals. The Board
of Building and Fire Codes Appeals shall consist of five members
and three alternate members who are qualified by experience and
training to rule on matters pertaining to building construction and fire
prevention. Each member shall be a professional engineer, architect,
builder, superintendent of building construction, master plumber,
master electrician, gas fitter, fire inspector, fire investigator, or any
other such person qualified by education or experience, in the opinion
of the Building Official, Fire Official, and the Mayor, to serve as a
member of the Board. Each member shall be a resident of the City.
The members shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the
Board of Aldermen. Each member shall hold office for three years
or until a replacement is appointed. The Board of Building and Fire
Codes Appeals shall adopt rules of procedure relative to application for
appeals and actions upon the same.
E. Section 1-7.2 is amended to read as follows: [Amended 12-13-2016
by Ord. No. O-16-02647]
1-7.2 Appeals. Appeals to the Board of Building and Fire Codes
Appeals are taken by any person aggrieved by any decision on
interpretation by the Fire Official made under the provisions
concerning the Fire Code, Life Safety Code, ordinances concerning
firesafety or any decision or interpretation of the Fire Official related
to the above.
F. Section 1-7.3 is amended to read as follows: [Amended 12-13-2016
by Ord. No. O-16-02648]
46.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that all members of the existing Building
Code Board of Appeals and Board of Fire Prevention Code Appeals must be appointed and
confirmed to this new Board of Building and Fire Codes Appeals and designated as a
member or alternate member.
47.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that all members of the existing Building
Code Board of Appeals and Board of Fire Prevention Code Appeals must be appointed and
confirmed to this new Board of Building and Fire Codes Appeals and designated as a
member or alternate member.
48.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that all members of the existing Building
Code Board of Appeals and Board of Fire Prevention Code Appeals must be appointed and
confirmed to this new Board of Building and Fire Codes Appeals and designated as a
member or alternate member.
§ 156-8 NASHUA CODE § 156-8
150:334
1-7.3 Application. An application for appeal must be submitted to the
Board of Building and Fire Codes Appeals within 20 days of the notice
or order of the Fire Official.
G. Sections 1-7.4 and 1-7.5 are deleted in their entirety.
H. Section 1-15.1 is amended to read as follows: [Amended 8-14-2007 by
Ord. No. O-07-107]
1-15.1 The authority having jurisdiction is authorized to establish and
issue permits, certificates, notice and approvals or orders pertaining
to fire control and fire hazards pursuant to this section. A schedule of
required permits shall be on file in the office of the authority having
jurisdiction. Fees for permits shall be in accordance with § 156-21.
I. Section 1-15.16(1)2 is amended to read as follows:
1-15.16(1)2A Separate permit, valid for the duration of the holder's
insurance, shall be required to conduct a blasting operation.
J. Section 1-15.16(o) is amended to read as follows:
1-15.16(o) Fire works. Possession, storage, manufacture, sale, or
discharge of fireworks within the jurisdiction. See also NRO Sec. 8-87.
K. Section 1-15.16 is amended by adding the following:
1-15.16(ff) Assembly Occupancies.
L. Section 1-16.1(e) is amended to read as follows:
1-16-1 (e) Design, installation, servicing or recharging or fixed fireextinguishing
systems.
M. Section 1-16.1 (f) is amended to read as follows:
1-16.1 (f) Design, installation or servicing of fire alarm or fire
communications systems.
N. Section 1-16, Certificates of Fitness, is amended by the addition of the
following Section 1-16.15:
1-16.15 Standards and/or qualifications for certificates of fitness shall
be approved by the Board of Fire Prevention Code Appeals.
O. Section 3-1.2 is amended to read as follows:
3-1.2 Every new and existing building shall comply with this code and
NFPA 101 Life Safety Code, as adopted by the City. See also Section
1-5.1.
P. Section 3-2, Electrical Fire Safety, is amended by the addition of the
following Section 3-2.6:
§ 156-8 FENCES § 156-8
150:335
§ 156-8.1. Amendments to Explosive Materials Code. [Added
6-26-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-010]
3-2.6 The authority having jurisdiction shall report electrical hazards
to the City Electrical Inspector for follow up and enforcement.
Q. Section 3-4.7 is amended to read as follows:
3-4.7 No charcoal burner shall be kindled, maintained or used within
five feet of a combustible building.
R. Section 3-4, Open Outdoor Fires, Incinerators, Outdoor Fireplaces, is
amended by the addition of the following Section 3-4.9:
3-4.9 See also Chapter 110 of the City Code and NH RSA 224.
S. Section 3-5, Fire Lanes, is amended by the addition of the following
Section 3-5.6:
3-5.6 See also § 320-58 of Chapter 320 of the City Code.
T. Section 3-8, Vacant Buildings, is amended by the addition of the
following Section 3-8.4:
3-5.6 See also § 156-1 of Chapter 156 of the City Code.
U. Chapter 3, General Provisions, is amended by the addition of the
following Section 3-14:
3-14 Cooking appliances within individual living units in board and
care facilities, hotels, dormitories and lodging or rooming houses are
subject to approval by the authority having jurisdiction.
V. Section 9-2 Operating Features is amended by the addition of the
following Section 9-2.10:
9-2.10 Assembly occupancy of over 300 occupants requires a fire
alarm system, and shall have the type of system determined by the
authority having jurisdiction based on the hazards present.
W. Section 17-1 is amended to read as follows:
17-1 Application. New and existing apartment buildings shall comply
with this chapter and the referenced edition of NFPA 101.
Exception: Egress in multifamily dwellings shall comply with the
Nashua Housing Code.
X. Section 31-2 is amended to read as follows:
31-2 Pyrotechnics before a Proximate Audience. Public display of
fireworks shall be in accordance with the applicable NH RSA and rules
of the State of New Hampshire.
§ 156-8 NASHUA CODE § 156-8.1
150:336
A. Section 65.9.1 of the 2009 Edition of the National Fire Protection
Association NFPA 1 Fire Prevention Code states:
(1) "65.9.1 The manufacture, transportation, storage, sale, and use of
explosive materials shall comply with NFPA 495, Explosive
Materials Code, and NFPA 498, Standard for Safe Havens and
Interchange Lots for Vehicles Transporting Explosives."
B. In addition to state law, state administrative rules, and the abovereferenced
adopted NFPA Codes, the City has the following additional
requirements with respect to explosives and blasting:
(1) Permit application.
(a) Permit applications and all required documentation shall be
submitted to the Nashua Fire Marshal a minimum of seven
days prior to scheduled commencement of work for review and
verification of completeness of application. Any omission of
required information shall be considered a reason for denial.
(b) Permits will be issued no more than seven days in advance of
the blast and will be valid for no more than seven days as
identified by the dates listed on the permit, and may be
extended per approval of the Fire Marshal, subject to an
additional fee.
(c) The following must be submitted with the application:
[1] A copy of the license issued under RSA Chapter 158 by the
State Police to the applicant allowing purchase, storing,
and transport of high explosive, along with proof of
identification.
[2] A copy of blasting supervisor's and all other blaster's
certificates of competency for explosives issued under RSA
Chapter 158 by the State Police.
[3] A list of owner(s) of the property and/or responsible
parties.
[4] A letter of permission from the property owner(s) of the
blasting or explosives discharge site.
[5] Approved, stamped site plan delineating area of blasting.
[6] A blast plan consisting of a detailed map and plan locating
the blast site, blast area, all buildings and structures
within 500 feet of the blast area or such extended distance
as may be specified by the Fire Marshal.
[7] Copies of safety data sheet (SDS) and/or technical data
sheet information for all products, materials and
§ 156-8.1 FENCES § 156-8.1
150:337
compounds that will be used on the site in association with
the blasting operation.
[8] Insurance requirements as follows:
[a] Coverage must be written with an insurance carrier
licensed to do business in the State of New
Hampshire. The certificate of insurance must name
the City of Nashua as additional insured.
[b] The City of Nashua requires 30 days' written notice of
cancellation or material change in coverage.
[c] Comprehensive general liability: $1,000,000 per
occurrence; $2,000,000 aggregate.
[d] Certificate of insurance must reflect that coverage
includes blasting.
[e] Motor vehicle liability: $1,000,000 combined single
limit.
[f] The certificate holder must be listed as: City of
Nashua, 229 Main Street, Nashua, NH 03060.
[g] Workers' compensation: as required by statute.
(d) Prior to acting on any permit, the Fire Marshal may consult
with such federal, state and/or City officials and employees
whose area(s) of responsibility are, or may be, affected by the
proposed blasting operation.
(e) After review and verification by the Fire Marshal, or as
determined by the Fire Marshal by an independent expert on
an as-needed basis at the applicant's expense, the Fire Marshal
shall act on the application and either issue the permit, with
any condition(s) necessary to achieve the purposes of state law
or regulation, NFPA codes, or City ordinances, or deny the
permit application, along with the reason(s).
(2) Additional preblast inspection requirements.
(a) Prior to conducting any blasting, the applicant or their agent
shall conduct preblast structural condition inspections on all
structures within 250 feet from the location of all proposed
blasts or such extended distance as may be specified by the
Fire Marshal prior to permit issuance. The preblast survey
shall document the existing visual conditions of the interior
and exterior of the structure, including improvements to the
property and other physical factors that could reasonably be
affected by the blasting. Structures such as pipelines, cables,
transmission lines, cisterns, wells, and other water systems
warrant special attention; however, the assessment of these
§ 156-8.1 NASHUA CODE § 156-8.1
150:338
structures may be limited to surface conditions and other
readily available data.
(b) The individual person or entity conducting the inspection shall
give written notice, not less than 10 days in advance, to the
owner of the property concerned, as well as to any tenants of
the property. The notice shall include:
[1] Information on the blasting that will take place.
[2] When blasting may occur, including dates and times, or a
range of dates and times.
[3] A five-business-day window for a property owner and/or
tenant to request a preblast inspection.
[4] The mailing address, e-mail address and telephone
number those property owner and/or tenants can use to
obtain information regarding the blasting or inspections,
and to request, at no cost, preblast inspections.
[5] The mailing address, e-mail address and telephone
number and instructions about how and where to contact
the applicant, or his or her representative concerning
blast-related complaints or claims.
(c) Preblast inspections.
[1] Descriptions on the preblast inspection shall locate any
existing cracks, damage, or other defects, and shall
include such information so as to make it possible to
determine the effect, if any, of the blasting operations on
the defect.
[2] Where significant cracks or damage exists, or for defects
too complicated to describe in words, photographs or
videos shall be taken. A photographic or video survey can
be used in lieu of a written form.
[3] The applicant, as well as the owner and/or tenant of the
property being inspected, shall sign all such inspections
once completed.
[4] A property owner and/or tenant refusal, for whatever
reason, to allow a preblast inspection, or to sign a preblast
inspection form, shall be noted on the preblast inspection
form.
[5] The applicant shall provide copies of the completed
preblast inspections to each property owner and/or tenant.
When a blast inspection is complete, with written consent
of the property owner and/or tenant, the Fire Chief, the
§ 156-8.1 FENCES § 156-8.1
150:339
Fire Marshal or their designees shall be permitted to
request a copy.
[6] The inspections shall be kept by the applicant and be made
available to the City, property owner and/or tenant
pursuant to Subsection B(2)(c)[5], upon request, for a
minimum of five years from the end date of the last
blasting permit issued.
(3) Post-blast inspections and blasting damage complaints.
(a) Any property owner and/or tenant can request, and receive at
no charge, a post-blast inspection, following the same
requirements in Subsection B(2)(c), above.
(b) Upon receipt of any blasting damage complaint, the applicant
shall notify the Fire Marshal of the complaint and provide a
copy of the blasting complaint within 24 hours. The applicant
shall also provide a copy of the applicant's blasting complaint
investigation findings when completed to the Nashua Fire
Marshal's office.
(4) Seismic measuring devices.
(a) Prior to conducting any blasting, the applicant or their agent
shall identify the two closest structures to the blasting site not
owned by the owner of the blast site, that are within 500 feet or
such distance as designated by the Fire Marshal, and request
written permission from the owner(s) thereof to install and
monitor seismic measuring equipment.
(b) The applicant shall make two attempts to obtain such
permission.
(c) If the second attempt is unsuccessful, the seismic measuring
equipment shall be installed between the structure and the
blast location as close as reasonable to the structure.
(d) An explanation of the reason for such location shall be made on
the vibration monitoring report for such structure, and the
peak particle velocity (in inches/second) shall be extrapolated
to the structure using standard relations.
(e) Blasting seismographs used to monitor ground and air
vibrations shall comply with the most recent version of the
International Society of Explosive Engineers (ISEE)
"Performance Specifications for Blasting Seismographs."
(f) Where used, blasting seismographs shall be deployed in the
field according to the most recent version of the ISEE "Field
Practice Guidelines for Blasting Seismographs."
§ 156-8.1 NASHUA CODE § 156-8.1
150:340
(g) The Fire Marshal may require additional measuring devices
when necessary to protect property.
(h) If an owner refuses to allow for or waives the placement of
seismic measuring equipment, the applicant shall note this on
the vibration monitoring report.
(i) Documentation of any such refusal shall be filed with the
Nashua Fire Marshal's office to include the date, time and, if
available, the names of the persons giving the refusal.
(5) Blasting notification.
(a) The applicant shall contact the nonemergency number for
Nashua Fire Dispatch not less than each day before blasting,
and 15 minutes before the scheduled blast and provide the
address of the blasting site, the total pounds of explosives and
the number of charged holes.
(b) The applicant shall notify the Fire Dispatch when the all clear
has been given after the scheduled blast.
(c) Signboards and flags indicating areas where blasting
operations are occurring shall be clearly visible and legible
from all points of access to the area.
(d) Blast area signs shall clearly indicate the length and nature of
audible blast warning and all clear signals.
(e) The applicant shall use sirens or horns or both sirens and horns
with sufficient intensity such that they can be heard for a
minimum distance of 1,000 feet in all directions.
(6) Flyrock control.
(a) Except as previously approved by the Fire Marshal, all blasts
within 1,000 feet of any structure, power transmission line or
communications tower shall be covered with an adequate
blasting mat or shield and secured together properly.
(b) In the event that flyrock is identified beyond the blast site or
lands on or within 15 feet of a traveled roadway, the applicant
shall cease all blasting operations.
(c) Immediate notification shall be made to the Fire Marshal of the
flyrock incident and the locations of where the flyrock had
landed.
(d) The blasting contractor shall review the flyrock incident and
determine the cause and solution for the incident. This report
shall be filed with the Fire Marshal prior to issuance of any
further blasting permits.
(7) Blasting monitoring.
§ 156-8.1 FENCES § 156-8.1
150:341
(a) The Fire Marshal reserves the right to have personnel on site
at any time at a cost to the applicant to monitor any and all
activities of the applicant. These representatives shall have the
right to order all blasting operations to cease at any time.
(b) The City reserves the right to require additional condition
surveys and/or placement of seismic measuring equipment on
properties should the need arise due to complaints or other
causes.
(c) The City reserves the right to require an independent expert
observer to ensure that all laws and requirements are being
met should there be a concern based on prior experiences or
acts.
(d) The costs associated with these additional requirements shall
be borne by the applicant.
(8) Storage of explosive materials on site.
(a) The unsupervised storage of explosive materials or blasting
agents on site is hereby prohibited in the City of Nashua.
(b) The supervised storage amount on site is limited to the amount
planned for a single daytime use for times outlined in the
blasting permit.
(c) Loaded explosives intended for detonation are considered
storage for blasting purpose. In the event that there are issues
that may arise preventing the detonation of explosives, the
applicant shall immediately notify the Fire Marshal for further
actions and requirements.
(9) Notifications.
(a) Emergency notifications. An applicant shall immediately report
to Nashua Fire Rescue and Nashua Police Department:
[1] The discovery of any loss, theft, or unlawful removal of
explosive materials.
[2] If there is any explosion, fire or other accident occurring in
connection with the keeping, storage, manufacture,
handling, transportation, use or other disposition of
explosives causing loss of life or injury to any person or
damage to property.
[3] Any loading of holes or blasting which occurred without a
valid permit issued by the Fire Department.
(b) Nonemergency notifications. Notification shall be made by
telephone to the Fire Marshal's office for incidents involving,
but not limited to:
§ 156-8.1 NASHUA CODE § 156-8.1
150:342
[1] Improper loading of holes.
[2] Minor damage following any blast.
[3] Any complaints received.
(c) The applicant shall follow up any emergency or nonemergency
notification with a written incident report, submitted to the
Fire Marshal's office within 24 hours.
(d) These notifications will not relieve the applicant of any other
required state or federal notifications.
(10) Additional prohibitions.
(a) Applicants shall only detonate explosives between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. unless authorized by the Fire Marshal.
(b) No blasting or explosive discharge shall be conducted on
Saturdays or Sundays or on days observed as state or national
holidays unless approval has been obtained from the Fire
Marshal.
(c) No blasting or loading of explosives shall be conducted after an
order to cease blasting operations has been issued by the Fire
Marshal and communicated to the applicant.
(d) No drilling shall take place within 50 feet of any loaded hole(s).
(e) No holes shall be loaded except those to be fired in the next
round of blasting.
(f) Impacts to surface water or groundwater shall be controlled by
using industry best practices.
(g) All explosives are to be shot on the day they are loaded.
(h) After loading, all remaining explosives shall be immediately
returned to the appropriate magazine or storage containers.
Any residue spilled shall be completely cleaned up and
containerized or reloaded into another hole to be shot.
(11) Revocation and restoration of permit; violations.
(a) The Fire Marshal may revoke any permit upon a showing that
the applicant has violated any provision of state law or
regulation, NFPA Codes, City ordinance, or any requirement or
condition of the issued permit.
(b) Any blasting or explosive discharge that occurs without a
permit may result in a thirty-day revocation pending an
investigation by the Fire Marshal and/or the New Hampshire
State Police.
§ 156-8.1 FENCES § 156-8.1
150:343
§ 156-9. Violations and penalties. [Added 12-9-1998 by Ord. No.
O-98-80]
Any person violating any of the provisions of the National Fire Protection
Association NFPA 1 Fire Prevention Code or failing to comply with any order
issued pursuant to any section thereof shall be guilty of a violation and upon
conviction thereof shall be subject to punishment as provided in § 1-12 of
the City Code for each offense. Each day that a violation continues after a
service of notice as provided in the code shall be deemed a separate offense.
(c) Any permit may be revoked or suspended upon a showing that
a condition or conditions exist which warrant such revocation
or suspension upon determination by the Fire Marshal.
(d) The Fire Marshal may restore any permit that has been
revoked upon a showing that the condition(s) leading to the
revocation have been corrected.
(e) Violations of these ordinances shall be subject to the general
penalty provision of § 1-12 of this code. Each day a violation
exists shall be a separate offense.
(12)Waivers for emergency conditions. In situations that pose a
possible or perceived danger to safety, the Fire Marshal may, for a
limited time, waive any City ordinance as may be necessary to
avoid and/or lessen that danger.
(13) Interpretation. If there is any conflict between, or different
requirements or standards found in, state laws and regulations, the
NFPA Codes, and City ordinances, the more stringent requirement
or standard shall apply.
§ 156-8.1 NASHUA CODE § 156-9
150:344
ARTICLE V
Life Safety Code
[NRO 1975, T. 9, §§ 951 and 952 (Secs. 8-56 to 8-57 of the 1987
Code)]
§ 156-10. Adoption. [Amended 9-22-1976 by Ord. No. O-76-52;
7-18-1977 by Ord. No. O-77-151; 11-23-1981 by Ord. No. O-81-123;
5-13-1986 by Ord. No. O-86-54; 12-9-1998 by Ord. No. O-98-80]
The 1997 Edition of the National Fire Prevention Association NFPA 101 Life
Safety Code is hereby adopted as the Life Safety Code of the City, with the
following changes:
§ 156-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-12-1978 by Ord.
No. O-78-107; 3-12-1985 by Ord. No. O-84-79]
Any person violating any of the provisions of the Life Safety Code or failing
to comply with any order issued pursuant to any section thereof shall
be guilty of a violation and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to
punishment as provided in § 1-12 of the City Code for each offense. Each
day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
A. Section 1-3.1 is amended to read as follows:
1-3.1 New and Existing Buildings. The code applies to both new
construction and existing buildings. In various chapters there are
specific provisions for existing buildings that might differ from those
for new construction.
Exceptions:
(1) Owner-occupied one- and two-family homes.
(2) Conditions which in the opinion of the authority having
jurisdiction do not present a distinct hazard to life or property.
B. Section 1-3, Application, is amended by the addition of the following
Section 1-3.14:
1-3.14 Requirements for handicap or barrier-free access shall be
controlled by the Building Code adopted by the City.49
C. Section 19-2.1, General, is amended by the addition of the following
Section 19-2.1.2:
19-2.1.2 Exits in existing apartment buildings shall be in conformance
with the Nashua Housing Codes.50
49.Editor's Note: See Ch. 105, Building Construction.
50.Editor's Note: See Ch. 182, Housing Standards.
§ 156-10 FENCES § 156-11
150:345

ARTICLE VI
Fire-Suppression Systems
[Adopted 4-12-1988 by Ord. No. O-88-17 (Secs. 8-58 to 8-66 of the
1987 Code)]
§ 156-12. Scope; conflicting regulations.
This article establishes minimum requirements for the protection of
buildings by the installation of fire-suppression systems. Such requirements
are in addition to the fire-suppression requirements of the Building Code
and Fire Code as adopted by the City.51 Where the provisions of this article
differ from other adopted codes of the City, the most stringent standard
shall apply.
§ 156-13. Definitions.
Words and terms used in this article shall have meanings as defined in the
Nashua Building or Fire Codes or, if not defined herein, such words and
terms shall have the meaning given in Webster's Unabridged Dictionary.
§ 156-14. Required; exceptions.
A. When systems required. Fire suppression systems shall be installed in
all new buildings and all existing buildings which are hereafter
enlarged or which are hereafter changed in use in whole or in part
where such new use involves a greater degree of hazard to life or
property.
B. Exceptions:
(1) Detached one- and two-family dwellings (Use Group R-4, 1987
Edition, BOCA National Building Code).
(2) Single-family dwellings including townhouses and row houses (Use
Group R-3, 1987 Edition, BOCA National Building Code.
(3) Any building which is less than three stories in height and less than
10,000 square feet in aggregate floor area, unless fire suppression
is otherwise required by the Building Code or the Life Safety Code
of the City.
(4) Alternative protection. In special use areas of buildings or
structures, an automatic fire alarm system shall be installed in lieu
of a fire-suppression system where such fire-suppression system
installation would be detrimental or dangerous to the specific use
or occupancy, as approved by the Code Official and the Fire Code
Official.
(5) Structures of Use Group A-5, outdoor assembly. This group shall
include structures used for outdoor assembly intended for
51.Editor's Note: See Ch. 105, Building Construction, and Art. IV of this chapter.
§ 156-12 FENCES § 156-14
150:347
§ 156-15. Floor area calculation.
For the purpose of this article, floor area shall be calculated without regard
to division by walls or partitions; the entire floor area shall contribute to the
determination of requirements.
§ 156-16. System selection; installation requirements.
Fire-suppression system selection shall conform to the Building Code of
the City. The installation methods, repair, operation and maintenance of
fire-suppression systems shall be in accordance with the Building and Fire
Codes of the City.
§ 156-17. Benefits derived from Building and Fire Codes.
Whenever a building is protected by a fire-suppression system, all benefits
derived from the provisions of the Building Code and Fire Codes of the City
shall be applicable.
§ 156-18. Enforcement; violation.
The Fire Code Official or his designee shall enforce, interpret and
administer the provisions of this article. It shall be the duty of the Director
of the Code Enforcement Department to not issue any permit or certificate
in violation of this article. It shall be unlawful to build, occupy or use any
building in violation of this article.
§ 156-19. Appeals. [Amended 12-13-2016 by Ord. No. O-16-02652]
participation in or reviewing activities, including grandstands,
bleachers, coliseums and stadiums, when of noncombustible
construction.
A. Any person shall have the right to appeal to the Board of Building and
Fire Codes Appeals within 20 days from the receipt of a written decision
of the Building or Fire Official (also known as the "Code Official"). An
application for appeal shall be based on the claim that the true intent of
the codes or rules legally adopted have been incorrectly interpreted,
the provisions do not fully apply, an equivalent form of construction can
be used, or the decision appealed from results in manifest injustice and
is contrary to the spirit and purpose of the Building or Fire Code and
the public interest.
B. Application for appeals and actions upon the same shall be in
accordance with the rules of procedure adopted by the Board of
Building and Fire Codes Appeals.
52.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that all members of the existing Building
Code Board of Appeals and Board of Fire Prevention Code Appeals must be appointed and
confirmed to this new Board of Building and Fire Codes Appeals and designated as a
member or alternate member.
§ 156-14 NASHUA CODE § 156-19
150:348
§ 156-20. Permits and fee schedules. [Added 8-14-2007 by Ord. No.
O-07-107]
C. Said Board of Building and Fire Codes Appeals shall be established in
accordance with the statutes of the State of New Hampshire and the
ordinances of the City and shall consist of five members and three
alternate members who are qualified by experience and training to rule
on matters pertaining to building construction and fire prevention.
Each member shall be a professional engineer, architect, builder,
superintendent of building construction, master plumber, master
electrician, gas fitter, fire inspector, fire investigator, or any other such
person qualified by education or experience, in the opinion of the
Building Official, Fire Official, and the Mayor, to serve as a member of
the Board. Each member shall be a resident of the City. The members
shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Board of
Aldermen. Each member shall hold office for three years or until a
replacement is appointed.
D. The statutes of the State of New Hampshire and the provisions of this
section shall take precedence, concerning appeals, over any conflicting
provision in any referenced code adopted by the City.
E. Said Board of Building and Fire Codes Appeals has no authority to
waive the requirements of the State Building Code or the State Fire
Code.
A. A permit shall not be valid until the prescribed fees have been paid and
the permit issued. No permit to begin work for new construction,
alteration, removal, demolition or other building or fire operation shall
be issued until the fees prescribed in this section have been paid to the
Office of the Fire Marshal, nor shall an amendment to a permit
necessitating an additional fee because of an increase in the estimated
cost or scope of work involved be approved until the additional fee has
been paid.
B. The Board of Aldermen may, at its option, waive or reimburse, as the
case may be, payment of fees payable under this section, in whole or in
part, to the extent of the value of municipal public improvements and/or
land dedication, which an applicant obligates itself to make, over and
above impact fees and the applicant's fair share of off-site
improvements imposed as a condition of site plan or subdivision
approval.
(1) Permits/fees:
(a) Life safety/site plan review fee, per building (includes one
rough and one final inspection):
[1] Up to 5,000 square feet area: $75.
[2] Five thousand one square feet to 15,000 square feet: $200.
§ 156-19 FENCES § 156-20
150:349
[3] Fifteen thousand one square feet to 25,000 square feet:
$325.
[4] Over 25,000 square feet: $600.
(b) Fire suppression systems permit (includes one rough and one
final inspection):
[1] Application fee: $20.
[2] NFPA 13D system (per riser): $55.
[3] NFPA 13R system (per riser): $110.
[4] NFPA 13 systems (per riser):
[a] Up to 10,000 square feet of protected area: $220.
[b] Ten thousand one square feet to 25,000 square feet:
$450.
[c] Twenty-five thousand one square feet to 52,000
square feet: $600.
[5] Partial sprinkler system (not complete building
protection):
[a] Up to 6 sprinkler heads: $30.
[b] Seven to 20 sprinkler heads: $110.
[6] Standpipe systems (not part of combined sprinkler/
standpipe systems):
[a] Up to 3 floors (per riser): $110.
[b] Add per floor beyond 3 add: $55.
[7] Carbon dioxide systems:
[a] Preengineered systems, each: $150.
[b] Engineered systems, each: $220.
[8] Clean agent extinguishing systems:
[a] Preengineered, each: $150.
[b] Engineered, each: $220.
[9] Dry chemical systems:
[a] Preengineered systems:
[i] Commercial cooking: $75.
[ii] Service station pump protection: $100.
§ 156-20 NASHUA CODE § 156-20
150:350
[b] Other systems: $110.
[i] Engineered, each: $220.
[10]Wet chemical systems, each: $110.
[11] Fire pump installation: $275.
(c) Modification to existing suppression systems (each system):
[1] Application fee: $20.
[2] Water and/or foam systems (all types):
[a] One to six heads (addition of heads): $30.
[b] Seven to 20 heads (addition of heads): $110.
[c] Twenty-one to 100 heads (addition of heads): $220.
[d] Add for each head beyond 100: $1.
[e] Change in head location only/per floor maximum 10
heads: $30.
[f] Annual corp. in-house modification permit (per
building): $300.
[3] Standpipe systems up to three floors: $75.
[a] Add for each floor beyond 3: $25.
[4] Carbon dioxide systems: $75.
[5] Clean agent extinguishing systems: $75.
[6] Dry chemical systems: $75.
[7] Wet chemical systems: $75.
[8] Other systems: $75.
(d) Fire alarms systems permits:
[1] Application fee: $20.
[2] Master box installation: $110.
[3] Automatic fire-detection systems (per FACP):
[a] Up to 25 devices: $110.
[b] Fifty to 99 devices: $220.
[c] Add for each device beyond 99: $1.
[4] Modification to automatic fire-detection systems:
§ 156-20 FENCES § 156-20
150:351
[a] FACP change out/upgrade (plus 20% of devices): $30.
[b] Add/Relocate one to 10 devices: $55.
[c] Add/Relocate 11 to 50 devices: $110.
[d] Add for each device beyond 50: $1.
[e] Annual corp. in-house modification permit (per
building): $300.
(2) Permit fees:
(a) Place of assembly permits:
[1] Greater than 99 people (valid for three years): $50.
[2] One hundred people or more (valid for one year): $50.
(b) Fireworks display (per display): $100.
(c) Explosive/blasting (per site):
[1] Up to seven days: $100.
[2] Add for each additional day beyond seven: $10.
(d) Underground storage tank (per tank):
[1] Removal only (except LP-gas cylinders): $60.
[2] Installation only: $75.
[3] Removal and reinstallation (except LP-gas cylinders):
$125.
(e) Aboveground storage tank (greater than 499 gallon capacity):
[1] Removal only (except LP-gas cylinders): $60.
[2] Installation only: $75.
[3] Removal and reinstallation (except LP-gas cylinders):
$125.
(f) Hazardous materials storage (valid for three years):
[1] Explosives/dangerous when wet/pyrophoric:
[a] One to 25 pounds: $150.
[b] Twenty-six to 100 pounds: $300.
[c] Greater than 101 pounds: $450.
[2] Flammable liquids (Class I liquids):
[a] Sixty to 660 gallons: $150.
§ 156-20 NASHUA CODE § 156-20
150:352
[b] Six hundred sixty-one to 2,500 gallons: $300.
[c] Greater than 2,500 gallons: $450.
[3] Flammable/combustible liquids (Class II and III):
[a] Two hundred seventy-six to 1,000 gallons: $100.
[b] One thousand to 2,5000 gallons: $300.
[4] Liquid petroleum (LPG) liquid natural (LNG) gases:
[a] Retail cylinder exchange: $75.
[b] One thousand to 3,000 gallon systems: $100.
[c] Greater than 3,000 gallon systems: $300.
[5] Cryogenic liquids:
[a] Nonflammable greater than 500 gallons: $75.
[b] Flammable greater than 10 gallons: $150.
[6] Poison by inhalation gases:
[a] Sixty to 660 gallons (water capacity): $150.
[b] Six hundred sixty-one to 2,500 gallons: $300.
[c] Greater than 2,500 gallons: $450.
[7] Caustics:
[a] Less than 2,000 pounds or 1,000 gallons: $150.
[b] Less than 4,000 pounds or 2,000 gallons: $300.
[c] Greater than 4,000 pounds or 2,000 gallons: $450.
(3) Inspection fees (every two years unless noted):
(a) Family day-care homes (up to six children): $30.
(b) Group day-care homes (seven to 12 children): $50.
(c) Day-care centers and/or nurseries (more than 12 children or
more than four children under the age of two years old): $100.
(d) Foster care (up to three children/adults): $30.
(e) Residential board and care:
[1] Four to 16 persons: $100.
[2] More than 16 persons: $150.
(f) Rooming/lodging home inspections:
§ 156-20 FENCES § 156-20
150:353
§ 156-21. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate a provision of this article shall be subject to
fines and penalties in accordance with the provisions of §§ 1-9, 1-11 and
1-12 of the City Code.
[1] Up to 16 beds: $100.
[2] More than 16 beds: $150.
(g) Health care facility (nursing home/hospital), annual: $200.
(h) Reinspection fee (each inspection):
[1] After first failed final inspection of permit: $150.
(4) Miscellaneous fees:
(a) Environmental searches (per address): $75.
(b) Incident reports (per incident): $10.
(c) Investigation report (per investigation): $25.
(d) Photocopies (per page): $1.
§ 156-20 NASHUA CODE § 156-21
150:354
Chapter 160
FIREWORKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 156.
§ 160-1. Prohibition of Class C fireworks. [Amended 2-26-2008 by
Ord. No. O-08-07]
In accordance with the provisions of RSA 160-B and 160-C, it shall be illegal
for any person, firm, partnership or corporation to offer for sale, expose for
sale, sell at retail, purchase, possess, use or explode any fireworks without a
permit. There shall be no permits granted, except to the City of Nashua for
programs and displays under its control, for the sale, purchase, possession,
use or explosion of Class C fireworks.
§ 160-2. Restrictions. [Added 11-22-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-113]
It shall be unlawful to use, discharge or display salute, reports, or thunder
shell fireworks between 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. There shall be only color
shells, cakes, and whistlers used, discharged or displayed after 10:00 p.m.
All permits issued shall specify the time period during which the fireworks
display shall be conducted. The only exceptions would be Independence
Day, New Year's Eve, the Holiday Stroll, and City-sponsored events with a
minimum of a twenty-four-hour notice.
§ 160-3. Construal of provisions. [Amended 2-26-2008 by Ord. No.
O-08-07]
This chapter shall be construed consistently with Fire Prevention Code
adopted in § 156-1 of the City Code, and is not meant to repeal any section
thereof.
§ 160-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-26-2008 by Ord. No.
O-08-07]
In addition to the penalty provisions of RSA 160-B and 160-C, a violation of
this chapter may be subject to the general penalty provisions of § 1-12 of
the City Code.
Chapter 164
FLAG
GENERAL REFERENCES
Use of City Seal — See Ch.66.
§ 156-21 FIREWORKS § 160-4
160:355
§ 164-1. Display and use of United States flag.
The display and use of the flag of the United States of America on property
of the City and during City-sponsored events shall be in accordance with the
applicable provisions of the United States Code, including Title 4, Chapter
1, Sections 5 through 10.
Chapter 170
FOOD-SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 83.
§ 170-1. Definitions. [Amended 9-15-1978 by Ord. No. O-78-79;
2-26-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-07]
The following words and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the
meaning given in this section:
BOARD — The City Board of Health.
DEPARTMENT — The City Environmental Health Department.
FOOD-SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — Any fixed or mobile restaurant;
pushcart; coffee shop; soda fountain; tavern; bar; cocktail lounge;
nightclub; roadside stand; industrial feeding establishment; food vending
operation, whether attended or unattended; private, public or nonprofit
organization or institution serving food; catering kitchen; commissary or
similar place in which food or drink is prepared for sale or for service on
the premises or elsewhere; and any other eating or drinking establishment
or operation where food is served or provided for the public with or without
charge. A food-service establishment also means a grocery store, meat
market, bakery or any establishment where food is stored, manufactured
and/or processed or packaged.
HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer of the City of Nashua.
TEMPORARY FOOD-SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — Any food-service
establishment which operates at a fixed location for a temporary period of
time, not to exceed two weeks, in connection with a fair, carnival, circus,
public exhibition or similar transitory gathering.
§ 170-2. License required; posting; transfer; duration. [Amended
9-15-1978 by Ord. No. O-78-79; 5-13-1980 by Ord. No. O-80-32]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food-service establishment
or a temporary food-service establishment within the City who does not
§ 160-4 NASHUA CODE § 170-2
164:356
possess a valid food-service license for that establishment issued by the
Department. Only a person who complies with the requirements of this
chapter shall be entitled to receive and retain such a license. A valid license
shall be posted in public view in every food-service establishment. Licenses
shall not be transferable from one person to another person or place. All
licenses except temporary food-service licenses shall be effective for one
year from the date of issuance.
§ 170-3. Application; issuance; conditions. [Amended 9-15-1978 by
Ord. No. O-78-79; 5-14-1985 by Ord. No. O-85-151; 10-8-1985 by
Ord. No. O-85-169; 6-14-1988 by Ord. No. O-88-40; 12-26-2001 by
Ord. No. O-01-176]
The Health Officer may issue a license to any food-service establishment
upon receipt of a written application on a form furnished by the Health
Officer and setting forth such information concerning the applicant and his
operation and facilities as may be required by regulations. A license shall
be granted upon the express condition that the food-service establishment
complies with all the requirements of this chapter, and the applicant agrees
at all times to conduct his operation and maintain his facilities in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter and those regulations
promulgated hereunder and furthermore, that the applicant is free of any
delinquency in any form of taxes, fees or contractual obligations to the City
as required by § 1-12 of the City Code.
§ 170-3.1. Beer and wine samples at farmers' markets. [Added
7-12-2016 by Ord. No. O-16-014]
Wine manufacturers, beverage manufacturers, nano breweries, and brew
pubs may provide samples for tasting to persons of legal drinking age
at farmers' markets, provided that they obtain a license as required by
§§ 170-2 and 170-3 of the City Code and provide the New Hampshire Liquor
Commission with a copy of the license. Samples of beer and wine shall be
restricted to clearly defined areas approved by the New Hampshire Liquor
Commission and be limited to one four-ounce sample per label per person
for any beer, specialty beer, or cider, and one two-ounce sample per label
per person for any wine. The terms "beverage," "brew pub," and "farmers'
markets" shall have the meanings as defined in RSA 175:1. The term "wine"
shall mean "wine-fortified" and "wine-table" as defined in RSA 175:1. A
"nano brewery" is a business that manufactures "beer" or "specialty beer,"
as those terms are defined in RSA 175:1, not exceeding 2,000 barrels
annually for sale in any quantity.
§ 170-4. Fee schedule. [Amended 5-14-1985 by Ord. No. O-85-151;
10-8-1985 by Ord. No. O-85-169; 6-14-1988 by Ord. No. O-88-40;
12-26-2001 by Ord. No. O-01-176;3-28-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-06]
A. Each application for, or renewal of, a license to operate a food-service
establishment within the meaning of this chapter shall be accompanied
§ 170-2 FLAG § 170-4
164:357
by a fee appropriate to the type and size of the operation in accordance
with the following schedule:
(1) Bakeries: $175.
(2) Caterers: $175.
(3) Commissaries: $175.
(4) Hospitals: $175.
(5) Nursing homes: $175.
(6) Private schools: $175.
(7) Beverage manufacturing and bottling: $140.
(8) Mobile vendors: $140.
(9) Shellfish vendors: $140.
(10) Churches: $35.
(11) Temporary licenses: $35.
(12) Food manufacturing and packaging: $280.
(13) Social clubs: $45.
(14) Vending locations: $15.
(15) Retail stores:
(a) Prepackaged items only: $90.
(b) With perishable foods add: $90.
(c) With delicatessen add: $90.
(d) With bulk foods/salad bar add: $90.
(16) Restaurants: $75.
(a) Plus $1.50 per seat (based on Fire Department permit).
(b) Plus $1.50 per seat for open air cafe seating.
(17) Restaurants with common seating (mall): $200.
B. The Environmental Health Department shall make the final
determination as to which license fee is applicable to each individual
food-service operation or establishment.
§ 170-4 NASHUA CODE § 170-5
164:358
§ 170-5. Enforcement under state code. [Amended 9-15-1978 by
Ord. No. O-78-79]
Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, the enforcement of this
chapter shall be governed by regulations adopted by the State Department
of Health and Welfare, Division of Public Health Services, under the
authority of RSA Chapter 143, commonly referred to as the "Sanitary Food
Code."
§ 170-6. Notice of alleged violation. [Amended 9-15-1978 by Ord.
No. O-78-79]
Whenever the Health Officer or his designated representative, based upon
an on-site inspection, determines that there are reasonable grounds to
believe that violations of this chapter or the regulations adopted under
§ 170-5 have occurred, notice of such alleged violations shall be given to the
owner or his agent. Such notice shall:
§ 170-7. Suspension of license; notice to license holder. [Amended
9-15-1978 by Ord. No. O-78-79]
Whenever the Health Officer or his designated representative finds
repeated violations of this chapter or unsanitary or other conditions in
the operation of a food-service establishment or temporary food-service
establishment, which in his judgment constitute a substantial hazard to the
public health, he may without warning, notice or hearing issue a written
notice to the license holder citing such conditions, specifying the corrective
action to be taken, and stating that the license is immediately suspended
and all food-service operations are to be immediately discontinued. Any
person to whom such an order is issued shall comply immediately therewith,
but upon written petition to the Health Officer shall be afforded a hearing
within 10 days of such petition.
A. Be in writing;
B. Include statements enumerating alleged violations and identifying the
basis of the violation;
C. Where appropriate, indicate corrective actions to be taken;
D. Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act required;
E. Be served upon the owner or his agent as the case may require,
provided that such notice or order shall be deemed to have been
properly served upon such owner or his agent when the inspection
report form containing information required by Subsections B, C and D
above has been completed and signed by the inspecting official and the
owner or his agent and a copy thereof has been provided to the owner
or his agent.
§ 170-5 FLAG § 170-8
164:359
§ 170-8. Reinstatement of license. [Amended 9-15-1978 by Ord. No.
O-78-79]
Any person whose license under this chapter has been suspended may
at any time make application for a reinspection for the purpose of
reinstatement of the license. Within 10 days following receipt of a written
request, including a statement signed by the applicant that in his opinion
the conditions causing suspension of the license have been corrected, the
Environmental Health Department shall make a reinspection. If the
applicant is complying with the requirements of this chapter and
regulations promulgated hereunder, the license shall be reinstated.
§ 170-9. Hearing and appeal. [Amended 9-15-1978 by Ord. No.
O-78-79]
The hearing provided for in § 170-7 shall be conducted by the Health Officer
at a time and place designated by him. Based upon the evidence presented,
the Health Officer shall make a finding and shall sustain, modify or rescind
any official notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of
the hearing discussion shall be furnished the license holder by the Health
Officer.
§ 170-10. Revocation of license. [Amended 9-15-1978 by Ord. No.
O-78-79]
For serious and repeated violations of any of the requirements or provisions
of this chapter or regulations promulgated hereunder, or for interference
with the Health Officer or his designated representative in the performance
of his duties, the license of a food-service establishment may be
permanently revoked after an opportunity for a hearing has been provided
by the Board of Health. Prior to such action the Health Officer shall notify
the license holder in writing, stating the reasons for which the license is
subject to revocation and advising the time and place at which the Board
will consider such action and that the license holder may be present and
present evidence on his behalf.
§ 170-11. Inspections. [Amended 9-15-1978 by Ord. No. O-78-79;
5-14-1985 by Ord. No. O-85-152]
A. The operation and facilities of all licensees under this chapter shall be
inspected at least twice a year.
B. The Health Officer or his designated representative shall have access to
all food-service establishments at any hour during which the foodservice
establishment is in operation for the enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter.
C. Whenever an inspection of a food-service establishment is conducted, a
record of the inspection and findings shall be recorded on a uniform
inspection report form which has been approved by the Health Officer.
This form shall summarize the requirements necessary for such
§ 170-8 NASHUA CODE § 170-11
164:360
§ 170-12. Approval of plans; fees. [Amended 5-14-1985 by Ord. No.
O-85-153; 6-14-1988 by Ord. No. O-88-40]
§ 170-13. Food-service equipment. [Amended 9-15-1978 by Ord. No.
O-78-79]
All new multiuse utensils and equipment shall meet current National
Sanitation Foundation standards or their equivalent as determined by the
Health Officer. If no standard exists for the item, it shall be determined
satisfactory if it is so designed and of such material and workmanship as to
be smooth, easily cleanable and durable, and shall be in good repair, and
the food contact surfaces of such equipment and utensils shall in addition
establishments to meet the minimum standards as governed by
regulations adopted under § 170-5. A copy of the completed inspection
form shall be furnished to the owner or operator of the food-service
establishment at the time of inspection in accordance with § 170-6.
Reinspection may be required if the routine inspection rating does not
meet minimum guidelines and criteria established by the department.
D. The cost of such reinspection shall be 1/2 of the cost of the annual
license fee of the food-service establishment. There is no fee to inspect
for fire, flood or chemical damage, or to assess damage to supplies and
equipment for insurance purposes.
A. When a food-service establishment is constructed or remodeled, or
when an existing structure is converted for use as a food-service
establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for such
construction, remodeling or alteration, showing layout arrangement
and construction of materials of work areas, and the location, size and
type of fixed equipment and facilities shall be submitted in duplicate to
the Health Officer or his designated representative for approval before
such work is begun.
B. Fees for the mandatory food-service plan review and associated
inspection(s) are established in accordance with the following schedule:
(1) Major remodeling of existing establishment: $75.
(2) Remodeling of existing establishment limited to equipment change
and minor structural modifications: $35.
(3) Food-service establishments other than restaurants or
supermarkets: $75.
(4) New restaurant with less than 50 seats: $75.
(5) New restaurant with 50 to 100 seats: $100.
(6) New restaurant with more than 100 seats: $125.
(7) Supermarkets: $125.
§ 170-11 FLAG § 170-13
164:361
be easily accessible for cleaning, nontoxic, corrosion-resistant and relatively
nonabsorbent.
§ 170-14. Seizure and restraint. [Amended 9-15-1978 by Ord. No.
O-78-79]
Any item of equipment or any utensils used in a food-service establishment
found in violation of this chapter shall be subject to seizure and restraint.
All adulterated and misbranded foods shall be subject to embargo and
condemnation as provided in RSA 146:20.
§ 170-15. Food-borne disease. [Amended 9-15-1978 by Ord. No.
O-78-79]
§ 170-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-15-1978 by Ord. No.
O-78-79; 3-12-1985 by Ord. No. O-84-79]
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in
§ 1-12 of the City Code. In addition thereto, such person may be enjoined
from continuing such violations. Each day upon which such a violation
occurs constitutes a separate violation.
Chapter 182
HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 105. Fire prevention — See Ch. 156.
A. Anyone having knowledge of or suspecting a food-borne disease
outbreak shall report it immediately by telephone to the City
Environmental Health Department.
B. When the Health Officer or his representative has reasonable cause to
suspect the possibility of disease transmission from any food-service
establishment or its employees, he shall make or cause to be made such
investigations as may be indicated and shall take appropriate action.
§ 170-13 NASHUA CODE § 170-16
164:362
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 182-1. Construction and interpretation of certain words.
Whenever the words "dwelling," "dwelling unit," "lodging house," "lodging
unit," "structure" and "premises" are used in this chapter they shall be
construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof."
§ 182-2. Terms not defined.
Where terms are not defined in this article but are defined in the Nashua
Building Code,53 as amended from time to time, those terms shall have the
meanings given therein. Terms not defined in either place shall have the
meaning given in Webster's Unabridged Dictionary.
§ 182-3. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the
meaning given in this section:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure the use of which is incidental to
that of the main structure and which is located on the same lot.
APPROVED — As approved by the Code Official or authority having
jurisdiction.
BASEMENT — Any portion of a building partly underground and having at
least 1/2 of its floor-to-ceiling height above the average grade.
CELLAR — Any portion of a building partly underground and having at least
1/2 of its floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade.
COMMON CORRIDOR and COMMON STAIRWAY — Any corridor or
stairway within the interior structure of a building, that is not located
entirely within a single dwelling unit.
DWELLING — Any structure which is wholly or partly used or intended to
be used for living and sleeping by human occupants.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling
and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or
intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
EXIT ACCESS — A portion of a means of egress which leads to an entrance
to an exit.
EXITWAY — Any unobstructed passageway to the out of doors discharging
at ground level.
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, rodents or
other pests by eliminating their harborage places, by removing or making
inaccessible materials that may serve as their food, by poison spraying,
fumigating or trapping, or by any other approved pest elimination methods.
53.Editor's Note: See Ch. 105, Building Construction.
§ 182-1 FLAG § 182-3
164:363
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
HABITABLE ROOMS — Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or
cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, corridors, storage or utility space
and similar areas are not considered habitable space.
HOUSING INSPECTOR — Any individual authorized by the City to
administer or enforce this chapter.
LET FOR OCCUPANCY or LET — To allow use of a dwelling unit by any
person or persons with or without remuneration.
LODGING HOUSE — A building containing lodging units.
LODGING UNIT — A space in a dwelling for semipermanent or transient use
by one or more individuals and not having cooking facilities. A lodging unit
shall include rooms in boardinghouses, lodging houses and tourist homes.
MULTIFAMILY — Containing more than two dwelling units.
OUTLET — A point on the wiring system at which current is taken to supply
utilization equipment.
OWNER — Any person, agent, firm or corporation having a legal or
equitable interest in property or the control over its use or disposition.
PERSON — Any individual or business entity.
PERSON RESPONSIBLE — The owner or any other person or persons with
the authority or capability to effect compliance with this chapter.
PLUMBING or PLUMBING FIXTURE — Water heating facilities, water
pipes, gas pipes, garbage and disposal units, waste lavatories, bathtubs,
shower baths, installed clothes washing machines or other similar
equipment, catch basins, drains, vents other similarly supplied fixtures,
together with all connections to water, gas, sewer or vent lines.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land including the buildings or
structures thereon.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Includes the following:
The physical condition or use of any premises regarded as a public
nuisance at common law;
A.
Any physical condition, use or occupancy of any premises or its
appurtenances constituting an attractive nuisance to children,
including but not limited to abandoned wells, shafts, basements,
excavations and unsafe fences or structures;
B.
C. Any premises that have unsanitary sewerage or plumbing facilities;
D. Any premises designated as unsafe for human habitation or use;
Any premises which are manifestly capable of being a fire hazard,
or are so manifestly unsafe or unsecure as to endanger life, limb or
property;
E.
§ 182-3 NASHUA CODE § 182-3
164:364
REMOTE EXITWAY — Exitways arranged so that the occupants have access
to two separate smoke areas for egress in the event of fire or other
emergency.
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage; the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal,
coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood,
excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, metals, mineral matter, glass,
crockery and dust and other combustible or flammable materials.
STRUCTURE — An assembly of materials forming a construction for
occupancy or use, including, among others, buildings, stadiums, tents,
reviewing stands, platforms, stagings, observation towers, radio towers,
water tanks, trestles, piers, wharves, open sheds, coal bins, shelters, fences
and display signs.
§ 182-4. Tense, gender and number.
Words used in the present tense include the future. Words in the masculine
gender include the feminine and neuter. The singular number includes the
plural and the plural the singular.
§ 182-5. Construction of "shall."
The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
Any premises from which the plumbing, heating or facilities required
by this chapter have been removed, or on which utilities have been
disconnected, destroyed, removed or rendered ineffective, or the
required precautions against trespassers have not been provided;
F.
Any premises which are unsanitary, or which are littered with rubbish
or garbage, or which have an uncontrolled growth of vegetation;
G.
Any structure or building that is in a state of dilapidation, deterioration
or decay, faultily constructed, overcrowded, open, vacant or
abandoned, damaged by fire to the extent as not to provide shelter, in
danger of collapse or failure, and is dangerous to anyone on or near the
premises.
H.
§ 182-3 FLAG § 182-5
164:365

ARTICLE II
Administration
§ 182-6. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "City Housing Code" and may be so cited
and pleaded.
§ 182-7. Code Enforcement Department created.
There is created within the City government a Code Enforcement
Department within the Community Development Division, responsibilities
of which include the enforcement and administration of the Housing Codes
adopted by the City. The department head of the Code Enforcement
Department shall be appointed by the Mayor in consultation with the
Director of the Community Development Division, for the establishment
and administration of an inspection and enforcement program designed to
ensure compliance with this chapter. He shall designate and direct officers,
agents and employees necessary to carry out the purpose of this chapter.
He shall submit an annual budget request for the operation of the agency
to the Director of the Community Development Division for inclusion in
the Division's budget request to the Mayor and members of the Board of
Aldermen.
§ 182-8. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is the establishment of the minimum standards
governing the condition and maintenance of dwellings; establishing
minimum standards governing supplied utilities and facilities and other
physical things and conditions essential to make dwellings safe, sanitary
and fit for human habitation; prevention of urban blight; establishing
minimum standards governing the condition of dwellings offered for rent;
fixing certain responsibilities and duties of owners and occupants of
dwellings; authorizing the inspection of dwellings, and the condemnation of
dwellings unfit for human habitation; and fixing penalties for violations.
§ 182-9. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter are the minimum property standards for all
structures, moveable and unmovable, which are now or in the future used
for human occupancy as residential dwellings and the areas, grounds or
parcels on which they are located in the City. Every portion of a building or
premises so used or intended to be used shall comply with the provisions
of this chapter, irrespective of when such buildings shall have been
constructed, altered, or repaired, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter.
§ 182-10. Severability.
If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter shall
be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision shall not affect
§ 182-6 FLAG § 182-10
164:367
the remaining portions of this chapter which shall continue in full force and
effect, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to
be severable.
§ 182-11. Prior existing violations.
This chapter shall not affect violations of any other ordinance, code or
regulation of the municipality existing prior to the effective date hereof, and
any such violation shall be governed and shall continue to be punishable to
the full extent of the law under the provisions of those ordinances, codes or
regulation in effect at the time the violation was committed.
§ 182-12. Conflicting provisions; interrelationship with other
provisions.
§ 182-13. Inspection authority.
A. This chapter shall not interfere with or annul any other ordinance, rule,
regulation or permit of the City, provided that unless specifically
excepted, where this chapter is more stringent it shall control.
B. Without limiting the generality of Subsection A, where an act or
omission is a violation of this chapter, and also a violation of any
provision of Chapters 105, 123 or 280 of the City Code, the Code
Official may seek abatement, issue orders, and seek applicable
remedies and penalties under either or all such chapters.
A. Right of entry. In order to safeguard the safety, health and welfare of
the public, the Code Official is authorized to enter any structure or
premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections
and performing his duties under this chapter, and may apply to a court
of competent jurisdiction for such warrants or other orders as may be
necessary to facilitate such entry for such purposes.
B. Interfering with inspection. If any owner, occupant or other person in
charge of a structure subject to the provisions of this chapter refuses,
impedes, inhibits, interferes with, restricts or obstructs entry and free
access to any part of the structure or premises where inspection
authorized by the chapter is sought, the administrative authority may
seek, in a court of competent jurisdiction, an order that such owner,
occupant or other in charge cease and desist with such interference.
C. Relief from personal liability. Any Code Official, officer or employee who
acts in good faith and without malice in the discharge of his duties of
enforcement of this chapter is relieved of all personal liability for any
damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of such acts
or alleged failure to act. Further, he shall not be held liable for any costs
in any action, suit or proceedings that may be instituted by him in the
enforcement of this chapter. In any of these actions the official or
employee shall be defended or represented by the jurisdiction's
attorney at law until the final termination of all proceedings.
§ 182-10 NASHUA CODE § 182-13
164:368
ARTICLE III
Unfit Structures
§ 182-14. Complaint of unfit structures; notice of hearing.
§ 182-15. Determination of Board; issuance of order to vacate;
posting of placard.
A. Whenever a petition is filed with the code enforcement agency by at
least 10 residents of the City charging that any dwelling is unfit for
human habitation, or whenever it appears to the Housing Inspector that
any dwelling is unfit for human habitation, the Housing Inspector shall,
if preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and
cause to be served upon the owner, every mortgagee of record, and all
parties in interest in such dwelling (including persons in possession), a
complaint stating the charges in that respect. If the person to be served
resides outside the state, service may be made upon him by registered
mail, or otherwise in accordance with § 182-23B of this chapter. If there
are unascertained persons having an interest in the dwelling, notice
may be given to them by publication in a newspaper having general
circulation in the City, such publication to be at least 10 days before the
date set for the hearing. The complaint shall contain a notice that a
hearing will be held before the Board of Housing Appeals at a place
therein fixed not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days after service
of the complaint that the owner, mortgagee and parties in interest shall
be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in
person or otherwise and give testimony at the place and time fixed in
the complaint and that the rules of evidence prevailing in the courts of
law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the Board of
Housing Appeals.
B. Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way
the power of a private citizen to bring complaint in the court against
any person who does not comply with the minimum standards of this
chapter.
C. Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit the power of
the City to enforce any provision of its Charter or of the City Code or to
define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement
according to applicable law.
A. If, after the notice and hearing, the Board of Housing Appeals
determines, according to the standards of this chapter, that the
dwelling under consideration is unfit for human habitation, it shall state
in writing its findings of fact in support of such determination and shall
issue and cause to be served upon the owners thereof an order which, if
the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling can be made at a
reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling and the ability of
the owner to assume such cost, requires the owner, within the time
specified in the order, to repair, after or improve the dwelling to render
§ 182-14 FLAG § 182-15
164:369
§ 182-16. Appeal from condemnation order.
If any owner is aggrieved by a decision of the Board of Housing Appeals,
he may appeal to the Mayor and Board of Aldermen. The Mayor and Board
of Aldermen shall hold a public hearing, due notice of hearing having
first been given to the Board of Housing Appeals and to the owner. The
it fit for human habitation or to vacate and close the dwelling as
a human habitation. If the repair, alteration or improvement of the
dwelling cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of
the dwelling and the ability of the owner to assume such cost, the Board
shall issue an order requiring the owner, within the time specified in
the order, to remove or demolish the dwelling.
B. After an order in accordance with Subsection A of this section, the
Housing Inspector shall placard the affected dwelling, lodging house,
dwelling unit or lodging unit unfit for human habitation, and shall post,
in a conspicuous place or places upon the affected dwelling, lodging
house, dwelling unit or lodging unit, a placard or placards bearing the
following words: "Condemned as Unfit for Human Habitation."
C. Any dwelling, lodging house, dwelling unit or lodging unit which has
been determined unfit for human habitation and which has been
placarded as such by the Housing Inspector shall be vacated within a
reasonable time as required by the Inspector. No owner or operator
shall rent to any person for human habitation, and no person shall
occupy, any dwelling, lodging house, dwelling unit or lodging unit which
has been determined unfit for human habitation and which has been
placarded by the Housing Inspector after the date which the Inspector
has required the affected dwelling, lodging house, dwelling unit or
lodging unit to be vacated.
D. No dwelling, lodging house, dwelling unit or lodging unit which has
been determined unfit for human habitation and which has been
placarded as such shall again be used for human habitation until
written approval is secured from, and the placard is removed by, the
Code Enforcement Department. The Code Enforcement Department
shall remove the placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the
determination of unfit for human habitation was based have been
eliminated.
E. No person shall deface or remove the placard from any dwelling,
lodging house, dwelling unit or lodging unit which has been determined
unfit for human habitation and placarded as such.
F. If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter, improve or
vacate and close the dwelling, or to remove or demolish the dwelling,
the City may file a petition in the superior court in which it shall set
forth the charges issued pursuant to § 182-23, as well as any other
allegations bearing upon the unfitness of the dwelling for human
habitation.
§ 182-15 NASHUA CODE § 182-16
164:370
Mayor and Board of Aldermen may affirm or revoke the decision of the
Board of Housing Appeals, or they may modify the same in accordance
with their findings. If they shall affirm or modify the decision, the Code
Enforcement Department shall proceed to enforce the order as affirmed or
so modified. If the Mayor and Board of Aldermen shall revoke the decision,
the proceedings shall be terminated.
§ 182-17. Creation of lien for recovery of costs.
Whenever the City shall incur costs for the repair, alteration, improvement,
vacating, closing, removal or demolition of a dwelling pursuant to an order
of the Superior Court, the amount of the costs shall be a lien against
the real property on account of which the costs were incurred, and the
lien (including as part thereof, upon allowance, City's costs and necessary
attorneys fees) may be foreclosed upon order of the Superior Court made
pursuant to a petition for that purpose filed in that Court. The lien shall
be subordinate to mortgages of record made before the institution of
proceedings under this chapter. Notice of the lien shall be filed with the
Register of Deeds for the county in which the real estate is situated, and
shall be recorded by him. If the dwelling is demolished by the City, it shall
sell the materials of such dwelling and pay the proceeds of the sale over to
the Superior Court for distribution to such persons as the Court shall find
entitled thereto.
§ 182-18. Board of Housing Appeals.
A. Created; terms of members. There is hereby created a Board of
Housing Appeals consisting of the Welfare Officer, the Health Officer
and the Fire Chief. Terms shall correspond with their respective official
tenure.
B. Chairman; meetings. The Welfare Officer shall be Chairman of the
Board. The Chairman shall preside over hearings and administer
affirmations and may vote on all matters. In the Chairman's absence the
Board shall elect an Acting Chairman from its membership, who shall
assume the responsibility of the Chairman. The Board shall meet on the
call of the Chairman.
C. Quorum; appeals. The presence of two members shall constitute a
quorum, and the concurring vote of two members shall be necessary to
modify or withdraw any notice of the Housing Inspector. The Board
shall hear appeals in open meetings at which the rules of evidence in
effect in the courts shall not apply.
D. Rules and regulations. The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations
as it may deem necessary to carry into effect its function under this
chapter.
E. The Board shall maintain a permanent record of all its meetings and
hearings and copies of all complaints, notices, orders and received
correspondence pertaining to its work.
§ 182-16 FLAG § 182-19
164:371
§ 182-19. Substandard conditions.
Any dwelling which has any or all of the following general substandard
conditions shall be deemed unfit for human habitation:
§ 182-20. Substandard conditions of structural elements.
Any dwelling which has any or all of the following defects of structural
elements shall be deemed unfit for human habitation:
A. Any dwelling which has become or is so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe,
unsanitary or which fails to provide the facilities essential to decent
living, or which is likely to cause sickness or disease, so as to work
injury to the health, safety or general welfare of those living therein;
B. Any dwelling having light and sanitation facilities which are inadequate
to protect the health, morals, safety or general welfare of human beings
who live or may live therein;
C. Any dwelling having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or
panic, or having insufficient stairways, fire escapes or other means of
communication;
D. Any dwelling which has parts which are so attached that they may fail
and injure members of the public or damage property;
E. Any dwelling which, because of its condition, is unsafe, unsanitary or
dangerous to the health, safety or general welfare of the people of this
City.
A. Any dwelling whose interior walls or other vertical members list, lean or
buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of
gravity falls outside of the middle third of its base;
B. Any dwelling which, exclusive of the foundation, shows 33% or more of
damage or deterioration of the supporting member or members, or 50%
of damage or deterioration of the nonsupporting enclosing or outside
walls or covering;
C. Any dwelling whose foundation will not adequately support the dwelling
structure at all points.
§ 182-19 NASHUA CODE § 182-20
164:372
ARTICLE IV
Enforcement
§ 182-21. Focus of inspections.
§ 182-22. Responsibility for compliance.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let for occupancy any
structure or premises or part thereof unless that part of the structure and
all common parts are in compliance with the standards established by this
chapter, except that certain sections of this chapter may otherwise delegate
responsibility.
§ 182-23. Contents, service of notice of violation.
A. Housing Code Inspectors shall direct their attention primarily to
dwellings based on:
(1) Citizen complaints;
(2) Exterior inspections, where they have reasonable cause to believe
there are housing code violations present;
(3) Target areas of the City given priority by the Community
Development Division.
B. As circumstances allow, there may be systematic inspections of all other
buildings.
A. Whenever the Housing Inspector determines that there has been or is a
violation, or that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has
been or is a violation of any provision of this chapter, he shall give
notice of such violation or alleged violation to the person or persons
responsible therefor. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification;
(3) Specify the violation which exists and the remedial action required;
(4) Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires.
B. Notices of violation, complaints, or orders shall be deemed to be
properly served upon the person responsible for an alleged violation if a
copy thereof is delivered to him personally, or left at his usual place of
abode or business with a person of suitable age and discretion who shall
be informed of the contents thereof, or sent by first-class mail to his last
known address, or posted in a conspicuous place on or about the
premises affected, or served, delivered or published in any other way
reasonably calculated to provide actual notice.
§ 182-21 FLAG § 182-23
164:373
§ 182-24. Warnings and citations.
§ 182-25. Prosecution.
In case any order is not promptly complied with the Housing Inspector may
request the City's legal representative to enforce the penalty provisions of
this chapter or to institute an appropriate action or proceeding at law or in
equity against the person responsible for the violation, ordering him to:
C. Notice of violation under this section includes warnings and citations
issued pursuant to § 182-24 of this chapter.
A. Generally. The head of the Code Enforcement Department and his
designee may issue warnings or citations to any person, natural or
otherwise, including but not limited to any owner, landlord, agent,
tenant, lessee or sublessee, who shall violate a provision of this chapter
or permit, allow or suffer any violation of this chapter, or who fails to
comply with an order or orders issued in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter. Such warnings or citations may be employed as either
substitution for or preliminary to and without limitation to other
remedies available to the City. Such warnings and citations shall be in
accordance with the procedures established by the head of the Code
Enforcement Department.
B. Action on warnings. Warnings shall be written upon standard forms
authorized by the head of the Code Enforcement Department. Warnings
shall specify the reason for the warning and shall direct abatement of
such condition which caused the issuance of such warnings within a
reasonable and certain period of time. Where warnings elicit
compliance as directed, the Code Official may cause such warnings to
be filed without further action.
C. Action on citations. Citations shall be written upon standard forms
authorized by the head of the Code Enforcement Department. Citations
shall specify the reason for the citation and shall direct abatement of
such conditions which cause the issuance of such citations within a
reasonable and certain period of time. Where citations elicit compliance
as directed, the Code Official may cause such citations to be filed
without further action after applicable fees, as provided by this chapter,
have been paid.54
A. Restrain, correct or remove the violation or refrain from any further
execution or work;
B. Restrain or correct the erection, installation or alteration of such
building;
C. Require the removal of work in violation;
54.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D, Fees for citations, which immediately followed, was
repealed 6-14-2016 by Ord. No. O-16-003.
§ 182-23 NASHUA CODE § 182-25
164:374
§ 182-26. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-14-2016 by Ord. No.
O-16-003]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished as provided in § 1-12 of the City Code. Every
day a violation continues after due notice has been served in accordance
with the terms and provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a separate
offense.
§ 182-27. Reprisal.
D. Prevent the occupation or use of the building, structure, or part thereof
erected, constructed, installed or altered in violation of, or not in
compliance with, the provisions of this chapter, or in violation of a plan
or specification under which an approval, permit or certificate was
issued.
A. No person shall threaten or take reprisal against any tenant of any
dwelling for reporting a violation or suspected violation of this chapter
to the Code Enforcement Department or to any board having as its
objective the enforcement of this chapter or for organizing or joining a
tenants union or council or similar organization. The receipt by any
tenant of any notice of termination of tenancy for reasons other than
nonpayment of rent or willful damage to the property by the tenant, or
the notice of increase in rent, or of notice of substantial alteration in the
terms of tenancy, within six months after making of a report or
complaint of violation or suspected violation of this chapter or the
organizing or joining of a tenants union or council shall create a
rebuttable presumption that such notice is a reprisal against the tenant
for such activity.
B. No person shall threaten or take reprisal against any landlord for
reporting a violation or suspected violation of this chapter to the Code
Enforcement Department.
§ 182-25 FLAG § 182-27
164:375

ARTICLE V
Structural Standards.
§ 182-28. Exterior standards.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy
any structure or part thereof unless that part of the structure and all
common parts are in compliance with the requirements of this section:
A. Foundation. In all structures the foundation shall be free from holes and
breaks and shall safely support the structure at all points.
B. Exterior walls. All exterior walls and trim shall be free from holes,
breaks and loose or rotted boards and all siding material shall be kept
free from defects.
C. Exterior finish. All exterior walls and trim shall be kept painted, treated,
sided or otherwise maintained so as to be substantially weatherproof
and neat in appearance.
D. Roofs. The roof shall be structurally sound, tight and have no defects
which might admit rain; roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent
rainwater from causing dampness to the walls or interior portion of the
building.
E. Chimneys. Chimneys shall be free from cracks, holes, loose bricks and
any blockage.
F. Porches and stairs. Every exterior stair, porch, balcony and all
appurtenances attached thereto shall be structurally sound and any
part thereof which shows excessive wear or is broken, cracked or loose
shall be repaired or replaced.
G. Carpeting. Carpeting or other covering on stairs and porches shall be
maintained in a safe condition.
H. Handrails and guardrails. Every flight of stairs which is over two risers
high shall have at least one handrail. Every open portion of a stair,
porch, landing or balcony which is more than 30 inches above the floor
or grade below shall have guardrails which shall have no openings
through which a nine-inch sphere can pass or as safety requires. All
handrails and guardrails shall be firmly fastened and maintained in
good condition.
I. Doorways. Every exterior doorway shall have a door which shall be
weathertight within its frame.
J. Doors. Every exterior door, door hinge, door knob, door frame and door
latch shall be maintained in good condition. Door locks in dwelling units
shall be in good repair and capable of tightly securing the door.
K. Door closing devices. All common exterior doors shall have automatic
door closing devices.
§ 182-28 FLAG § 182-28
164:377
§ 182-29. Interior standards.
No person shall let for occupancy any structure or part thereof unless that
part of the structure and all common parts are in compliance with the
requirements of this section:
L. Exit doors. Every door available as an exit shall be capable of being
opened from the inside easily and without the use of a key.
M. Hatchways. Every hatchway shall be so constructed and maintained as
to prevent the entrance of rodents, rainwater and surface drainage
water into the structure.
N. Windows to be tight. Every window sash shall be structurally sound and
fit within its frame so as to prevent outside elements from passing
through.
O. Windows to be glazed. Every window sash shall be fully fitted with
glass, plexiglass or polycarbonate panes which are without cracks or
holes.
P. Windows to be openable. In every window other than in a fixed window,
the lower sash shall be capable of being easily opened and shall be
capable of being held in the open position by window hardware.
Q. Insect screens. From May 15 to October 15 of each year, every window
used for ventilation purposes shall be supplied with window screens,
except that no such screens shall be required for a dwelling unit on a
floor above the fifth floor.
R. Street numbers. Each structure to which a street number has been
assigned shall have the number so assigned displayed in a position
easily observable and readable from the public right-of-way.55
A. Structural members. The supporting structural members of every
building shall be maintained structurally sound and shall be reinforced
or replaced when deterioration or defects exist which could render
them unsafe.
B. Dampness prevention. In every building, cellars, basements and crawl
spaces shall be maintained free from dampness conducive to decay or
deterioration of the structure.
C. Stairs. All interior stairs shall be maintained structurally sound, and
every part thereof which shows excessive wear or which is broken,
warped, cracked or loose shall be repaired or replaced.
D. Handrails and guardrails. Every flight of stairs which is more than two
risers high shall have at least one handrail. Every open portion of a
stair, porch, landing or balcony which is more than 30 inches above the
floor shall have guardrails which shall have no openings through which
55.Editor's Note: See Ch. 280, Street and Building Identification.
§ 182-28 NASHUA CODE § 182-29
164:378
a nine-inch sphere can pass. All handrails and guardrails shall be firmly
fastened and maintained in good condition.
E. Doors. Every exit access door, door hinge, door knob, door frame and
door latch shall be maintained in good condition. Door locks in dwelling
units and lodging units shall be in good repair and capable of tightly
securing the door.
F. Interior surfaces. Floors, walls (including windows and doors), ceilings
and other interior surfaces shall be maintained in good, clean and
sanitary condition. Peeling paint, cracked or loose plaster, decayed
wood and other defective surface conditions shall be eliminated.
G. Sanitation of dwelling units. It shall be the responsibility of the
occupant or occupants thereof to maintain the interior of every dwelling
unit in a clean and sanitary condition.
H. Sanitation of common areas. It shall be the responsibility of the owner
thereof to maintain all common areas of a structure in a clean and
sanitary condition.
I. Floor coverings. Carpeting, linoleum or other covering on stairs and
floors shall be maintained in a safe condition.
J. Bathroom and kitchen floors. Every toilet room, bathroom and kitchen
floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be
substantially impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to be
easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
K. Storage of garbage or rubbish. Garbage, rubbish or hazardous items
shall not be allowed to accumulate or be stored in common corridors or
stairways.
L. Rodent and insect protection. All structures shall be kept free from the
infestation of insects, rodents and other pests, and where such
infestation exists the insects, rodents or other pests shall be promptly
exterminated by an accepted process. After extermination, approved
precautions must be taken to prevent reinfestation. In the case of a
rodent infestation the structure must be rodentproofed.
M. Responsibility for eradication of pests. When an infestation is limited to
a single dwelling unit, responsibility under this section lies with the
occupant thereof. When an infestation occurs in more than one dwelling
unit of a structure, or in the common areas of a structure, responsibility
under this section shall lie with the owner.
N. Dwelling unit identification. Each dwelling or lodging unit shall have a
number assigned and displayed on all unit exit access doors, with said
identification prominently displayed.
§ 182-29 FLAG § 182-30
164:379
§ 182-30. Premises and accessory structure standards.
No person shall occupy as owner occupant, let to another for occupancy or
maintain any structure or premise or part thereof unless that part of the
structure and all common parts are in compliance with the requirements of
this article.
§ 182-31. Emergency and Code Enforcement Department
information. [Amended 5-13-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-1856]
A. Sanitation. All exterior property areas shall be maintained in a clean
and sanitary condition free from any accumulation of rubbish or
garbage.
B. Accessory structure. All accessory structures, including detached
garages, shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair and
they shall conform to the requirements of § 182-28 of this chapter.
C. Unregistered motor vehicles. No more than one currently unregistered
or uninspected, ungaraged motor vehicle shall be located on any
residential lot. A motor vehicle failing to display a currently valid
registration plate or inspection sticker shall be deemed to be
unregistered or uninspected for the purpose of this section.
D. Sidewalks and public areas. All sidewalks, walkways, steps and
driveways shall be kept free of snow, ice and other debris hazardous to
the public.
E. Public nuisance. All premises shall be maintained free from public
nuisance.
A. Posting of owner's emergency information and Code Enforcement
Department information.
(1) All dwellings which are let or in which one or more units are let to
another for occupancy shall have posted in a regularly accessible
common area written notification containing the following:
(a) The name, address, and telephone number of the owner or his/
her agent. If the owner or his/her agent does not reside in New
Hampshire and within 25 miles of the subject structure, the
owner must post, in addition to his/her or his/her agent's name,
the name, address, and telephone number of a person to
contact in case of an emergency who resides in New
Hampshire and within 25 miles of the structure.
(b) A statement that disputes regarding building code and/or
housing standards should first be addressed by the property
owner(s) and tenant(s) before contacting the Code
Enforcement Department.
56.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall become effective 9-1-2008.
§ 182-30 NASHUA CODE § 182-31
164:380
(c) A statement that the party or parties responsible for
compliance with building codes or housing standards should
correct a violation within 14 days of receipt of a written notice
of said violation or, in an emergency, as promptly as conditions
require. An "emergency" exists when a violation of a building
code and/or housing standard creates conditions which pose
an immediate and serious threat to the health or safety of
persons occupying a dwelling unit. A "nonemergency" situation
exists when a violation of a building code and/or housing
standard materially affects the habitability of a dwelling place
but does not pose an immediate risk to the health or safety of
the tenant(s).
(d) The address, telephone number(s) and website address of the
Code Enforcement Department.
(2) Exception. In lieu of posting the written notification, an owner may
maintain copies of said notification signed by each tenant. An
owner shall file a copy of the written notification containing the
required owner's emergency information with the Code
Enforcement Department. An owner shall, upon request, provide
copies of the signed written notification to Code Enforcement
Department employees for review.
B. The Code Enforcement Department shall prepare a written notification
form which shall be provided to owners upon request.
C. Transfer of ownership. Upon transfer of ownership, the new owner shall
comply with the posting or filing of emergency and Code Enforcement
Department information within 24 hours of transfer.
D. Unattended emergency numbers. Whenever emergency numbers are
left unattended for a period of 24 hours or longer, another name and
emergency number shall be provided in accordance with this section.
E. Violations. The head of the Code Enforcement Department or designee
may issue warnings or citations for violations of this section as provided
for in § 182-24. Subsequent violations of this section shall be punishable
as provided for in § 182-26.
§ 182-31 FLAG § 182-31
164:381

ARTICLE VI
Basic Residential Requirements
§ 182-32. Standards.
No person shall let for occupancy any structure or part thereof unless that
part of the structure and all common parts are in compliance with the
requirements of this article.
§ 182-33. Sanitary facilities.
A. Facilities and equipment. All equipment and all building space and
parts in or attached to every building or structure shall be constructed,
installed and maintained so as to properly and safely perform their
intended function.
B. Privacy and security. Every dwelling unit and lodging unit shall be
designed and arranged to provide privacy and security.
A. Maintenance. The minimum sanitary facilities set out in Subsections B
through I of this section shall be supplied and maintained in a sanitary,
safe and working condition.
B. Water closet. Every dwelling unit shall contain within its walls a room,
separate from the habitable rooms, which affords privacy and which is
equipped with a water closet.
C. Lavatory. Every dwelling unit shall contain a lavatory which shall be in
the same room as the water closet or, if in another room, the lavatory
shall be located in close proximity to the door that leads directly into
the water closet room.
D. Bathtub or shower. Every dwelling unit shall contain a room which
affords privacy to a person in the room and which is equipped with a
bathtub or shower.
E. Kitchen sink. Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink apart from
the lavatory.
F. Water and sewer system. Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub or
shower and water closet required under this section shall be properly
connected to either a public water and sewer system or to an approved
private water and sewer system. All sinks, lavatories, bathtubs and
showers shall be supplied with hot and cold running water.
G. Water heating facilities. Every dwelling unit and lodging house shall be
supplied with water heating facilities which are installed, maintained
and connected with hot water lines to the fixtures requiring hot water
under this chapter. Water heating facilities shall be capable of heating
water to such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water
to be drawn from every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub,
shower and laundry facility at a temperature of not less than 130° F.
§ 182-32 FLAG § 182-33
164:383
§ 182-34. Mechanical requirements.
§ 182-35. Electrical requirements.
H. Plumbing fixtures. All plumbing fixtures, vents, drains and water supply
lines shall be properly installed, connected and maintained in a safe
working order; and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and
defects and shall be capable of performing the functions for which they
were designed.
I. Lodging houses. Every lodging house shall be supplied with at least one
water closet, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower properly connected
to an approved water and sewer system and in a safe working condition,
and shall be supplied for each six sleeping rooms within a lodging house
or where ever said facilities are shared.
J. Waste containers. Every dwelling unit and lodging house shall be
supplied with rigid plastic or metal containers with covers of sufficient
volume to provide storage for all rubbish and garbage generated within
the dwelling.
K. Responsibility for waste storage. It shall be the responsibility of the
occupants of each dwelling, lodging unit to properly store all rubbish
and garbage in the containers required by Subsection J.
L. Stove and refrigerator. Every dwelling unit shall be provided with a
stove for cooking food, and a refrigerator for the safe storage of food at
temperatures less than 45° F., but more than 32° F. under ordinary
maximum summer conditions, which are properly installed with all
necessary connections for safe, sanitary and efficient operation. The
stove and refrigerator need not be installed when, pursuant to express
agreement between the owner and occupant, the occupant is expected
to provide same upon occupancy. If the occupant is expected to provide
the stove or refrigerator the owner is required to provide sufficient
space and adequate connections for the safe and efficient installation
and operation of a stove or refrigerator.
A. Heating facilities. The owner of every dwelling unit and lodging unit
shall provide and maintain in safe condition, heating facilities that are
capable of adequately maintaining a room temperature of at least 64° F.
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. and 68° F. between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. at a point three feet above the floor
and three feet from an exterior wall in all habitable rooms, bathrooms
and toilet rooms. The owner, when providing the heat, shall maintain
these minimum average room temperatures.
B. Clothes dryers exhaust. Clothes dryer venting systems shall be
independent of all other systems and be vented directly to the outdoors.
A. Electrical outlets. Every habitable space except kitchens in a dwelling
shall contain at least three separate and remote outlets, one of which
§ 182-33 NASHUA CODE § 182-35
164:384
may be a ceiling or wall-type light fixture. Every kitchen shall contain
a minimum of three separate and remote outlets. Where kitchen
countertops exist, at least one of the required kitchen outlets shall be
located above the countertop. Every bathroom and laundry room shall
contain at least one outlet. The required receptacle outlets shall be
duplex type.
B. Lighting fixtures.
(1) Every corridor, stairway, water closet room, bathroom, laundry
room, kitchen and furnace room shall contain at least one light
fixture. The light in every stairway within a dwelling unit shall be
controlled by conveniently located three-way switches.
(2) Exception. Cellar stairway lighting may be controlled by a single
pole switch.
C. Common corridors and stairways. Every common corridor and stairway
shall be supplied with a lighting system which produces illumination
sufficient to protect the safety of all persons using those facilities. Such
lighting systems shall be kept in continuous operation, or shall be
controlled by three-way or four-way switches which are conveniently
located for all persons who might use the stairway or corridor, or shall
be operated by an automatic timer set to turn the lights on at least 1/2
hour before sunset and turn the lights off at not earlier than 1/2 hour
after sunrise.
D. Overcurrent protection devices. Every electrical panel board shall be
provided with mechanical circuit breakers or Type S fuses. Maximum
ampacity of which shall be determined by the wire size as shown in the
following table:
Maximum Overcurrent Ampacity Requirements
Copper Wire Size Maximum Ampacity
14 15
12 20
10 30
Aluminum Wire Size Maximum Ampacity
12 15
10 20
E. Panel board accessibility.
(1) Panel boards shall be accessible at all times to the occupants of
every dwelling.
(2) Exception. In a multiple-occupancy building where electric service
and electrical maintenance are provided by the building
management and where these are under continuous building
management supervision, the panel boards supplying more than
§ 182-35 FLAG § 182-35
164:385
one occupancy shall be permitted to be accessible to authorized
management personnel only.
F. Maintenance. All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be
maintained in a safe manner. All electrical equipment shall be of an
approved type. Extension cords shall not be used as permanent wiring.
G. Exterior lighting. Every exterior doorway shall be equipped with an
artificial lighting system which produces sufficient illumination to allow
safe usage of the doorway.
H. Defective systems. When the Housing Inspector believes that the
electrical system or any part thereof in a dwelling is defective and
unsafe, posing an immediate hazard to life or property the Housing
Inspector, in consultation with the Electrical Inspector, shall cause the
hazard to be eliminated.
§ 182-35 NASHUA CODE § 182-35
164:386
ARTICLE VII
Means of Egress
§ 182-36. Standards.
No person shall let for occupancy any structure or part thereof unless that
part of the structure and all common parts are in compliance with the
requirements of this article.
§ 182-37. Lodging units.
In lodging houses or where lodging units and dwelling units are located
within the same structure, the Code Official will coordinate with the Fire
Marshal's office for the enforcement of egress requirements in accordance
with the Life Safety Code.
§ 182-38. Number of exitways.
In multifamily dwellings having one or more dwelling units above the first
story, every dwelling unit shall have access to at least two remote exitways.
Such exitways may use common or connecting corridors, but the two
required exitways from any one dwelling unit shall not use a common
stairway or ladder. Such exitways may not use ropes or similar devices, and
may use fire escapes and ladders only as allowed by this article. One- and
two-family dwellings shall require access to two remote exitways only when
located in a structure where a nonresidential unit is located.
§ 182-39. Egress doors.
§ 182-40. Fire escapes and ladders.
A. All egress doors in multifamily dwellings that open to interior common
corridors or stairways shall be at least one and three-fourths inch solid
bonded wood core doors or equivalent. Exception: Structures which are
equipped with an approved fire suppression system installed
throughout the structure.
B. Doors in multifamily dwellings leading to common corridors and
stairways shall be equipped with self-closing devices capable of closing
and latching the door. Exception: Structures which are equipped with
an approved fire suppression system installed throughout the structure.
A. Whenever a fire escape is provided as an exitway or part thereof it shall
consist of an access opening, access platform and railing, stairway and
railing or ladder, intermediate landing and railing if over one story, and
ground level discharge. Ladders shall be permitted only for the second
story of a structure and also for a half-story above the second story. In
no case shall fire escape ladders or stairways descend more than one
story without an intermediate platform and a separate ladder or
stairway descending to ground level. All ladders shall be permanently
installed in a fixed position and shall be capable of being collapsed into
§ 182-36 FLAG § 182-40
164:387
a single rail configuration and shall be supported by rigid connection to
the structure.
B. All fire escapes shall be maintained in a safe and structurally sound
condition, painted to prevent rust and free from obvious defects.
C. Every fire escape shall meet the following requirements:
(1) The access window or door opening shall provide a clear opening of
not less than 5.7 square feet in area. At no time shall the width be
less than 20 inches nor shall the height be less than 24 inches to
determine the required 5.7 square feet.
(2) Every balcony platform shall extend on each side beyond the access
opening and shall be a minimum of 36 inches in length (parallel to
the wall) and 30 inches in width (perpendicular to the wall) and
shall be installed not more than eight inches below a door and not
less than 12 inches nor more than 18 inches below a window sill.
(3) Every stairway landing not serving as an access balcony shall be
not less than 36 inches in length (parallel to the wall) and not less
than 22 inches wide (perpendicular to the wall).
(4) Every balcony, landing and stairway shall have a railing not less
than 30 inches nor more than 36 inches high with vertical balusters
not more than nine inches apart and shall be capable of
withstanding a concentrated load of 200 pounds applied in any
direction at the top of the rail.
(5) Every fire escape shall be designed to support a live load of 100
pounds per square foot and shall be constructed of iron, steel or
other metal in design having equivalent strength and resistance to
corrosion. Every platform or stair tread shall consist of one-eighthinch
by one-inch flat bars on edge one inch apart with adequate
bracing.
(6) All fastenings for fire escape platforms and stairways shall pass
through the wall and securely fasten on the opposite side or shall
fasten to the framework of the structure by four-and-one-half-inch
by three-eights-inch galvanized lag bolts with not less than four to
be incorporated in supporting each angle brace.
(7) All stairs shall be a minimum width of 22 inches clearance between
rails, a maximum of nine inches rise, and a minimum of nine inches
tread. Stairs shall have a maximum height of 12 feet between
landings and a minimum of six feet six inches headroom. Fire
escapes shall discharge to the ground level by a fixed stair,
swinging stair, or by ladder where allowed by this article.
(8) There shall be a minimum of 26 inches and a maximum of 28 inches
clearance between any platform and ladder.
§ 182-40 NASHUA CODE § 182-40
164:388
§ 182-41. Smoke detection/alarm devices.
(9) Ladder rails shall be one-and-one-half-inch by one-and-one-halfinch
by one-eighth-inch angle or channel and shall be 16 inches
apart.
(10) Ladder rungs shall be 7/8 inch in diameter or one-eighth inch by
one-inch by one-inch angle and there shall be 10 inches to 12
inches distance between rungs with the lowest rung 12 inches from
the ground and shall be fastened with three-eighths-inch bolts in
one-half-inch holes in the rails and three-eighths-inch holes in the
rungs to provide a "sloppy" fit. The rail not fixed to the structure
must touch the ground with a pad.
(11) Permits are required before installation of any fire escape or part
thereof.
A. Annunciation devices in dwelling units.
(1) Every dwelling unit shall be protected by smoke detection/alarm
devices as specified by this article. All smoke detection/alarm
devices required by this article shall be listed by a nationally
recognized testing laboratory and installed in a manner consistent
with the requirements of the City Building Code.57 Where this
section requires that smoke detection/alarm devices be powered by
the building electrical service, a permit shall be obtained from the
Code Enforcement Department prior to the commencement of
work. All smoke detection/alarm devices and associated equipment
shall be maintained in operating condition at all times.
(2) At least one approved smoke detection/alarm device powered by
the building electrical service shall be installed at every level in
every dwelling unit.
(3) The required smoke detection/alarm devices within a dwelling unit
shall be located in the proximity of the bedroom(s). When the
bedrooms are so arranged that one smoke detection/alarm device
will not protect all bedroom areas, one or more additional smoke
detection/alarm device shall be installed to ensure that a smoke
detection/alarm device exists in the proximity of all bedroom areas.
(4) Every basement/cellar stairway leading directly into a dwelling unit
or which is entirely within a dwelling unit shall have a smoke
detection/alarm device located on the ceiling at the foot of the
stairway. Exception: Smoke detection/alarm devices not powered
by the building electrical service which were installed prior to July
1, 1984, may be continued in service and are deemed to meet the
requirements of this article until such time as they are in need of
being replaced.
57.Editor's Note: See Ch. 105, Building Construction.
§ 182-40 FLAG § 182-41
164:389
§ 182-42. Fire suppression systems.
B. Annunciation devices in common areas. In buildings containing two or
more dwelling units, common corridors and stairways shall have a
smoke detection/alarm device at each level which are powered by the
building electrical service. A permit shall be obtained from the Code
Enforcement Department prior to the commencement of work. All
devices and equipment required by this article shall be listed by a
nationally recognized testing laboratory and installed in a manner
consistent with the requirements of the City Building Code. All smoke
detection/alarm devices and associated equipment shall be maintained
in operating condition at all times.
A. All structures having 12 or more dwelling units having one or more
dwelling units entirely located higher than the second floor shall have
an approved water sprinkler system, installed throughout the structure
in accordance with the City Building Code, and maintained in
accordance with the Fire Prevention Code.58
(1) Exception: Those structures that comply with the requirements of
the City Building Code for:
(a) Firestopping;
(b) Interior finish in common areas;
(c) Section 804.0 which pertains to exits in "existing buildings."
B. This section shall be effective January 1, 1992.
58.Editor's Note: See Ch. 156, Fire Prevention.
§ 182-41 NASHUA CODE § 182-42
164:390
ARTICLE VIII
Lead Paint Poisoning Prevention and Control
[Added 6-12-1990 by Ord. No. O-90-34]
§ 182-43. State law adopted.
The City has duly adopted the provisions of RSA 130-A in accordance with
RSA 130-A:7 by Ordinance No. O-90-10.59
§ 182-44. Time for notice and removal.
Notwithstanding the provision of any other law or regulation, for the
purposes of enforcement within the City, the provisions of RSA 130-A:4
which provide for a thirty-day notice and abatement period shall be read
and enforced as providing a seventy-five-day notice and abatement period.
§ 182-45. Scope.
The provisions of this chapter are supplement to, and not in place of, any
other provisions of the Charter of the City or of the City Code, or any rule
or regulation lawfully promulgated thereunder.
59.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. O-90-10, adopted 3-27-1990, is on file in the Clerk's office.
§ 182-43 FLAG § 182-45
164:391
Chapter 190
LAND USE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conservation Commission — See Ch. 12, Art.
I.
Abutter notification — See Ch. 72.
Building construction — See Ch. 105.
Communication towers and antennas — See
Ch. 123.
Construction and demolition work — See Ch.
128.
Fences — See Ch. 150.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 156.
Noise — See Ch. 201.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 285.
§ 182-45 NASHUA CODE § 182-45
164:392
Part 1
Generally
ARTICLE I
Universally Applicable Provisions
§ 190-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known, and may be cited as, the "Land Use Code of
the City of Nashua."
§ 190-2. Applicability. [Amended 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-063]
§ 190-3. Implementation of Master Plan.
This code implements the Master Plan of the City of Nashua, adopted by
the Planning Board on November 15, 2001, and approved resolution of the
Board of Aldermen on December 16, 2001.
§ 190-4. Coordination with other regulations.
Activities subject to this code shall comply with all other applicable
requirements of the City Code, including but not limited to Chapters 105,
123 and 280 (relating to buildings), Chapters 110, 156 and 160 (relating to
fire prevention), Chapter 255 (sewage disposal), and Chapters 195, 231 and
285 (relating to streets, management of public right-of-way).
§ 190-5. Rules of construction.
Rules for interpreting this code, including definitions, are established in
Article XLII of this code.
A. The requirements of this chapter, as amended from time to time, shall
apply to all development or changes in land use within the municipal
borders of the City of Nashua, including those undertaken by the City of
Nashua and its constituent and affiliated agencies, departments and
officials, to the fullest extent of the law, except when the City of Nashua
acquires an interest in land for a highway as defined in RSA 229:1. If, as
a result of the City acquiring said interest, there is a violation of this
chapter on the private property remaining after partial acquisition,
then that violation is deemed nonconforming and shall be governed by
Article XII, Nonconformities.
B. The requirement for an advisory opinion from the Historic District
Commission shall apply to that portion of Greeley Park bordered by
Manchester Street to the west and the tracks of the Boston and Maine
Railroad on the east, currently designated as lots 57-1 and 48-2.
[Added 10-24-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-039]
§ 190-1 FLAG § 190-6
164:393
§ 190-6. Permits and certificates.
No development activity or change in land use shall commence or be
established unless and until all applicable permits required by Part 3 of this
chapter are approved and issued.
§ 190-7. Condominiums.
§ 190-8. Special use permit for development of lots with access
from paper streets.
A. Pursuant to RSA 356-B:5, this chapter does not prohibit condominiums
as such by reason of the form of ownership inherent therein. In
addition, this chapter does not treat any condominium differently where
it permits a physically identical project or development under a
different form of ownership.
B. Proposed conversion condominiums and the use thereof that do not
conform to the zoning, land use and site plan regulations of this chapter
shall secure a conditional use permit and any other required approvals
prior to becoming a conversion condominium.
A. A special use permit from the Planning Board under RSA 674:21 II for
development of a lot whose sole access from a public street is by a rightof-
way which was dedicated to public use by being shown on a
subdivision plan but which has been released and discharged from all
public servitude by vote of the aldermen or by lack of public use under
RSA 231:51 and 231:52. The special use permit shall be in addition to
the variance for such development required from the Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
B. Application for a special use permit shall be on a form provided by the
Planning Department, and the applicant is to pay the minimum
application fee set forth in § 190-267, abutter notification costs, sign
posting requirements in the same dollar amount established for site
plan and subdivision applications. The applicant shall submit an
abutter's list, information and plans detailing how the applicant
satisfies the six conditions of approval listed in Subsection D of this
§ 190-8 to the applicable City department or other public utility. The
Planning Department, Division of Public Works, Fire Rescue
Department, Environmental Health Department, and applicable public
utilities shall review and make a recommendation on the application
and forward it to the Planning Department for consideration by
Planning Board.
C. A public hearing shall be required for a special use permit under this
section with the same abutter and public notice as for a subdivision or
site plan application.
§ 190-6 NASHUA CODE § 190-8
164:394
§ 190-9. Summary.
D. The special use permit shall be granted upon a finding by the Planning
Board that the proposed development fulfills all of the following
conditions:
(1) Adequate access for proper water, sewer and other utility
connections;
(2) Provision for snow removal and trash removal;
(3) Proper drainage from driveway;
(4) Adequate access for emergency vehicles;
(5) Safe sight distance for driveway; and
(6) No other substantial adverse impact on public health and safety.
A. Purpose of the Land Use Code. The major purpose of the Land Use Code
is to implement the City's adopted Master Plan. It is designed to provide
the rules about what is expected of applicants in order to gain approval
to develop land in the City. This executive summary describes how the
Land Use Code is structured. It describes how to navigate the Code, the
major topics covered in each article, and how the sections are
numbered (consistent with the format of other City Code provisions).
The Land Use Code is available online at the Planning Department's
Web site: http://www.nashuah.gov/planning. [Amended 2-26-2008 by
Ord. No. O-08-07]
B. Navigating the Land Use Code. The Land Use Code is comprehensive in
scope and is not intended to be read from cover to cover. It is organized
so readers may look up only the parts they need. The list of articles and
divisions in the table of contents shows the main topics and overall
organization of the Land Use Code, while the section listings at the
beginning of each division provide more detail about the subjects
addressed. Later portions of this introduction explain different ways to
use the Land Use Code to answer frequently asked questions. There are
many other ways to use this Land Use Code, depending on your
objectives.
C. Land Use Code organization.
(1) The numbering system is consistent with the system used
throughout the City's Code. The Land Use Code is Chapter 190 of
the City Code. Chapter 190 is divided into Parts, which are divided
into articles, which are divided into sections and subsections as
follows:
1 I § 190-1 A (1) (a)
Part Article Section Subsections
§ 190-8 FLAG § 190-9
164:395
(2) Outside the section. When a reference is to text outside of the same
section, the reference number starts with the Article number and
continues to the appropriate level for the reference. The names
"Land Use Code" and "chapter" are used if the reference is to the
entire Land Use Code or Chapter 190.
(3) Within the section. When a reference is to text within the same
section, the name of the subsection is used, and the reference
"number" starts with the appropriate subsection number.
(4) Purpose statements. The beginning of most Parts, articles, and
sections include an italicized purpose statement. The purpose
statement summarizes the Master Plan policies that the section is
designed to implement, other relevant public policies, and factfindings
governing the section. These purpose statements provide
the basis for the development standards, but are not standards. In
other words, an application for approval of a development cannot
be denied because of a conflict with the purpose statement.
However, an application will be denied where it conflicts with the
standards.
D. Contents of the Land Use Code. Major topics within the chapter are
called Parts. The Parts are summarized below.
(1) Part 1 includes background material germane to the entire Land
Use Code. It describes the purpose and scope of the ordinance, and
sets the stage for the remainder of the document.
(2) Part 2.
(a) Part 2 is the City's zoning ordinances. This article establishes
the zoning districts, overlay zoning districts, and special
zoning districts as well as use regulations, and bulk and
dimensional standards. These regulations establish the uses
that are permitted in each zone. They also state which uses are
allowed in limited situations, known as "conditional uses," and
which are prohibited. Development standards for each base
district are also included.
(b) Section 190-11 lists the zoning districts. A summary schedule
showing the permitted uses and special uses in all districts is
presented in § 190-15. This schedule is referred to as the "Use
Matrix." A summary schedule showing the minimum lot size,
density, intensity, height, and open space percentage in all
districts is presented in § 190-16. This schedule is referred to
as the "Dimensional Matrix."
(c) To avoid repetition, Article VI of Part 2 contains regulations for
specific uses and development types that apply in all base
districts. Examples include attached dwellings, home
occupations, and cell towers. These uses may or may not be
permitted as of right or as a conditional use, depending on how
§ 190-9 NASHUA CODE § 190-9
164:396
they are listed in the particular district under the Use Matrix.
The standards are designed to address particular issues that
are raised by the particular use.
(d) Standards relating to the City's zoning authority are codified in
Part 2. These include floodplain management, impact fees,
signs, and wetlands. Part 2, Article XII, includes the
regulations for legal nonconforming uses and structures.
(e) Special districts and overlay districts. Overlay districts consist
of regulations that address specific subjects that may apply to
a variety of areas in the City, such as requirements for historic
districts and landmarks. Special districts are regulations that
are tailored to a specific area of the City or to a specific type of
development. The Zoning Map identifies overlay districts as
well as the base zoning districts and other information.
(3) Part 3 describes how to obtain a permit and describes what
happens if the Land Use Code is violated. It consolidates permitting
procedures ranging from legislative decisions (such as rezoning),
administrative decisions (subdivision and site plan approval;
variances), and ministerial decisions (e.g., building permits). It also
contains enforcement procedures.
(4) Part 4 contains the development standards applicable to
subdivision plans and site plans. Some of these standards may also
apply to building permits where indicated by Part 2.
(5) Part 7 formally establishes the agencies involved in the permitting
process: Planning Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment, Historic
District Commission, and Conservation Commission.
(6) Part 8, Articles XLII and XLIII, are technical sections needed to
administer and interpret the ordinance. Article XLII includes the
definition of terms and phrases used throughout the ordinance.
Article XLIII is the checklist of information that must be submitted
in order to have a complete application.
E. Using the Land Use Code.
(1) Determining where a specific use may locate.
(a) To determine what base district a specific use may be located,
the user must first determine what land use category it is in.
Use the Use Matrix (§ 190-15, Table 15-1) to look up a specific
use. These are listed by category (for example, retail sales or
heavy industry) rather than types of business. If there is a
question as to how the use is defined, the Land-Based
Classifications (LBCS) published by the American Planning
Association and/or the North American Industrial
Classification System (NAICS) should be consulted. These
resources are comprehensive classification systems for land
§ 190-9 FLAG § 190-9
164:397
uses or industries that are cross referenced in the Land Use
Code. [Reference: See Article XLII.]
(b) Then, look at the Use Matrix to see the status of the particular
land use. Land use categories may be allowed by right, allowed
only as a conditional use (with additional conditions possible),
or prohibited. You should also check Article VI for
supplemental use regulations because some uses are subject to
special standards.
(c) Finally, although a base district may allow a use, a specific site
may be subject to additional regulations from an overlay
district or special district. The regulations of the overlay
district or special district supersede the regulations of the base
district and may affect the uses allowed and conditions
required, so those regulations should also be consulted.
(2) Determining which procedures apply. Each section of Part 3,
Procedures, describes the procedures for zoning, subdivision and
site plan approval. Each section includes a subsection entitled
"Applicability." This subsection describes the situations where a
particular process is needed. If the section applies, the reader
should then consult the other subsections, which describe how an
application is initiated, how an application is processed, the criteria
for review, and cross references to other parts of the Land Use
Code. In addition, most sections have a subsection entitled "Scope
of approval" which describes the rights granted to an applicant by
the issuance of approval of the permit. Keep in mind that not all
permits entitle an applicant to begin construction. In fact, most
simply allow an applicant to proceed to the next step in the
approval process.
(3) Determining the standards applicable to a site.
(a) If the site only requires zoning approval, consult the
Dimensional Matrix (§ 190-16, Table 16-3) to determine the
density, setbacks, height and other restrictions.
(b) If subdivision or site plan approval is required, proceed to
Parts 3 through 6 to determine the standards that apply. Read
the sections entitled "Applicability" carefully, because some of
these standards apply only to certain types of situations.
§ 190-9 NASHUA CODE § 190-9
164:398
Part 2
Zoning Districts And Supplemental Use Regulations
ARTICLE II
Generally
The purpose of this Part 2 is:
• To implement the Master Plan pursuant to RSA 674:2, by
providing the best and most appropriate future development of
the area under the jurisdiction of the Planning Board, to aid
the Board in designing ordinances that result in preserving and
enhancing the unique quality of life and culture of Nashua, and
to achieve smart growth, sound planning, and wise resource
protection.
• To accomplish the purposes described in RSA 674:17.
§ 190-10. Interpretation. [Amended 2-26-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-07]
The words, terms and phrases used in Part 2 shall be as defined and
described in Article XLII, which is hereby incorporated by reference.
§ 190-11. Establishment of districts. [Amended 2-26-2008 by Ord.
No. O-08-07]
In order to implement the Master Plan, the City of Nashua is hereby divided
into the following zoning districts:
Table 11-1
Zoning Districts
Full Name Class Short Name
Rural Residence Base R-40
A Suburban Residence Base R-30
B Suburban Residence Base R-18
C Suburban Residence Base R-9
A Urban Residence Base R-A
B Urban Residence Base R-B
C Urban Residence Base R-C
Local Business Base LB
General Business Base GB
Downtown 1 Base D-1
Downtown 3 Base D-3
Highway Business Base HB
Park Industrial Base PI
§ 190-10 FLAG § 190-11
164:399
Table 11-1
Zoning Districts
Full Name Class Short Name
General Industrial Base GI
Airport Industrial Base AI
Airport Approach District Overlay A
Historic Overlay H
Mixed Use Overlay MU
Flexible Use Overlay FU
Water Supply Protection Overlay WSP
Four Hills Landfill
Groundwater Management
Zone [Added 10-22-2013 by
Ord. No. O-13-050]
Overlay FHL-GMZ
Planned Residential
Development
Overlay PRD
Medical District Special MD
Higher Education District Special HE
Transit-Oriented Development
[Amended 10-27-2015 by
Ord. No. O-15-064]
Overlay TOD
§ 190-12. Zoning Map.
A. The location and boundaries of the zoning districts are hereby
established as shown on a map titled "Zoning Map of the City of
Nashua, New Hampshire," dated November 9, 2005, and as amended,
which is hereby declared to be a part of Part 2. The authenticity of the
Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Administrative
Officer under the following words: "This is an accurate representation
of the Zoning Map adopted by the Board of Aldermen on November 9,
2005, and Ordinance No. O-04-19." [Amended 2-26-2008 by Ord. No.
O-08-07]
B. Any change in the location of boundaries of a zoning district hereafter
made through amendments of this Part 2 shall be indicated by the
alteration of the Zoning Map, and the map, as altered, is declared to be
a part of Part 2.60 [Amended 2-26-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-07]
C. The Zoning Map shall be drawn at a scale of one inch to 1,000 feet, with
ink of stable material, and shall be located in the office of the
Administrative Officer. Photographic reductions of this large-scale map
may serve as copies of the map.
60.Editor's Note: See Table of Zoning Map Amendments at the end of this chapter.
§ 190-11 NASHUA CODE § 190-13
164:400
§ 190-13. Boundaries of districts.
A. Generally. Where any uncertainty exists with respect to the boundary of
any district as shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall
apply:
(1) Where a boundary is indicated as being a street, alley, railroad or
watercourse, river, canal, or other body of water, it shall be
construed to be the center line or middle thereof, or where such
boundary approximates a City boundary, then to the limits of the
City boundary.
(2) Where a boundary is indicated as following approximately or
parallel to a street, railroad or watercourse or other body of water,
it shall be construed to be parallel thereto and at such distance
therefrom as shown on the Zoning Map. If no dimension is given,
such distance shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on
the Zoning Map.
(3) Where a dimensioned boundary coincides, within 10 feet or less,
with a lot line, the boundary shall be construed to be the lot line.
(4) Where a boundary is indicated as intersecting the center line of a
street, railroad or watercourse or other body of water, and unless it
is otherwise indicated, it shall be construed to intersect at right
angles to such center line or in the case of a curved center line, to
the tangent to the curve at the point of intersection.
(5) The abbreviation "PL" means property line as shown on the City
Assessor's map as in effect on the effective date of this article.
(6) The abbreviation "CL" means "center line," and "CI" means "center
of intersection."
B. Split-zoned properties. When a lot is transected by a zoning district
boundary, the regulations of this Zoning Ordinance applicable to the
larger part by area of such lot may, at the option of the owner, be
deemed to govern the smaller part of the lot beyond. Uses permitted
within the smaller part of the lot, and that are not permitted on the
larger part of the lot, shall require a conditional use permit.
C. Special districts. The boundaries of a special district shall be
established through an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance as set
forth in §§ 190-12B and 190-132, Zoning amendments.
§ 190-13 FLAG § 190-13
164:401

ARTICLE III
Base Districts
§ 190-14. Purpose statements.
The purpose and intent of the base zoning districts are as follows:
Table 14-1
Zoning District Purpose Statements
District Purpose
Rural Residence
(R-40)
The Rural Residential District has a minimum
lot size requirement of 40,000 square feet (or
approximately one acre). This district is
reserved primarily for the southwest quadrant
of the City and other areas with limited
infrastructure capacity and environmental or
topographical restrictions. The R-40 District is
also the primary district where individual
wells and septic systems are in use, although
sewer and water extensions have been made
to some parts of the district.
A Suburban Residence
(R-30)
The R-30 District is similar to R-40, with a
slightly smaller minimum lot size of 30,000
square feet. Most of the R-30 Districts provide
a buffer between the R-40 District and
suburban areas, such as the southwest
quadrant and the northwest quadrant near the
Hollis border west of the airport.
B Suburban Residence
(R-18)
These districts are more evenly distributed
throughout the City, although the majority of
the R-18 and R-9 land is found in the
southwest quadrant. This district provides
suburban densities and intensities for
primarily residential neighborhoods, with
conservation subdivisions permitted as an
option in order to encourage the preservation
of natural resources.
C Suburban Residence
(R-9)
These districts are more evenly distributed
throughout the City, although the majority of
the R-18 and R-9 land is found in the
southwest quadrant. This district provides
suburban densities and intensities for
primarily residential neighborhoods, with
conservation subdivisions permitted as an
option in order to encourage the preservation
of natural resources.
§ 190-14 FLAG § 190-14
164:403
Table 14-1
Zoning District Purpose Statements
District Purpose
A Urban Residence
(R-A)
This district is appropriate for the older
residential sections of Nashua surrounding
the urban core. R-A is predominantly single
family, although duplexes are allowed subject
to special standards.
B Urban Residence
(R-B)
This district is appropriate for the older
residential sections of Nashua surrounding
the urban core. The R-B District permits
duplexes by right and multifamily dwellings
with three or more units subject to special
standards.
C Urban Residence
(R-C)
This district is appropriate for the more wellestablished
residential sections of Nashua that
include areas immediately surrounding the
urban core and neighborhoods throughout the
urban area. The R-C District permits all
residential types by right, provided all
dimensional requirements are met.
Local Business
(LB)
Local Business (LB) Districts are commercial
areas primarily located adjacent to or within
established residential neighborhoods. They
are intended as convenience commercial
districts that support adjacent neighborhoods.
The LB District is pedestrian-oriented as
opposed to automobile-oriented.
Highway Business
(HB)
Highway Business (HB) Districts are
commercial areas located primarily adjacent
to heavily traveled arterial roads, such as
Amherst Street and the Daniel Webster
Highway.
General Business
(GB)
General Business (GB) Districts are similar to
the HB Districts in purpose, function, and
appearance, but require a smaller minimum
lot size. The GB Districts are generally found
in close proximity to the HB Districts, but tend
to be developed as shopping centers with
large parking areas (including the malls),
rather than for "strip" commercial
development, which characterizes
development in the HB Districts.
§ 190-14 NASHUA CODE § 190-14
164:404
Table 14-1
Zoning District Purpose Statements
District Purpose
Downtown
(D-1 and D-3)
The D Districts consist of the downtown and
the surrounding business area. These are
mixed-used districts, which permit some
apartment and multifamily uses as well as
commercial and institutional uses. The D
Districts are pedestrian-oriented as opposed
to automobile-oriented. These districts include
many of Nashua's historic structures.
Park Industrial
(PI)
The Park Industrial (PI) Districts are industrial
areas that, for the most part, abut the major
turnpike interchanges, and are adjacent to
residential zones. The PI District provides
locations for light industry and industrial
parks. This district implements the Master
Plan recommendation to provide adequate
zoning for industrial park-type development.
General Industrial
(GI) [Amended
2-26-2008 by Ord. No.
O-08-07]
The General Industrial (GI) Districts are the
older, traditional industrial areas of the inner
City. They are often in close proximity to the
Nashua or Merrimack Rivers and are
generally accessible by railroad and/or local
roads. Most of Nashua's heavy industries are
located in the GI Districts. This district
implements the Master Plan recommendation
to provide a reasonable amount of space for
heavy industrial uses, provided they are
environmentally sound and do not detract
from neighboring land uses.
Airport Industrial
(AI)
This district includes the Boire Field Airport
and the surrounding industrially zoned land. It
supports the airport's operations by providing
an area for airport-related and airportcompatible
uses.
§ 190-15. Permitted uses.
Purpose: Pursuant to RSA 674:16, this section regulates the location and
use of buildings, structures and land used for business, industrial,
residential, or other purposes. This section implements the following
Master Plan recommendations:
• Update the commercial land-use definitions in the Nashua
Revised Zoning Ordinances.
§ 190-14 FLAG § 190-15
164:405
• Write clear definitions of all potential industrial types/uses and
apply them to all of the Industrial Zones.
A. Applicability. Except as provided in this article, no building, structure or
land shall be used except for the purposes permitted in the district as
described in this article.
B. Mixed uses. In cases of mixed occupancy, the regulation for each use
shall apply, as provided in this Part 2, to that portion of the building or
land.
C. Use Matrix.
(1) The uses permitted in each zoning district are set forth in Table
15-1 below. Any use not listed is prohibited, unless the
Administrative Officer determines that it falls within the same class
as a listed use as set forth in Subsection D below.
(a) Uses permitted by right are uses designated by a "P" in Table
15-1.
(b) Conditional uses are designated by a "C" in Table 15-1 and
require a permit from the Planning Board as set forth in
§ 190-133 of the Land Use Code.
(c) Uses that require a special exception are designated by an "S"
in Table 15-1 and require review by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment as set forth in § 190-134 of the Land Use Code.
(d) Accessory uses are defined by Article XLII, Definitions, and are
designated by an "A" in Table 15-1.
(2) Uses permitted by right or by conditional use shall be subject, in
addition to use regulations, to all other provisions of this article.
D. Interpretation of Table 15-1.
(1) Uses not listed as a permitted or conditional use are presumed to
be prohibited from the applicable zoning district. In the event that
a particular use is not listed in the Use Matrix, and such use is not
listed as a prohibited use and is not otherwise prohibited by law,
the Administrative Officer shall determine whether a materially
similar use exists in this section. Should the Administrative Officer
determine that a materially similar use does exist, the regulations
governing that use shall apply to the particular use not listed, and
the Administrative Officer's decision shall be recorded in writing.
Should the Administrative Officer determine that a materially
similar use does not exist, this chapter may be amended to
establish a specific listing for the use in question.
(2) The Administrative Officer may determine that a use is materially
similar if:
§ 190-15 NASHUA CODE § 190-15
164:406
(a) The use is listed as within the same structure or function
classification as the use specifically enumerated in the Use
Matrix, as determined by the Land-Based Classification
Standards (LBCS) of the American Planning Association
[Reference: http://www.planning.org/Ibcs/index.html]. The use
shall be considered materially similar if it falls within the same
LBCS classification and meets the requirements of Subsections
D(2)(b) and (c) below.
(b) If the use cannot be located within one of the LBCS
classifications pursuant to Subsection D(2)(a) above, the
Administrative Officer shall refer to the North American
Industry Classification Manual (NAICS) [Executive Office of
the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1997]. The
use shall be considered materially similar if it falls within the
same industry classification of the NAICS, and meets the
requirements of Subsection D(2)(c) below. [Reference:
http://www.census.gov/epcd/www/naics.html]
(c) The proposed use shall not generate average daily trips
exceeding other uses proposed in the zoning district by more
than 10%, as determined by the Institute of Transportation
Engineers, Trip Generation (6th ed., 1997) [the "ITE Manual"],
which document is hereby incorporated by this reference. If
the trip generation is not listed in the ITE Manual, the use shall
be considered materially similar. The Administrative Officer
may also refer to similar local traffic studies.
(3) In order to assist in interpretation of the Use Matrix, the LBCS and
NAICS numbers precede each use in the Use Matrix. In
interpreting the Use Matrix, the following rules of construction
shall apply:
(a) If a use is listed for a specific classification, while a more
general classification within the same industry classification is
also listed for another use, the specific classification governs.
The specific use is not permitted in all districts where the uses
coded to the general classification are permitted simply
because they share a similar LBCS or NAICS code number. The
numbers increase as the classifications get more specific.
(b) Some uses are listed separately, but fall within the same LBCS
or NAICS classification. The uses within one such classification
are not permitted in all of the zoning districts as the others
simply because they fall within the same LBCS or NAICS
classification.
(4) Commercial uses designated with the superscript "1" (1) are
permitted only as part of a site plan in which at least 75% of the
gross floor area is reserved for uses listed in the "industrial and
manufacturing" category.
§ 190-15 FLAG § 190-15
164:407
§ 190-15 NASHUA CODE § 190-15
164:408
§ 190-15 FLAG § 190-15
164:409
§ 190-15 NASHUA CODE § 190-15
164:410
§ 190-15 FLAG § 190-15
164:411
§ 190-15 NASHUA CODE § 190-15
164:412
§ 190-15 FLAG § 190-15
164:413
§ 190-15 NASHUA CODE § 190-15
164:414
§ 190-15 FLAG § 190-15
164:415
§ 190-15 NASHUA CODE § 190-15
164:416
§ 190-15 FLAG § 190-15
164:417
§ 190-15 NASHUA CODE § 190-15
164:418
§ 190-15 FLAG § 190-15
164:419
§ 190-15 NASHUA CODE § 190-15
164:420
§ 190-15 FLAG § 190-15
164:421
§ 190-15 NASHUA CODE § 190-15
164:422
§ 190-16. Dimensional regulations.
Purpose: Pursuant to RSA 674:16, this section regulates the location and
use of buildings, structures and land used for business, industrial,
residential, or other purposes. This section implements the following
Master Plan recommendations:
• Encourage infill development within, and work to revitalize
existing commercial areas.
• Guide commercial and industrial development to the existing built
areas of the City and minimize development in outlying,
undeveloped areas.
The dimensional regulations are found in Table 16-3 of this section.
A. Applicability.
(1) This section establishes minimum and maximum standards for the
height, number of stories and size of buildings and other
structures, the percentage of lots that may be occupied, the size of
§ 190-15 FLAG § 190-16
164:423
yards, courts and other open spaces, the density of population,
and the location and use of buildings pursuant to RSA 674:16.
Developments subject to the supplemental use regulations (Article
VI) may be governed by their respective sections in this chapter
and, if so indicated in the specific supplemental use regulation,
may be exempt from the dimensional and density regulations of this
§ 190-16 or Table 16-3.
(2) No land or building shall hereafter be used or occupied and no
building or part thereof shall hereafter be constructed, erected,
altered or moved unless in conformity with all of the regulations
herein specified for the zoning district in which it is or will be
located. No building permit shall be issued unless the proposed
building or structure conforms to the standards established in this
section.
Comment: For utility structures, see Part 6.
B. Residential density (Dimensional Matrix, Column B).
(1) Density restrictions apply only to conservation subdivisions and to
dwelling units other than single-family detached dwellings. No
building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied in
excess of the prescribed density regulations, nor accommodate a
greater number of dwelling units than prescribed for in the zoning
district in which it is or will be located.
(2) In computing density for large tracts or multiunit housing projects,
the density limits established by the zoning district apply. Densities
may exceed the maximum on part of a tract, if the overall density
on the total project site does not exceed the limits established by
the zoning district.
Comment: For single-family detached dwellings not in
conservation subdivisions, no maximum number of total permitted
dwelling units is established because the total number of dwelling
units is governed by minimum lot size. Conservation subdivisions
are not subject to minimum lot size, but total permitted dwelling
units shall not exceed the density established as set forth in Table
16-3.
(3) No household other than a family shall have a number of members
exceeding the figure provided in Table 16-1 below entitled
"Occupancy Restrictions":
§ 190-16 NASHUA CODE § 190-16
164:424
Table 16-1
Occupancy Restrictions
Dwelling Type
Maximum Number of
Occupants in
Unrelated Household
Per 300 Square Feet of
Habitable Floor Area
Single-family dwelling 1
Duplex or townhouse 1
Apartment, including accessory
apartments
1.5
Bed-and-breakfast 3
Rooming/boarding, including
accessory rooming/boarding
2
Dormitory 3
Fraternity or sorority 2
Nursing home 2
Elderly housing 1.5
C. Minimum lot area (Dimensional Matrix, Column C).
(1) Applicability. The lot or yard areas required for any new building or
use may not include any part of a lot required by any other building
or use to comply with any provision of this article, nor may these
areas include any property of which the ownership has been
transferred subsequent to the effective date of this article if such
property was a part of the area required for compliance with the
dimensional regulations applicable to the lot from which such
transfer was made. Lots shall not be so separated or transferred in
ownership so as not to comply with this article. No permit for
development shall be issued for a lot that does not meet the
minimum lot area requirements of Table 16-3 of this chapter except
for nonconforming lots of record.
(2) Nonconforming lots of record. See § 190-121.
D. Floor area ratio/intensity in nonresidential districts (Dimensional
Matrix, Column O). Unless otherwise stated, all references to
nonresidential intensity shall be deemed to refer to floor area ratio
(FAR). FAR is computed as the ratio of gross floor area of all buildings
and structures to the total lot area.
E. Setbacks (Dimensional Matrix, Columns G through K).
(1) Applicability and rules of interpretation. Setbacks for buildings or
structures are measured as the area between the furthest
projection of a principal structure and the property line of the lot
§ 190-16 FLAG § 190-16
164:425
on which the structure is located, except as provided below. Where
a yard abuts a street, the setback shall be measured from the
abutting street right-of-way line.
Commentary: Typically, the side and rear setback is measured
from the property line, while the front setback is measured from
the right-of-way because the front yard adjoins the street.
(2) Development in setbacks.
(a) Setbacks shall be unobstructed from the ground to the sky
except as specified in this section. The following features may
encroach into a required building setback:
[1] Any buttress, cornice or pier may extend beyond the
setback not more than 12 inches.
[2] Unenclosed steps not extending above the first floor level
may extend up to three feet to a side property line or up to
a front property line.
[3] Retaining walls, regardless of necessary height, may
extend up to 18 inches to a street line or service lane.
[4] A protective hood or overhang over a doorway may extend
not more than three feet into the required minimum yards.
[5] Balconies or bay windows, not to exceed three feet into the
required setback.
[6] Chimneys, not to exceed two feet.
[7] Heating and cooling units, not to exceed three feet.
[8] Overhanging roof, eave, gutter, cornice, or other
architectural features and awnings, not to exceed two feet.
[9] Unenclosed decks, terraces, stoops or porches, provided
that:
[a] Such structures shall not exceed four feet in height;
and
[b] Such structures shall not be located closer than five
feet to any property line.
[10] Fences or shrubs.
[11] Steps or stoops over four feet in height, windowsills,
chimneys, roof eaves, structural overhangs or projections
enclosing habitable living space, or similar architectural
features which may project not more than two feet.
§ 190-16 NASHUA CODE § 190-16
164:426
[12] Projecting overhangs on the ground floor not listed above
may extend:
[a] Up to 30 inches beyond the front setback; and
[b] Beyond the side setback up to 20% of the side yard.
[13] Fire escapes, fire towers, storm enclosures, or handicap
ramps where required by the Building Code.61
[14] Any accessory building or use customarily incidental to the
permitted principal use or building as allowed in
accordance with § 190-31, Accessory uses and structures.
(b) Whenever more than one principal building is to be located on
a lot, the required yards shall be maintained around the group
of buildings. Buildings shall be separated by any distance
prescribed by the Fire Code. (See Chapter 156 of the City
Code).
(3) Special exceptions for minor encroachments.
Purpose: This subsection provides a streamlined review process
for applicants proposing minor encroachments into required
setback areas. The purpose is to reconcile the legitimate
objectives of homeowners requesting minor expansions of existing
dwellings, with the objectives of surrounding neighborhoods to
protect their character, appearance, and safety. Accordingly, this
subsection provides an inexpensive, streamlined review process,
while allowing concerned neighbors to comment where the
expansion will have a measurable impact.
(a) For purposes of this subsection, the extension of a building,
structure, or paved surface not exempted by Subsection E(2)
above, into a setback by a distance not exceeding the amounts
prescribed in Table 16-2 shall be considered a "minor
encroachment" and may be approved as a special exception
(See § 190-134.) by the Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA) on a
consent agenda. Nothing in this section shall be construed in
such a manner as to eliminate the applicant's burden of
proving that the encroachment meets the criteria for approval
of a special exception. The application for a special exception
considered on the ZBA's consent agenda shall include a
monumented survey. If the applicant chooses not to submit a
monumented survey, the case shall be considered as part of the
ZBA's normal hearing process. The application, including a
monumented survey, shall be considered part of the evidence
in the proceeding unless it is excluded by the ZBA following an
objection stated on the record. This subsection does not apply
to an application for subdivision plan approval.
61.Editor's Note: See Ch. 105, Building Construction.
§ 190-16 FLAG § 190-16
164:427
Table 16-2
Minor Encroachments
Zoning District
Front Yard
Encroachment
(feet)
Side Yard
Encroachment
(feet)
Rear Yard
Encroachment
(feet)
R-40 6 5 16
R-30 6 5 11
R-18 6 5 11
R-9 6 4 10
R-A 6 4 9
R-B 6 4 6
R-C 4 4 3
F. Front setbacks.
(1) Adjustment for infill lots. The Administrative Officer may approve
the reduction of a district's setback requirement for the
development of infill lots, where it can be shown that the proposed
setback is consistent with the average setback that exists in the
neighborhood. The applicant shall provide to the Administrative
Officer a map showing the adjoining lots within 200 feet of the
subject lot, noting what the existing setbacks are on those
properties.
(2) Buildings facing away from street. Where a principal use building
or structure is oriented to face away from the street on which it
fronts, said building or structure shall conform to the required
front yard setback for the district in which it is located. Any
accessory use(s) prohibited from required front yards within such
districts are prohibited within the required front yard setback from
a principal use building or structure facing away from the street.
(3) Front setbacks. Where a frontage is divided among districts with
different front yard requirements, the deepest front yard applies to
the entire frontage. However, the front setback may be adjusted as
provided in Subsection F(1) above.
(4) Development in front yard. No structure other than a driveway,
sign, fence, gate, sidewalk, berm or other landscape feature shall
be erected or permitted to be located in a required front yard area.
G. Side setbacks. Side setbacks shall be measured from the side property
line. (See special rules for corner lots in Subsection J below.)
H. Rear setbacks. Rear setbacks shall be measured from the rear property
line.
§ 190-16 NASHUA CODE § 190-16
164:428
I. Height of buildings and/or structures.
(1) Height shall be measured as provided in Chapter 5 of the
International Building Code.
(2) Height limitations.
(a) The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to any of
the following structures not intended for human occupancy:
Antennas
Beacons
Belfries
Chimney flues
Chimneys
Clock towers
Cupolas
Domes
Electrical, mechanical, or elevator
Monuments
Parapet walls as needed to screen equipment
Radio aerials
Smokestacks
Spires
Steeples
Structures for essential services
Television antennas (subject to § 190-38)
Transmission towers (subject to § 190-38)
Windmills
(b) Height limits shall not apply to any bulkhead, elevator, water
tank, or to any similar structure or necessary mechanical
appurtenance extending above the roof of any building if such
structure does not occupy more than 33% of the area of the
roof.
(3) In Park Industrial (PI), Transit-Oriented Development (TOD) and
Highway Business (HB) Zones, the maximum height permitted is
increased to 120 feet and the maximum number of stories
permitted is increased to eight, where the building is at least 400
feet from the nearest R-B or R-C Zone, and at least 1,000 feet from
the nearest R-A, R-9, R-18, R-30, or R-40 Zone.
J. Corner lots or through lots. Corner lots and through lots shall be
considered to have a front yard bordering on each street line, and a side
§ 190-16 FLAG § 190-16
164:429
yard opposite each front yard. Where a lot fronts on two
nonintersecting streets, or two intersecting streets forming an angle of
60° or less, front yards shall be provided on both streets.
K. Sight triangle.
(1) For purposes of this subsection, "sight triangle area" means the
portion of a corner lot lying within a triangle area formed by
measuring from the vertex of that portion of the property line
adjacent to the intersecting street, to a point on each property line
running from the vertex equal to 20 feet in residential zoning
districts and five feet in nonresidential zoning districts, and then
connecting the two points thus established with a third line.
(2) No planting, wall, fence, sign, or other obstruction to motorists'
vision shall be planted, erected or maintained higher than the
following distance above the adjoining street grade within a sight
triangle area:
(a) Curbed streets: one foot.
(b) Uncurbed streets: 1 1/2 feet.
L. Cul-de-sac lots. In the case of lots which have the entire frontage on the
bulb of a cul-de-sac, the minimum frontage may be reduced to 50 feet,
provided that the required minimum frontage dimension for the
applicable district is observed as the minimum lot width at the required
front yard setback.
M. Open space percentage. "Open space" means the space on a lot
unoccupied by buildings, unobstructed to the sky by man-made objects,
not devoted to streets, driveways, off-street parking or loading spaces.
The open space percentage (Column (N) of Table 16-3, below) refers to
the minimum open space area expressed as a percentage of total lot
area.
§ 190-16 NASHUA CODE § 190-16
164:430
§ 190-17. Residential Districts (R-40, R-30, R-18, R-9, R-A, R-B, RC).
Purpose: These districts implement the following Master Plan
recommendations:
• Protect the character of existing neighborhoods through zoning
regulation and enforcement.
§ 190-16 FLAG § 190-17
164:431
§ 190-18. Commercial Districts (LB, GB, HB).
A. No application for development approval in the R-40, R-30, R-18, R-9, RA,
R-B, R-C Zoning Districts shall be approved unless the proposed use
and/or development conforms to the requirements of this article and a
building permit is issued in accordance with Part 3. If subdivision and
site plan approval are required the proposed development shall comply
with the requirements of Parts 4 through 8.
B. Only one principal structure shall be permitted on a lot, except where
otherwise provided by this chapter.
C. All proposed uses shall comply with the parking standards (Article
XXVIII) and sign regulations (Article X) regardless of whether a site
plan is required.
D. Specific residential district criteria. The following standards apply to all
residential districts: All two-family dwellings (duplexes) shall be
structures consisting either of two separate dwelling units on separate
floors or of two separate dwelling units connected and separated by a
common wall connecting living spaces, perpendicular to the longest
dimension of the structure, and having a common length equal to at
least: (i) 90% of the widest part of each structure measured
perpendicular to the longest dimension, if the longest dimensions are
parallel; or (ii) 90% of the widest part of one unit measured
perpendicular to the longest dimension, and 50% of the longest
dimension of the other unit, if the longest dimensions are perpendicular
to each other. [Added 2-27-2007 by Ord. No. O-06-51]
A. Specific LB District criteria.
(1) The following criteria shall be used (in addition to the general
rezoning guidelines in § 190-132) in consideration of the placement
of this district and the type and arrangement of uses within it.
(a) Refuse enclosures within an LB District shall be located at the
rear of the site and screened with a wall and gate.
B. Specific GB and HB District criteria. The following standards apply to
the GB and HB Zoning Districts:
(1) The following criteria shall be used (in addition to the general
rezoning guidelines in § 190-132) in consideration of the placement
of this district and the type and arrangement of uses within it:
(a) The district and its uses shall continue the orderly
development and concentration of business and commercial
uses; and
(b) Pedestrian and vehicular conflicts shall be minimized by an
existing system of sidewalks and other pedestrian amenities
which provide connectivity to surrounding neighborhoods,
§ 190-17 NASHUA CODE § 190-18
164:432
§ 190-19. Industrial Districts (PI, AI, GI).
Purpose: This section implements the following Master Plan
recommendations:
• Provide a reasonable amount of space for heavy industrial uses,
provided they are environmentally sound and do not detract
from neighboring land uses.
• Provide adequate zoning for industrial park-type development.
• Discourage or prohibit noxious industries that create the
potential for serious health or safety hazards.
• Encourage attractive, landscaped, and sensitively sited
industrial development that is compatible with surrounding land
uses.
while providing adequate separation and channeling of
pedestrian and vehicular movements; and
(c) GB and HB Districts shall be located along arterials and
arterial/arterial or arterial/collector intersections.
(2) Outdoor display, storage and sales of merchandise is authorized
subject to §§ 190-52 and 190-53.
A. Specific PI and AI District criteria. The following standards apply to the
PI and AI Zoning Districts:
(1) Location criteria. The following criteria shall be used (in addition to
the general rezoning guidelines in § 190-132) in consideration of
the placement of this district and the type and arrangement of uses
within it:
(a) The district and its uses shall continue the orderly
development and concentration of industrial and
manufacturing uses; and
(b) The land area shall be sufficient to maintain compatibility with
surrounding uses; and
(c) All lots within a PI District shall have direct access to arterial
and/or collector streets.
(2) Commercial uses. See § 190-15D(4).
Comment: In § 190-15, commercial uses designated with the
superscript "1" are permitted only as part of a site plan in which at
least 75% of the gross floor area is reserved for uses listed in the
industrial and manufacturing category.
(3) Additional site and building design criteria.
§ 190-18 FLAG § 190-19
164:433
(a) In addition to the dimensional standards of § 190-16, no
buildings or other structures, including parking lots, shall be
erected closer than 30 feet to any property line abutting any
area developed or zoned as a residential zoning district.
(b) All loading shall be from the rear or side of the building, but
not facing a public street.
(c) Sidewalks consistent with the street improvement standards
shall link all principal buildings, or shall link the principal
building or buildings to off-site destinations, including retail,
shopping, or services (including day care, dry cleaners or
grocery stores).
(d) All noises, vibrations, emissions of smoke, dust, or gases shall
be controlled so as not to be detrimental or cause a nuisance to
nearby residential or commercial areas in conformance with
the industrial performance standards of this chapter.
(e) Applicants are encouraged to provide the following site plan
elements in order to create an office complex ambiance and
appearance to the industrial development:
[1] Loading courts which are not visible from any public
street. Screening of these areas shall be provided by the
principal building; and
[2] Entry courts and pedestrian plazas; and
[3] Unique landscape features such as berming, fountains,
and sculpture gardens, particularly adjacent to the arterial
street; and
[4] Covered or decked parking structures which appear as an
integrated part of the industrial building; and
[5] Parking areas located to the rear of the principal buildings
or structures.
B. Specific GI District criteria. The following standards apply to the GI
Zoning District:
(1) Location criteria. The following criteria shall be used (in addition to
the general rezoning criteria established in § 190-132) in
consideration of the placement of this district and the type and
arrangement of uses within it:
(a) The district and its uses shall continue the orderly
development and concentration of industrial and
manufacturing uses; and
(b) The land area shall be sufficient to maintain compatibility with
surrounding uses; and
§ 190-19 NASHUA CODE § 190-19
164:434
§ 190-20. Downtown Districts (D-1 and D-3).
Purpose: The Downtown Districts are established:
• To promote the goals, objectives and strategies adopted as part
of the City's Master Plan and the Downtown Master Plan.
• To protect the value and efficiency of operation of surrounding
properties.
• To maintain unique aesthetic, architectural and visual amenities
of individual buildings or cluster of buildings.
• To enable infill development to occur in a manner that is
compatible with the surrounding site environment and
neighborhood.
• To ensure that private development and rehabilitation are
compatible and coordinated with public investment and
improvements.
• To support new construction and adaptive reuse of buildings
through appropriate engineering, architectural and design
solutions.
• To guide the orderly and timely transition from one land use to
another within areas subject to building obsolescence, changes
in technology, environmental conditions and adjoining
development patterns and influences.
• To ensure that redevelopment occurring in close proximity to the
Nashua and/or Merrimack Rivers will conserve and incorporate
natural features and enable both visual and physical riverfront
access.
• To promote development opportunities that will eliminate blight
and disinvestment.
• To introduce uses that will have positive long-term social and
economic impacts.
(c) GI Districts shall have direct access to arterials and/or major
collector streets. GI Districts shall not have direct access to a
local street. Secondary or emergency access may be from a
local street.
(2) Additional site and building design criteria.
(a) All driveways, parking areas, and pedestrianways shall be
surfaced with an all-weather surface. Curbing shall be
provided where required by the street design and
transportation standards (Article XXX).
(b) All delivery and freight-handling areas shall be screened from
view so as not to be visible from the boundary of any property
not zoned GI or from the public right-of-way.
§ 190-19 FLAG § 190-20
164:435
• To establish a complimentary and integrated working, shopping
and living environment.
This section implements the following Master Plan recommendations:
• Develop unified facade and signage standards for commercial
buildings in the downtown.
• Guide commercial and industrial development to the existing
built areas of the City and minimize development in outlying,
undeveloped areas.
• Encourage and support businesses that reduce employee and
product-related vehicle trips.
In accordance with the Downtown Master Plan, this section establishes two
downtown districts. D-1 is the traditional downtown core. It permits more
intensive development coupled with pedestrian-friendly design standards.
D-3 is a predominantly commercial area, with a more human scale and
pedestrian-friendly design standards.
The illustrations throughout this section serve as a guide and are not
regulatory.
A. Generally.
(1) Applicability. This Subsection A applies to any lot or parcel within a
D-1 or D-3 District. Any site plan or building permit application
submitted for a lot in or partly in a D-1 or D-3 District that involves
the addition or enlargement of structures or any amendment to an
approved site plan is subject to this section. This subsection applies
whether the use is listed in the Use Matrix, or is allowed by
variance, special exception, conditional use permit or other similar
permission, or is a prior nonconforming use.
(2) Standards applicable to D-1 and D-3 Districts.
(a) Permitted uses for each district are established in the Use
Matrix (§ 190-15).
(b) Setbacks and other dimensional regulations are governed by
the Dimensional Matrix (§ 190-16).
(c) Hard-surfaced exterior wall materials are required. This can
include brick, wood, brownstone, limestone, concrete masonry
units (CMUs), parged block, painted brick, stone, terra cotta,
stucco, EIFS, or plaster. Vinyl, plastic, metal, structural or
unfinished concrete, painted concrete blocks, and tinted or
reflective glass are not permitted as the primary exterior
facade surface. However, vinyl, wood, plastic or glass block
may be used as accent elements surrounding a doorway or
window.
(3) Procedures and alternative standards. In order to provide flexibility
while maintaining the character of built environment in the
§ 190-20 NASHUA CODE § 190-20
164:436
downtown area, this section provides several alternatives for
development approval, as follows:
(a) The applicant may conform to the standards established in this
section for each district. (See Subsection B for D-1 or
Subsection C for D-3.) If the application does not request a
conditional use (see § 190-15), the applicant may proceed
directly to building permit or certificate of occupancy approval
without filing a site plan; or
(b) As an alternative, the applicant may request an alternative
standard. If the applicant chooses this alternative, the
applicant must file a site plan with the Planning Board. The
format for the site plan is prescribed in § 190-280. The
procedures and standards for this alternative shall be as
established in § 190-23D through F for the Mixed Use Overlay
District. As part of the site plan approval, the Planning Board
may modify any of the dimensional standards or design
standards; or
(c) An applicant may continue to elect to seek variances from the
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
B. Downtown 1 (D-1).
Purpose: The D-1 Downtown District is established:
• To promote the goals, objectives and strategies adopted as
part of the City's Downtown Master Plan along Main Street
between Nashua River and Hollis Street.
• To preserve and build upon "Walking Main Street" and its
walkable, vibrant, and safe character.
• To foster the mix of retail, offices, and restaurants, working
towards the goal of the "twenty-four-hour city."
§ 190-20 FLAG § 190-20
164:437
(1) Building height. A minimum height of two stories shall be required
for all new structures (not including additions) even if the building
contains only one functional story. The maximum height permitted
in the district is six stories or 90 feet, excluding those features
excluded from height limits by § 190-16.
(2) Building design.
(a) Buildings shall be oriented to the street. A building is "oriented
to the street" where all of the following apply:
[1] A principal entrance to a building faces a street, or is open
to a square or plaza. All street-level uses with sidewalk
frontage shall be furnished with an individual entrance
and direct access to the sidewalk in addition to any other
access that may be provided.
[2] Off-street parking does not lie between the building's
principal entrance and the street.
[3] Pedestrian access from the public sidewalk, street right-ofway
or driveway to the principal structure is provided
through a hard surface.
(b) The front facade of commercial buildings shall be aligned with
the finished grade of the street except as otherwise provided
herein.
(c) The principal entry for a residential, civic use or a civic
building may include a stoop, portico, colonnade, or a portal.
(3) Building fenestration; storefronts and other uses.
(a) This subsection applies to storefronts and any use except to the
conversion of a residential building to a commercial use.
§ 190-20 NASHUA CODE § 190-20
164:438
(b) Facades facing or visible from a public street shall include at
least four of the following elements:
[1] A pediment.
[2] A cornice adjoining the top of the roof or top of the facade.
[3] Windows in each story above the ground level. Individual
window openings shall not exceed four feet horizontally
and eight feet vertically. Circular, semicircular and
octagonal windows are permitted.
[4] Architectural treatment to articulate the middle of any
two-story building, or the first and second floors of a
building exceeding two stories, including molding, a
canopy, a transom, or similar elements.
[5] A recessed entryway consistent with the requirements of
Subsection B(3)(e) below.
(c) Between 60% to 90% of the length, and at least 50% of the
surface, of the first floor street frontage shall be in transparent
public entrances or windows (including retail display
windows). Between 10% to 50% of the surface of the front
facade for each floor above the first floor street frontage shall
be in transparent windows. At least one public entrance, such
as a doorway, shall be accessible from the sidewalk. No
windows or openings of storefronts shall utilize a mirrored
reflective film. Films allowing light to pass through but
blocking ultraviolet light are permitted. The intent is that
interior displays will be visible from the right-of-way.
(d) Building frontages that face public streets and exceed a width
of 20 feet must include vertical piers or other vertical visual
elements to break the plane of the building frontage. Such
vertical piers or vertical elements must be spaced at intervals
of 15 feet to 35 feet along the entire building frontage. Vertical
visual elements may include entryways, windows, columns,
colonnades, or other form of modular fenestration.
(e) Doors may be recessed into the face of the building to provide
a sense of entry and to add variety to the streetscape. The
ground surface of an entryway shall not be less than 15 square
feet. Door openings shall not exceed six feet horizontally and
10 feet vertically. Overhead doors for loading docks, delivery
and distribution shall be permitted only on the rear of the
building.
(f) Roofs shall not mask or obscure the architectural features of
the front facade such as pediments or cornices.
§ 190-20 FLAG § 190-20
164:439
(4) Canopies, arcades and awnings. Canopies, arcades, awnings, and
similar appurtenances may be constructed over the entrance to any
building, and/or over windows subject to the following criteria.
Canopies, awnings and similar appurtenances are encouraged at
the entrances to buildings and in open space areas. Such features
may be constructed of rigid or flexible material designed to
complement the streetscape of the area. Such features shall not
obscure the upper stories or a sign panel located above the first
floor. Any such facility may extend from the building to within two
feet of the back of the curb. Vertical supports for such features are
not allowed in the public right-of-way. No canopy shall extend into
the public right-of-way unless any encroachment permit or
agreement required by the City and state has been approved and
issued.
(5) Access standards. Driveways with ingress and egress onto alleys
are preferred. No new driveways are permitted on a collector or
arterial street, except as provided for parking entrances.
(6) Landscaping requirements. See Article XXVII.
(7) Lighting. Lighting is not subject to Article IX, Lighting. Lighting
shall be installed above front entrances to buildings located in the
D-1 District. All lighting shall be directed on site or onto adjacent
walkways and shall be shielded from direct off-site viewing.
(8) Off-street parking requirements.
(a) Parking ratios. No minimum number of off-street parking
spaces is required.
(b) Location. No off-street parking (whether it is a principal or an
accessory use) is permitted between a principal structure and
the street. Surface parking areas shall not adjoin a street, but
may adjoin an alley. Surface parking shall be located to the
rear of buildings.
(c) Entrances. One opening or entrance to a parking area is
permitted per block face adjoining a public street. There is no
limit on the number of opening or access points for that portion
of lots or parcels adjoining an alley. The opening or entrance
shall not exceed 36 feet in width. No opening that requires an
access from the public right-of-way that reduces on-street
parking is permitted except for parking areas that are reserved
for use by the general public.
(d) Loading docks. Loading/unloading docks or designated loading
areas shall be located only in the rear or side yard.
(e) Surface. Parking areas shall have a paved surface or a hard
surface. Ground surface areas not covered with a paved
§ 190-20 NASHUA CODE § 190-20
164:440
surface or a hard surface shall be restricted from parking by
signage and curbing, fencing, or other physical barriers.
(9) Utilities and trash receptacles. See § 190-182, Screening of service
or storage areas. In addition:
(a) All new transformer vaults, utility structures, air vents,
backflow preventers, or any other similar devices, except these
facilities when located below grade, must be located behind
the front setback or the front facade, whichever is furthest
from the front property line.
(b) All roof-mounted equipment, including satellite dishes and
other communication equipment, shall be screened so as not to
be visible from any public right-of-way by a parapet or similar
structure that is similar to the architectural style of exterior
elevation of the principal building.
C. Downtown District (D-3).
Purpose: The D-3 Downtown District is established:
• To promote the goals, objectives and strategies adopted as
part of the City's Downtown Master Plan along Main Street
between Otterson Street and Salmon Brook.
• To concentrate Downtown's retail growth potential in a
second retail node along Main Street South.
• To create mixed-use buildings with mandatory, traditional
storefronts oriented toward Main Street with retail uses at
the ground floor.
• To support existing and proposed infrastructure investments
such as broad sidewalks, street trees, and on-street parking
with awnings, and active storefronts to create a vibrant
pedestrian-oriented retail node.
Source: Urban Design Associates
§ 190-20 FLAG § 190-20
164:441
Source: Urban Design Associates
(1) Permitted uses. Dwelling units are permitted above the first floor of
any building with commercial and/or retail uses on the first floor.
(2) General standards and building form. Buildings, lots and parcels
shall conform to the standards established subsection § 190-20B(2)
through (9) above.
(3) Circulation.
(a) Sidewalks shall be provided by the individual developers and
property owners. All sidewalks shall connect to the existing/
proposed sidewalks, parking areas, buildings, and public
spaces. Public sidewalks shall be a minimum of six feet wide.
The applicant may grant an easement to the City for the
sidewalk and a planting area between the sidewalk and the
paved section of the street.
(b) Pedestrian walkways shall be provided mid-blocks and
between properties, connecting the sidewalks in front of the
building with the parking behind the building. Walkways can
be either interior to a building or exterior. Lighting shall be
provided for pedestrian safety. Amenities such as seating and
planters should be provided in or at the entrance to alleys to
encourage pedestrian circulation. The walkways shall be a
minimum of four feet wide. The maximum side setback is
waived to the extent needed to accommodate a pedestrian
walkway.
§ 190-20 NASHUA CODE § 190-20
164:442
§ 190-20 FLAG § 190-20
164:443

ARTICLE IV
Overlay Districts
§ 190-21. Airport Approach Zone.
Purpose and findings: The increasing aircraft activity that is occurring
at the Boire Field Municipal Airport has created the need for special
zoning restrictions for uses subject to the most recently adopted Part 150
Noise Compatibility Plan prepared by the Boire Field Airport Authority. To
avoid land use conflicts with uses which may be incompatible with noise
levels generated at the Boire Field Airport, the regulations of the Noise
Overlay District provide for the exclusion of certain land uses, and for
soundproofing to be required in the construction of other uses which may
be compatible if mitigating action is taken to reduce noise interference
with the use.
A. Applicability.
(1) In addition to the limitations and requirements set forth in the
other articles of this Part 2 for various zoning districts within the
City, any use, structure or object of natural growth situated within
the limits of Airport Approach Zones and other restricted areas
shall be further governed by the limitations of this section.
(2) All other articles of this Part 2, including those relating to permits,
nonconforming uses and variances, shall, where applicable, apply
to the persons and subject matter governed by this Part 2.
(3) Prior to filing an application for development approval within the
Airport Approach Zone, the applicant shall submit a Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA) Form 7460-1 to the FAA, and shall
submit the comments of the FAA as part of the application for
approval.
B. Establishment of airport approach plans. Any publicly owned airport or
privately owned airport licensed for commercial operations, existing or
which may be developed, shall have an airport approach plan prepared
by the New Hampshire Aeronautics Commission in accordance with
RSA 424 as last amended. The airport approach plan for the Boire Field,
adopted by the New Hampshire Aeronautics Commission February 12,
1968, is hereby declared to be part of this section.
C. Boire Field airport approach plan.
(1) This airport approach plan, prepared under the authority of RSA
424:3, is based upon the ultimate development of a general aviation
type airport with a runway 14/32 6,000 feet and a primary surface
6,400 feet by 1,000 feet. [Amended 10-23-2018 by Ord. No.
O-18-027]
§ 190-21 FLAG § 190-21
164:445
(2) Federal Aviation Regulations, Part 77, effective May 1, 1965,
establishes the standards used to determine the limit of height of
obstructions in the vicinity of the airport.
(3) The limit of height of obstructions shall be:
(a) In the approach zone to Runway 32 (SE end), which is 1,000
feet wide at a point 200 feet from the end of the runway and
3,500 feet wide at a point 10,200 feet from the end of the
runway, an inclined plane of 34:1 slope. [Amended
10-23-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-027]
(b) In the approach zone to Runway 14 (NW end), which is 1,000
feet wide at a point 200 feet from the end of the runway and
4,000 feet wide at a point 10,200 feet from the end of the
runway, an inclined plane of 50:1 slope, widening thereafter to
16,000 feet at a point 50,200 feet from the end of the runway,
an inclined plane of 40:1 slope. [Amended 10-23-2018 by
Ord. No. O-18-027]
(c) On the sides of the primary and approach surfaces, an inclined
plane of 7:1 slope from the edges of those surfaces. This
subsection does not limit the height of a structure or tree to
less than 30 feet above the ground upon which it is located.
(d) Within 7,000 feet of the airport reference point 150 feet above
the airport, 349 feet above sea level.
(e) Between 7,000 feet and 12,000 feet from the airport reference
point, a conical surface with a slope of 20:1 measured in a
vertical plane passing through the center of the airport.
(4) The airport reference point is located on the center line of the
runway, 3,000 feet from the southeast end of the runway, and the
airport elevation is 200.38 feet above mean sea level (USGS
Datum). [Amended 10-23-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-02762]
D. Height limits. No structure or tree shall be erected, altered or allowed
to grow within an airport approach zone and adjacent area above a
height of 30 feet above the ground on which it is located unless the
inclined plane is more than 30 feet above the ground, in which case a
structure or tree may be erected, altered or allowed to grow up to the
level of the plane or the height limitation of § 190-16, whichever is less.
E. Permitted uses.
(1) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Part 2 no use may be
made of land within the airport hazard area in such manner as to:
62.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection C(5), regarding noise
compatibility zones, which immediately followed this subsection.
§ 190-21 NASHUA CODE § 190-21
164:446
(a) Create electrical or visual interference with any electronic
facility or instrumentation, wherever located within the airport
hazard area, including but not limited to, radio transmitters
and receivers, radar installations, landing and navigational
aids and weather instruments where such facilities are used in
connection with the landing, taking off and maneuvering of
aircraft;
(b) Make it difficult for flyers to distinguish between airport lights
and others;
(c) Result in glare in the eyes of flyers using the airport;
(d) Impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport;
(e) Cause physical objects of any nature to penetrate, however
briefly, the air space above the imaginary surfaces established
in this article, such objects including but not limited to kites,
balloons, projectiles, rockets, model aircraft, derricks and
cranes, unless a special temporary permit be obtained from the
authorities in charge of the affected airport;
(f) Establish or alter privately owned flying fields, strips or
heliports, unless found not to be objectionable after a special
aeronautical study by federal aviation authorities;
(g) Create bird strike hazards;
(h) Otherwise endanger the landing, taking off, or maneuvering of
aircraft.
(2) Uses prohibited in the noise overlay zones shall be as specified in
the Table of Land Use Compatibility Standards. Soundproofing
shall be required for certain land uses in each of the noise overlay
zones as shown in the Table of Land Use Compatibility Standards
(Table 21-1 below). Where soundproofing is required, no building
permits shall be issued until the applicant has demonstrated that
the building design is capable of achieving the noise level reduction
required in the Table of Land Use Compatibility Standards.
§ 190-21 FLAG § 190-21
164:447
Table 21-1
Table of Land Use Compatibility Standards [Amended 10-23-2018 by Ord.
No. O-18-027]
Yearly Day/Night Average Sound Level (Ldn) in Decibels
Land Use Below 65 65 to 70 70 to 75 75 to 80 80 to 85 Over 85
Residential
Residential
(other than
mobile
homes and
transient
lodgings)
Y N1 N1 N N N
Mobile
home parks
Y N N N N N
Transient
lodgings
Y N1 N1 N1 N N
Public Use
Schools Y N1 N1 N N N
Hospitals
and nursing
homes
Y 25 30 N N N
Churches,
auditoriums,
and concert
halls
Y 25 30 N N N
Government
services
Y Y 25 30 N N
Transportation Y Y Y2 Y3 Y4 Y4
Parking Y Y Y2 Y3 Y4 N
Commercial
Use
Offices,
businesses
and
professional
Y Y 25 30 N N
Wholesale
and retail
building
materials,
hardware,
and farm
equipment
Y Y Y2 Y3 Y4 N
§ 190-21 NASHUA CODE § 190-21
164:448
Table 21-1
Table of Land Use Compatibility Standards [Amended 10-23-2018 by Ord.
No. O-18-027]
Yearly Day/Night Average Sound Level (Ldn) in Decibels
Land Use Below 65 65 to 70 70 to 75 75 to 80 80 to 85 Over 85
Retail trade
- general
Y Y 25 30 N N
Utilities Y Y Y2 Y3 Y4 N
Communication Y Y 25 30 N N
Manufacturing
and
Production
Manufacturing,
general
Y Y Y2 Y3 Y4 N
Photographic
and optical
Y Y 25 30 N N
Agriculture
(except
livestock)
and forestry
Y Y6 Y7 Y8 Y8 Y8
Livestock
farming and
breeding
Y Y6 Y7 N N N
Mining and
fishing,
resource
production
and
extraction
Y Y Y Y Y Y
Recreational
Outdoor
sports
arenas and
spectator
sports
Y Y5 Y5 N N N
Outdoor
music
shells,
amphitheaters
Y N N N N N
Nature
exhibits and
zoos
Y Y N N N N
§ 190-21 FLAG § 190-21
164:449
Table 21-1
Table of Land Use Compatibility Standards [Amended 10-23-2018 by Ord.
No. O-18-027]
Yearly Day/Night Average Sound Level (Ldn) in Decibels
Land Use Below 65 65 to 70 70 to 75 75 to 80 80 to 85 Over 85
Amusements,
parks,
resorts, and
camps
Y Y Y N N N
Golf
courses,
riding
stables, and
water
recreation
Y Y 25 30 N N
Key:
Y (Yes): Land use and related structures compatible without restrictions.
N (No): Land use and related structures are not compatible and should be
prohibited.
NLR: Noise level reduction (outdoor to indoor) to be achieved through
incorporation of noise attenuation into the design and construction of the
structure.
25, 30 or 35: Land use and related structures generally compatible;
measures to achieve NLR of 25, 30 or 35 dB must be incorporated into
design and construction of structure.
Notes:
1 Where the community determines that residential or school uses must
be allowed, measures to achieve outdoor to indoor noise level
reduction (NLR) of at least 25 dB and 30 dB should be incorporated
into building codes and be considered in individual approvals. Normal
residential construction can be expected to provide an NLR of 20 dB,
thus, the reduction requirements are often stated as 5, 10 or 15 dB over
standard construction and normally assume mechanical ventilation and
closed windows year round. However, the use of NLR criteria will not
eliminate outdoor noise problems.
2 Measures to achieve NLR of 25 dB must be incorporated into the
design and construction of portions of these buildings where the public
is received, office areas, noise-sensitive areas or where the normal
noise level is low.
3 Measures to achieve NLR of 30 dB must be incorporated into the
design and construction of portions of these buildings where the public
is received, office areas, noise-sensitive areas or where the normal
noise level is low.
§ 190-21 NASHUA CODE § 190-21
164:450
§ 190-22. Historic Districts.
Purpose and findings: This article contemplates that the future of the City
will be enhanced by recognizing and strengthening the City's heritage. The
preservation of structures and places of historic and architectural value is
hereby declared to be a public purpose. This section:
(1) Preserves districts in the City that reflect elements of its cultural,
social, economic, political and architectural history;
(2) Conserves property values in such districts;
(3) Fosters civic beauty;
(4) Strengthens the local economy; and
(5) Promotes the use of Historic Districts for the education, pleasure and
welfare of the citizens of the City.
The City hereby finds that the loss of historic or architecturally significant
structures through demolition, alteration, moving or incompatible new
construction contributes to the destruction of the unique character of the
City.
4 Measures to achieve NLR of 35 dB must be incorporated into the
design and construction of portions of these buildings where the public
is received, office areas, noise-sensitive areas or where the normal
noise level is low.
5 Land use compatible, provided special sound reinforcement systems
are installed.
6 Residential buildings require an NLR of 25.
7 Residential buildings require an NLR of 30.
8 Residential buildings not permitted.63
A. Certificate of approval.
(1) Written application for a certificate of approval shall be submitted
to the Historic District Commission, through the Building
Department Manager, stating the location and nature of the matter
or item for which such certificate is sought. Taking into
consideration the size and extent of the improvements or changes
for which a permit is sought, the Commission may request of the
applicant any site plans, building plans, elevation drawings,
samples of materials, photographs, sketches or other information
which may assist it in determining the appropriateness in question,
and which are reasonable in consideration of the size of the project
proposed.
63.Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, Signs, and former Subsection G, Variances, both of
which immediately followed this table, were repealed 10-23-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-027.
§ 190-21 FLAG § 190-22
164:451
(2) Before passing on an application for a permit, and in reviewing the
application, the Commission shall take into account the purpose of
this section and consider the following:
(a) The historical or architectural value of the building or
structure and its setting; and
(b) The general compatibility of exterior design, arrangement,
texture and materials proposed to be used in relationship to
the existing building or structure and its setting or if new
construction, to the surrounding area; and
(c) The general size and scale of new construction in relationship
to the existing surroundings, including such factors as the
building's overall height, width, street frontage, number of
stories, type of roofs, facade openings (windows and doors),
and architectural details; and
(d) Other factors, including yards, off-street parking space,
location of entrance drives, sidewalks, extent and coverage of
pavement, signs and landscaping, which might affect the
character of any building or structure within the district, and
any other factor which relates to the appropriate setting for
such structure or grouping of structures; and
(e) The special character of the area including whether or not it is
primarily residential or commercial; and
(f) The economic activity of the building and the needs of that
activity, and as it relates to the welfare of the community.
(3) The Building Department Manager is not required to forward the
following applications to the Historic District Commission for their
review, provided the proposed project complies with the
stipulations specified:
(a) Ordinary maintenance and repair of any exterior architectural
feature which does not involve a change in design, materials or
outer appearance thereof;
(b) Painting or repainting of a building or structure;
(c) Roofing or reroofing of existing structures, provided that the
roof plane remains the same;
(d) Siding or re-siding of structures, provided that exterior
architectural features (exclusive of existing siding material,
such as clapboards, shingles) are not removed, destroyed or
covered and provided that the siding is similar in style and
appearance to the original construction;
(e) Storm doors and storm windows, provided that original
architectural features are not removed or destroyed.
§ 190-22 NASHUA CODE § 190-22
164:452
(4) All other construction, repairs, renovations, alterations not
mentioned and all applications for moving or demolition are
considered as coming within the scope of review of this article.
(5) The Building Department Manager shall consult with the Historic
District Commission on a periodic basis to review permits that have
been issued to determine that the purposes of this section are
being carried out.
(6) Members of the Historic District Commission shall discuss any
proposed changes with citizens or anyone contemplating work in a
district even though a review is not required by this article.
B. Procedure for Commission review.
(1) When an application is made to the building official for a building
permit or demolition permit which comes within the scope of
review of the Historic District Commission, the building official
shall submit the application to the secretary of the Commission
within three working days after the application is filed.
(2) The Commission shall file with the building official either a
certificate of approval or a notice of disapproval following the
review and determination of the application. Such certificate shall
be filed with the building official within 30 calendar days after the
submission of the application to the secretary of the Commission
unless the applicant shall agree in writing to a longer period of
time. Failure to file a notice of disapproval within the specified time
period shall constitute approval by the Commission.
(a) No building permit or demolition permit may be issued by the
building official until the Commission has either filed with the
building official a certificate of approval or has failed to file a
notice of disapproval within the specified time period.
(b) The Commission shall hold a public hearing on all applications.
Notice of the application and the date and time of the public
hearing shall be given to the applicant and every abutting
property owner whose property adjoins or is directly across the
street or stream from the land under consideration as
determined from the records of the City Assessor. Such notice
shall be given by certified mail not less than 14 days before the
date of the public hearing. A notice of the public hearing shall
also be placed in a newspaper of general circulation in the area
not less than five days before the date fixed for the hearing.
The abutter notification fee shall be any necessary postal fees
plus $3 per abutter. Any application shall require on-site notice
in accordance with § 190-126 of this chapter, with the title of
the action to read: "HISTORIC DISTRICT APPLICATION."
[Added 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-25]
(3) Written finding required:
§ 190-22 FLAG § 190-22
164:453
(a) Certificate of approval. If, in the opinion of a majority of the
Historic District Commission members present and voting, the
applicant's proposal meets the purposes of this section, the
Historic District Commission shall issue a certificate of
approval, signed by the Chairman, together with any changes,
conditions and stipulations necessary to secure the purposes of
this article.
(b) Notice of disapproval. If, in the opinion of a majority of the
Historic District Commission members present and voting, the
applicant's proposal does not meet the purposes of this article,
the Historic District Commission shall issue a notice of
disapproval in writing together with reasons for such decision,
signed by the Chairman of the Commission. The issuance of
such a notice shall prohibit the Building Department Manager
from issuing a building, demolition or other permit. If the
applicant's proposal is denied, the applicant may, and is
encouraged to, modify the proposed plans and may resubmit
the application at any time after so doing, provided that the
reasons for denial as stated in the notice of disapproval are
addressed in the resubmittal.
(4) Appeal. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the building
official or of the Commission under this section shall have a right to
appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment as provided in § 190-136.
(5) Location of Historic Districts. Historic Districts shall be created
and indicated on the Zoning Map of the City in accordance with
Article III of this chapter. No district shall be created prior to the
Historic District Commission's holding of public informational
meetings to explain the benefits and restrictions of such a district
to the residents and owners of the area contemplated for
designation. Owners of property in a potential district shall be
notified by the City by first class mail of the time and location of any
public hearing at which designation of their property in a Historic
District is to be discussed. Substantial objection to the creation of a
Historic District by the owners of property in the proposed district
shall be deemed ample evidence for the Board of Aldermen to deny
the proposed rezoning. Historic District regulations, as stated in
this article, shall be in addition to any other zoning regulations of
this Part 2 and shall in no way be construed to supersede those of
other zoning, building, life safety or other ordinances of the City.
C. Advisory referral from the Board of Aldermen. The Board of Aldermen
may request an advisory opinion of the Commission with respect to
applications for any building permit or demolition permit which would
come within the scope of review of the Historic District Commission.
Recognizing that the Board of Aldermen may request such an opinion
well in advance of formal design, the Board of Aldermen will submit to
the Commission such design information as may exist at the time. The
Commission shall report to the Board of Aldermen its findings and
§ 190-22 NASHUA CODE § 190-22
164:454
§ 190-23. Mixed Use Overlay District (MU).
Purpose: Mixed Use Districts are established from time to time to achieve
the following objectives:
• To promote the goals, objectives and strategies adopted as part
of the City's Master Plan.
• To assist conventional underlying zoning and land use
regulations where the modification of use, dimensional, density
and other requirements is appropriate through site plan review.
• To protect the value and efficiency of operation of surrounding
properties.
• To maintain unique aesthetic, architectural and visual amenities
of an individual building or cluster of buildings.
• To enable infill development to occur in a manner that will
be compatible with the surrounding site environment and
neighborhood.
• To ensure that private development and rehabilitation will be
compatible and coordinated with public investment and
improvements.
• To support new construction and adaptive reuse of buildings
through appropriate engineering, architectural and design
solutions.
• To guide the orderly and timely transition from one land use to
another within areas subject to building obsolescence, changes
in technology, environmental conditions and adjoining
development patterns and influences.
• To ensure that redevelopment occurring in close proximity to the
Nashua and/or Merrimack Rivers will conserve and incorporate
natural features and enable both visual and physical riverfront
access.
• To promote development opportunities that will eliminate blight
and disinvestment.
• To introduce uses that will have positive long-term social and
economic impacts.
• To establish a complimentary and integrated working, shopping
and living environment.
recommendations on those items in its discretion, as enumerated in
Subsection A(2) above. The Commission may make suggestions
regarding design details in its discretion but not yet complete. Such
report will be returned to the Board of Aldermen within 30 days of
receipt of the request. [Added 10-24-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-039]
A. Applicability.
(1) Mixed Use Districts are overlay zones that conform to RSA 674:21.
§ 190-22 FLAG § 190-23
164:455
(2) In areas where Mixed Use Districts may overlap with the Historic
District, the powers and duties of the Historic District Commission
and District, including the scope of building permit review, shall
remain in force.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) All principal and accessory uses permitted under § 190-15, Table
15-1, by right or special exception within the underlying districts
shall continue to be permitted according to the dimensional,
density and other applicable requirements established by this Part
2, within Mixed Use Districts.
(2) The powers and duties assigned to the Zoning Board of Adjustment
by § 190-257 to hear and decide appeals, special exceptions and
variances for uses permitted by the underlying district(s) shall not
be preempted by this section except where a use proposed is only
permitted by Subsection C, or the applicant elects to submit a site
plan to the Nashua Planning Board in accordance with the
provisions and requirements of this section.
(3) Any site plan submitted for a lot in or partly in the D-1 or D-3
Zoning Districts which involves the addition or enlargement of
structures or any amendment to an approved site plan shall be
subject to the provisions of this section, whether the use is listed in
§ 190-15 or Subsection C of this section, or is allowed by variance,
special exception, conditional use permit or other similar
permission, or is a prior nonconforming use.
C. Alternative uses. In addition to principal and accessory uses permitted
and regulated by the underlying districts, the following alternative
principal and accessory uses are also permitted within Mixed Use
Overlay Districts in conformance with the provisions of Subsections D
and E of this section:
(1) Principal uses:
(a) Residential:
[1] Multifamily dwellings.
[2] Multifamily high-rise dwellings.
[3] Dormitories.
[4] Elderly housing development.
(b) Community facilities:
[1] Educational purpose which is religious, sectarian,
denominational or public.
[2] Nonprofit school, college, university, business or trade
school.
§ 190-23 NASHUA CODE § 190-23
164:456
[3] Nonprofit boating, swimming and tennis clubs.
[4] Historical association or society.
(c) Agricultural.
[1] Retail sale of agricultural or farm products.
(d) Retail; service; commercial:
[1] Retail establishment selling convenience goods, including
but not limited to food, drugs and proprietary goods.
[2] Retail establishment selling general merchandise.
[3] Eating and drinking places.
[4] Hotels.
[5] Personal service establishments.
[6] Membership club operated for profit.
[7] Miscellaneous professional, medical and business offices.
[8] Proprietary school, college, business or trade school.
[9] Proprietary schools for education in the arts, dance, music
and drama.
[10] Private day care, nursery, or kindergarten.
[11] Movie theaters or performance theaters.
[12] Museums and art galleries.
[13] Amusement and recreation services, indoor and outdoor.
(2) Accessory uses:
(a) Accessory repair and storage facilities in any retail sales or
consumer establishment.
(b) Accessory outdoor storage.
(c) Accessory retail or consumer service uses primarily for the
occupants or uses within a hotel or office building.
(d) Accessory dormitory.
D. Modification of dimensional, density and other regulations.
(1) The Planning Board, in determining the acceptability of proposed
site plans within Mixed Use Districts, shall have the authority to
modify the dimensional, density and other regulations of the
underlying districts in accordance with Subsection F of this
section.
§ 190-23 FLAG § 190-23
164:457
(2) The authority granted to the Planning Board by this section shall
apply to all uses contained within or approved as a part of a
development submitted in accordance with the provisions of this
section. An applicant may continue to elect to obtain variances to
dimensional, density and other regulations of the allowed land uses
within the underlying zone district as identified in § 190-15, in
accordance with applicable review procedures and as approved by
the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
E. Site plan suitability report.
(1) Within the Mixed Use Districts, all site plans submitted to the
Planning Board for approval in accordance with this section shall
be accompanied by a site plan suitability report, including
appropriate studies, drawings, plans and illustrations, which shall
address the following relevant factors:
(a) Analysis of the ability of the proposed use and existing uses to
coexist and the potential impacts that proposed and existing
adjoining and surrounding uses and buildings may have upon
one another.
(b) Analysis of any impacts on significant natural, architectural,
visual or aesthetic qualities of the surrounding environment.
(c) Analysis of the health and safety impacts on customers,
residents, employees and the general downtown and inner-city
population.
(d) Analysis of economic or property value impacts.
(e) Analysis of traffic and parking impacts.
(f) Analysis of the adequacy of existing municipal facilities and
services.
(g) The consistency of the site plan with the Mixed Use District
objectives and guidelines established by this section, the
Master Plan and sound planning and development principles.
(2) Prior to the preparation and submission of a site plan and site plan
suitability report, the applicant shall hold preliminary review
sessions with the Planning Department and/or Planning Board to
solicit their comments and recommendations.
F. Guidelines for site plan evaluation. The following Mixed Use District
guidelines are an extension of the enabling purpose and objectives of
this section. The guidelines are intended to provide the Planning Board
with the criteria to evaluate site plans and site plan suitability reports
required by Subsection E above, and to determine whether a site plan
submitted under this section should be approved, approved with
conditions, or denied. In approving any site plan under the provisions of
this section, the Planning Board may require in a reasonable manner as
§ 190-23 NASHUA CODE § 190-23
164:458
a condition of approval any and all specific treatments of the criteria
listed in this section as it deems necessary to meet the purpose of this
section as set forth in the purpose statement above.
(1) Dimensional and density requirements. The base dimensional and
density requirements of the underlying zone shall apply to
proposed uses allowed within projects submitted in accordance
with this section. The Planning Board may vary the dimensional
requirements of the underlying zone subject to a report by the
Planning Director in consultation with the Code and Fire
Departments. The specific per-unit lot area requirement for
developments incorporating residential uses shall be removed.
Residential uses may be included within the allotted floor area
without limitation per se on the total number of units per acre. The
purpose of this section is to provide additional design flexibility,
and is subject to the Planning Board's finding that the development
adequately addresses and satisfies the requirements of this section.
The underlying zone shall be utilized for purposes of calculating
allowed densities of development appropriate for the area.
(2) Building and site design:
(a) Proposed building massing, proportions, spacing, scale,
setbacks, orientation, facade treatment, height and roof lines
should be integrated and compatible with surrounding
buildings.
(b) Exterior building and paving materials and details shall be of a
composition, scale and form compatible with the site and
building environment.
(c) Buildings should be designed in context with clusters of
buildings that present a distinct or unified architectural
pattern and scale.
(d) Buildings shall be oriented to enhance, maintain and protect
unique or significant internal and external view corridors and
vistas.
(3) Building rehabilitation:
(a) The removal, covering or alteration of significant architectural
features shall be avoided unless shown to be economically
unfeasible and the architectural and aesthetic characteristics
of the building and its compatibility with surroundings can be
preserved in some other way.
(b) Building design, materials and details shall be replicated
where feasible.
(c) Replacement elements and features, where replication or
reapplication is not feasible, shall be in harmony with the
§ 190-23 FLAG § 190-23
164:459
scale, design, texture and composition of original building
elements.
(d) The Planning Board may require the state Historic
Preservation Office or the Nashua Historic District
Commission to review and report on plans for buildings within
either National Register or local historic districts.
(4) Circulation:
(a) Vehicular and pedestrian facilities shall be designed to serve
both existing and proposed buildings and provide for safe,
unified and efficient access pattern that is coordinated with
existing and planned roads and sidewalks. Vehicular and
pedestrian access improvements shall be reviewed by the City
Traffic Engineer.
(b) Adequate access for safety, fire and emergency vehicles shall
be available and approved by the Fire Department.
(c) Provisions for public transit connections and stops should be
provided where deemed necessary and appropriate by the
public transit agency.
(5) Parking:
(a) Adequate off-street parking shall be available within 1,000 feet
of a mixed use overlay district and a suitable parking location
and management plan shall be established that will not
adversely impact off-site circulation conditions and parking
availability.
(b) A minimum of one off-street parking space shall be provided
for each dwelling unit. Parking regulations defined by
§ 190-198 shall apply to all other nonresidential uses permitted
within the Mixed Use District except where modified by this
section or following review and report from the Planning
Director in consultation with the Traffic Engineer.
(c) Off-street loading regulations defined by § 190-190 of this
chapter for all uses permitted within the Mixed Use District.
(d) Landscaping and screening shall be provided in conformance
with Article XXVII as a means to break up the visual monotony
and impervious surface area of parking facilities.
(6) Open space; landscaping:
(a) Landscape plans shall conform to Article XXVII.
(b) Nashua and Merrimack riverfront open space shall be retained
and expanded. Public and private visual and physical access to
riverfront open space shall be made available. All open space
§ 190-23 NASHUA CODE § 190-23
164:460
and landscape plans should be consistent with the City's
Central Nashua Riverfront Plan.
(c) Open space and landscaping shall be incorporated and, where
practical, provide visual and physical links to parks, plazas,
squares and Main Street.
(d) Open space and landscaping shall be provided to accentuate
points of access and pedestrian activity.
(7) Lighting:
(a) Lighting sources shall be of an appropriate design and located
at strategic locations to provide a safe environment and to
accentuate important points of activity, access and building
features of landmark proportions and details.
(b) Lighting sources shall be adequately shielded to avoid glare.
(c) All new construction and rehabilitation projects shall conform
to City minimum lighting standards.
(8) Signage:
(a) Rooftop signs and billboards are not permitted as part of site
plans for uses permitted by Subsection B unless approved by
the Planning Board following review and report by the Zoning
Administrator.
(b) All signs shall conform to Article X, Signs, of this chapter,
except as modified by this section.
(c) Thematic or display banners incorporated as part of new
construction and rehabilitation projects may be introduced if
they are of a suitable size, color and graphic design to enhance
the site and building environment and assist in enlivening and
defining a building or space.
(d) All directional and advertising signs shall conform to Article X
of this chapter and shall be of a scale, color and materials
consistent with the building, property and surrounding
environment.
§ 190-23 FLAG § 190-24
164:461
§ 190-24. Water Supply Protection District.
Purpose: It is the purpose and intent of this article to establish an overlay
district to increase protection for the Pennichuck Brook Watershed above
the supply pond dam, including Pennichuck Brook, its associated ponds,
wetlands, and tributaries, said water being the primary source of the
City's public drinking water supply. Regulations within the district are
intended to preserve the purity of the drinking water supply; to maintain
the groundwater table; and to maintain the filtration and purification
function of the land; thereby protecting the public health, safety and
welfare.
A. Water Supply Protection District established. The Water Supply
Protection District is herein established as an overlay district and shall
be superimposed on the other districts established by the zoning
ordinances. The requirements enumerated hereafter for this Water
Supply Protection District shall be in addition to, rather than in place of,
the requirements of such other districts.
B. Boundaries.
(1) The Water Supply Protection District is herein established to
include all lands within the City of Nashua lying within the
watershed of the Pennichuck Brook upgradient of the supply pond
dam. The map entitled "Water Supply Protection District Map, City
of Nashua, New Hampshire," dated October 28, 1998, and
prepared by the City of Nashua Community Development Division
shall delineate the boundaries of the district. This map as may be
amended is hereby declared to be a part of this article.
(2) Where any uncertainty exists with respect to the boundary of the
Water Supply Protection District as shown on the Water Supply
Protection District Map, the applicant shall supply the data needed
to determine the district boundary. The Administrative Official shall
determine the boundary based upon the location of the watershed
and there is a hydrological connection to the surface waters based
upon information supplied by the applicant.
(3) There shall exist a Conservation Zone within the Water Supply
Protection District which shall consist of all land areas located
within 300 feet of the annual high-water mark of Supply Pond,
Bowers Pond, Holt Pond, Harris Pond, and Pennichuck Pond, and all
land areas located within 150 feet horizontally from all water
bodies that are connected via surface water to the aforementioned
ponds and the wetlands associated with those water bodies. The
Conservation Zone shall be delineated on the map.
(4) To fulfill its function as a prime aquifer recharge zone, the
Conservation Zone is intended to be maintained as an undisturbed
natural buffer for the purpose of protecting the drinking water
supply. In case where a lot is not located entirely within the Water
§ 190-24 NASHUA CODE § 190-24
164:462
Supply Protection District, the requirements of the Water Supply
Protection District shall apply to that portion of the lot located
within the Water Supply Protection District.
C. Application for uses in the Water Supply Protection District.
Notwithstanding the requirements of other provisions of this article,
applications submitted for uses proposed within the Water Supply
Protection District shall be accompanied by sufficiently detailed
information and plans to clearly show the extent of the Conservation
Zone and the use proposed to be located on the subject property. The
Administrative Officer shall review the information provided to
determine its sufficiency.
D. Uses in the Conservation Zone.
(1) Unless permitted by the article, all uses are prohibited in the
Conservation Zone. Activities that maintain existing uses
associated with municipal water supply and treatment are allowed
in the Conservation Zone. Forest management, wildlife
conservation and passive, nonmotorized recreational activities are
permitted where developed in accordance with a Forest
Management Plan consistent with NH DES adopted or approved
best management practices and rules, approved by the Nashua
Conservation Commission.
(2) To reduce potential damage to the Conservation Zone from
significant storm events, overflow capacity may be provided within
the Conservation Zone only by vegetated swales. Piping, headwalls,
riprap and all other techniques other than vegetated swales are
prohibited. Tree cutting is strictly limited to what is absolutely
necessary to construct and maintain the vegetated swale. All other
tree cutting in the Conservation Zone is prohibited, except for treecutting
consistent with a Forest Management Plan developed in
accordance with NH DES approved best management practices
and rules, approved by the Nashua Conservation Commission.
(3) Land contained in the Conservation Zone may satisfy the open
space requirements of any lot.
E. Restriction on fertilizer and pesticide use. The use of fertilizers or
pesticides is prohibited on any lands within the Conservation Zone or
within 250 feet horizontally from the annual high-water mark of all
water bodies and all associated wetlands, whichever is greater.
F. Lots of record and nonconforming uses:
(1) The lawful use of any building or land existing at the time of the
enactment of this article may be continued.
(2) For lots of record as of the date of adoption of this article which
have distances from the front lot line to the edge of a water body
and associated wetlands in the Conservation Zone of less than 150
§ 190-24 FLAG § 190-24
164:463
§ 190-24.1. Four Hills Landfill Groundwater Management Zone.
[Added 10-22-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-050]
Purpose: On April 5, 2011, the New Hampshire Department of
Environmental Service (NH-DES) issued Groundwater Management and
Release Detection Permit No. GWP-198403099-N-004 to the City of Nashua
for the Four Hills Landfill (Permit). One of the conditions of the Permit was
for the City to collect data for a final definition of the off-site Groundwater
Management Zone (GMZ). A GMZ is an area within which groundwater
feet, the restrictions of the Conservation Zone in that location shall
be considered waived up to a distance of 75 feet. This subsection
shall not apply to the three-hundred-foot conservation area around
the ponds.
(3) In cases where legal lots of record, as of December 16, 1998,
cannot reasonably be used for a permitted use due solely to the
provisions of this article, a special exception may be granted
allowing the use, provided that there shall be no resulting
significant adverse impact to the water supply.
(4) Any use made nonconforming by the provisions of this article may
be expanded, provided that such expansion would otherwise be
permitted in the underlying zoning district and a minimum of 50%
open space is maintained.
(5) In other cases where currently developed sites are proposed for
expansion or redevelopment, a special exception may be granted, if
the following conditions are met:
(a) The proposed expansion or redevelopment would be allowed
under current zoning ordinances and meets all other
requirements for a special exception as set forth in § 190-134
of this chapter.
(b) The proposed expansion cannot be reasonably accomplished
within the constraints of Part 2. [Amended 2-26-2008 by
Ord. No. O-08-07]
(c) Determination by the conservation commission within 30 days
from formal submission of the proposal declaring that the
proposed use will not create a danger of prohibited acts under
§ 12-3 of the City Code.
(d) No increase of impervious surface in the Conservation Zone is
proposed, except as designated in Subsection F(5)(c) of this
section.
(e) All stormwater management systems must be compliant with
the requirements set forth in Article XXXI, Stormwater
Management Standards, and must be sufficient to infiltrate all
stormwater from the ten-year twenty-four-hour storm event.
§ 190-24 NASHUA CODE § 190-24.1
164:464
use must be controlled and/or monitored due to the potential presence of
groundwater contaminants that exceed the State's Ambient Groundwater
Quality Standards (AGQS). On June 10, 2013 the City submitted its technical
justification for the boundary of the proposed off-site GMZ. The boundary
was determined by analysis of groundwater flow in the areas surrounding
the Four Hills Landfill. The NH-DES approved the off-site GMZ boundary
delineation proposed by the City on June 24, 2013.
NH RSA 485-C:6-b and regulations thereunder require that notice of a
GMZ be recorded in the registry of deeds in the chain of title for each
property included in the GMZ. As an alternative form of notice, the law
allows for the establishment of an overlay district. Due to the number of
parcels affected by the GMZ, the City in consultation with the NH-DES
determined that it was more efficient to establish a Four Hills Landfill
Ground Management Zone Overlay District in lieu of recording notice in
the chain of title for each property located within the GMZ. The overlay
district also includes properties in the GMZ of the Gilson Road Superfund
Site which is administered by NH-DES.
It is the purpose and intent of this section to establish an overlay district
to protect the public health and the well-being of the City by restricting
groundwater use to meet the requirements of New Hampshire's
Groundwater Protection Act and the rules promulgated thereunder. The
groundwater quality is being monitored under the Permit.
A. Authority. The Four Hills Landfill Groundwater Management Zone
Overlay District (FHL-GMZ) is established in consultation with the New
Hampshire Department of Environmental Services (NH-DES) and
pursuant to NH RSA 47:17, XV "Bylaws and Ordinances,
Miscellaneous," NH RSA 485-C, "Groundwater Protection Act," and the
regulations promulgated thereunder, including but not limited to Env-
Or 607.02 and 607.06, and the Groundwater Management and Release
Detection Permit No. GWP-198403099-N-004 issued April 5, 2011 to the
City of Nashua by the NH-DES (Permit).
B. Four Hills Landfill Groundwater Management Zone Overlay District
established. The Four Hills Landfill Groundwater Management Zone
Overlay District is hereby established as an overlay district and shall be
superimposed on the other districts established by the zoning
ordinances. The requirements for this FHL-GMZ shall be in addition to,
rather than in place of, the requirements of such other districts.
C. Boundaries.
(1) The FHL-GMZ is herein established to include all lands within the
City of Nashua lying in and between the Four Hills Landfill and in a
westerly direction, the easterly bank of the Nashua River; in a
northern direction the Trestle Brook and following northwesterly
along the Trestle Brook to the easterly bank of the Nashua River;
and in a southern/southwesterly direction the southern boundary of
the Gilson Road Superfund site extending westerly to the easterly
§ 190-24.1 FLAG § 190-24.1
164:465
bank of the Nashua River. The map entitled "Current and Proposed
Land Use, Groundwater Overlay District Four Hills Landfill and
Gilson Road Superfund Site," dated July 2013, and prepared by the
City shall delineate the boundaries of the overlay district. The FHLGMZ
shall extend to any newly-created lot or map numbers created
as a result of a subdivision within the defined area. This map as
may be amended is hereby declared to be a part of this article.
(2) The boundary of the FHL-GMZ shall be reviewed no less frequently
than as required by the Permit or the NH-DES. Subsequent to such
review, lots may be removed from or added to the FHL-GMZ after
consultation with the NH-DES.
(3) When the boundary of the FHL-GMZ is in dispute by any owner or
abutter affected by said boundary, the City shall engage, at the
owner or abutter's sole expense, a professional geologist or
hydrogeologist to determine more accurately the precise boundary
of the FHL-GMZ. The City shall consult with and receive approval
from the NH-DES prior to any modification of the boundary of the
FHL-GMZ.
D. Prohibited uses. In the FHL-GMZ any and all extraction and use of
groundwater by any means and for any purpose whatsoever is
prohibited unless the City and the NH-DES grant specific prior
approval. No wells of any nature shall be dug, installed or otherwise
created within the FHL-GMZ without prior approval from the City and
the NH-DES. No groundwater shall be drawn or pumped by any means
or for any use from within the FHL-GMZ without prior approval of the
City and the NH-DES, unless it is for the specific and sole purpose of
pumping groundwater out of a sump to keep a basement from flooding.
No disturbance of wetlands within the FHL-GMZ shall be permitted
without the prior approval of all authorities having jurisdiction,
including but not limited to the City and the NH-DES.
E. Administration.
(1) The provisions of the FHL-GMZ shall be administered by the Health
Officer and the Department of Public Works.
(2) Notice of any variances given from the provisions of the FHL-GMZ
shall be forwarded to the NH-DES.
F. Enforcement. The Health Officer shall be responsible for enforcement
of the provision of the FHL-GMZ and may pursue all legal and equitable
remedies to ensure compliance with this section.
G. Effective date. This section shall become effective upon passage. The
FHL-GMZ shall remain in effect until such time as the Ambient
Groundwater Quality Standards (AGQS) are restored within the GMZ
and the NH-DES approves release of the overlay prohibitions.
§ 190-24.1 NASHUA CODE § 190-25
164:466
§ 190-25. Flexible Use District.
Purpose: The Flexible Use District is an overlay zone as depicted on a
conceptual plan entitled "Conceptual Plan, Main Dunstable Road, Nashua,
New Hampshire," dated February 15, 1997, at a scale of 1" = 200' prepared
for Terra Verde, 20 Trafalgar Square, Nashua, NH, as amended ("plan"),
and on file at the Community Development Division of the City of Nashua.
The Flexible Use Overlay District shall also encompass the land shown
on a conceptual plan entitled "Concept Plan, Ridge Road, Nashua, New
Hampshire" dated November 12, 2001, at a scale of 1" = 150' prepared for
Lamsco Holdings, L.L.C., 84 Lake Street, Nashua, NH (the "Lamsco Plan"),
on file at the community development division of the City of Nashua, with
the provision that said concept plan describe 82 new housing units and one
existing housing unit. The flexible use district is developed as an innovative
land use control pursuant to RSA 674:21I(i). It is designed to promote
the health, safety and general welfare of the community. The flexible use
district is further intended to promote the goals, objectives and strategies
of the City of Nashua's duly adopted Master Plan, capital improvements
program and its charter and ordinances, and thereby effectuates legitimate
public purposes and facilitates the orderly growth and development of the
City consistent with the needs of citizens.
The flexible use district permits multiple, coordinated uses in an integrated
concept development plan, and provides for open space, wetland
protection and recreational opportunities.
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Single-family residential. Single-family residential development
shall be permitted in Phases I-VIII as depicted on the plan in a
number not to exceed 250 units. Single-family residential
development shall be permitted as depicted on the Lamsco Plan in
a number not to exceed 82 units.
(2) Mixed-use village area:
(a) Purpose. A mixed-use village area will be permitted as depicted
on the plan and will be developed in conformity with the
traditional New England architectural style. The mixed-use
village area is intended to house retail facilities that primarily
serve the needs of the surrounding residential neighborhoods.
(b) Design standards. All structures erected in the mixed-use
village area shall be designed in keeping with the "Hall's
Corner Architectural Design Review, Procedure and
Guidelines," dated February, 1987, and as may be amended
from time to time by the Nashua Planning Board.
(c) Permitted uses. The following uses developed shall be
permitted in the mixed use village area as depicted on the plan.
All uses not listed here, or in the conditional use Subsection
A(4) below, shall be prohibited.
§ 190-25 FLAG § 190-25
164:467
[1] Elderly housing units.
[2] Retail establishment selling general merchandise
including but not limited to food, drugs, dry goods, apparel
and accessories, gifts, flowers, books, periodicals, jewelry,
tobacco, toys and crafts, stationery, antiques.
[3] Miscellaneous professional and business offices and
services including but not limited to legal and other
professional services, and finance, insurance, real estate
offices, banks, ATM and other financial institutions.
[4] Personal service establishments including but not limited
to hair styling, tailoring, shoe repair, laundromat and dry
cleaning establishments or similar uses.
[5] Eating and drinking establishments including but not
limited to restaurants, coffee shop, delicatessen, bagel,
pizza and sandwich shops where consumption is primarily
on the premises, but specifically excluding establishments
offering drive-through, curbside or other similar food
service, or where, consumption is frequently in
automobiles or off-premises.
[6] Private day-care nursery.
[7] Quasi-commercial, civic and institutional uses including
but not limited to studios for art, dance, music and
photography, churches, libraries and post offices.
[8] Farm stands and agricultural uses.
[9] Any type of municipal facility or activity.
(3) Accessory uses. Accessory uses typically associated with the above
principal uses shall be allowed with the approval of the Planning
Board at the time of site plan review.
(4) Conditional uses. The uses listed in this section shall be considered
conditional uses, subject to approval by the Planning Board per the
provisions of RSA 674:21, "Innovative Land Use Controls." In order
for the conditional uses to be permitted, the Planning Board must
determine that the proposed use complies with the statement of
purpose of this section and meets all of the provisions of the
Flexible Use Overlay District.
(a) With the approval of the conservation commission, dispensing
of automotive fuel, with no more than four fuel filling locations.
(b) Medical, dental and veterinary offices.
(c) Indoor amusement and recreation service, including but not
limited to health club, fitness center and recreation facilities,
§ 190-25 NASHUA CODE § 190-25
164:468
limited to no more than three coin-operated amusement
devices.
(d) Funeral homes.
(e) Greenhouses.
B. Signs/mixed-use district. The mixed-use village area shall have a
uniform sign criteria, submitted with the site plan and approved by the
Nashua Planning Board as a condition of approval of the site plan, that
shall conform, at a minimum, to the local business (LB) zoning district,
as described in Part 2, Article X. Internally illuminated signs are
prohibited.
C. Hours of operation. All commercial and other enterprises within the
mixed-use village area shall be limited to the following hours of
operation: 5:00 a.m. — 11:00 p.m. The Planning Board may further
restrict the hours of operation of individual businesses, based upon
anticipated usage, at the time of site plan approval.
D. Residential property dimensional requirements.
(1) Single-family dwellings shall conform to the following
requirements in lieu of § 190-16:
Single-Family Dwellings Setback Requirement
Minimum lot area 9,000 square feet
Minimum side yard 10 feet
Minimum rear yard 25 feet
Minimum front yard 25 feet
Minimum lot width 75 feet
Minimum lot depth 90 feet
Accessory structures 6 feet from all lot lines
(2) Dwellings shall be sited with a variety of setbacks to prevent the
row house effect.
(3) There shall be no more than 60 elderly housing units included in
the development.
E. Nonresidential lot and area requirements. The minimum lot area and
yard requirements shall generally follow the conceptual plan. The exact
lot area and dimensional requirements, along with access to the lots,
shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Board. There may be
only one retail establishment selling general merchandise, as defined in
Subsection A(2)(c)[2] of § 190-25, with a gross floor area of up to 20,000
square feet. A church may also have up to 20,000 square feet of gross
floor area. All other establishments within the mixed-use village area
shall have no more than 10,000 square feet of gross floor area. The total
§ 190-25 FLAG § 190-25
164:469
gross floor area of all structures in the mixed-use village area shall not
exceed 80,000 square feet.
F. Open space requirements. At least 30% of the total tract area depicted
on the plan shall be dedicated as open space. Said open space shall be
deeded to the City of Nashua to be used for public purposes including a
greenway system of public trails as depicted on the plan and placement
of utilities. The trail network within the greenway will be established
prior to the issuance of any occupancy permits for dwelling units within
each approved phase. The City shall use, maintain and preserve these
open space areas in their existing condition except for development of
trails. One hundred twenty-five feet of open space shall be provided
along all frontage on Ridge Road, and all existing foundations shall be
removed from this area.
G. Street and utility requirements. The following requirements shall
supersede Article XXX of this chapter where applicable:
(1) Noncollector, residential streets may be 24 feet in width with prior
Planning Board approval. If the road width is reduced, the Planning
Board may waive the requirement for curbing and closed drainage.
(2) Public rights-of-way shall be 50 feet.
(3) The Planning Board may require speed reduction or traffic calming
devices as it deems necessary.
(4) The Board of Aldermen may accept streets pursuant to § 285-21 of
the City Code.
(5) The Planning Board may require that culs-de-sac be teardrop in
shape, to facilitate snow plowing or for any other reason.
(6) All utilities shall be provided via underground connections.
H. Submission and approval. Site plans submitted under the Flexible Use
Overlay District shall meet the requirements Article XVII (Site Plan
Procedures) of this chapter and those elements of § 190-135 deemed
appropriate by the Planning Director. Development of the Lamsco
Holdings concept plan shall be in at least three phases of not more than
30 units per phase.
I. Administration.
(1) The Administrative Officer or his designee is authorized to
administer and enforce the provisions of this section. Any decision,
verbal or written, in the application of this section by the
Administrative Officer may be appealed to the Planning Board
whose decision is final unless appealed to Superior Court. The
Administrative Officer shall determine the applicable date of
constructive notice from which an aggrieved party has 20 days to
file a written appeal to the Planning Board. The Planning Board
shall follow its adopted bylaws in processing applications. As an
§ 190-25 NASHUA CODE § 190-25
164:470
§ 190-26. Planned Residential Development (PRD).
Purpose: This section establishes procedures and standards for the use of
flexible zoning standards for residential development. This section relieves
residential developments subject to a common plan of development from
rigid zoning requirements, but also establishes higher standards for open
space and building design.
innovative land use control, any waiver of the terms, uses and
dimensional requirements of this section shall be submitted to the
Planning Board who has been delegated the authority to decide
waivers based on the criteria established in § 190-137. Applications
for waivers and the notification of abutters and the public of the
application for variance shall be subject to the provisions of
§ 190-137. Waiver decisions by the Planning Board are final unless
appealed to Superior Court.
(2) The Planning Board, in determining the acceptability of proposed
site plans within the Flexible Use District shall have the authority
to modify the dimensional, density, and other regulations of the
underlying districts in accordance with the criteria for such
modification set forth for the D Downtown District in § 190-20,
subject to the restriction that the dimensional specifications set
forth in this article, and any other provision of this article which is
in conflict with the provisions of § 190-20 shall supersede the
provisions of § 190-20.
(3) All applicable fees for submittal of site plans and subdivision plans
shall apply.
J. Repeal of conflicting provisions of Ordinance No. O-88-05. Ordinance
No. O-88-05, "Rezoning a parcel of land on Conant Road to GB;
rezoning a second parcel on Buckmeadow Road to R-C; and approving a
planned residential development known as Hall’s Corner," is hereby
repealed in its entirety, along with all of its conditions and stipulations,
except for the Hall’s Corner Sewer Agreement, which will be addressed
separately. The Mayor of Nashua is authorized to execute such
documents as the City Solicitor/Corporation Counsel deems necessary
to extinguish or remove any agreements of record which were executed
as part of Ordinance No. O-88-05. [Amended 2-26-2008 by Ord. No.
O-08-07]
A. Applicability.
(1) This section applies to developments using a planned residential
concept for mixed residential, commercial, institutional and other
uses which are subject to the dimensional and density regulations
of this section and not those of § 190-16 of this chapter.
(2) The tract shall be at least 10 contiguous acres, and may include
parcels separated by existing public roads. Existing, intervening
§ 190-25 FLAG § 190-26
164:471
public roads shall not count toward tract size. However, proposed
dedications for future public roads shall not be discounted from
tract size.
(3) This section does not apply to those planned residential
developments which have received aldermanic approval prior to
passage of this chapter. However, modifications to the approved
concept plan may be authorized by the Planning Board, provided
that the original intent of the concept plan is adhered to specifically
regarding:
(a) Maximum number of dwelling units, nonresidential
development, and total building and parking lot site coverage.
(b) Total recreational space/facilities being provided.
(c) Preservation of natural features.
(d) Compliance with any density bonus provisions.
B. Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted within a PRD:
(1) Single-family detached, duplex, or multifamily dwellings.
(2) Community facilities as listed in the table of use regulations shall
be permitted as well as membership clubs under controlled use of
the residents of the planned residential development, recreational
membership clubs and facilities open to both residents and the
public, and public recreation or open space.
(3) Commercial retail and service establishments as allowed in Local
Business (LB) District.
(4) A maximum of 3% of total land area at any one time (excluding land
area devoted to private day nurseries or kindergarten facilities)
may be devoted to commercial uses, including required off-street
parking, whenever the proposed development consists of a
minimum of at least 100 acres.
C. Procedures.
(1) The applicant shall submit a concept plan for the entire tract of the
planned residential development. The concept plan shall include
the information required by Article XLIII.
(2) Submission and review.
(a) Only parcels with natural features and amenities, including,
but not limited to, wetlands and slopes that have not been
intentionally altered to circumvent the purpose of this section
shall be eligible for approval.
(b) Prior to the official submission of a general concept plan to the
City, the developer shall hold preliminary review sessions with
§ 190-26 NASHUA CODE § 190-26
164:472
the Administrative Officer to solicit his comments and
recommendations.
(c) Upon completion of the Administrative Officer review sessions,
the applicant shall submit the concept plan to the City Clerk for
inclusion on the Board of Aldermen agenda. The plan will then
be referred to the aldermanic Planning and Economic
Development Committee and the Planning Board, before they
act on the proposal. The aldermanic Planning and Economic
Development Committee will hold a public hearing, notice of
which shall be provided by publication in a newspaper having
general circulation in the City not less than 15 days, prior to
such hearing. As a condition of approval, the Board of
Aldermen may require the reasonable phasing of a
development in order to minimize its impact on existing
municipal facilities. This phasing shall allow sufficient time for
any expansions or improvements to municipal facilities as may
be necessary to accommodate the planned residential
development. All proposed recreational improvements shall be
phased to coincide with the phasing of the total project
development schedule. One hundred percent of all
nonresidential uses shall be constructed prior to the approval
by the Planning Board of the final 15% of the total number of
residential units.
(d) Upon approval of the concept plan, approval from the Planning
Board shall be required for each phase or structure to be built.
Such review shall conform to the site plan and/or subdivision
regulations of this chapter.64
(e) Failure to begin construction of a planned residential
development within one year of its approval by the Board of
Aldermen shall result in such approval being null and void
unless an extension has been granted by the Board of
Aldermen.
(f) A current list of all property owners, their addresses, and zip
codes, which abut the development shall be provided to the
Planning Board, and the Planning Board shall provide notice of
schedule public input meetings related to the proposed
development.
D. Dimensional standards.
(1) Density. The total number of dwelling units within the planned
residential development shall be no more than 3.8 units per acre of
net developable land plus incentives as provided in Subsection D(2)
below. "Net developable land" shall mean total tract acreage minus
the sum of:
64.Editor's Note: See Part 3 of this chapter, particularly Arts. XVI and XVII thereof.
§ 190-26 FLAG § 190-26
164:473
(a) Fifty percent of acreage defined as wetlands (as determined in
accordance with Article XI) and acreage within the onehundred-
year floodplain (as determined in accordance with
Article VII).
(b) Seventy-five percent of acreage encompassed by topography
having slopes of 20% or greater. This subtraction does not
apply to those slopes of at least 20% caused by prior human
activity, which are treated as slopes of less than 20% slopes for
purposes of the concept plan.
(c) Acreage within the fifty-foot buffer area required by Article XI
(Wetlands) of this chapter which is adjacent to any existing
intervening street, which would not be required if such
existing intervening street did not exist. This subtraction shall
not apply to those streets which are discontinued in
conjunction with the proposed development.
(d) All commercial acreage.
(e) Acreage occupied by indoor recreation facilities open to the
general public and operated for profit.
(f) Industrial acreage.
(2) Bonus density. Additional dwelling unit density may be obtained if
the following incentive(s) are fully satisfied:
§ 190-26 NASHUA CODE § 190-26
164:474
Table 26-1
PRD Bonus Density
(A)
Incentive
(B)
Bonus Units
(per acre)
Tracts
Exceeding
25 Acres
(C)
Bonus Units
(per acre)
Tracts
Between
10-25 Acres
An existing natural landscape
buffer, which shall be supplemented
by additional planting where natural
vegetation is sparse or nonexistent,
at least 200 feet in depth along
existing public rights-of-way
(excluding existing structures which
are to be incorporated into the
proposed project) and 100 feet
along all project property lines,
whose purpose is to provide a
natural visual screen between the
proposed development and adjacent
property and public roads.
0.5 0.25
Providing 250 square feet per unit
or more of developed active
recreation facilities, such as
swimming pools, tennis courts,
basketball courts, play lots and ball
fields.
0.3 0.15
§ 190-26 FLAG § 190-26
164:475
Table 26-1
PRD Bonus Density
(A)
Incentive
(B)
Bonus Units
(per acre)
Tracts
Exceeding
25 Acres
(C)
Bonus Units
(per acre)
Tracts
Between
10-25 Acres
When recommended by the
Planning Board, and confirmed by
the Board of Aldermen, a dedication
and/or development of land for a
public community facility (excluding
water or sewer improvements or
roads) which is necessary to serve
the general area or district in which
the development is located, and/or
providing 250 square feet per unit
or more of developed active
recreation facilities as described
above. Such recreation facilities
shall be dedicated for public use;
shall be consistent with the goals of
the City recreation plan; shall be
reviewed by the City's Parks and
Recreation Director prior to
submittal of the plan to the Planning
Board and Board of Aldermen. Any
dedications secured under this
paragraph may be permitted within
the required fifty-foot or onehundred-
foot buffer area.
0.20 to 0.50
units per
acre,
depending
upon the
quantity and
quality of the
dedicated
facilities as
determined
by the
Planning
Board
0.10 to 0.25 additional
units per
acre,
depending
upon the
quantity and
quality of the
dedicated
facilities as
determined
by the
Planning
Board
§ 190-26 NASHUA CODE § 190-26
164:476
Table 26-1
PRD Bonus Density
(A)
Incentive
(B)
Bonus Units
(per acre)
Tracts
Exceeding
25 Acres
(C)
Bonus Units
(per acre)
Tracts
Between
10-25 Acres
Privately operated day nursery or
kindergarten facilities providing
care for 12 or more resident or
nonresident children contained
within a freestanding structure
(except if associated with a
multiple-tenant commercial
structure) may be approved by the
Planning Board. Such facilities shall
be compatible with surrounding
land uses and designed in a manner
which permits safe and convenient
vehicular access and egress. In
addition, day nursery or
kindergarten facilities shall be
subject to the approval and periodic
inspection of the City Community
Services Division.
0.05 0.025
(3) Height. Structures shall not exceed 35 feet in height unless setback
75 feet from the project boundaries plus an additional 75 feet for
each 10 feet above 35 feet. No building shall exceed 80 feet in
height. When recommended by the Planning Board and confirmed
by the Board of Aldermen, requirements of this section may be
waived for special conditions such as commercial or industrial
abutters, or other special features such as rivers, highways, etc.,
where literal application of this section would not serve the
purpose of providing adequate buffers to established residential
neighborhoods.
(4) Perimeter setbacks. New principal structures and parking areas
shall be at least 50 feet from the project boundary, and this area is
to be considered a buffer comprised of existing natural vegetation,
which shall be supplemented by additional planting where natural
vegetation is sparse or nonexistent. Additionally, new principal
structures and parking areas shall be at least 30 feet from any
internal traffic routes or public roads and at least 20 feet from any
other principal structures. Accessory structures shall be at least
five feet from any other structure.
§ 190-26 FLAG § 190-26
164:477
E. Open space, parks and recreation.
(1) At least 20% of the total tract area shall be designated as common
open space.
(2) Not more than 75% of the common open space shall be wetlands or
over 5% sloped area.
(3) The Planning Board may allow land exceeding the slope limitations,
bodies of water, and historical sites to qualify as part of the
common open space requirement, by taking into consideration the
proposed use of any lands to be dedicated to public use, and the use
of the land or water in relation to the recreational needs of the
development.
(4) Stormwater management facilities (e.g., detention or retention
basins/ponds) required by Article XXXI) shall not be designated as
part of the required open space.
(5) Covenants protecting the common open space shall be reviewed
and approved by the Planning Board after review and approval of
the City Solicitor/Corporation Counsel prior to the first subdivision
or site plan approval. Such covenants shall provide for adequate
protection in their natural state for wetlands, bodies of water and
vegetation which are to be delineated on the concept plan.
F. Conservation regulations. See Article XXV.
G. Stormwater management. A stormwater management plan consistent
with Article XXXI shall be provided with the initial application for all
phases of the proposed development.
H. Street design and transportation.
(1) Street design and transportation shall comply with Article XXX.
(2) The number of new access points to existing and proposed public
streets and major through roads within the development shall be
limited to two unless otherwise determined by the Planning Board.
(3) The Planning Board may require principal streets to become
dedicated public ways.
(4) Private streets shall conform to Subsection H(1) above, and the
following standards:
(a) Private maintenance of all street improvements is required
(except as specifically required by the City) including rubbish
collection, lighting and snow plowing.
(b) The streets shall be posted as private streets by standard
street signs.
§ 190-26 NASHUA CODE § 190-26
164:478
§ 190-26.1. Transit-Oriented Development (TOD) Overlay District.
[Added 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-064]
Purpose: The purpose of the Transit-Oriented Development Overlay
District is to encourage innovative and supportive development near
transit stations such as commuter rail and bus with focus on intermodal
transportation connections and innovative financing of infrastructure. This
section promotes the transportation goals and objectives of the Nashua
Master Plan and specific objectives and recommendations of the 2004 East
Hollis Street Area plan adopted as part of the Master Plan.
(c) The Planning Board may allow up to 25% of streets within the
development to become public streets when appropriate.
(d) All dwelling units to be sold must have either frontage or
permanent easement access to a public street.
I. Utility requirements. The development shall be served by both a public
water and public sewerage system.
J. Homeowners' association requirements. All parks, open space and
other common areas shall be maintained by a homeowners' association
or equivalent entity as provided in § 190-205D of this chapter. The
applicant shall provide all documentation and instruments required
under this section for review by the City Solicitor/Corporation Counsel.
A. Applicability.
(1) The provisions of this section apply to any use or development
located within a Transit-Oriented Development (TOD) Overlay
District whose boundaries are established on the official Zoning
Map of the City by the Board of Aldermen.
(2) The Transit-Oriented Development Overlay Districts are flexible
overlay zones which are authorized by RSA 674:21.
B. Processing procedures. Development consistent with the regulations
established herein may occur as of right in any TOD Overlay District,
subject to the locational restrictions of Subsection C below.
C. Locational criteria. TOD Overlay Districts shall be located within a
reasonable walking distance to a transit station as established on the
official Zoning Map.
D. Uses.
(1) Any uses permitted in the R-C, D-1 or D-3 Zoning Districts, and the
uses permitted in the underlying zoning district, are permitted in
TOD Overlay Districts. In addition, research and development
offices are permitted as a conditional use (Use No. 180 of the Use
Matrix, § 190-15, Table 15-1 of this chapter) if not permitted by
right in the underlying district. Rail/bus passenger stations/
terminals (Use No. 257 of the Use Matrix), parking lots, surface,
§ 190-26 FLAG § 190-26.1
164:479
underground or in structures, as a principal use (Use No. 262),
railroad freight yards, repair shops/sheds and marshalling yards
(Use No. 263), and taxi and limousine service (Use No. 264) are
permitted uses in TOD Overlay Districts. A site plan is required for
development in a TOD Overlay District.
(2) Site plan suitability report. Within TOD Overlay Districts, all site
plans submitted to the Planning Board for approval in accordance
with this section shall be accompanied by a site plan suitability
report, including appropriate studies, drawings, plans and
illustrations, which shall address all factors identified in the Mixed
Use Overlay Zone site plan suitability report (§ 190-23E).
E. Modification of dimensional, density and other regulations.
(1) The Planning Board, in determining the acceptability of proposed
site plans within TOD Overlay Districts, shall have the authority to
modify the dimensional, density and other regulations of the
underlying districts in accordance with Subsection F below.
(2) The authority granted to the Planning Board by this section shall
apply to all uses contained within or approved as part of a
development submitted in accordance with the provisions of this
section.
F. Guidelines for site plan evaluation. The guidelines as established in the
Mixed Use Overlay District, § 190-23F, are intended to provide the
Planning Board with the criteria to evaluate site plans and site plan
suitability reports required by Subsection D above, and to determine
whether a site plan submitted under this section should be approved,
approved with conditions, or denied. In approving any site plan under
the provisions of this section, the Planning Board may modify or waive
any criteria listed in the Mixed Use Overlay District, § 190-23F, or
require in a reasonable manner as a condition of approval any and all
specific treatments of the criteria listed in that subsection as it deems
necessary to meet the above general purpose statement and generally
those of the Mixed Use Overlay District, § 190-23.
G. Adequate public facilities. The adequate public facilities standards of
Article XXIII of this chapter shall not apply to any application for site
plan approval within a TOD.
H. Lot arrangement and dimensions. The front setback shall be
established as follows:
(1) Minimum front setback: zero feet from the edge of the sidewalk. A
minimum setback of five feet from the property line shall be
required where street tree planting is required pursuant to Article
XXVII of this chapter.
(2) Maximum front setback: 15 feet.
§ 190-26.1 NASHUA CODE § 190-26.1
164:480
ARTICLE V
Special Districts
§ 190-27. Framework.
Special district regulations below provide the framework for zoning
districts to be created in appropriate areas throughout the City. The district
boundaries of the special districts shall be established through an
amendment to the Zoning Ordinance as set forth in §§ 190-12B
and 190-132, Zoning amendments.
§ 190-28. Higher Education District (HE).
Purpose: This district is intended to permit the location and growth of
institutions of higher education in areas appropriate for such use. This
section implements the following Master Plan recommendations:
• Require higher education facilities (HEFs) to maintain their site
plan.
• Require HEFs to submit for approval any requested additions to
an existing HEF.
A. Establishment of HE District. Prior to the establishment of an HE
District by the Board of Alderman, an applicant shall present a master
site plan of the proposed district to the Planning Board for approval.
The master site plan may be processed concurrent with a request to
rezone any lot(s) or parcel(s) to an HE District, pursuant to § 190-135,
and shall constitute the site plan for any lot or parcel after it is
approved This plan shall show:
(1) Adjacent properties sufficiently to identify surrounding uses and
potential impacts on them by the applicant's plan;
(2) The location and capacity of all off-street parking spaces;
(3) Internal traffic circulation plans, including traffic ingress and
egress locations; and
(4) For new facilities, estimates of traffic load impacts on surrounding
public streets.
B. Permitted uses. Colleges, universities, junior colleges and other
educational institutions of higher learning are permitted in a Higher
Education District. The following uses are considered accessory to the
permitted uses in a Higher Education District:
LBCS
Accessory Uses NAICS Function Activity Structure
Dormitories 1300 1320
Gymnasium 713940 7110 4220
Libraries 514120 4242 4100 4400
§ 190-27 FLAG § 190-28
164:481
LBCS
Accessory Uses NAICS Function Activity Structure
Museums and art
galleries
712110 5200,
5210
6700 4220
Swimming facilities/
natatoriums
713940 7110
Outdoor recreation
fields
7190
Student unions 4220
Amateur radio
transmitter
513112
Bookstore 451211 2135
Churches 813110 6600 6600 3500
Concert halls/
performance centers
711310 3110
Day-care and
preschool facilities
624410 6562
Floral shops 453110 2141
Game halls 713990 5320,
5380
Gift shops 453220
Hair salons and
barbers
812111 2600
Ice skating rink 7130
Parking structure 812930 5230
Restaurants and
cafeterias
722110 2510 2200 2220
722111 2520
722212
Stadiums 5210 3300
C. Dimensional standards.
(1) There is no minimum lot area or minimum lot width requirement
for the HE District The minimum building setback from the HE
District boundary shall be 25 feet for buildings up to 2 1/2 stories
or 35 feet in height.
(2) A building may be erected up to 75 feet, provided that the required
setbacks are increased by one foot for each foot of building height
measured from the outside edge of that portion of the structure
that exceeds 35 feet up to a maximum of six stories.
§ 190-28 NASHUA CODE § 190-28
164:482
(3) Parapet walls may be erected as necessary to screen rooftop
equipment if the walls extend around the perimeter of the building
and incorporate exterior building materials similar to those of the
main building. Parapet walls subject to this subsection are exempt
from the height restrictions.
D. Parking.
(1) Parking areas shall set back a distance of 25 feet from the district
boundary.
(2) Parking is not required for upper story dwellings above a first floor
commercial or office use.
(3) All parking areas within the same block should be designed to allow
interconnection to neighboring parking areas.
E. Transportation. Five-foot-wide sidewalks shall be required along the
streets of lots or parcels to be developed. Such sidewalks shall connect
to the major entryways of buildings. Sidewalks shall be so designed as
to tie to existing sidewalks within or abutting the district.
F. Building design.
(1) All roof-mounted equipment, including satellite dishes and other
communication equipment shall be screened to the extent possible
so as not to be visible from any public right-of-way by a parapet or
similar structure that is similar to the architectural style of exterior
elevation of the principal building. The equipment should not be
visible from recreation trails or from public sidewalks adjacent to
the building. Communications towers are subject to § 190-38.
(2) All equipment and activities shall be screened and placed so as to
minimize noise disturbance on any neighboring property.
(3) Exterior lighting used to illuminate the premises and/or advertising
copy shall be directed away from adjacent properties, and shall
conform to Article IX.
(4) Architectural elevations of all buildings and structures in the
district shall be submitted for review and approval by the Planning
Board. Particular attention will be paid to those facades that are
visible from a public street. The review by the Planning Board shall
be conducted with attention to proposed architectural features,
details, materials, and colors of buildings and structures. The
Board may require modification to the proposed designs and may
impose conditions in granting approval. Key elements that may be
reviewed include:
(a) Facade design and features.
(b) Window size, style and placement.
§ 190-28 FLAG § 190-28
164:483
§ 190-29. Medical District (MD).
Purpose: The MD Medical District is intended to accommodate medically
oriented businesses and facilities. Medical Districts (MD) accommodate
medical centers, hospitals and all their normally related functions, if
properly sited in relation to each other and pursuant to an approved plan
for that district. These standards are designed to ensure that developments
in the MD are functionally integrated with other buildings and parking
areas and in substantial conformity with a master site plan.
This section implements the following Master Plan recommendations:
• Consider if the Zoning Ordinance, as it relates to medical
services generally, needs to be revised to include provisions for
a Medical Services District and related use and dimensional
requirements.
• Any hospital or medical facility expansions need to recognize
and protect adjacent residential areas from unreasonable
impacts.
(c) Exterior materials and color.
(d) Roof form.
(e) Sign location and design.
(5) In those cases where the proposed building or structures will be
within 20 feet of the district setback, the architectural design shall
recognize and respect the architectural character of the existing
adjacent neighborhood in terms of scale and proportion.
G. Site plan.
(1) No building shall be erected or constructed, and no development
shall occur, unless and consistent with the master site plan
approved by the Planning Board.
(2) An updated master site plan may be concurrently submitted to the
Planning Board for proposed new building, construction, or
development not consistent with the existing plan on record.
A. Establishment of MD District. Prior to the establishment of a MD
District by the Board of Alderman, an applicant shall present a master
site plan of the proposed District to the Planning Board for approval.
The master site plan may be processed concurrent with a request to
rezone any lot(s) or parcel(s) to a MD District, pursuant to § 190-135,
and shall constitute the site plan for any lot or parcel after it is
approved. This plan shall show:
(1) Current and anticipated uses of the property;
(2) Adjacent properties sufficiently to identify surrounding uses and
potential impacts on them by the applicant's plan;
§ 190-28 NASHUA CODE § 190-29
164:484
(3) The location and capacity of all off-street parking spaces;
(4) Internal traffic circulation plans, including traffic ingress and
egress locations; and
(5) Estimates of traffic load impacts on surrounding public street
system.
B. Uses permitted.
(1) Hospitals and health care providers are permitted in a Medical
District. The following uses are accessory uses within an MD
District:
LBCS
Accessory Uses NAICS Function Activity Structure
Ambulatory and
outpatient care
services
6214 6510 4100
Blood and organ
banks
621991 6514 4100
Diagnostic imaging
centers
621512 6513
Dormitories 1300 1320
Emergency response
centers
621910 6430 4200
Family planning and
outpatient care
services
621410 6512 4100
Day-care homes 624120 6566
Hospitality houses
Hotels
Kidney dialysis
centers
621492
Medical and
diagnostic
laboratories
621511 6513 4100
Medical and nursing
schools
611310,
611519
Parking structures,
public or private,
subject to the
standards in
Subsection C below.
812930 5230
Pharmacies 446110 2161
§ 190-29 FLAG § 190-29
164:485
LBCS
Accessory Uses NAICS Function Activity Structure
Physical therapy
establishments
622310 6520 4100
Residential care and
treatment facilities
4500
Bookstore 451211 2135
Day-care and
preschool facilities
624410 6562
Floral shops 2141
Gift shops
Hair salons and
barbers
2600
Restaurants and
cafeterias
722212 2510 2200 2200
2520
LBCS
Uses Allowed by
Conditional Use
Permit NAICS Function Activity Structure
Communication
towers subject to
§ 190-69
4200 6500
Heliports 5640
Dwelling units 1100 1100,
1200
C. Dimensional standards.
(1) There is no minimum lot area, minimum lot width, requirement for
the MD district. The minimum building setback from the MD
District boundary shall be 30 feet. The Planning Board shall have
the authority to modify the setback requirements when the plan is
in conformance with the Nashua Master Plan.
(2) A building may be erected up to 90 feet up to a maximum of six
stories, provided that the required setbacks are increased by one
foot for each foot of building height measured from the outside
edge of that portion of the structure that exceeds 35 feet up to a
maximum of six stories.
(3) For purposes of this section, the land area used to compute the
open space percentage shall include the entire area subject to the
site plan or master site plan.
§ 190-29 NASHUA CODE § 190-29
164:486
(4) Parapet walls may be erected as necessary to screen rooftop
equipment if the walls extends around the perimeter of the building
and incorporate exterior building materials similar to those of the
main building.
D. Parking.
(1) There is no maximum parking ratio for buildings in the MD District.
(2) Parking areas shall be set back a distance of 25 feet from the MD
boundary. For through lots, parking should be located between the
principal building and the street that carries less traffic, but no
closer than 10 feet to the front property line.
(3) Parking is not required for upper-story dwellings above a first-floor
commercial or office use.
(4) All parking areas within the same block should be designed to allow
interconnection to neighboring parking areas.
E. Street design and transportation. Six-foot-wide sidewalks shall be
required along the streets of lots or parcels to be developed. Such
sidewalks shall connect to the major entryways of buildings. Sidewalks
shall connect to existing sidewalks within or abutting the district.
F. Building design.
(1) All roof-mounted equipment, including satellite dishes and other
communication equipment, shall be screened to the extent possible
so as not to be visible from any public right-of-way by a parapet or
similar structure that is similar to the architectural style of exterior
elevation of the principal building. The equipment should not be
visible from recreation trails or from public sidewalks adjacent to
the site.
(2) All equipment and activities shall be screened and placed so as to
minimize noise disturbance on any neighboring property.
(3) Exterior lighting is required for all employee and visitor parking
areas, walkways, and building entrances and exits. Exterior
lighting used to illuminate the premises and/or advertising copy
shall be directed away from adjacent properties, and shall relate to
the scale and location of the development. Article IX (Lighting)
shall not apply to the MD District.
(4) Architectural elevations of all buildings and structures in the
District shall be submitted for review and approval by the Planning
Board. Particular attention will be paid to those facades that are
visible from a public street. The review by the Planning Board shall
be conducted with attention to proposed architectural features,
details, materials, and colors of buildings and structures. The
Board may require modification to the proposed designs and may
§ 190-29 FLAG § 190-29
164:487
§ 190-30. (Reserved)65
impose conditions in granting approval. Key elements that may be
reviewed include:
(a) Facade design and features.
(b) Window size, style and placement.
(c) Exterior materials and color.
(d) Roof form.
(e) Sign location and design.
(5) In those cases where the proposed building or structures will be
within 20 feet of the district setback, the architectural design shall
recognize and respect the architectural character of the existing
adjacent neighborhood in terms of scale and proportion.
G. Master site plan. No building shall be erected or constructed, and no
development shall occur, unless and consistent with the master site
plan approved by the Planning Board.
65.Editor's Note: Former § 190-30, Transit-Oriented Development (TOD), was repealed
10-27-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-064.
§ 190-29 NASHUA CODE § 190-30
164:488
ARTICLE VI
Supplemental Use Regulations
§ 190-31. Accessory uses and structures.
§ 190-31.1. Keeping of chickens. [Added 12-11-2018 by Ord. No.
O-18-019]
A. Dimensional standards.
(1) In residential, commercial and industrial districts, a detached
accessory building shall comply with the following:
(A) (B)
Standard Requirement
Maximum percent of front or rear yard 25%
Minimum front setback 20 feet
Minimum side or rear setback 6 feet
Maximum height, within 10 feet of
property line
12 feet
Maximum height, more than 10 feet of
property line
20 feet
(2) An accessory building attached to the principal building shall be
considered an integral part thereof and shall be subject to front,
side and rear yard requirements applicable to the principal
building.
B. Campers. See § 190-35.
A. Purpose. It is the intent of this section to allow for the keeping of
domestic female chickens on a lot for the sole use and enjoyment of the
residents of the lot on which such chickens are kept, while at the same
time preserving the quality of life of the surrounding neighborhood by
not allowing chickens to be kept in a number or in a manner that could
create a nuisance.
B. Applicability. This section applies to chickens as defined in § 190-264.
This section does not apply to R-40 and R-30 zoning districts.
C. Standards.
(1) Chickens shall be kept in accordance with all applicable City
ordinances and regulations, and state laws, including but not
limited to RSA 644:8, Cruelty to Animals.
(2) Up to six adult chickens may be kept on a lot. Only female chickens
are allowed to be kept. Adult male or crowing male chickens
(roosters) are prohibited.
§ 190-31 FLAG § 190-31.1
164:489
(3) The keeping of chickens shall be accessory to and on the premises
of a single-family or two-family detached dwelling in an accessory
structure or coop and shall be for personal use only.
(4) No person shall sell eggs or engage in chicken breeding or any
commercial activity related to the keeping of chickens.
(5) Chickens shall not be permitted to roam free. Chickens shall be
secured in a coop during nondaylight hours.
(6) A coop must be provided for the chickens. A coop is a roofed
structure enclosed on all sides which protects the chickens from
the weather, rodents and wild and domestic animals. Coops must
meet the following standards:
(a) The coop must have a minimum of three square feet of floor
space per chicken if a run is provided. A minimum of 10 square
feet of floor space per chicken in the coop is required if no run
is provided. Each chicken must have a total available ground
space (including coop and run, if any) of at least 10 square feet
per chicken.
(b) The coop must provide roosting space off the floor of one foot
of roost space per chicken.
(c) The coop must provide adequate ventilation, be kept in a neat
and sanitary condition at all times, and in a manner that will
not disturb neighboring lots due to noise, odor or other adverse
impact.
(d) The maximum height for a coop is eight feet measuring from
the ground to the top of the structure.
(e) The materials used in building the coop shall be uniform for
each element of the structure.
(7) An enclosed run is permitted. A run is a fenced area outside the
coop. An enclosed run is completely bound on all sides, including
overhead, by a fence, cage or wire. An enclosed run must be
attached to the coop. The maximum height for an enclosed run is
eight feet measuring from the ground to the top of the structure. A
run shall be kept in a neat and sanitary condition at all times, and in
a manner that will not disturb neighboring lots due to noise, odor
or other adverse impact.
(8) The coop and any run must be located in side or rear yards and
cannot be located within 20 feet of a property line.
(9) All feed supplies must be kept in rodent-proof containers.
(10) All stored manure shall be covered by a fully enclosed structure or
container. No more than three cubic feet of manure shall be stored.
§ 190-31.1 NASHUA CODE § 190-31.1
164:490
§ 190-32. Accessory dwelling units. [Amended 8-8-2017 by Ord. No.
O-17-036]
(11) All manure not used for composting or fertilizing, waste material
(including but not limited to spent feed, litter, and waste eggs) and
dead chickens shall be properly and promptly removed from the
property.
A. Applicability. This section applies to any accessory dwelling unit.
B. Standards.
(1) The accessory dwelling unit shall be clearly incidental and
subordinate in extent, use, and purpose to the primary structure
and does not exceed 750 square feet.
(2) The accessory dwelling unit shall be the only accessory dwelling
unit within or on the same lot as the single-family dwelling.
(3) The accessory dwelling unit shall not alter the single-family
character or appearance of the single-family dwelling or its
conformity with the character of the neighborhood.
(a) No new entrance or exit to an accessory dwelling unit shall be
constructed on the front or frontage side of the single-family
dwelling.
(b) No new curb cut from the street shall be constructed.
(c) The exterior design of the accessory dwelling unit shall be
compatible with the single-family dwelling through
architectural use of building forms, scale and construction
materials.
(4) (Reserved)
(5) The owner of the property must occupy either the primary or
accessory dwelling unit as the owner's principal place of residence.
[Amended 5-22-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-013]
(6) The owner of the property shall provide the City of Nashua with a
covenant for filing with the Hillsborough County registry of deeds,
along with the appropriate filing fees. The covenant shall read
substantially as follows:
"_____of _____ covenants and agrees that the property located at
_____ contains an accessory dwelling as defined by the City of
Nashua Land Use Code (§ 190-264 of Article XLII). That use of
the property is permitted as a special exception granted by the
Zoning Board of Adjustment on __________, _____. The continued
use of the accessory dwelling unit is conditioned upon compliance
with all current and subsequently adopted ordinances and statutes
applicable to the property."
§ 190-31.1 FLAG § 190-32
164:491
§ 190-33. Attached dwellings.
Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide reasonable, pedestrianfriendly
design standards that accommodate a variety of housing types
while protecting surrounding neighborhoods. This section implements the
Housing Element of the Master Plan.
The granting of a certificate of occupancy of the accessory dwelling
unit shall be contingent upon receipt of the covenant and fees.
(7) One additional off-street parking space is required above the
minimum standard for a single-family house.
(8) An interior door shall be provided between the primary dwelling
unit and the accessory dwelling unit.
(9) The single-family dwelling and the accessory dwelling unit shall not
be separated in ownership (including by condominium ownership).
(10) Accessory dwelling units shall only be associated with single-family
detached dwellings and shall not be associated with manufactured
housing as defined in RSA 674:31.
A. Multifamily development.
Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide reasonable design
standards for multifamily residential developments that:
• Provide design flexibility;
• Accommodate affordable housing for current and future residents
of the county;
• Protect the health, safety and general welfare of the general
public and occupants of the units;
• Protect the property values of surrounding dwelling units;
• Promote a pedestrian-friendly, walkable streetscape; and
• Provide for aesthetically pleasing development patterns.
(1) This section applies to multifamily dwelling units as permitted by
the Use Matrix (§ 190-15, Table 15-1 of this chapter).
(2) For developments over 10 acres, common open space areas shall be
required in accordance with the parks and open space standards
(Article XXIX) of this chapter. The Planning Board may waive up to
50% of the open space requirement if all units within the
development are located within 1,000 feet of a public park as
measured along a public sidewalk, trail or bikeway. The open space
requirements of this section shall not apply to multifamily
residential developments which are second-floor units above firstfloor
commercial development, or to any residential developments
in the D Zoning District that are located above the first floor. Open
space provided pursuant to this requirement shall be accessible to
§ 190-32 NASHUA CODE § 190-33
164:492
§ 190-34. Bed-and-breakfast.
The purpose of this section is to regulate bed-and-breakfast establishments
within the City. Such establishments as specified by zoning district are
subject to the conditions of this section.
all residents of the development and shall measure at least 30 feet
across its narrowest dimension.
(3) Sidewalks or pedestrian walkways shall be constructed within the
interior of the development to link residential buildings with other
destinations such as, but not limited to, parking, adjoining streets,
mailboxes, trash disposal, adjoining sidewalks or greenways and
on-site amenities such as recreation areas. These interior sidewalks
or pedestrian walkways shall be constructed in accordance with
the standards for sidewalks as set forth in § 190-212 of this chapter.
Sidewalks, in combination with curbs, shall be required adjacent to
all public streets that provide access to the development. Such
improvements may be subject to road widening and other related
improvements.
(4) All utility lines shall be located underground.
B. Room renting. Room renting, where permitted by the Use Matrix
(§ 190-15, Table 15-1), shall comply with the following:
(1) No more than four roomers are permitted per dwelling unit; and
(2) Parking areas shall be located only within the rear yard and outside
of any required setback. Parking areas shall not exceed 50% of the
rear yard.
A. The individual or family who operated the bed-and-breakfast facility
must occupy the house as their primary residence.
B. The maximum number of permitted guest rooms per bed-and-breakfast
establishment within each zoning district shall be as indicated in the
following table. Any bed-and-breakfast establishment with more than
12 guests rooms shall be considered a hotel and shall comply with the
zoning provisions for such uses.
Table 34-1
Bed-and-Breakfast Guest Rooms
Zoning District
Number of Guest
Rooms
R-A, R-B, R-C* 3
LB, GB 10
D 12
§ 190-33 FLAG § 190-34
164:493
§ 190-35. Campers.
For the location of a recreational vehicle or camper on a lot in a residential
district, the following requirements apply:
§ 190-36. Child day-care facilities.
All child care facilities shall comply with the requirements of this section as
well as the provisions of RSA 170-E, Child Day Care, Residential Care, and
Child-Placing Agencies.
* Up to 7 additional guest rooms may be permitted in the R-C District
by special exception.
C. No signs are permitted within residential districts except for a
nameplate not exceeding one square foot in size and consisting of the
name of the establishment only. This nameplate may be attached to the
building, gatepost, gate, or other permanent fixture to allow visibility
from the street.
D. One off-street parking space per guest room shall be provided in
addition to the required off-street parking for the owner/operator.
Tandem parking is allowed. However, except for the driveway, the front
yard shall not be used for parking.
E. Food services and alcohol may only be provided to overnight guests of a
bed-and-breakfast facility pursuant to applicable state and county
regulations.
A. Storage. A camper owned by a property owner or lessee may be stored
or parked on the premises of the owner or lessee during periods of
nonuse in any residential district, providing the camper remains
mobile. A camper not registered to operate on public highways must be
located so as to comply with the minimum setbacks for a structure
situated in the zoning district where the camper is located.
B. Guest stationing. Any property owner or lessee in any residential
district may accommodate one camper of a nonpaying guest for a
period not to exceed 30 days in any one calendar year, provided that:
(1) Notification of guest stationing is furnished to the Administrative
Officer within 72 hours after arrival of the camper. Such
notification may be given orally or in writing, and the Building
Department Manager shall then enter it upon his records and shall
issue a permit.
(2) No water or sanitary facilities within the camper shall be used
unless connected with a disposal system approved by the Health
Officer and the Plumbing Inspector, both of whom shall give written
approval thereto.
§ 190-34 NASHUA CODE § 190-36
164:494
A. A child day-care facility as a principal use is subject to the following
standards:
(1) All child day-care facilities shall be located on lots that have direct
access to and from a collector or arterial street, or access to a
street which shall be physically improved in order to fulfill the
function and meet the standards of a collector street;
(2) Outdoor activity areas for child day-care facilities shall be enclosed
by fences and shall not be located in the front yard of a residential
district. Where the lot is located within or adjacent to a residential
district, the enclosure shall be a solid fence made of wood or other
suitable material not more than six feet in height which shall be
erected and maintained in good condition around the outdoor
activity area.
B. Child day-care facilities located within a dwelling unit and providing
care for more than three children are subject to the following standards
and requirements:
(1) The child day-care facility shall be subordinate to a single-family
detached dwelling; and
(2) The maximum capacity of a child day-care facility shall be 12
children; and
(3) A child day-care facility providing care for six or more children
shall be located on a lot that conforms to the minimum dimensional
standards for the applicable zoning district established in § 190-16,
Dimensional regulations, of this chapter;
(4) There is on-site parking for the principal residential use;
(5) Outdoor activity areas for child day-care facilities shall not be
located in the front yard and shall be enclosed by a solid fence
made of wood or other suitable material not less than six feet in
height which shall be erected and maintained in good condition
around the outdoor activity area; and
(6) No signs shall be permitted except for a nameplate not exceeding
one square foot in size and attached flat to the main structure.
C. Child day-care facilities accessory to a principal nonresidential use are
subject to the following standards and requirements:
(1) Where the child day-care facility is located in a separate building
more than 500 feet from the building in which the principal
nonresidential use is located parking shall be provided in addition
to the parking required for the principal nonresidential use; and
(2) Outdoor activity areas for child day-care facilities shall be enclosed
by fences. Where the facility is located within or adjacent to a
residential district, the outdoor activity area shall be enclosed by a
§ 190-36 FLAG § 190-36
164:495
§ 190-37. Churches, synagogues, and places of religious worship;
and community centers.
§ 190-38. Communications towers and antennae.
Purpose and findings: In order to accommodate the communication needs
of residents and businesses while protecting the public safety and general
welfare of the community, the City finds that these regulations are
necessary in order to:
• Facilitate the provision of wireless telecommunication services
to the residents and businesses of the City;
• Minimize adverse visual effects of communications towers and
antennas through careful design and siting standards;
• Minimize economic impacts on adjacent property values;
• Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower
failure through setback requirements; and
• Maximize the use of existing and approved towers and buildings
to accommodate new wireless telecommunication antennas in
order to reduce the number of towers needed to serve the
community.
solid fence made of wood or other suitable material not less than
six feet in height which shall be erected and maintained in good
condition around the outdoor activity area.
D. Outdoor play for any child day-care facility located within any
residential district is restricted to the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
A. Applicability. This section applies to any churches, synagogues, parish
houses, Sunday school buildings, convents and similar uses and their
customary uses including child care on the premises during worship
services, as defined in the Use Matrix (§ 190-15, Table 15-1).
B. Standards. Churches shall comply with all of the dimensional standards
for the applicable zoning district, provided that:
(1) Within any R-40, R-30, R-18, R-9, R-A, or R-B Zoning District, the
maximum height shall be 36 feet or three stories, subject to any
height exemptions prescribed in § 190-16I; and
(2) Within any residential zoning district, no off-street parking shall be
located within the front yard.
A. City-wide tower and antenna location plan. A City-wide tower and
antenna location plan for all communications towers and antennas
anticipated by the applicant must be submitted by the applicant prior to
or at the time of the application to the Planning Board. The planning
staff shall review the proposed plan to ensure its consistency with this
subsection and the purpose statement recited above. Said plan shall
then be forwarded to the Planning Board with a recommendation from
§ 190-36 NASHUA CODE § 190-38
164:496
the staff. Upon approval of the Planning Board, all antennas shall be
installed consistent with said plan. Any amendment to the plan shall
be reviewed by the planning staff for consistency with the original
plan, including but not limited to such factors as number, type, and
location of antennas, and forwarded to the Planning Board with any
future requests for exceptions based on the plan, along with the
recommendation of the staff regarding the amendment to the plan.
[Amended 8-9-2011 by Ord. No. O-10-44]
B. Standards. No special exception application shall be approved by the
Zoning Board of Adjustment unless the communications tower complies
with the criteria established in Subsections C through L of this section.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment may waive the requirements of
Subsections C (location) and E (height) to the extent necessary to
resolve any gap in service where required by the Federal
Telecommunications Act of 1996. The Administrative Officer shall
provide notification as required by RSA 12-K:7(I). [Amended 8-9-2011
by Ord. No. O-10-44]
C. Tower locations.
(1) New freestanding communications towers shall not be located
closer than one mile from any existing or approved communications
tower.
(2) All communications towers must be located the greater of 400 feet
from all lot lines or the towers' height from all lot lines of abutting
residential properties. [Amended 8-9-2011 by Ord. No.
O-10-44]
(3) In all cases, communications towers must meet the minimum
setback requirements of the underlying zoning district.
(4) Only one communications tower is permitted on any one
residentially zoned parcel.
(5) The Planning Board shall find that a complete assessment of
locations in order of priority has been undertaken and completed,
and that higher priority uses are exhausted or unfeasible. All
communications towers erected, constructed, located, replaced,
altered, or extended within the City shall comply with the following
requirements:
(a) Communications towers and antennas shall be located using
the following priority:
[1] On existing buildings;
[2] On other existing structures, including but not limited to
water tanks and utility transmission poles;
[3] On existing communications towers;
§ 190-38 FLAG § 190-38
164:497
[4] On new structures under 50 feet; and
[5] On new communications towers.
(b) Any proposed communications tower shall be designed,
structurally, electrically, and in all respects, to accommodate
both the applicant's antennas and comparable antennas for at
least two additional users if the tower is over 100 feet in height
or for at least one additional user if the tower is less than 100
feet in height. All users are to be charged industry standard
rates on a competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory basis.
Towers must be designed to allow for future rearrangement of
antennas upon the tower and to accept antennas mounted at
varying heights.
D. Design. Where reasonably practicable, all proposed or modified towers
and antennas shall be designed to blend into the surrounding
environment the use of color and camouflaging architectural
treatments, except in instances where the color is dictated by federal or
state authorities such as the Federal Aviation Administration. The
Planning Board may require such architectural treatments or other
design techniques as it deems necessary in order to meet the provisions
of this subsection.
E. Height. The height of towers shall be determined by measuring the
vertical distance from the tower's point of contact with the ground or
rooftop to the highest point of the tower including all antennas or other
attachments. When towers are mounted upon other structures, the
combined height of the structure and tower shall be used in
determining compliance with the tower location requirements set forth
in Subsection C above. [Amended 8-9-2011 by Ord. No. O-10-44]
F. Lighting. No communications tower or antenna shall have affixed or
attached to it in any way except during time of repair or installation,
any lights, reflectors, flashers, or other illuminating devices, except as
required by the Federal Aviation Agency or the Federal
Communications Commission. When incorporated into the approved
design of the tower, light fixtures used to illuminate ball fields, parking
lots, or similar areas or United States flags may be attached to the
tower.
G. Signs and advertising. The use of any portion of a tower for signs or
advertising purposes is prohibited, with the exception of the provisions
of Subsection J below.
H. Communications tower safety. No communications tower shall have
constructed thereon, or attached thereto, in any way, any platform,
catwalk, crow's nest, or like structure, except during periods of
construction or repair. Every communications tower affixed to the
ground shall be protected to prohibit climbing of the tower by
unauthorized persons. At a minimum, the tower base and associated
§ 190-38 NASHUA CODE § 190-38
164:498
equipment shall be surrounded by a fence of a design agreeable to the
zone and in keeping with the character of the site, of at least six feet in
height if practicable.
I. Accessory utility buildings. All utility buildings and structures
accessory to a tower shall be architecturally designed to blend in with
the surrounding environment and shall meet the minimum setback
requirements of the underlying zoning district. Ground-mounted
equipment shall be screened from view by minimum Type B buffer as
set forth in § 190-181B(b), except where a design of nonvegetative
screening better reflects and complements the architectural character
of the surrounding neighborhood.
J. Antennas as an accessory use. Antennas are allowed as an accessory
use on signs or their associated structural supports, lighting poles or
other similar structures, provided that the structure otherwise
conforms to the City Code, and that the nature of the structure is not
substantially altered by the addition of the antenna, and that the
antenna is mounted no more than 20 feet above the existing height of
the structure.
K. Additional submittal requirements. In addition to the information
required elsewhere in this chapter and regularly required by the
Planning Board, and all other information deemed necessary to
evaluate the request, development applications for towers shall include
the supplemental information required by Article XLIII.
L. Abandoned or unused towers, portions of towers, or antennas.
Abandoned or unused towers, portions of towers, or antennas shall be
removed as follows:
(1) All abandoned or unused towers and associated facilities shall be
removed within 12 months of the cessation of operations at the site
unless a time extension is approved by the Administrative Officer. A
copy of the relevant portions of a signed lease which requires the
applicant to remove the tower and associated facilities upon
cessation of operations at the site shall be submitted at the time of
application. In the event that a tower is not removed within 12
months of the cessation of operations at a site, the tower and
associated facilities may be removed by the City and the costs of
removal assessed against the commercial wireless
telecommunications service or the property owner.
(2) All owners of commercial wireless telecommunication towers shall
obtain and maintain a bond, with limits of $10,000 per tower to
cover the cost of removal of abandoned, unused towers or portions
of towers. A bond certificate shall be submitted to the City of
Nashua 30 days before final approval to erect the tower. The
amount of said bond shall be reviewed by the planning staff every
five years to ensure the amount of the security is adequate and may
be increased if necessary.
§ 190-38 FLAG § 190-39
164:499
§ 190-39. Commercial retrofit or "Greyfield" redevelopment.
This section encourages the redevelopment of existing shopping centers,
big-box retail sites, and other sites characterized by large expanses of
surface parking into a development pattern that is pedestrian friendly,
compatible with surrounding development, provides a visually attractive
site design, and which reduces reliance on the automobile for vehicular
trips.
This section implements the following Master Plan recommendations:
• Encourage and support businesses that reduce employee and
product-related vehicle trips.
• Encourage and support businesses that are working to reduce
dependence on fossil fuels and other nonrenewable resources.
A. Applicability. Existing parking lots adjoining the frontage of any site
located within the GB, HB, PI, or GI Zoning Districts may be replaced
with buildings.
B. Size and location of site. No minimum parcel size is required.
C. Uses and density. Development may consist of the following activities:
(1) The construction of additional buildings between a collector street
right-of-way and the existing buildings (hereinafter "additional
buildings"). The facades of the additional buildings which face the
public right-of-way and the existing buildings on the lot, tract or
parcel shall conform to the building design standards for the D-1
Downtown District (§ 190-20).
(2) Apartments may be placed above new or existing office or retail
uses. The height of buildings adding aboveground apartments shall
not exceed that designated in Table 39-1 below.
§ 190-39 NASHUA CODE § 190-39
164:500
Table 39-1
Commercial Retrofit Mixed Use Height Limits
Zoning District
Existing Number
of Stories
Additional Stories
of Apartment Use
Permitted
LB 1 2
2 1
3 or more 0
GB 1 2
2 2
3 or more 1
HB 1 2
2 3
3 or more 3
PI, GI 1 3
2 3
3 3
4 3
5 or more 3
Other districts 1 2
2 2
3 or more 2
D. Adequate public facilities. The adequate public facilities standards
(Article XXIII) shall not apply to a commercial retrofit.
E. Site design. The additional buildings shall have a facade oriented to the
principal buildings and a facade facing the frontage line. The facades
facing the principal buildings shall conform to the building design
standards for the D-1 Downtown District (§ 190-20).
F. Open space and parks. A commercial retrofit is not subject to the open
space, parks, recreation and civic space standards of this chapter
(Article XXIX); provided, however, that a commercial retrofit may
provide plazas, courtyards, or forecourts.
G. Conservation regulations. A commercial retrofit is not subject to the
conservation regulations of this chapter (Article XXV).
H. Parking.
(1) Parking areas shall adjoin buildings to the rear. Parking areas shall
not adjoin buildings at the front or the primary entryway. Additional
parking may be placed to the rear of the principal buildings so long
§ 190-39 FLAG § 190-39
164:501
§ 190-40. Conservation subdivisions.
This option provides flexibility in site design in order to allow developers to
preserve common open space and natural resources. The specific purposes
of this section are:
• To protect the public health, safety and general welfare by
avoiding surface and groundwater pollution, contaminated runoff,
air quality contamination, and urban heat islands which result
from pavement and the clearing of natural vegetation.
• To protect and preserve natural resources such as wetlands,
streams, lakes, steep slopes, woodlands, and water recharge
areas.
• To reduce infrastructure and housing costs by reducing the
engineering and construction costs produced by conventional
subdivision design, which requires more pavement, wetland
crossings, grading of trees and natural areas, and maintenance
from lawn and landscaping maintenance.
• To protect property values by allowing open space design features
which enhance the marketability of development.
• To provide design flexibility.
as the number of spaces for the entire site do not exceed the
maximum parking requirements of this chapter (Article XXVIII,
§ 190-198, Table 198-1).
(2) Parking areas may be connected to rear parking lots on adjoining
properties in order to allow customers to drive to other locations
without reentering the major street network and adding to traffic
volumes.
(3) Service entrances and service yards shall be located only in the
rear or side yard.
(4) Not more than four rows of parking may be placed between the
existing buildings and any buildings constructed between the
existing buildings and the street right-of-way pursuant to this
subsection.
§ 190-39 NASHUA CODE § 190-40
164:502
• To promote development on soils which are most suitable for urban
densities, while preserving soils that are primarily adaptable to
other uses such as woodlands, wildlife habitat, and agricultural
uses.
This section implements the following Master Plan recommendations:
• Encourage the protection of wildlife habitats through improved
land use regulations, . . . and the setting aside of such land
in cluster developments and planned residential developments
(PRDs) [Conservation Element].
• Ensure that an adequate amount of open space is set aside for the
enjoyment of citizens, as a relief from the built environment, and
as wildlife habitat (Conservation Element).
• Encourage the use of the cluster and PRD styles of subdivision
development, to enable greater amounts of open space in
subdivisions (Conservation Element).
• Amend the cluster and PRD sections of the Nashua Zoning
Ordinance to increase the amount of open space required to be
set aside and decrease the amount of wetlands that can qualify
towards the total open space area (Conservation Element).
• Require developers to set aside adequate amounts of accessible
and usable recreational land within subdivisions and on large
nonresidential tracts, where advisable, through the subdivision
and site plan approval processes (Conservation Element).
A. Applicability. A conservation subdivision is permitted in any residential
zoning district.
B. Size and location of site. There is no minimum or maximum size for a
conservation subdivision; provided, however, that the minimum open
space requirements may limit the availability of this option for some
sites.
C. Uses and density.
(1) Permitted uses are governed by the applicable zoning district
regulations.
(2) The minimum lot size requirements of the zoning district (Article
III, § 190-16) shall not apply to a conservation subdivision.
However, a conservation subdivision shall not exceed the maximum
density permitted by § 190-16, Table 16-3 (Dimensional Matrix).
[Note: See example below.]
(3) In order to provide undivided open space for direct views and
access, at least 40% of the lots within a conservation subdivision
shall abut a conservation area.
§ 190-40 FLAG § 190-40
164:503
(4) Direct pedestrian access to the open space from lots not adjoining
the open space shall be provided through a continuous system of
sidewalks and trails.
(5) Additional dwelling unit density may be obtained if the incentive(s)
described in Table 40-1 are fully satisfied.
Comment: An example of how densities are computed for a
conservation subdivision is as follows:
Assume that a parcel is 100 acres and located in the R-40 District.
This district permits a maximum density of 1.0 dwelling units per
acre for conservation subdivisions. The gross acreage is used to
compute density. Total permitted dwelling units are 100 (100 gross
acres x 1 = 100 dwelling units).
For conventional subdivisions, a minimum lot size of 40,000
square feet applies. Assuming that 20% of the tract is used for
streets, utility easements, or other nondevelopable land, total
dwelling units (lot yield) is 80 acres in streets, etc., +40,000 = 87
lots.
Table 40-1
Conservation Subdivision Bonus Density
(A)
Incentive
(B)
Bonus Units (per
acre) for Tracts Not
Exceeding 10 Acres
An existing natural landscape buffer,
which shall be supplemented by additional
planting where natural vegetation is
sparse or nonexistent, at least 200 feet in
depth along existing public rights-of-way
(excluding existing structures which are
to be incorporated into the proposed
project) and 100 feet along all project
property lines, whose purpose is to
provide a natural visual screen between
the proposed development and adjacent
property and public roads.
0.25
Providing 250 square feet per unit or
more of developed active recreation
facilities such as swimming pools, tennis
courts, basketball courts, play lots and
ball fields.
0.15
§ 190-40 NASHUA CODE § 190-40
164:504
Table 40-1
Conservation Subdivision Bonus Density
(A)
Incentive
(B)
Bonus Units (per
acre) for Tracts Not
Exceeding 10 Acres
When recommended by the Planning
Board, and confirmed by the Board of
Aldermen, a dedication and/or
development of land for a public
community facility (excluding water or
sewer improvements or roads) which is
necessary to serve the general area or
district in which the development is
located, and/or providing 250 square feet
per unit or more of developed active
recreation facilities as described above.
Such recreation facilities shall be
dedicated for public use; shall be
consistent with the goals of the City
recreation plan; shall be reviewed by the
City's Parks and Recreation Director prior
to submittal of the plan to the Planning
Board and Board of Aldermen. Any
dedications secured under this paragraph
may be permitted within the required
fifty-foot or one-hundred-foot buffer area.
0.10 to 0.25 additional units per
acre, depending upon
the quantity and
quality of the
dedicated facilities as
determined by the
Planning Board
Privately operated day nursery or
kindergarten facilities providing care for
12 or more resident or nonresident
children contained within a freestanding
structure (except if associated with a
multiple-tenant commercial structure)
may be approved by the Planning Board.
Such facilities shall be compatible with
surrounding land uses and designed in a
manner which permits safe and
convenient vehicular access and egress.
In addition, day nursery or kindergarten
facilities shall be subject to the approval
and periodic inspection of the City
Community Services Division.
0.25
D. Site design.
(1) A conservation subdivision shall comply with Article XXV of this
chapter, except as otherwise provided herein.
§ 190-40 FLAG § 190-40
164:505
(2) Lots within a conservation subdivision are not subject to the
minimum frontage or minimum lot width requirements of the
Dimensional Matrix (Article III, § 190-16, Table 16-3).
(3) Lots within 100 feet of a conservation area shall front on a
conservation access street. Lots shall not front on a collector or
higher order street.
E. Street design and transportation.
(1) A conservation subdivision shall comply with Article XXV of this
chapter, unless otherwise provided, and the provisions of this
subsection.
(2) The design of local streets shall comply with the standards for
geometric design, as set forth in § 190-208.
(3) The conservation subdivision shall include a pedestrian circulation
system that connects sidewalks with other sidewalks or with trails,
which in turn connects to potential areas qualifying as conservation
areas on adjoining undeveloped parcels or with existing open space
on adjoining developed parcels, where applicable.
(4) Streets shall not cross existing slopes exceeding 25%.
F. Open space and parks.
(1) The open space and parks standards relating to maintenance
(§ 190-205) shall apply to a conservation subdivision. No other
requirements of the open space and parks standards (Article XXIX)
apply to a conservation subdivision.
(2) A minimum of 40% of the gross land area (GLA) shall be designated
as conservation areas. The areas designated in Table 40-2 shall be
designated as conservation areas. For purposes of computing the
percent of GLA within a conservation area, the areas designated in
Column A of Table 40-2 shall be multiplied by the function value
factor in Column B of Table 40-2.
(3) Stormwater management ponds or basins may be included as part
of a conservation area, as may land within the rights-of-way for
underground pipelines. However, land within the rights-of-way of
high-tension power lines shall not be included as comprising part of
a conservation area.
(4) Conservation areas shall abut existing open space land on adjacent
parcels, including the open space located in other subdivisions,
public parks, or properties owned by or subject to easement in
favor of private land conservation organizations.
(5) No conservation area shall be cleared, graded, filled, or subject to
construction; provided, however, that rights-of-way for trails (see
street design and transportation standards); any streets needed to
§ 190-40 NASHUA CODE § 190-40
164:506
provide access to the proposed subdivision; and water, sewer,
electric, or cable lines may be cleared. The width of rights-ofway
for streets or trails shall be restricted to the minimum as
designated in the street design and transportation standards
(Article XXX).
(6) Not more than 50% of the wetlands on the site shall be designated
as a conservation area.
Table 40-2
Conservation Subdivision Open Space
(A) (B)
Area
Function Value
Factor
Wetlands 0.5
Woodlands 1.5
Sensitive aquifer recharge features 0.5
All of the floodway and flood fringe within
the 100-year floodplain, as shown on
official FEMA maps
0.5
All areas within 100 feet of the edge of the
100-year floodplain as delineated on the
FEMA maps and any Letter of Map
Revision
1.0
All areas within 100 feet of the banks of
any stream shown as a blue line on the
USGS 1:24,000 (7.5 minute) scale
topographic maps for the City of Nashua
1.0
Steep slopes (i.e., slopes exceeding 25%) 0.5
Soils subject to slumping, as indicated on
the medium-intensity maps contained in
the county soil survey published by the
USDA Natural Resources Conservation
Service
0.5
Significant wildlife habitat areas 1.0
Areas with highly permeable ("excessively
drained") soil
0.5
Historic, archaeological or cultural
features listed (or eligible to be listed) on
national, state or county registers or
inventories
1.0
Scenic views into the property from
existing public roads
1.0
§ 190-40 FLAG § 190-40
164:507
§ 190-41. Drive-through or drive-in uses.
Purpose: This section minimizes the negative impact that nonresidential
uses with drive-through windows create because of the potential additional
traffic hazards from vehicles entering and exiting and/or waiting to
patronize the facility.
G. Parking. In order to encourage design flexibility, to preserve open
space, and to minimize impervious surfaces, a conservation subdivision
is not subject to the minimum parking requirements of the parking
standards (Article XXVIII) of this chapter. A conservation subdivision is
subject to the maximum parking requirements of the parking standards
of this chapter.
A. Applicability. This section applies to any lot or parcel that contains a
drive-through facility or any building or structure that has an attached
drive-through facility. A "drive-through facility" means any window or
similar location at which food, merchandise, or services are delivered to
a customer while located in a motor vehicle. A drive-through facility
may consist of driveway lanes, an ordering station, and a drive-through
pickup window.
B. Ingress and egress geometry.
(1) Individual driveway lanes that are less than 12 feet wide shall exit
at least 85 feet from any other driveway.
(2) Stacking lanes for the drive-through facilities shall be at least 10
feet wide.
(3) The need for a bypass lane shall be determined at the time of site
plan review. If required, the bypass lane shall be at least nine feet
wide.
(4) Minimum distance for on-site stacking of automobiles (measured
from the center line of the pickup window) shall conform to Table
41-1 below. The stacking distance is measured from the edge of the
public right-of-way or, if there is a sidewalk in the right-of-way, the
interior edge of the sidewalk, to the edge of the drive-in pickup
window or ordering station, whichever is closest. [See Subsection
B(8) below.]
Table 41-1
Drive-Through Stacking Distances
Number of Drive-Through
Lanes
Stacking Distance
(feet)
1 160
2 140
3 120
§ 190-40 NASHUA CODE § 190-41
164:508
§ 190-41.1. Drug replacement therapy facilities. [Added 4-13-2010
by Ord. No. O-10-13]
Table 41-1
Drive-Through Stacking Distances
Number of Drive-Through
Lanes
Stacking Distance
(feet)
4 100
5 80
(5) Where no turns in the drive-through lane are required, the
minimum distance to the drive-through exit from the center line of
the pickup window shall be 60 feet.
(6) Where turns in the drive-through lane are required, the minimum
distance to the beginning of the turn from the center line of the
pickup window shall be 40 feet with a minimum turning radius of
17 feet.
(7) Stacking lanes shall not conflict with parking space access.
(8) Stacking lanes shall not cross pedestrian accessways. For purposes
of this subsection, a "pedestrian accessway" means a sidewalk or
other passageway designed to provide access for pedestrians from
parking areas or the public right-of-way. Driveways leading to
stacking lanes may cross a public sidewalk, but the area within the
public right-of-way up to the edge of the sidewalk is not counted as
part of the stacking lane distance required in Subsection B(3)
above.
(9) The entrance into the drive-through lanes shall not conflict with
general access to the site.
C. Compatibility standards.
(1) The minimum distance from a drive-through lane to any residential
zoning district shall be 30 feet as measured at the narrowest point
between the residential district boundary to the closest point of the
drive-through lane.
(2) Alleys or driveways in residential zoning district adjacent to drivethrough
facilities shall not be used for circulation of customer
traffic.
A. Applicability. This section applies to any new or expanded drug
replacement therapy facility, as defined in § 190-264, whether sited in a
new or existing building.
B. Location. Drug replacement therapy facilities are permitted as a
conditional use in the General Business (GB) and Highway Business
§ 190-41 FLAG § 190-41.1
164:509
§ 190-42. Housing for older persons. [Amended 2-27-2007 by Ord.
No. O-06-52; 3-21-2017 by Ord. No. O-16-020]
Purpose: To recognize that housing for older persons provides for the
diverse and special needs of this group, including the needs for meeting/
function rooms and recreational facilities, and attempt to foster
development of housing alternatives for older persons with the basic
supportive facilities and services.
(HB) Zone Districts. (See § 190-15, Table 15-1.) Notwithstanding Table
15-1, no drug replacement therapy facility shall be located within 1,000
feet of another such facility, nor within 1,000 feet of any residence, daycare
facility, school, college, park, or playground.
C. Standards.
(1) Any new or expanded drug replacement therapy facility requires
site plan and conditional use permit approval by the Nashua
Planning Board.
(2) A facility management plan shall be submitted to the Planning
Board with the site plan. The management plan shall, at a
minimum, describe the population to be served and number of
clients, the services to be provided, and methods of treatment,
including the identification of controlled substances to be kept on
site. The plan shall also address staffing requirements, hours of
operation, and security provisions to prevent the theft or misuse of
controlled substances. Copies of all other licenses and permits
required shall be included with the plan.
(3) The applicant must demonstrate to the Planning Board that the
property is adequate to accommodate the patient load, including
providing sufficient interior space to avoid patient queuing on
sidewalks, in parking areas, and in other areas outside of the
facility.
(4) Hours of operation of the facility shall commence no earlier that
7:00 a.m. and end no later than 6:00 p.m.
(5) The facility shall offer outpatient services only. No beds or any form
of overnight accommodations are permitted.
(6) Outdoor advertising shall be limited to one sign with an area no
greater than 12 square feet.
§ 190-41.1 NASHUA CODE § 190-42
164:510
• The development of housing for older persons may allow residents
the opportunity to enjoy the rights and privileges of ownership and
maintenance of private property within the City of Nashua.
• It is a community goal to promote development of housing for
older persons that provides facilities and service offerings typically
demanded by this group, and it is also a goal to promote proximity
of such development to support services (shopping, medical
services, transportation, etc.) necessary to meet the needs of these
residents.
• Housing developed in this section must be established and
maintained in compliance with all applicable state and federal laws
with respect to such housing and/or medical care, including the
Fair Housing Act, as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 3601 et seq., NH and
RSA 354-a:15.
• Pursuant to RSA 354-a:15, II and III, it is recognized that
prohibitions against housing discrimination do not apply to housing
for older persons, which conforms to all applicable rules and
regulations.
• The intent is to foster development of housing for older persons
while detailing local planning standards and promoting consistency
with land use policies in the Master Plan and the land use laws and
regulations.
• The intent is to regulate the intensity and mix of the different
types of dwelling units required to meet the needs of these citizens
so as to provide ample outdoor and livable space and to retain
a sense of personal identity intimacy and human scale within the
development.
• The intent is to review the bulk, height, and spacing of buildings
and the traffic circulation and parking pattern within the
development to ensure that the adequate light, air, privacy
landscaping, and open space for passive and active recreation are
provided with the development.
The City of Nashua finds, determines and declares that:
• There is a recognized need within the City for suitable and
appropriate housing for older persons.
• Older persons are exclusively people age 55 and older.
• According to Demographic Element of the Master Plan, the number
and proportion of persons 55 years or older will increase
significantly during the next several decades, thereby creating an
increased demand for elderly housing.
• Housing for older persons can be developed to provide housing
opportunities for this group and at the same time not detract from
the low-density settlement patterns defined by significant open
space and a rural community character described in the Master
Plan.
§ 190-42 FLAG § 190-42
164:511
• It is recognized that exclusive zoning for persons 55 or older
promotes the general health and welfare.
This section implements the following Master Plan recommendation:
• Due to the likely increase in demand for elderly housing, both for
independent living and managed care facilities, it is recommended
that the Zoning Ordinance be examined and revised, if necessary, to
ensure that adequate opportunities to develop elderly housing are
available. This is especially important given the projected increase
in the senior population over the next 10 to 20 years.
A. Applicability. For purposes of this section, "housing for older person"
means housing that complies with the provisions of RSA 354-a:15
(Housing for Older Persons).
B. Where permitted.
(1) Housing for older persons that contains duplex or multifamily
dwellings is permitted as of right in the D-1, D-3, R-A, R-B or R-C
and R-9 Zoning Districts and by conditional use permits in the GB
and HB Zoning Districts subject to the requirements of this section.
Housing for older persons in the form of single-family detached
dwellings is permitted in the R-40, R-30, R-18, R-9, R-A, R-B and RC
Zoning Districts.
(2) The provisions of this division shall apply only to applications
consisting of dwelling units of less than 1,000 square feet each.
(3) The provisions of this division shall apply only to projects consisting
of more than 30 units in the case of new development and more
than 10 units in the case of redevelopment of sites containing or
most recently containing nonresidental uses which have not
received a site or subdivision plan approval in the previous five
years.
(4) Any project approved under the provisions of this division shall
include common area of not less than 25 square feet per dwelling
unit and shall include space which is devoted to providing common
services for residents.
(5) Housing for older persons developments may contain more than
one principal structure on a lot.
C. Standards. Applications subject to this section shall conform to the
following standards:
(1) Permits and phasing. The Planning Board shall approve a site plan
if it complies with the standards established below. A building
permit shall be obtained for each dwelling unit and each accessory
use.
(2) Compliance.
§ 190-42 NASHUA CODE § 190-42
164:512
(a) At the time an application is submitted to the Planning Board
for site approval for housing for older persons, the applicant
shall demonstrate how the proposed development will comply
with the applicable provisions of this § 190-42, RSA 354-a:15
and all applicable rules and regulations established by the New
Hampshire Human Rights Commission, for age discrimination
in housing, if any.
(b) In order to qualify as housing for person 55 years or older
under RSA 354-a:15, IV, and obtain the density allowance set
forth in Table 42-2 below, the proposed development shall
provide (directly or indirectly) significant facilities and services
to the extent required in § 190-42C(3) below. Such significant
facilities and services include, but are not limited to, the
following:
[1] Programs designed to provide a social life for residents;
[2] Continuing education programs of interest to residents;
[3] Information and counseling services;
[4] Recreational programs;
[5] Homemaker services;
[6] Services designed to assist residents with the maintenance
and upkeep of building and grounds;
[7] An accessible physical environment;
[8] Emergency and preventive health care programs;
[9] Congregate dining facilities;
[10] Transportation to facilitate access to social services;
[11] Referral services; and
[12] Services designed to encourage and assist residents to use
the services and facilities available to them.
(3) If significant facilities and services are so required (for housing for
persons 55 years or older), then the governing body of the
particular housing for persons 55 years or older community (e.g., a
homeowners' association), directly or indirectly, shall provide at
least half of the facilities and services itemized above or such other
qualifying significant facilities and services as approved by the
Planning Board.
(4) Dwelling unit density. The proposed development shall conform to
the density established in Table 42-2 below. A density bonus may
also be granted for proposed developments that also conform to
§ 190-48 (inclusionary zoning).
§ 190-42 FLAG § 190-42
164:513
Table 42-2
Elderly Housing Density dwelling units per acre
Zoning
District Single-Family Duplex Multifamily
R-40 2 0 0
R-30 3 0 0
R-18 5 0 0
R-9 6 8 8
R-A 8 8 8
R-B 8 8 12
R-C 8 8 12
D-1, D-3 0 0 40
HB 0 8 12
GB 0 8 12
(5) Pedestrian traffic. The use of interconnecting walkways, trails and
natural walking paths shall be an integral part of the design of any
development to facilitate access between common areas, groups of
dwelling units and open space areas. Easements shall be requested
where trails or potential trails on abutting lands may allow for a
local connection. Appropriate timing and restrictions may apply.
Primary walkways and sidewalks shall meet Americans With
Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements. Trails and natural walking
paths are exempt from this requirement, but the Board encourages
maximizing accessibility to residents.
(6) Building design. Architectural renderings of a typical unit and all
accessory buildings shall be provided which the Planning Board
will evaluate in accordance with the site plan regulations to
confirm that proposed development is an appropriate massing and
scale of building, in accordance with the underlying zoning district,
and will not materially adversely affect abutting properties' access
to adequate light.
(7) Other site conditions. In reviewing an application for subdivision or
site plan approval for a proposed housing for older persons
development, the Planning Board shall also take into consideration
the nature of the subject property, including its geographic and
topographic conditions, and the proposed development's impact on
the topography, slopes, wetlands, viewsheds and surrounding
neighborhood to avoid any material adverse impacts thereto.
(8) Safety issues. The following requirements may be amended at the
discretion of the Planning Board prior to final approval:
§ 190-42 NASHUA CODE § 190-42
164:514
§ 190-43. Extractive industries.
See Part 5, Excavation Regulations.
§ 190-44. Fences.
Wall, fence or similar enclosures shall conform to the following:
§ 190-45. Gas stations/convenience stores.
Purpose: This section reconciles the interests of the City and residential
neighborhoods relating to health and safety, traffic, property values and
aesthetics, with the economic interests and public needs relating to
gasoline stations. This section mediates these concerns by:
• Varying spacing requirements for small gas stations, car-care
centers, and convenience stores selling gas.
• Applying design standards and signage regulations to canopies
and pumps.
(a) Each unit shall have address numbering of contrasting color to
the structure, a minimum of six inches in size, and visible from
the street and/or driveway.
(b) In the case of shared driveways, a permanent marker
(preferably granite) shall be visible from the street and shall
depict, by diagram, the location and the number of each
dwelling unit. Additional markers shall be placed at any split in
the shared portion, shall be a minimum of 16 feet in width, a
maximum grade of 9%, designed to allow safe access and
support the weight of emergency vehicles. Shared driveway
designs are subject to Board approval.
A. In residential zoning districts, shall not exceed six feet in height or
interfere with traffic circulation.
B. In nonresidential zoning districts, shall not interfere with traffic
circulation (no height restriction).
A. Location requirements. No property in the City shall be used for the
sale of gasoline at retail unless it is located 750 feet or more from
property line to property line of any other property used for the sale of
gasoline at retail. Nothing in this section shall be construed to forbid
the installation of one additional pump and appurtenant underground
tank for the purpose of vending gasoline or diesel fuel on properties
used for the sale of gasoline at retail at the time this section becomes
effective.
B. Uses. The retail sale of gasoline shall be considered the principal use of
the site. Uses contained within the principal structure may include the
following uses:
§ 190-42 FLAG § 190-45
164:515
(1) Interior ATM machine.
(2) Check cashing services.
(3) Copying and fax services.
(4) Money orders or money grams.
(5) Pre-prepared/packaged food.
C. Accessory uses.
(1) The accessory uses listed below may be combined with the
principal uses pursuant to Table 45-1:
Table 45-1
Accessory Uses
Number of Accessory Uses
Permitted
Lot Area
(square feet)
Lots Not
Within 400
Feet of a
Residential
Zoning
District
Lots Within
400 Feet of a
Residential
Zoning
District
Less than 10,000 2 1
10,000 to 19,999 4 2
20,000 to 43,560 6 3
Greater than 43,560 8 4
(2) However, not more than one of the following uses is permitted on
the same lot or parcel to a gasoline or service station unless the
applicant complies with the adequate public facilities standards
(Article XXIII).
(a) Car washes, if permitted or conditionally permitted by the
respective zone, and subject to the specifications of § 190-45H
below.
(b) Auto repair, if permitted or conditionally permitted by the
respective zone, and limited to the following activities:
[1] Changing of engine oil and filters.
[2] Lubrication of motor vehicle chassis.
[3] The cleaning of component parts.
[4] Brake adjustment and replacement.
[5] Alignments.
§ 190-45 NASHUA CODE § 190-45
164:516
[6] The sale and installation of batteries and minor automotive
accessories.
[7] The sale, mounting and repair of tires.
[8] The servicing of air conditioners.
[9] The servicing of air pollution control devices.
[10] The testing, adjustment and replacement of parts.
[11] Towing operations.
(c) Fast-food/deli counter services for made to order food.
(d) Exterior standalone ATM machine(s).
(e) Ticket outlet/distribution services for entertainment or
sporting events.
(f) Video games, arcades or video rental.
(g) Drive-through window.
(h) Mail/package pickup services.
(i) Outdoor sales (in excess of 300 square feet).
D. Pumps.
(1) Pumps shall be a minimum 20 feet from public right-of-way and
from buildings.
(2) Pumps shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from residentially
zoned properties.
(3) Pump islands shall be designed with a minimum of one vehicle
stacking spaces behind vehicle parked at the pump closest to an
exit and/or entrance driveway.
E. Canopies.
(1) Canopies can be no higher than the district regulations for
structures.
(2) Fixtures shall be recessed into the canopy so that no glare is visible
from the fixture.
(3) Canopies are considered an accessory structure and are included
in all calculations for site coverage.
(4) No more than 18% of the site shall be covered by a canopy.
F. Circulation. The on-site circulation pattern shall include adequate
driving space to maneuver vehicles around cars parked at the pumps,
with adequate areas for the circulation of vehicles not involved in the
§ 190-45 FLAG § 190-45
164:517
purchase of fuel, including deliveries of gasoline and merchandise.
The Planning Board may restrict delivery times depending on the site
location, adjacent traffic volumes and property dimensions.
G. Driveways. The standards of § 190-209 shall apply except as follows:
(1) The number of entrances shall not exceed two from any one street.
(2) Driveway entrances shall be separated by the following minimum
distances as measured along the street right-of-way line, but in no
case less than 25 feet:
(a) Local streets: two times the driveway width; and
(b) Collector or arterial streets: three times the driveway width.
(3) Driveways shall be located a minimum of five feet from the side lot
line.
H. Automatic car wash.
(1) One automatic car wash, capable of washing only one car at a time,
is permitted on the lot or parcel in the building or structure in
which car washing occurs, located 50 feet away from any
residential zoning district.
(2) All washing facilities shall be located within a building which is
enclosed except those openings necessary for vehicular and
pedestrian access. Car wash facilities within 200 feet of a
residential building shall have doors on any openings to minimize
noise.
I. Auto repairs. All auto maintenance lubes or other authorized or
permitted repairs must be conducted wholly within a structure.
J. Service bays. Service bays shall be located at least 75 feet from the
nearest property line. If the service bays face residentially zoned or
occupied property, the Planning Board may restrict hours of operation.
K. Self-service vacuum stations. All self-service vacuum stations shall be
located at least 30 feet from residentially zoned property.
L. Outdoor loudspeakers. Outdoor loudspeakers or public address systems
designed to communicate with customers at pump islands shall not be
audible beyond the property line of the lot or parcel.
M. Refuse storage and disposal. Trash areas shall be provided and
screened on at least three sides from public view by an opaque impactresistant
fence of sufficient height to screen the dumpster(s).
N. Landscaping. The area between the public sidewalk and the private
curbs defining the limits of the driveways and the parking areas on the
site shall be landscaped consistent with § 190-185.
§ 190-45 NASHUA CODE § 190-45
164:518
§ 190-46. Halfway houses and community living facilities.
Purpose: This section accommodates the need of halfway houses and
juvenile homes service providers while protecting neighborhoods by
establishing restrictions on density and spacing consistent with state and
federal law.
O. Perimeter wall. A minimum six-foot-high solid fence or wall with a
minimum five-foot-wide landscaped strip along the full length of the
wall and property line is required when the facility abuts any
residentially zoned property. The landscaped strip shall comply with
§ 190-181, and is in lieu of any buffer required by that section.
P. Outdoor sales. In addition to the requirements in § 190-53, the outside
display of merchandise is permitted only under a canopy, or if there is
no canopy, on or between the pump island, or in an area immediately
adjacent to the cashier's kiosk.
Q. Stacking. Minimum distance for on-site stacking of automobiles
(measured from the center line of the pickup window) shall be
consistent with § 190-41 (drive through or drive in uses), Table 41-1.
R. Design. Architectural elevations of all buildings and structures for the
convenience store and any accessory uses or secondary principal uses
sharing the premises shall be submitted for review and approval by the
Planning Board pursuant to Article XXIV of this chapter (building
design). Where the lot is within 100 feet of a residential district,
architectural design of buildings and structures shall recognize and
respect the architectural character of the existing adjacent
neighborhood in terms of scale and proportion. The review by the
Planning Board shall be conducted with attention to proposed
architectural features, details, materials, and colors of buildings and
structures, and the Board may require modification of designs and may
impose conditions in granting approval.
A. Applicability.
(1) This section applies to any of the following:
(a) Any community living facility. A "community living facility"
means any halfway house or other residence devoted to
persons with developmental disabilities. The phase
"developmental disability" shall have the meaning assigned in
RSA 171-A:2.
(b) Any halfway house. A "halfway house" means any residence
where two or more people reside for the purpose of their
rehabilitation, behavioral modification or therapeutic
counseling. A "halfway house" may include a facility for the
care and supervision of delinquent youth, persons with mental
health illnesses, or substance abusers (e.g., alcoholism, drug
addiction), or any other facility where persons are aided in
§ 190-45 FLAG § 190-46
164:519
readjusting to society following a period of imprisonment or
institutionalized treatment.
(2) Pursuant to an application for a variance or an appeal, the ZBA may
waive any part of this section to the extent need to avoid frustrating
the state policy to locate community living facilities in
predominantly residential areas, and to provide facilities,
programs, or services which least inhibit the freedom of movement,
freedom of choice, and participation in the community of a person
with a developmental disability, while achieving the purposes of
habilitation and treatment.
(3) In addition to a conditional use permit, an applicant must comply
with site plan review regulations as set forth in Parts 3 and 4.
B. Dimensional standards. The dimensional requirements for a
development of attached or multifamily dwellings shall be as specified
in § 190-16, Dimensional regulations, of this chapter, for the respective
districts. Where the center is not comprised of dwelling units, but
provides rooms for sleeping quarters together with common sanitary
and dining facilities, the number of rooms used as sleeping quarters
shall not exceed the number of dwelling units that would otherwise be
permitted on the premises.
C. Building design.
(1) No buildings shall have a horizontal dimension, whether length or
width, in excess of 160 feet, and all buildings shall comply with the
maximum height as specified in § 190-16, Dimensional regulations,
of this chapter for the respective districts in which attached or
multifamily dwellings are permitted. There shall be a minimum of
40 feet of separation between all buildings and a minimum of 15
feet of separation between buildings and parking lots.
(2) To the extent practical, all new construction or additions to existing
buildings shall be compatible with the scale and character of the
surroundings, and exterior building materials shall be harmonious
with other buildings in the neighborhood.
D. Spacing. Halfway houses shall be located at least 1/4 mile from all
existing halfway houses and from all of the following uses as defined in
the Use Matrix (§ 190-15, Table 15-1):
(1) Correctional facility.
(2) Orphanage, children's homes and similar uses.
(3) Day-care facility, adult.
(4) Hotel, motel, or tourist court.
(5) Schools, academic, continuance, alternative, adult, colleges and
universities, and technical, trade, and other specialty schools;
§ 190-46 NASHUA CODE § 190-46
164:520
§ 190-47. Home occupations.
nursery and preschool, grade schools, elementary, middle, and high
schools.
E. Operations.
(1) The maximum number of persons served shall not exceed 32.
(2) On-site services shall be for residents of the facility only, except
where part of a regimen of scheduled postresidential treatment.
(3) The operator shall submit a management plan for the facility and a
floor plan showing sleeping areas, emergency exits and bathrooms.
A. Minor home occupation. The purpose of this subsection is to permit the
accessory use of a residence for business purposes which are clearly
incidental to the principal residential use, provided that the use does
not change the residential character or function of the property to the
extent that the property would be distinguishable from other residential
properties. Upon determination of compliance with the following
conditions, the Administrative Officer shall issue a certificate of use and
occupancy for the minor home occupation as provided for in § 190-130
of this chapter:
(1) No nonresidents shall be employed on the premises.
(2) No more than 20% of the existing gross floor area of the dwelling or
200 square feet, whichever is less, shall be devoted to such use.
(3) The use shall be carried on entirely within the principal building.
(4) The use shall not change the internal or external residential
character of the dwelling or require internal or external alterations
to the structure.
(5) There shall be no exterior storage or display of any kind which is
related to the home occupation.
(6) Visitation to the premises in conjunction with the home occupation
by customers, vendors, solicitors or commercial deliveries shall be
unusual and may only be on an infrequent basis, i.e., no more than
three such visits per week, on the average.
(7) The use shall be conducted in such a manner that the premises is
otherwise indistinguishable from other residences in the
neighborhood and shall not create any noise, dust, vibration, odor,
smoke, glare, electrical interference, fire hazard or nuisance to any
greater or more frequent extent than that usually experienced in a
residential dwelling.
(8) There shall be no advertising on the premises other than a single
nonilluminated sign which shall not exceed two square feet in area
§ 190-46 FLAG § 190-47
164:521
and which may only identify the occupant's name and address. The
street address of the premises shall be prominently displayed by
use of numerals no smaller than three inches in height and no
larger than six inches in height.
(9) Not more than one commercial vehicle shall be stored, parked or
otherwise situated on the premises. Such vehicle shall not exceed
25 feet in length.
B. Major home occupations. The purpose of this subsection is to permit the
accessory use of a residence for business purposes which is clearly
incidental to the principal residential use, provided that the use does
not significantly change the residential character or function of the
property to the extent that the use will be objectionable to other
residential uses in the neighborhood. Specifically, the following special
regulations must be met to the satisfaction of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment as well as the conditions set forth in § 190-134 before a
special exception can be granted. In granting a special exception, the
Zoning Board of Adjustment may attach any reasonable conditions to
the approval to ensure the protection of the residential character of the
neighborhood: [Amended 11-12-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-38]
(1) No more than one nonresident shall be employed.
(2) No more than 30% of the gross floor area of the dwelling or 300
square feet, whichever is less, shall be devoted to such use, except
for child day-care facilities, which may use up to 420 square feet.
(3) The use shall be carried on strictly within the principal building.
(4) The use will not change the internal or external residential
character or function of the dwelling to the extent that the use will
be objectionable to other residential uses in the neighborhood.
(5) There shall be no exterior storage or display of any kind which is
related to the home occupation.
(6) The use shall not create any noise, dust, vibration, odor, smoke,
glare, electrical interference, fire hazard or nuisance to any greater
or more frequent extent than that usually experienced in other
residential dwellings.
(7) Only goods produced on the premises, and made to order for a
specific customer, may be sold on the premises.
(8) There shall be no advertising on the premises other than a single
nonilluminated sign which shall not exceed two square feet in area.
Such sign may only indicate the owner's name and address, and the
street address shall be prominently displayed by use of numerals
no smaller than three inches in height and no larger than six inches
in height.
§ 190-47 NASHUA CODE § 190-47
164:522
§ 190-48. Inclusionary zoning.
Purpose: The City of Nashua finds that:
• The Regional Housing Needs Assessment (August 1999)
prepared by the Nashua Regional Planning Commission (NRPC)
identified an acute shortage of rental housing that is affordable
for a large number of working households in the region. For
low-wage households and households on fixed incomes, this
shortage creates an immediate and dangerous risk of
homelessness. The shortage of affordable housing threatens the
City's capacity for economic growth by limiting the ability of
workers to locate housing within a reasonable distance of their
workplace. It is necessary to encourage the private and
nonprofit sectors to address the critical shortage of affordable
housing by reducing unnecessary regulatory barriers to the
development of such housing.
• The general welfare of the City, region and state requires that
the City's land use ordinances make reasonable provisions for
affordable housing.
(9) Not more than one commercial vehicle shall be stored, parked or
otherwise situated on the premises. Such vehicle shall not exceed
25 feet in length.
(10) The use will not cause vehicular traffic which is substantially
different from that which currently exists on the street.
C. Sign regulations. The following regulations apply to any home
occupation sign in any residential district:
(1) Maximum sign area shall be two square feet.
(2) Sign shall not be illuminated.
(3) Sign content shall be identification only including the name and
address of the occupant or business.
(4) Maximum number of home occupation signage per premises shall
be one.
(5) Advertising on the premises is prohibited.
(6) Street address of the premises shall be prominently displayed by
use of numerals no smaller than three inches in height and no
larger than six inches in height.
(7) The above conditions for home occupation signage apply to both
minor and major home occupations, as referenced in this § 190-47
of this chapter.
§ 190-47 FLAG § 190-48
164:523
• Inclusionary zoning is expressly authorized as an "innovative"
land use control under state law (RSA 674:21). Inclusionary
zoning may include, among other things, density bonuses and
streamlined application processes for developers providing
affordable housing.
This section implements the following Master Plan recommendations:
• Maintain a wide variety of housing types, residential densities,
and open space, meeting the needs of the full spectrum of our
citizens; and
• Continue to prevent and address housing discrimination.
• Explore opportunities to provide shopping, medical facilities,
recreation, and public transportation near high-density housing.
• Strive to meet the needs of all citizens seeking owner-occupied
housing.
• Consider an amendment to the Nashua Code to allow incentive
zoning in targeted areas (i.e., the City would allow residential
density in excess of that permitted in the existing or underlying
zoning and require that a certain percentage of additional units
be affordable).
• Promote continued and expanded homeownership in inner City
neighborhoods in support of neighborhood revitalization efforts.
• Work to ensure that the stock of rental housing is of sufficient
quantity and quality to meet the needs of those desiring this
housing option.
• Increase the supply of rental housing in the City to meet the
needs of all income groups.
• Give priority to the rehabilitation of vacant and or substandard
inner-city residential buildings that can be used as rental
housing.
• Review the City's Zoning Ordinance to assess opportunities for
providing alternative housing designs.
This section provides a density bonus and other incentives to encourage a
broad variety of housing for low- and moderate-income households in the
City.
A. Applicability. This section applies to any application for development
approval within any residential zoning district or district that permits
residential uses that include affordable housing with the minimum ratio
specified in Column (C) of Table 48-1 below.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
§ 190-48 NASHUA CODE § 190-48
164:524
AFFORDABLE —
AFFORDABLE HOUSING — Any category of housing as defined in
Columns (A) and (B) of Table 48-1.
AREA MEDIAN INCOME (AMI) — The median income of the Nashua
region, adjusted for the number of persons in the household, as
determined by the Nashua Regional Planning Commission.
COMMUNITY HOUSING DEVELOPMENT ORGANIZATION (CHDO) —
As defined in 24 CFR § 92.2, which is hereby incorporated by this
reference.
FAIR MARKET RENT — The fair market rent published annually to
by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development
pursuant to Section 8(c)(1) of the United States Housing Act of 1937 for
Hillsborough County.
INNER CITY — Any lot, parcel or tract within a contiguous area that:
(1) is located within or abuts the D Downtown Zoning District and is
located within a residential zoning district; or (2) designated as such by
the Planning Board.
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household whose income does not
exceed 50% of area median income (AMI).
MODERATE INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household whose income is
more than 50%, and does not exceed 80%, of area median income
(AMI).
OWNER-OCCUPIED HOUSING — Any dwelling unit intended to be
conveyed in fee simple, condominium, or equity-sharing arrangement
such as a community housing land trust and limited equity
cooperatives.
RENTAL HOUSING — Any dwelling unit intended to be rented and that
is not subsidized housing as defined below.
SUBSIDIZED HOUSING — Any housing subsidized by the state or
federal government under any program to assist the creation of rental
units.
For rental housing, that the rent plus utilities for the dwelling unit
does not exceed 30% of the income of the household; or
(1)
For owner-occupied housing, that the total cost of mortgage
principal and interest, property taxes, association fees and
homeowners' insurance does not exceed 33% of the maximum
allowed income of the purchaser. Calculation of housing costs shall
be based on current taxes, a thirty-year fixed-rate mortgage, a fivepercent
down payment, and prevailing mortgage rates within the
region; or
(2)
For subsidized housing, that the rents do not exceed fair market
rents.
(3)
§ 190-48 FLAG § 190-48
164:525
C. Affordable housing categories and incentives.
(1) A site plan or subdivision plan may be approved with an increase in
the density of the site as set forth in Table 48-1 where requested by
the applicant. The applicant shall consent to a voluntary and
enforceable condition in which the specified percentage of the
developable density of the site, as specified in Column (C) of Table
48-1, is reserved as that category of affordable housing designated
in Column (B) for the application. In lieu of providing the dwelling
units that constitute affordable housing, the applicant may pay a
fee equivalent to the cost of constructing the dwelling units into a
Housing Trust Fund if established by ordinance of the Board of
Aldermen.
(2) Table 48-1 shall be construed as follows:
(a) Determine the category of housing as set forth in Columns (A)
and (B).
(b) Determine the required set-aside for the application category
by referring to Column (C). For purposes of this subsection, the
number of affordable dwelling units required is determined by
multiplying the total number of dwelling units permissible on
the site as set forth in Column (B) of Table 16-3 of § 190-16 by
the percentage prescribed in Table 48-1, Column (C).
(c) Determine the density increase that may be awarded by
referring to Column (D). For purposes of this subsection, the
additional density that may be awarded is determined by
multiplying the total number of dwelling units permissible for
the site as set forth in Column (B) [maximum density] of Table
16-3 of § 190-16 by the percentage prescribed in Column (D) of
Table 48-1 below. The City shall not require the additional
dwelling units to be restricted as to income. The Planning
Board shall approve a reduction in the minimum lot size
otherwise applicable to the zoning district as needed to permit
the densities computed below.
(d) Determine the control period as set forth in Column (E) and
Subsection D below.
§ 190-48 NASHUA CODE § 190-48
164:526
Comment: An example of how densities are computed for
inclusionary zoning is as follows:
Assume that a parcel is 100 acres and located in the R-18
District. This district permits a maximum density of 2.5
dwelling units per acre. The gross acreage is used to compute
density. Total permitted dwelling units are 100 (100 gross
acres by 2.5 = 250 dwelling units). The applicant proposes to
set aside 25 units (10% of the base total) for owner moderate
housing. The applicant is entitled to a bonus of 15%, or a total
of 288 dwelling units (250 x 1.15), or 38 additional dwelling
units.
D. Control period. In order to qualify as affordable housing under this
section, the developer must make a binding commitment that such units
will remain affordable for not less than the time prescribed in Column
(E) of Table 48-1. The control period shall be enforced through a deed
restriction, restrictive covenant, or contractual arrangement through a
state or federal program or CDHO that ensures that the affordable
housing will remain affordable for the time period prescribed herein.
E. Additional incentives and standards.
(1) Permit streamlining. If a rezoning is required for the type of
dwelling unit requested, the applicant may file a combined site plan
and rezoning pursuant to § 190-135.
(2) As of right.
(a) Transit moderate rental, transit moderate owner, transit low
rental, or transit low owner housing is permitted by right in
any Transit-Oriented Development District.
(b) Rehab moderate owner, rehab moderate renter, rehab low
owner, rehab low rental housing is permitted by right in any
area designated as inner-city by this section or the Master
Plan.
(3) Compatibility. The dwellings qualifying as affordable housing shall
be compatible in architectural style and appearance to the
dwellings in the proposed development that are not affordable
housing.
F. Project phasing. No density bonus or other incentive shall be approved
for a site plan or subdivision plan pursuant to this section unless the
applicant consents to a condition that certificate of occupancy (CO)
permits for the dwelling units that are not affordable housing
(hereinafter "market-rate units") shall, unless an alternative phasing
schedule is approved by the Planning Board, be issued as follows:
§ 190-48 FLAG § 190-48
164:527
(1) CO permits may be issued for the first 50% of the market-rate units
prior to the construction and offering for sale or rental of any
affordable housing.
(2) No CO permits may be issued for the next 25% of the market-rate
units (i.e., from 51% up to 75% of the approved market-rate units)
prior to the construction and offering for sale or rental of at least
25% of the approved affordable housing.
(3) No CO permits may be issued for the next 15% of the market-rate
units (i.e., from 76% up to 90% of the approved market-rate units)
prior to the construction and offering for sale or rental of at least
75% of the approved affordable housing.
(4) No CO permits may be issued for the remainder of the market-rate
units (i.e., from 91% to 100% of the approved market-rate units)
prior to the construction and offering for sale or rental of 100% of
the approved affordable housing.
G. Administration.
(1) This section may be administered by the Community Development
Department of the City of Nashua (CDD).
(2) Affordable housing sales prices throughout the City shall be
established by CDD.
(3) Affordable housing rental prices shall be established by CDD
initially and shall be adjusted semiannually, based on a
determination of all ordinary, necessary and reasonable costs
required to construct and market the required number of
affordable dwelling rental units by private industry in the area, and
other information such as the area's current general market and
economic conditions.
Density Bonus for Inclusionary Zoning
(A) (B) (C) (D) (E)
Category Definition Set-Aside
Density
Bonus
Control
Period
(years)
Rental
moderate
housing
Rental housing
affordable to
moderate-income
households
15% 15% 30
Owner
moderate
housing
Owner-occupied
housing
affordable to
moderate-income
households
10% 15% 30
§ 190-48 NASHUA CODE § 190-48
164:528
 Density Bonus for Inclusionary Zoning
(A) (B) (C) (D) (E)
Category Definition Set-Aside
Density
Bonus
Control
Period
(years)
Rental low
housing
Rental housing
affordable to lowincome
households
20% 20% 30
Owner low
housing
Owner-occupied
housing
affordable to lowincome
households
5% 20% 30
Transit
moderate
rental
Rental moderate
housing located
in a Transit-
Oriented
Development
(TOD) District
15% 30% 20
Transit
moderate
owner
Owner moderate
housing located
in a TOD District
10% 25% 20
Transit low
rental
Rental low
housing located
in a TOD District
20% 30% 20
Transit low
owner
Owner low
housing located
in a TOD District
3% 15% 20
Rehab
moderate
owner
Owner-occupied
housing located
in vacant and or
substandard
inner-city
residential
buildings that are
affordable to
moderate-income
households
5% 20% 20
§ 190-48 FLAG § 190-48
164:529
§ 190-49. Junkyard, automotive recycling yards and motor vehicle
recycling yards.
Purpose: This section establishes regulations consistent with state law,
including RSA 236:111 to 236:129.
 Density Bonus for Inclusionary Zoning
(A) (B) (C) (D) (E)
Category Definition Set-Aside
Density
Bonus
Control
Period
(years)
Rehab
moderate
renter
Rental housing
located in vacant
and or
substandard
inner-city
residential
buildings that are
affordable to
moderate-income
households
10% 20% 20
Rehab low
owner
Owner-occupied
housing located
in vacant and or
substandard
inner-city
residential
buildings that are
affordable to lowincome
households
2% 20% 20
Rehab low
rental
Rental housing
located in vacant
and or
substandard
inner-city
residential
buildings that are
affordable to lowincome
households
15% 25% 20
A. All motor vehicle recycling yards and junkyards shall comply with the
requirements of this section as well as the applicable provisions of RSA
236:90 et seq., as amended, or RSA 236:111 et seq.
§ 190-48 NASHUA CODE § 190-49
164:530
B. Motor vehicle recycling yards and junkyards established or expanded
after the effective date of this chapter shall be located at least 300 feet
from any residence or office residence district.
C. Any new motor vehicle recycling yard and junkyard and any substantial
intensification of an existing facility shall require approval of a
conditional use permit. For the purposes of regulating motor vehicle
recycling yards and junkyards "substantial intensification" shall mean
any of the following:
(1) Any geographic expansion of the facility.
(2) The addition of any shredding, milling, grinding; baling or packing
equipment for the handling of scrap or salvage materials, or the
replacement of any existing shredding, milling, grinding, baling or
packing equipment for the handling of scrap and salvage materials.
(3) The replacement of any existing shredding, milling, grinding,
baling or packing equipment for the handling of scrap and salvage
materials, which results in an increase of greater than 10% in the
rated compression capacity, shear force capacity or other
appropriate power or capacity measurement approved by the
Administrative Officer for the piece of equipment being replaced.
D. All motor vehicle recycling yards and junkyards shall provide the
following with any application for conditional use permit:
(1) A vicinity plan.
(2) A description of natural features, including streams, rivers, lakes,
wetlands and major topographical features located within 350 feet
of the site.
(3) A description of the proposal and how it compares to land uses
within 350 feet of the site.
(4) A description of any potential environmental hazard due to existing
or proposed land uses, including soil, water and air contamination.
(5) An air quality plan describing stationary and mobile source air
emissions, their quantities and composition, and indicating
conformance with all applicable air quality regulations.
(6) A dust management plan describing dust emission sources, their
quantity and composition, and how dust will be collected, managed
and disposed of, and indicating conformance with all applicable
dust emission regulations.
(7) A sound attenuation plan describing sources of sound and
indicating conformance with all applicable sound and noise
regulations.
§ 190-49 FLAG § 190-49
164:531
§ 190-50. Manufactured housing.
(8) A vibration dampening plan describing sources of vibration and
indicating conformance with all applicable vibration regulations.
(9) A drainage plan for stormwater management and runoff.
(10) A traffic plan describing the number of truck trips the proposal will
generate and the principal access routes to the facility, including a
description of the facility's traffic impact on the surrounding area.
E. No material shall be placed in any motor vehicle recycling yard or
junkyard in such a manner that it is capable of being transferred out of
the motor vehicle recycling yard or junkyard by wind, water or other
natural causes. The loose storage of paper and the spilling of flammable
or other liquids into streams or sewers is prohibited.
F. All materials shall be stored in such a manner as to prevent the
breeding or harboring of rats, insects or other vermin. Where
necessary, this shall be accomplished by enclosure in containers,
raising of materials above the ground, separation of types of materials,
preventing the collection of stagnant water, extermination procedures
or other means. Professional monthly exterminating services are
required, and a log indicating the dates and findings of such
professional services shall be maintained on the premises. Upon proper
inspection and investigation, the Administrative Officer may waive any
portion of these requirements.
A. Applicability. This section applies to manufactured housing located in
manufactured home parks. Manufactured home parks are permitted
where indicated in the Use Matrix, provided that:
(1) The lot conforms to the dimensional and density regulations set
forth in § 190-16, as well as all other applicable regulations of this
section.
(2) Evidence shall be presented to substantiate that adequate
provision is being made for water supply and sewage disposal.
(3) The manufactured home residence must conform to the general
character of developed land uses within the neighborhood.
B. Sewage and waste disposal.
(1) No disposal of sewage from a flush toilet or other discharge of
liquid waste from a manufactured home shall be permitted except
when the discharge pipe or other outlet is directly connected to a
City sewer or disposal system approved by the Plumbing Inspector
and Health Officer, or other approved means of treatment and
disposal is provided.
(2) No dry or chemical toilet in a manufactured home shall be used,
and such toilets or flush toilets, unless sewer-connected or unless
§ 190-49 NASHUA CODE § 190-50
164:532
as connected otherwise to conform to the provisions of this section,
shall be sealed while within the City limits.
C. Districts allowing parks. See Use Matrix (§ 190-16).
D. Permits.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, maintain or operate
within the City limits any manufactured home park, whether
charges are levied or not, without obtaining and possessing a land
use permit from the Administrative Officer. (See § 190-128.)
(2) Application for a permit shall be made in writing to the
Administrative Officer. The application shall state or describe the
location of the existing or proposed manufactured home park, the
number of lots, the proposed source of water supply, the proposed
method of sewage disposal, the proposed method of garbage and
trash disposal, and the proposed lighting system.
(3) The applicant must file with the Administrative Officer a complete
plan of the proposed manufactured home park. This plan,
accompanied by legal description of the property shown, shall be
drawn to scale and must clearly show the extent and area of the
land to be used for manufactured home park purposes. The plan
shall represent existing and proposed roads and driveways, the
individual manufactured home lots, principal topographic features,
easements, the plans for water supply, sewerage and sewer
disposal, garbage and trash disposal, lighting, general drainage,
park or playground areas, and proposed office, laundry, recreation,
sanitary convenience or other buildings. Supplementary data such
as key elevations, contours and street profiles must be submitted if
requested by the Administrative Officer.
(4) Upon receipt of the proper application for a permit, the
Administrative Officer shall promptly cause an inspection of the
premises to be made in company with the Health Officer. The
Administrative Officer and the Health Officer shall thereupon
submit to the Planning Board a copy of the proposed plan and a
report of the inspection in such manner as the Planning Board may
request, together with any recommendations they may deem
necessary or advisable for the revision of or amendment to the plan
in the interests of the general welfare of the community.
(5) When satisfied that the proposed manufactured home park will not
be a source of danger to the health or safety of its occupants or to
others, and will comply with this and all other City ordinances, and
will conform to accepted principles of good community planning,
the Planning Board shall affix its approval to the final plan and
description by signature of the Chairman accompanying the word
"Approved," and the date of approval as voted by a majority of the
Planning Board.
§ 190-50 FLAG § 190-50
164:533
E. Location and space requirements.
(1) Permitted locations for a manufactured home park shall include
only sites which are or will be well-drained, not subject to smoke, to
noise excessive for residential purposes, to the probability of
flooding or erosion, or to insect or rodent infestation.
(2) Not more than one manufactured home shall be placed upon a lot.
No manufactured home shall be situated closer than 50 feet to any
permanent residence on adjoining property.
(3) Each lot in a manufactured home park shall contain not less than
9,000 square feet and shall have a frontage of at least 90 feet. The
boundaries of each lot shall be designated by permanent markers
such as stone monuments or iron pipe placed in the ground at each
corner. Each lot shall contain parking for one automobile, and shall
be kept free from dense growth of brush or weeds.
(4) The front yard setback of each lot shall be at least 25 feet. The rear
setback of each lot shall be at least 15 feet. The side setbacks of
each lot shall be at least 10 feet. In establishing these setbacks, and
other space requirements, awnings, vestibules or other attached
building components and patios shall be considered an integral
part of a manufactured home.
(5) Any buildings other than manufactured homes in a manufactured
home park shall be situated on the lot in accordance with the
setbacks required for the zoning district in which they are located.
Such buildings shall be separated by a minimum distance of 10
feet.
(6) The minimum acreage for the site of a manufactured home park
shall be 15 acres.
F. Concrete stands. Each manufactured home site shall be provided with a
stand consisting of either a solid concrete slab or two concrete ribbons
of a thickness and size adequate to support the maximum anticipated
loads during all seasons. When concrete ribbons are used, the area
between the ribbons shall be filled with a layer of crushed rock.
G. Foundation. Manufactured housing located outside of a manufactured
home park shall be set on a permanent foundation consisting of solid
concrete, masonry or block. Manufactured housing located in a
manufactured home park shall be screened with masonry skirting.
H. Open space, parks and recreation. Each manufactured home park shall
comply with Article XXIX.
I. Convenience facilities and establishments. Coin-operated laundries and
other commercial convenience establishments may be permitted in
manufactured home parks, provided that:
(1) They are subordinate to the residential character of the park;
§ 190-50 NASHUA CODE § 190-50
164:534
(2) They are located, designed and intended to serve only the needs of
persons living in the park;
(3) They and any parking areas related to their use shall not occupy
more than 5% of the total developed area of the park; and
(4) They present no visible evidence of their commercial nature to
areas outside the park.
J. Storage space. Each park shall provide either one central waterproof
structure available to all manufactured home sites, or a single
waterproof structure for each manufactured home site, suitable for
storage of goods and the usual effects of persons occupying the park.
K. Street design and transportation. Street design and transportation shall
comply with Article XXX.
L. Utilities. Utilities shall comply with Article XXXII.
M. Garbage and refuse disposal.
(1) All garbage and refuse in a manufactured home park shall be
stored in suitable watertight and flytight receptacles which shall be
kept covered with tightly fitting covers. At least one such
receptacle shall be provided and conveniently located for each lot.
It shall be unlawful for any person to disposal of garbage or refuse
of any kind upon the grounds of a manufactured home park.
(2) The owner or manager of the park shall ensure that all garbage and
refuse is disposed of regularly and in a sanitary manner approved
by the Health Officer.
N. Lighting. Every manufactured home park shall be provided with
adequate street lighting facilities, and shall be kept lighted in
accordance with the timetable for the lighting and extinguishing of
public streetlights. In no case shall the lighting intensity be less than
0.2 footcandle. This may be increased where it is determined by the
Board that conditions of pedestrian and vehicular traffic warrant it.
O. Maintenance and repairs. Manufactured home parks and all structures
situated therein shall be kept in good repair and shall at all times be
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Streets and driveways
within such parks shall be graded, well drained, kept in good order and
kept open so as to permit the entry of fire-fighting or other emergency
equipment at all times.
P. Records. The owner or manager of every manufactured home park shall
keep a record of all manufactured home owners and a record of all
guests with campers, noting the name and address of each lot occupant,
the license number of each automobile and of each manufactured home
or camper, the state issuing such licenses, and the dates of arrival and
departure. This register shall be available at all times for inspection by
representatives of the Police and Health Departments.
§ 190-50 FLAG § 190-50
164:535
§ 190-51. Neighborhood Center.
Purpose: A Neighborhood Center provides shopping, service and
employment opportunities within walking or driving distance of residential
areas. The Center is spatially defined and concentrated in a nodal pattern,
as opposed to conventional strip shopping centers. Neighborhood Center
features urban design guidelines such as zero setbacks and streetscapes
with windows and entryways.
This section permits Neighborhood Center in a wider variety of districts
and situations, subject to strict design standards that prohibit strip
development and encourage walkable streetscapes. Freestanding
commercial uses that do not meet the standards of this section are located
in the other commercial zoning districts.
This section implements the following Master Plan recommendations:
• Provide adequate shopping and service opportunities for underserviced
populations.
• Encourage infill development within, and work to revitalize
existing commercial areas.
• Guide commercial and industrial development to the existing
built areas of the City and minimize development in outlying,
undeveloped areas.
• Encourage and support businesses that reduce employee and
product-related vehicle trips.
Q. Inspections. The Administrative Officer, Health Officer and Fire
Inspector shall inspect each manufactured home park from time to
time, at reasonable hours.
R. Application of City ordinances. In the location, operation and
maintenance of a manufactured home park, this article and all other
ordinances of the City not in conflict herewith shall be observed.
S. Enforcement. The several municipal departments shall, according to
their customary official responsibilities, enforce the provisions of this
division. For that purpose, representatives of the several municipal
departments such as the Building Department Manager, Health Officer,
Fire Inspector and police are hereby empowered to inspect
manufactured home parks at all reasonable times.
A. Applicability. This section applies to any of the following:
(1) The expansion of any commercial use located in a residential
zoning district that was lawfully established but no longer
conforms to the applicable use restrictions. This section does not
apply to the existing use, operation, or improvement of such
facilities unless the applicant requests permission to expand,
renovate, or redevelop the existing building or parking areas.
§ 190-50 NASHUA CODE § 190-51
164:536
(2) Any Neighborhood Center authorized by a conditional rezoning to
an LB Zoning District.
B. Processing procedures. A Neighborhood Center shall require approval
of a site plan.
C. Size and location of site.
(1) A Neighborhood Center may be located at the intersection of any
collector or higher traffic volume street classification as a
conditional use within all residential zoning districts.
(2) A Neighborhood Center shall not exceed 150 feet of frontage.
(3) The establishment of a Neighborhood Center shall not establish a
precedent for higher-density zoning between the nodes or
intersections where the Neighborhood Centers are established.
D. Uses and density. A Neighborhood Center may include any of the uses
permitted in a LB Zoning District. Residential dwellings are permitted
above or below the first floor of any building with commercial and/or
retail uses. Dimensional requirements shall conform to Table 51-2.
Table 51-2
Dimensional Requirements
(A) (B) (C)
R-40, R-30 R-18, R-9 R-A, R-B,
R-C
Minimum frontage (feet) 15 15 15
Maximum frontage (feet) 150 150 150
Maximum height (stories) 2 2 2
Minimum front setback (feet) 30 20 0
Maximum front setback
[principal arterial, arterial]
(feet)
35 25 25
Maximum front setback
[collector, local] (feet)
10 10 5
Maximum building size (square
feet)
8,000 10,000 12,000
Maximum size per use or
tenant (square feet) [not
applicable to grocery stores
(land use codes LBCS Function
2151, NAICS 445110)]
4,000 4,000 4,000
Maximum parcel size (square
feet)
43,560 43,560 25,000
§ 190-51 FLAG § 190-51
164:537
§ 190-52. Permanent outdoor display areas.
E. Open space and parks.
(1) The open space within the proposed development shall be
compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. The following
amenities are recommended to be provided in the open space area:
(a) Ornamental fountains.
(b) Ornamental lampposts
(c) Stairways.
(d) Waterfalls.
(e) Sculptures.
(f) Arbors.
(g) Trellises.
(h) Planted beds.
(i) Drinking fountains.
(j) Clock pedestals.
(k) Awnings.
(l) Canopies.
(m) Benches, picnic tables, or similar outdoor seating spaces.
(2) Not less than one linear foot of seating shall be provided for each
50 square feet of open space. Seating dimensions shall comply with
the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act.
F. Building design. The building design shall be compatible with the
surrounding neighborhood.
A. Outdoor display of retail goods, wares and merchandise is a permitted
accessory use in the GB, D-1, D-3, and HB Districts if expressly
permitted pursuant to a site plan. No such outdoor display is permitted
unless the site plan shows the location, area and boundaries of the
outdoor display.
B. Such outdoor display must be customarily incidental to a principal use
in the district in which the outdoor display is permitted. Only the
business or entity occupying the principal use or structure shall sell
merchandise in the outdoor display areas.
C. Such outdoor display is permitted in any yard, subject to a minimum
setback of 20 feet from an adjoining property line.
§ 190-51 NASHUA CODE § 190-52
164:538
§ 190-53. Outdoor storage.
Uses that involve the outdoor storage of inventory, materials, parts, or
equipment shall comply with the following standards:
D. Outdoor display shall be screened from view along any property line
abutting a residential zoning district by a minimum Type B buffer as set
forth in § 190-181B(2). This section does not apply except where a
design of nonvegetative screening better reflects and complements the
architectural character of the surrounding neighborhood. To the extent
that buildings on the premises are located so as to screen views from
adjacent streets and properties, such buildings may be considered to be
part of the required screening in lieu of landscaping, fences, walls, and
enclosures.
E. Maximum height of displayed merchandise limited to height of fence or
wall or six feet.
F. All outdoor displays must be located on the same lot as the principal
use.
G. Areas used for such display shall be furnished with an all-weather hard
surface of a material such as bituminous or concrete.
H. Merchandise shall not be placed or located so as to interfere with
pedestrian or building access or egress, required vehicular parking and
handicap parking, aisles, access or egress, loading space parking or
access, public or private utilities, services or drainage systems, fire
lanes, alarms, hydrants, standpipes, or other fire-protection equipment,
or emergency access or egress.
I. Outdoor display areas shall not be located on any parking spaces
needed to comply with the minimum parking ratios of Article XXVIII,
Table 198-1. Outdoor display areas shall be considered part of the floor
area of the principal use or structure for purposes of computing the
minimum number parking spaces required.
J. Such display shall not violate applicable federal, state, or local laws
specific to the use of solid, liquid and gaseous chemicals, materials or
products.
A. Required setbacks.
(1) Outdoor storage shall not be located within a required front
setback. (See Table 16-3.)
(2) Outdoor storage shall not be located closer than 50 feet to any
street or any residential district boundary line.
B. Screening and landscaping. See § 190-182.
§ 190-52 FLAG § 190-54
164:539
§ 190-54. Residential uses.
All uses listed as residential uses in the Use Matrix (§ 190-15, Table 15-1)
shall comply with the parking standards established in Article XXVIII of this
chapter in addition to the applicable requirements of this chapter.
§ 190-55. Sexually oriented businesses.
A. Purpose and findings.
(1) The purpose of this section is to promote the health, safety and
general welfare of the citizens of the City of Nashua by providing
special design guidelines/standards and development regulations
which regulate the time, place and manner of the operation of
sexually oriented use facilities in order to minimize the negative
secondary effects associated with the concentration of such
facilities. The specific purposes of this section are to:
(a) Establish a procedure that places strict limits on processing
time and eliminates any possibility for the exercise of
unfettered discretion in reviewing applications for establishing
sexually oriented uses.
(b) Ensure orderly and thorough City review of applications for
sexually oriented uses.
(c) Establish reasonable and uniform regulations that will reduce
possible adverse secondary effects that sexually oriented uses
may have upon the residents of the City and preserve the
integrity of existing commercial areas of the City and of
residential areas which are in close proximity to such
commercial areas.
(d) To protect the rights conferred by the United States
Constitution to sexually oriented uses in a manner that ensures
the continued and orderly development of property within the
City and diminishes those undesirable negative secondary
effects that recognized studies have shown to be associated
with the development and operation of sexually oriented uses.
(e) To allow a process whereby the unusual site development
features or operating characteristics of uses which must
comply with this section may be conditioned through an
individual review, in order to be compatible with the
surrounding uses of property.
(2) Experience in this City as well as in cities and counties within and
outside of New Hampshire including the County of Los Angeles, the
City of Garden Grove and the Cities of Renton, Washington; Seattle,
Washington; Detroit, Michigan; Austin, Texas; Indianapolis,
Indiana; and Phoenix Arizona; have demonstrated that such uses
have objectionable secondary effects upon immediately adjacent
§ 190-54 NASHUA CODE § 190-55
164:540
residential and commercial areas. The City recognizes and relies
upon the experience of these other cities and counties in adopting
sexually oriented business regulations including the County of Los
Angeles [as discussed in Smith v. County of Los Angeles 211 Cal.
App. 3d 188 (1989)]; City of Renton, Washington [as discussed in
City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc. 475 U.S. 41 (1976)]; the
City of Seattle Washington [as discussed in Northend Cinema v.
City of Seattle 90 Wash. 2d 709, 585 P.2d 1153 (1978)]; and the
County of Palm Beach, Florida [as discussed in Movie and Video
Work v. Board of County Commissioners 723 F. Supp. 695 (S.D.
Fla. 1989)] in support of this chapter. The City also recognizes and
relies upon the studies done by:
(a) The 1979 Sexually-Oriented Use Study by the Phoenix
Planning Department;
(b) Tucson, Arizona (1990).
(c) The 1991 report to the City of Garden Grove by Drs. McCleary
and Meeker on the relationship between crime and sexually
oriented business operations;
(d) The City of Los Angeles in 1977;
(e) The 1984 "Analysis of Adult Entertainment Businesses in
Indianapolis" by the Department of Metropolitan Development;
(f) Minneapolis, Minnesota (1980);
(g) Cleveland, Ohio (1977);
(h) Oklahoma City, Oklahoma (1986);
(i) Austin, Texas' study on effects of sexually oriented businesses;
(j) Amarillo, Texas (1977);
(k) Beaumont, Texas (1982);
(l) Houston, Texas (1983); and
(m) Seattle, Washington (1989).
(3) The Board of Aldermen believes the following statements are true,
in part based upon its understanding of the experiences of the
various jurisdictions identified, and hereby finds and determines
that:
(a) Crime rates tend to be higher in residential areas surrounding
sexually oriented businesses than in industrial or commercial
areas surrounding sexually oriented businesses;
(b) Areas within close walking distance of single and multiplefamily
dwellings should be free of sexually oriented businesses;
§ 190-55 FLAG § 190-55
164:541
(c) Sexually-oriented businesses should be located in specific
areas of the City which are a specified distance from sensitive
uses such as residences, parks, religious institutions and
schools, irrespective of whether physical barriers are present.
This is necessary to:
[1] Ensure that the impact on such sensitive uses by adverse
secondary effects caused by sexually oriented businesses
are mitigated to the maximum extent possible;
[2] Prevent ad hoc decisions with respect to a potential
sexually oriented business site which does not meet the
criteria set forth herein; and
[3] Provide certainty to the residents of the City and sexually
oriented business operators with respect to potential
sexually oriented use sites.
(d) The image of the City as an attractive place to reside will be
adversely affected by the presence of sexually oriented
businesses in close proximity to residential uses, schools,
religious institutions and parks;
(e) The existence of sexually oriented businesses in close
proximity to residential areas has been shown in some cities to
reduce the property values in those residential areas;
(f) A reasonable regulation of the location of sexually oriented
businesses protects the image of the community and its
property values and protects its residents from the adverse
secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses while
providing those who desire to patronize sexually oriented
businesses an opportunity to do so in appropriate areas in the
City; and
(g) There is substantial evidence that an increase in crime tends to
accompany, concentrate around, and be aggravated by
sexually oriented businesses, including but not limited to an
increase in the crimes of narcotics distribution and use,
prostitution, pandering, and violence against persons and
property.
(4) The studies from other cities establish convincing evidence that
sexually oriented businesses which are not regulated as to
permissible locations often have a deleterious effect on nearby
businesses in residential areas, causing, among other adverse
secondary effects, an increase in crime and a decrease in property
values. Regulations for sexually oriented businesses should be
developed to prevent deterioration and/or degradation of the
vitality of the community before the problem exists, rather that
waiting for problems to be created.
§ 190-55 NASHUA CODE § 190-55
164:542
(5) The Board of Aldermen recognizes and relies on the findings set
forth in the 1986 United States Attorney General's Report on
Pornography in support of this chapter, including but not limited to
its recommendations that local governments ban certain features
of video booths that facilitate carnal sexual encounters.
(6) The Board of Aldermen finds the following, in part based upon its
understanding of the documents and judicial decisions in the public
record:
(a) Evidence indicates that some dancers, models and other
persons who publicly perform specified sexual activities or
publicly display specified anatomical parts in sexually oriented
businesses (collectively referred to as "performers") have been
found to engage in sexual activities with patrons of sexually
oriented businesses on the site of the sexually oriented
business;
(b) Evidence has demonstrated that performers employed by
sexually oriented businesses have been found to offer and
provide private shows to patrons who, for a price, are
permitted to observe and participate with the performers in
live sex shows;
(c) Evidence indicates that performers at sexually oriented
businesses have been found to engage in acts of prostitution
with patrons of the establishment;
(d) As a result of the above, and the increase in incidents of AIDS
and Hepatitis B, which are both sexually transmitted diseases,
the City has a substantial interest in adopting regulations
which will reduce, to the greatest extent possible, the
possibility for the occurrence of prostitution and casual sex
acts at sexually oriented businesses.
(7) The Board of Aldermen has determined that the establishment of a
permitting process for sexually oriented businesses is a legitimate
and reasonable means of ensuring that:
(a) Operators of sexually oriented businesses comply with the
reasonable regulations of this chapter. The recognized
secondary impacts of a proposed sexually oriented business in
a specific location are mitigated; and
(b) Operators of sexually oriented businesses have specific
guidelines with respect to where they can establish or operate
a sexually oriented business.
(8) It is not the intent of the Board of Aldermen in adopting this
chapter to suppress any activities protected by the First
Amendment, but rather to enact a content-neutral ordinance which
addresses the secondary effects that sexually oriented businesses
§ 190-55 FLAG § 190-55
164:543
have on the City. The Board of Aldermen desires to protect the
rights conferred by the United States Constitution to sexually
oriented businesses in a manner that ensures the continued and
orderly development of property within the City and diminishes
those undesirable negative secondary effects the previously
mentioned studies have shown to be associated with the
development and operation of sexually oriented businesses.
(9) The Board of Aldermen and Planning Board have held duly noticed
public hearings, to receive input and testimony from the public
concerning the adoption of this proposed ordinance.
B. Definitions. In addition to the definitions contained in Article XLII of the
Land Use Code, the following words and phrases shall, for the purposes
of this section, be defined as follows. Should any of the definitions be in
conflict with the current provisions of the Land Use Code, these
definitions shall prevail:
ADULT ARCADE — Any business establishment or concern to which
the public is permitted or invited and where coin or slug operated
or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled amusement
devices, still or motion-picture machines, projectors, videos or other
image-producing devices are maintained to show images on a regular
or substantial basis, where the images so displayed are considered
adult material as defined by this section.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having as a substantial or
significant portion of its stock-in-trade adult material, or an
establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display
of such material.
ADULT CABARET or ADULT NIGHTCLUB — A business establishment
or concern which features live performances by dancers or similar
entertainers in the nude.
ADULT DANCE STUDIO — Any business establishment or concern
which provides for members of the public a partner for dance where
the partner appears nude, or where the dance is distinguished or
An establishment shall be deemed to have a "substantial or
significant portion of its stock-in-trade" if not less than 20% of
the stock of the business or 20% of the floor area which houses
the sexually oriented business is adult material; provided, however,
that if the sexually oriented business is housed in a building or
structure which includes more than one business, then the "floor
area" shall mean and refer to only that portion of the building
which is leased or otherwise demised to the sexually oriented
business.
(1)
An establishment shall also be deemed to have a "substantial or
significant portion of its stock in trade" if not less than 20% of the
gross receipts of the business or use are derived from the sale of
adult material (as defined below).
(2)
§ 190-55 NASHUA CODE § 190-55
164:544
characterized by the emphasis on matter depicting, or describing or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT STUDIO — Any premises to which the
public, patrons or members are invited or admitted and which are
so physically arranged as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms,
compartments or stalls separate from the common areas of the
premises, wherein an entertainer provides entertainment to a member
of the public, a patron or a member, when such entertainment is held,
conducted, operated or maintained for a profit, direct or indirect. An
adult entertainment studio includes, without being limited to, any
premises that is physically arranged and used as such, whether
advertised or represented as an entertainment studio, rap studio, exotic
dance studio, encounter studio, sensitivity studio, modeling studio or
any other term of like import. Adult entertainment studio shall not
include theaters, concert halls, or similar establishments where
entertainment is performed for groups of four or more.
ADULT HOTEL — A hotel which is used for presenting on a regular and
substantial basis material which is distinguished or characterized by
the emphasis on matter depicting or describing or relating to specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas through closed circuit
or cable television or through video tape recorder where video tapes
are provided by the hotel/motel. For purposes of this subsection, a
"hotel" means any building or other structure which is kept, used,
maintained, advertised or held out to the public as a place where
sleeping accommodations are offered for pay primarily to transient
guests and in which four or more rooms are used for the
accommodation of such guests, regardless of whether such building or
structure is designated as a motel, cabin camp, tourist cabin, or other
type of lodging unit. Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel has been
rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less
than 10 hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment
is an adult hotel as that term is defined in this section.
ADULT MATERIAL — Materials which are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT-ORIENTED MERCHANDISE — Sexually oriented implements,
paraphernalia, or novelty items, such as but not limited to sexually
oriented vibrators, inflatable orifices, anatomical balloons with orifices,
simulated and battery operated sexual organs, and similar sexually
oriented devices which are designed or marketed primarily for the
stimulation of human genital organs or sadomasochistic activity or
distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
ADULT THEATER — A theater or other commercial establishment with
or without a stage that is used for presenting, on a regular and
substantial basis, material which is distinguished or characterized by
§ 190-55 FLAG § 190-55
164:545
an emphasis on matter depicting, or describing, or relating to specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ARCADE BOOTH — A closed or partially enclosed portion of an
establishment in which an adult arcade is located, or where a live
performance is presented, on a regular or substantial basis, where the
material presented is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting, or describing, or relating to specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas.
BREAST — A portion of the human female mammary gland (commonly
referred to as the "female breast") including the nipple and the areola
(the darker colored area of the breast surrounding the nipple) and an
outside area of such gland wherein such outside area is (i) reasonably
compact and contiguous to the areola and (ii) contains at least the
nipple and the areola and 1/4 of the outside surface area of such gland.
COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICT — Any property within the City
which is zoned Local Business (LB), General Business (GB), Downtown
(D) or Highway Business (HB), on the City's Official Zoning Map
adopted pursuant to § 190-12 of the Nashua Land Use Code, as may be
amended from time to time.
DANCER — A performer who dances or otherwise performs in an adult
cabaret or adult nightclub, adult dance studio, adult entertainment
studio, arcade booth, or erotic dance studio, and who seeks to arouse
or excite the patrons' sexual desires.
EMPLOYEE — Any and all persons, including independent contractors,
who work in or at or render any services directly related to the
operation of an adult entertainment studio.
ENTERTAINER — Any person who provides entertainment within an
adult entertainment studio as defined in this section, whether or not
a fee is charged or accepted for entertainment and whether or not
entertainment is provided as an employee or an independent
contractor.
ENTERTAINMENT — Any exhibition, performance, display or dance
of any type, removal of articles of clothing or appearing unclothed,
pantomime, modeling, or any other personal service offered for
amusement.
EROTIC DANCE STUDIO — A fixed place of business which emphasizes
and seeks, through one or more dancers or performers, to arouse or
excite the patrons' sexual desires.
FIGURE MODELING STUDIO — Any establishment or business which
provides for members of the public, the services of a live human model
for the purpose of reproducing the human body, wholly or partially in
the nude, by means of photograph, painting, sketching, drawing, or
other pictorial form.
INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICT — Any property within the City which
is zoned Commercial Industrial (CI), Park Industrial (PI), or General
§ 190-55 NASHUA CODE § 190-55
164:546
Industrial (GI) on the City's Official Zoning Map adopted pursuant to
§ 190-12 of the Nashua Land Use Code, as may be amended from time
to time.
MATERIAL — Relative to sexually oriented businesses, "material" shall
mean and include, but not be limited to, accessories, books, magazines,
photographs, prints, drawings, paintings, motion pictures, pamphlets,
videos, slides, tapes, or electronically generated images or devices
including computer software, or any combination thereof.
NUDE —
OBSCENE — Any material or performance is obscene if the average
person applying contemporary community standards would find that
such material or performance, taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient
interest; that the material or performance has patently offensive
representations or descriptions of ultimate sexual acts, normal or
perverted; and that the material or performance, taken as a whole,
lacks serious literary, educational, artistic, political or scientific value.
OPERATOR — Any person, partnership, or corporation operating,
conducting or maintaining a sexually oriented use or sexually oriented
business.
PARK — Any public or private land designated as "open space public"
or "open space, private" in the Master Plan.
PATRON — Any person who is a guest, member or customer on or in a
sexually oriented business.
PERFORMER — Any person who is an employee or independent
contractor of the sexually oriented business, or any person who, with
or without any compensation or other form of consideration, performs
live entertainment for patrons of a sexually oriented business and who
seeks to arouse or excite the patrons' sexual desires.
Any state of undress in which the whole or part of any of the
following, at a point below the top of the areola, is less than
completely and opaquely covered:
(a) The male or female genitals; or
(b) The male or female pubic area; or
(c) The female breast (see the last sentence in this subsection); or
The buttocks. Attire which is insufficient to comply with this
requirement includes, but is not limited to, G-strings, T-backs,
dental floss and thongs.
(d)
(1)
Body paint, body dyes, tattoos, liquid latex whether wet or dried,
and similar substances shall not be considered opaque covering.
Each female person may determine which 1/4 of her breast surface
area (see definition of "breast") contiguous to and containing the
nipple and the areola is to be covered.
(2)
§ 190-55 FLAG § 190-55
164:547
PERSON — Any natural person, or any association, partnership, or
corporation.
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION — A facility used primarily for religious
assembly or worship and related religious activities, including any
church, place of worship, parish house, or convent.
RESIDENTIAL ZONE — Any property within the City which is
designated as a residential district pursuant to § 190-15 of this chapter,
as may be amended from time to time, including any property within
the City which is zoned R-40 (Rural Residence), R-30 (Suburban
Residence), R-18 (Suburban Residence), R-A (Urban Residence), RB
(Urban Residence) or R-C (Urban Residence) on the City's Official
Zoning Map adopted pursuant to § 190-12 of this chapter.
SCHOOL — Any institution of learning for minors, whether public or
private, which offers instruction in those courses of study required
by the New Hampshire Board of Education or which is maintained
pursuant to standards set by the New Hampshire Board of Education.
This definition includes a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary
school, junior high school, senior high school, whether public,
parochial, or private, but not including dancing schools, riding
academies, or trade or vocational schools.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS —
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
Any business establishment or concern which as a regular and
substantial course of conduct operates as an adult bookstore, adult
theater, adult arcade, adult cabaret or adult nightclub, figure
modeling studio, adult dance studio, adult entertainment studio,
erotic dance studio, adult hotel, or massage establishment (other
than a message therapist holding a currently valid massage
therapist license issued by the New Hampshire Department of
Health and Human Services); or
(1)
Any business establishment or concern which as a regular and
substantial course of conduct offers, sells or distributes adultoriented
merchandise or sexually oriented merchandise, or which
offers to its patrons adult materials or other products,
merchandise, services or entertainment characterized by an
emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical parts.
(2)
Less than completely and opaquely covered:
(a) Human genitals, pubic region;
(b) Buttock; or
Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola; or
(c)
(1)
§ 190-55 NASHUA CODE § 190-55
164:548
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Includes:
TAVERN — Any premises on which alcoholic or cereal malt beverages
are sold or served for consumption on the premises pursuant to a
license or permit issued by the State of New Hampshire or any other
political subdivision or agency of the State of New Hampshire.
Any device or covering, when exposed to view, which simulates
the female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola, human genitals, pubic region or buttock; or
(2)
Human or simulated male genitals in a discernible turgid state,
even if completely and opaquely covered.
(3)
(1) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; and/or
(2) Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or arousal; and/or
Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus
or masturbation; and/or
(3)
Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating, or the
infliction of pain; and/or
(4)
Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal
irrigation; and/or
(5)
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock, or female breast.
(6)
C. Applicability.
(1) No sexually oriented business shall be constructed, established, or
operated unless and until a sexually oriented use permit or a
temporary land use permit has been issued by the Administrative
Officer.
(2) Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to any play,
drama, ballet, or motion picture in any theater, concert hall,
museum of fine arts, school, institution of higher education, or
other similar establishment as a form of expression or opinion or
communication of ideas or information, as differentiated from the
promotion or exploitation of nudity for the purpose of advancing
the economic welfare of a commercial or business enterprise.
(3) The establishment of any sexually oriented business includes any of
the following activities:
(a) The opening of such a business as a new business.
(b) The relocation of a sexually oriented business.
(c) The conversion of an existing business to a sexually oriented
business.
§ 190-55 FLAG § 190-55
164:549
(d) An increase of the square footage of an existing sexually
oriented business.
(e) The conversion of an existing sexually oriented business to a
different type of sexually oriented business.
D. Locational limitations.
(1) Subject to the limitations of Subsection D(2) below, sexually
oriented businesses may be located in any HB Highway Business
Zoning District of the City as herein defined. A sexually oriented
business shall not be established in any other zoning district.
(2) In the zoning districts where sexually oriented businesses
regulated by this section would otherwise be permitted uses, it
shall be unlawful to establish any such sexually oriented business
unless the location complies with the following requirements:
(a) No sexually oriented business is permitted within 1,000 feet of
another existing sexually oriented business or one for which a
building permit or zoning certificate of use has been applied
for; and
(b) No sexually oriented business is permitted within 750 feet of
any residence or any of the following: amusement or theme
park establishment (LBCS Function 5310); recreation or
amusement enterprises (LBCS 5300, NAICS 71399);
recreation, indoor commercial (e.g., bowling alley, billiards,
pool) [LBCS Function 5380, LBCS Structure 3200, NAICS
71312]; or recreation, outdoor commercial (LBCS Function
5310, LBCS Structure 4440, or NAICS 71311).
(c) No sexually oriented business is permitted within 750 feet of
any religious institution, school, kindergarten, licensed day
care and/or day nursery, state-approved day-care center or
public sports/recreation parks; and
(d) No sexually oriented business is permitted within 750 feet of
the City boundaries; and
(e) No sexually oriented business is permitted within 1,000 feet of
another existing sexually oriented business on the date of the
passage of this amendment; and
(f) No sexually oriented business is permitted within a building,
premises, structure or other facility that contains a sexually
oriented business as defined in Subsection B above.
E. Development and performance standards.
(1) Hours of operation.
§ 190-55 NASHUA CODE § 190-55
164:550
(a) No sexually oriented use or sexually oriented business shall be
open earlier than 11:00 a.m. or later than 11:00 p.m. No
sexually oriented use or sexually oriented business shall be
open on any Sunday. It shall be unlawful for any operator or
employee of a sexually oriented business to allow such sexually
oriented business to remain open for business, or to permit any
employee to engage in a performance, solicit a performance,
make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service, or solicit a service,
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 11:00 a.m. of any day or
on any Sunday.
(b) All sexually oriented uses or sexually oriented businesses shall
be open to inspection at all reasonable times by any law
enforcement officer, the Administrative Officer, or such other
persons as the Administrative Officer may designate in the
normal course of his duties.
(2) Lighting requirements. All exterior areas of the sexually oriented
business shall be illuminated at a minimum of 1.0 footcandle
throughout the premises, minimally maintained and evenly
distributed at ground level.
(3) Signs. All sexually oriented uses or sexually oriented businesses
shall comply with the following sign requirements in addition to the
requirements of Article X of this chapter:
(a) No merchandise or pictures of the products or entertainment
on the premises shall be displayed in window areas or any area
where they can be viewed from the sidewalk in front of the
building. Neither the performance nor any photograph,
drawing, sketch or other pictorial or graphic representation of
a performance displaying any portion of the breasts below the
top of the areola or any portion of the pubic hair, buttocks,
genitals, and/or anus may be visible outside of the sexually
oriented use or sexually oriented business.
(b) Window areas shall not be covered or made opaque in any way.
No signs shall be placed in any window. A one-square-foot sign
may be placed on the door to state hours of operation and
admittance to adults only.
(4) Access provision. The operator shall not permit any doors on the
premises to be locked during business hours and, in addition, the
operator shall ensure that any room or area on the premises shall
be readily accessible at all times and shall be open to view in its
entirety for inspection by any law enforcement officer.
(5) Minors' access.
(a) No employee, owner, operator, responsible managing
employee, manager or permittee of a sexually oriented
business shall allow any person below the age of 18 years upon
§ 190-55 FLAG § 190-55
164:551
the premises or within the confines of any sexually oriented
business.
(b) X-rated movies. X-rated movies or video tapes shall be
restricted to persons over 18 years of age. If an establishment
that is not otherwise prohibited from providing access to
persons under 18 years of age sells, rents, or displays videos
that have been rated "X" or rated "NC-17" by the motionpicture
rating industry (MPAA), or which have not been
submitted to the MPAA for a rating, and which consist of
images which are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas, said videos shall be located in a
specific section of the establishment where persons under the
age of 18 shall be prohibited and shall not be visible from
outside the premises or from areas within the premises where
persons under the age of 18 are allowed.
(c) Other adult materials. Access to adult materials shall be
restricted to persons over 18 years of age.
(6) Closed booths. No one shall maintain any arcade booth or
individual viewing area unless the entire interior of such premises
wherein the picture or entertainment that is viewed is visible upon
entering into such premises; and further, that the entire body of
any viewing person is also visible immediately upon entrance to the
premises without the assistance of mirrors or other viewing aids.
No partially or fully enclosed booths/individual viewing area or
partially or fully concealed booths/individual viewing area shall be
maintained. No arcade booth shall be occupied by more than one
patron at a time. No holes shall be permitted between arcade
booths or individual viewing area.
(7) Notification of requirements. A sign shall be conspicuously
displayed in the common area of the premises, and shall read as
follows:
"THIS SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS IS REGULATED BY
NASHUA LAND USE ORDINANCE § 190-55. ENTERTAINERS
ARE:
1. Not permitted to engage in any type of sexual conduct;
2. Not permitted to expose their sex organs;
3. Not permitted to demand or collect all or any portion of a fee
for entertainment before its completion."
(8) Regulation of viewing areas. Every sexually oriented use or
sexually oriented business shall be physically arranged in such
manner that the entire interior portion of the booths, cubicles,
rooms or stalls wherein entertainment is provided is visible from a
common area of the premises. Visibility shall not be blocked or
§ 190-55 NASHUA CODE § 190-55
164:552
obscured by doors, curtains, drapes, or any other obstruction
whatsoever. All viewing areas within the sexually oriented business
shall be visible from a continuous and accessible main aisle in a
public portion of the establishment, and shall not be obscured in
any manner by any door, curtain, wall, two-way mirror or other
device which would prohibit a person from seeing into the viewing
area from the main aisle. A manager shall be stationed in the
main aisle, or a video monitor shall be established at a location
from which the inside of all of the viewing areas are visible at all
times, in order to enforce all rules and regulations. All viewing
areas shall be designed or operated to permit occupancy of either
one person only, or more than 10 persons. The operator shall be
responsible for and shall provide that any room or area used for
the purpose of adult entertainment shall be readily accessible at
all times and shall be opened to view in its entirety for inspection
by the Administrative Officer or a law enforcement officer at all
reasonable times. "Viewing area" shall mean any area in which
a person views performances, pictures, movies, videos, or other
presentations.
(9) Private performances. Any area in which a private performance
occurs shall:
(a) Have a permanently open entranceway not less than two feet
wide and not less than six feet high, which entranceway is not
capable of being closed or partially closed by any curtain, door,
or other partition which would be capable of wholly or partially
obscuring any person situated in the area; and
(b) Have a wall-to-wall, floor-to-ceiling partition of solid
construction without any holes or openings, which partition
may be completely or partially transparent, and which
partition separates the employee from the person viewing the
display.
(10) On-site manager; security measures. No person shall engage in,
conduct or carry on, or permit to be engaged in, conducted or
carried on the operation of a sexually oriented business unless each
and all of the following requirements are met:
(a) All sexually oriented businesses shall have a person who shall
be at least 18 years of age and shall be on the premises to act
as manager at all times during which the business is open. The
sexually oriented business shall register any and all
individual(s) designated as the on-site manager with the
Administrative Officer by the owner to receive all complaints
and be responsible for all violations taking place on the
premises.
(b) The sexually oriented business shall provide a security system
that visually records and monitors all parking lot areas, or in
§ 190-55 FLAG § 190-55
164:553
the alternative, uniformed security guards to patrol and
monitor the parking lot areas during all business hours. A sign
indicating compliance with this provision shall be posted on
the premises. The sign shall not exceed two by three feet and
shall at a minimum be one foot by 1 1/2 feet.
(11) Clothing. All employees of sexually oriented businesses, other than
performers while performing, shall, at a minimum while on or
about the licensed premises, wear an opaque covering which
covers their specified anatomical areas.
(12) Dancing and performing. In order to reduce the opportunity for
prostitution and narcotics transactions, to prevent patrons and
dancers/performers from engaging in sexual fondling and
caressing, and to reduce the likelihood of drug and sex
transactions, the following additional regulations shall apply to the
operation of any adult cabaret, adult dance studio, erotic dance
studio, or figure modeling studio:
(a) Separation distances between entertainers and patrons. No
person shall perform live entertainment for patrons of a
sexually oriented business except upon a permanently fixed
stage or platform which is at least two feet above the level of
the floor, separated by a distance of at least 10 feet from the
nearest area occupied by patrons and surrounded with a threefoot-
high barrier. No patron shall be permitted within six feet
of the stage while the stage is occupied by a performer.
(b) Contact between entertainers and patrons prohibited. When
patrons are present at the establishment, no dancer or
performer shall fondle or caress any patron, and no patron
shall fondle or caress any dancer or performer. This prohibition
does not extend to incidental touching. Patrons shall be
advised of the separation and no touching requirements by
signs placed on the barrier and, in the event that a patron
disregards this requirement, by employees of the
establishment.
F. Procedures. No sexually oriented business shall be established until a
land use permit is issued pursuant to § 190-128. The following
procedures supersede any inconsistent requirements of § 190-128:
(1) The Administrative Officer shall approve, approve with conditions,
or deny the application within 30 days after it is filed. If the
application is not approved, approved with conditions, or denied
during this time period, it shall be deemed approved.
(2) The Administrative Officer shall issued the land use permit if it
complies with the requirements of this section.
G. Appeals.
§ 190-55 NASHUA CODE § 190-55
164:554
(1) Any interested person may appeal the decision of the
Administrative Officer to the Board of Zoning Appeals in
accordance with the provisions of Part 4 of this chapter.
(2) Consideration of an appeal of the Administrative Officer's decision
shall be at a public hearing which shall be noticed as provided in
§ 190-136D of this chapter and shall occur within 30 days of the
filing or initiation of the appeal. A final decision of the Board of
Zoning Appeals shall be rendered not less than 30 days after the
date of the initial public hearing. Said time period for rendering a
final decision shall be computed from the date of the initial public
meeting, and shall not be construed to run from the date of any
continuation of said public hearing without the express written
consent of the applicant, which consent shall include a knowing
waiver of any and all constitutional rights to a hearing within this
time period.
(3) An appeal to the Hillsborough County Superior Court from any
action of the Board of Zoning Appeals hereto shall be taken in
accordance with RSA Chapter 677.
H. Temporary permit pending judicial review of decision to grant or deny.
(1) Purpose. In order to comply with the standards for prompt judicial
review of a decision relating to the issuance of a sexually oriented
use permit as set forth in Freedman v. Maryland, 380 U.S. 51
(1965), the following procedures are hereby established.
(2) Application. If land use permit is denied and an appeal or other
legal challenge to said action is filed with the Board of Zoning
Appeals and/or in the Nashua District Court or a Federal District
Court, the applicant may file an application for a temporary land
use permit which shall contain all of the information required by
§ 190-268 and a copy of the pleadings challenging said decision. If
an application for a temporary land use permit is filed during the
pendency of any judicial proceedings, the pleadings thereto shall
be file-stamped by the circuit clerk of the court in which such
proceedings have been filed.
(3) Approval procedure. Within five days after receipt of the
application for a temporary land use permit, the Administrative
Officer shall determine whether the application is complete. If the
application is complete, the Administrative Officer shall issue the
temporary land use permit within five days after receipt thereof. If
the application is not complete, the Administrative Officer shall
return the application to the applicant with a statement of the
manner in which the application does not conform to the submittal
requirements of this section.
(4) Scope of approval. Upon issuance of a temporary land use permit,
the applicant may commence operations as set forth in the
application for a temporary land use permit. The temporary land
§ 190-55 FLAG § 190-55
164:555
use permit shall immediately expire, and the operations shall
immediately cease, upon a final decision by the District Court and
courts of appellate jurisdiction which is not subject to appeal, and
which affirms or upholds the decision of the Administrative Officer
denying the application for a sexually oriented use permit. Upon
a final decision by the District Court and all courts of appellate
jurisdiction which is not subject to appeal, and which reverses
or invalidates the decision of the Administrative Officer, the
temporary land use permit application shall expire, and the
applicant may commence or continue operations in accordance
with the application for a sexually oriented use permit. Upon a
final decision by the District Court and all courts of appellate
jurisdiction which is not subject to appeal, and which upholds
in part and reverses or invalidates in part the decision of the
Administrative Officer, the temporary land use permit application
shall expire and operations shall immediately cease, and the
applicant shall reapply for a permit in accordance with those
provisions of this chapter and/or the actions of the Administrative
Officer which were upheld by said decision.
(5) Limitations and exceptions. No temporary land use permit shall be
issued for a sexually oriented use within a residential zoning
district. No temporary land use permit shall be issued for a
massage establishment, which activities are not considered
expressive conduct protected by the First Amendment.
I. Permit expiration. Any land use permit approved pursuant to this
section shall become null and void if not exercised within one year from
the date of the approval. If a sexually oriented business ceases to
operate for a period of six months, the land use permit shall become
null and void. A permit extension shall be granted if prior to the
expiration date the permittee demonstrates to the satisfaction of the
Administrative Officer that it has a good faith intent to presently
commence the proposed use. Such extensions shall not exceed a total of
two six-month extensions.
J. Permit approval criteria. The Administrative Officer shall not approve
or conditionally approve an application for a land use permit unless
where the information submitted by the applicant substantiates the
following findings:
(1) The sexually oriented business use is consistent with the location
requirements of § 190-55D and the applicable performance
standards of § 190-125E; and
(2) The sexually oriented business is located in a zoning district which
lists sexually oriented businesses as a permitted use; and
(3) The sexually oriented business structure does not contain any
apartments or other living quarters; and
(4) The applicant is at least 18 years of age; and
§ 190-55 NASHUA CODE § 190-55
164:556
(5) The applicant has not been found guilty or pleaded nolo contendere
within the past four years of a misdemeanor or a felony classified
by the state as a sex or sex-related offense pursuant to RSA
Chapters 571:B of Article LVIII and Chapters 632, 632:A, 649:A,
649:B, and 650 of Article LXII.
K. Display of license or permit. The land use permit shall at all times be
displayed in a conspicuous public place in the sexually oriented
business.
L. Responsibilities of the operator. The City hereby finds that the following
information is necessary in order to ensure the proper administration of
this § 190-55, as well as the proper inspection and identification of all
persons which control the operation of any sexually oriented business
permitted pursuant to this chapter.
(1) The operator shall maintain a register of all employees, showing
the name, and aliases used by the employee, home address, age,
birth date, sex, weight, color of hair and eyes, phone numbers,
social security number, date of employment and termination, and
duties of each employee and such other information as may be
required by the Board. The above information on each employee
shall be maintained in the register on the premises for a period of
one year following termination.
(2) The operator shall make the register of employees available
immediately upon demand of any law enforcement officer at all
reasonable times.
(3) Every act or omission by any employee constituting a violation of
the provisions of this § 190-55 shall be deemed the act or omission
of the operator, if such act or omission occurs either with the
authorization, knowledge or approval of the operator, or as a result
of the operator's negligent failure to supervise the employee's
conduct, and the operator shall be punishable for such act or
omission in the same manner as if the operator committed the act
or caused the omission.
(4) An operator shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees
while on the licensed premises and any act or omission of any
employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this § 190-55
shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator for purposes of
determining whether the operator's land use permit shall be
revoked, suspended or renewed.
(5) There shall be posted and conspicuously displayed in the common
areas of each adult entertainment studio a list of any and all
entertainment provided on the premises. Such list shall further
indicate the specific fee or charge in dollar amounts for each
entertainment listed.
§ 190-55 FLAG § 190-55
164:557
(6) The operator shall make the list available immediately upon
demand of any law enforcement officer at all reasonable times.
(7) The owner or operator shall ensure that the premises comply, at all
times, with the standards of this section.
M. Permit revocation.
(1) Any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this section may be
revoked by the Administrative Officer on the basis of any of the
following:
(a) That the business or use has been conducted in a manner
which violates one or more of the requirements of this
§ 190-55, or if the operator or entertainer or any employee of
the operator violates any provision of this § 190-55; provided,
however, that in the case of a first offense by an operator where
the conduct was solely that of an employee, the penalty shall
not exceed a suspension of 30 days if the Administrative Officer
shall find that the operator had no actual or constructive
knowledge of such violation and could not by the exercise of
due diligence have had such actual or constructive knowledge.
(b) Any cost or fee required to be paid by this § 190-55 is not paid.
(c) An operator employs an entertainer who does not have a
permit or provides space on the premises, whether by lease or
otherwise, to an independent contractor who performs as an
entertainer without a permit.
(d) Any intoxicating liquor or cereal malt beverage is served or
consumed on the premises of the sexually oriented business or
sexually oriented use.
(e) That the permittee has failed to obtain or maintain all required
City, county, and state licenses and permits;
(f) That the permit is being used to conduct a use different from
that for which it was issued;
(g) That the building or structure in which the sexually oriented
business is conducted is hazardous to the health or safety of
the employees or patrons of the business or of the general
public under the standards set forth in the Building Code,
Plumbing Code (Chapter 105 of the City Code, as amended), or
the Uniform Fire Code (Chapter 156 of the City Code, as
amended);
(h) That the permittee has failed to obtain a business license; or
(i) That the permittee, if an individual, or any of the officers or
general partners, if a corporation or partnership is found guilty
or pleaded nolo contendere to a misdemeanor or felony
§ 190-55 NASHUA CODE § 190-55
164:558
classified by the state as a sex or sex-related offense pursuant
to RSA Chapter 571-B of Article LVIII and Chapters 632, 632-A,
649-A, 649-B, and 650 of Article LXII during the period of the
adult establishment's operation; or
(j) That the use for which the approval was granted has ceased to
exist or has been suspended for six months or more.
(k) False or misleading information or data was given on any
application or material facts were omitted from any
application.
(2) The transfer of a land use permit shall automatically and
immediately revoke the land use permit.
(3) Except in the case of Subsection M(2) hereof, the Administrative
Officer before revoking or suspending any license or permit shall
give the operator or entertainer at least 10 days' written notice of
the charges against him or her and the opportunity for a public
hearing before the Board of Zoning Appeals at which time the
operator or entertainer may present evidence bearing upon the
question. In such cases, the charges shall be specific and in writing.
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall notice and conduct a public
hearing on the proposed permit revocation. Written notice shall be
provided within at least 10 days prior to the hearing to all parties
who have expressed their interest in writing. The revocation
hearing shall be heard by the Board of Zoning Appeals. The Board
of Zoning Appeals shall not be bound by the formal rules of
evidence at the hearing. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall revoke,
not revoke, or not revoke but add additional conditions to, the
permittee's land use permit. Any additional conditions imposed
upon the permit shall be in keeping with the objective development
standards of this section as set forth in § 190-55L above, and the
underlying zoning district in which the property is located. The
Board of Zoning Appeals shall render its decision within 30 days of
the public hearing. All other procedures before the Board of Zoning
Appeals shall be governed by § 190-136 of this chapter.
(4) Any operator or entertainer whose land use permit is revoked shall
not be eligible to receive a license or permit for five years from the
date of revocation. No location or premises for which a land use
permit has been issued shall be used as a sexually oriented
business for two years from the date of revocation of the land use
permit.
N. Violations. Any person who violates any section of this § 190-55 shall be
subject to the provisions of § 190-156 of this chapter.
O. Applicability to other regulations. The provisions of this section are not
intended to provide exclusive regulation of the regulated sexually
oriented uses. Such uses shall comply with any and all applicable
§ 190-55 FLAG § 190-55
164:559
§ 190-56. Shopping centers.
Purpose: This section is designed to improve the appearance and character
of larger shopping centers. This section implements the following Master
Plan recommendations:
Enhance existing commercial areas with improved landscaping, aesthetics,
signage, nighttime light pollution, architectural design, traffic flow and
coordination with abutting land uses whenever the opportunity presents
itself. (Economic Development)
Require developers to set aside adequate amounts of accessible and usable
recreational land within subdivisions and on large nonresidential tracts,
where advisable, through the subdivision and site plan approval processes.
(Conservation Element)
regulations imposed in other articles of the Nashua Land Use
Ordinance, other City ordinances and state and federal law.
P. Conduct constituting a public nuisance. The conduct of any business
within the City in violation of any of the terms of this section is hereby
found and declared to be a public nuisance, and the City Solicitor/
Corporation Counsel or the District Attorney may, in addition or in lieu
of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or
proceeding for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof, in the
manner provided by law; and shall take other steps and shall apply to
such courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or
remove such sexually oriented use and restrain and enjoin any person
from conducting, operating or maintaining a sexually oriented use
contrary to the provisions of this section.
A. Applicability. This section applies to any of the following uses that
include at least 30,000 square feet of gross floor area:
Land Use Code
Use
LBCS
Function
LBCS
Structure NAICS
Shopping center, community center
(general merchandise with two or
more anchors) including between
100,000 to 300,000 gross square feet
of building area and between 10 to
30 acres of site area
2520 44-45
Shopping center, regional center
(enclosed mall with two or more
anchors) including between 400,000
to one million gross square feet of
building area and between 10 to 100
acres of site area
2530 44-45
§ 190-55 NASHUA CODE § 190-56
164:560
Land Use Code
Use
LBCS
Function
LBCS
Structure NAICS
Shopping center, super-regional
center (similar to regional, but has
three or more anchors) including at
least 500,000 gross square feet of
building area and more than 100
acres of site area
2540 44-45
Shopping center/superstores, over
60,000 square feet
2500 2560 44-45
Shopping, fashion/specialty center
(higher end, fashion-oriented stores)
2550
Shopping, home improvement center 2122 2592 444130
Shopping, malls, shopping centers,
or collection of shops not otherwise
enumerated
2500
Shopping, market shops including
open markets
2260
Shopping, outlet or discount center
(manufacturer outlet stores)
2580
Shopping, power center (categorydominated
anchors with few small
tenants), including between 250,000
to 600,000 gross square feet of
building area and between 25 to 80
acres of site area
2560
Shopping, theme or festival center
(leisure, tourist-oriented,
restaurants)
2570
B. Site design. Bus stops, dropoff and pickup points shall be integrated
with traffic patterns on the site.
C. Building design. See § 190-172.
D. Open space and parks.
(1) At least two of the following amenities shall be provided in an open
space area: ornamental fountains;
(a) Ornamental lamp posts;
(b) Stairways;
(c) Waterfalls;
(d) Sculptures;
§ 190-56 FLAG § 190-56
164:561
§ 190-57. Temporary uses.
Purpose: This section restricts the impacts and permit times for temporary
uses such as carnivals, Christmas tree sales, construction offices, and
similar temporary uses.
(e) Arbors;
(f) Trellises;
(g) Planted beds;
(h) Drinking fountains;
(i) Clock pedestals;
(j) Awnings;
(k) Canopies; or
(l) Benches, picnic tables, or similar outdoor seating space.
(2) Not less than one linear foot of seating shall be provided for each
50 square feet of open space. Seating dimensions shall comply with
the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act.
A. This section applies to uses and structures that have only a seasonal or
temporary duration, including those uses enumerated in Subsections E
and F below, and flea markets, vegetable stands, Christmas tree sales,
community festivals, fresh produce stands and temporary promotions
by permanent businesses.
B. Any person wishing to establish a temporary use shall obtain a land use
permit for such use.
C. The Administrative Officer shall make each of the following findings
before issuing a zoning certificate for a temporary use:
(1) The temporary use shall not be detrimental to the public health,
safety or welfare, and is compatible with the purpose and intent of
this Zoning Ordinance and the specific zoning district in which it is
located.
(2) The temporary use shall be compatible in intensity, characteristics
and appearance with surrounding land uses. Factors such as
location, access, traffic generation, noise, light, dust control and
hours of operation shall be considered.
(3) The temporary use shall comply with the general standards for the
zoning district in which it is located, including but not limited to
hours of operation, yard requirements, commercial vehicle parking
and signs.
§ 190-56 NASHUA CODE § 190-57
164:562
(4) Adequate off-street parking shall be provided to serve the
temporary use.
D. The Administrative Officer may impose such conditions on any
proposed temporary use and require such guarantees as he or she
deems reasonable and necessary to protect the public interest and to
ensure compliance with the standards and purposes of this Zoning
Ordinance and policies of the Comprehensive Plan.
E. The following temporary uses and structures shall be permitted in all
zoning districts, except as otherwise specified below, provided such
temporary use or structure shall comply with the regulations of the
zoning district in which it is located and all other applicable regulations
of this chapter.
(1) The indoor or outdoor storage of building materials and equipment
and temporary buildings for construction purposes may be allowed
as a temporary use, provided that such storage or temporary
building shall be located on the site under construction and shall
not exceed the duration of such construction or one year,
whichever is less. The Administrative Officer, upon written request,
may for good cause shown grant extensions to this time limit.
(2) Temporary real estate tract offices for the purpose of conducting
the sale of lots of the tract upon which the tract office is located
may be allowed as a temporary use, provided that such office shall
be located on the tract for a period not to exceed one year. The
Administrative Officer, upon written request, may for good cause
shown grant extensions to this time limit.
(3) Indoor or outdoor temporary amusement events, including the
erection of tents for such event, may be allowed as a temporary
use, provided that such use shall not exceed a duration of 15 days
in one calendar year. In the residence and office residence districts,
such temporary amusement events shall be located on institutional
and public uses property only.
(4) The seasonal outdoor sale of Christmas trees may be allowed as a
temporary use in the following locations:
(a) On vacant and developed properties within commercial zoning
districts.
(b) On properties with existing commercial businesses in
noncommercial zoning districts where tree sales have occurred
for at least five years as evidenced by vendors permits issued
by the City Clerk's office. No zoning authorization shall be
given to establish new sites.
(c) On vacant properties in noncommercial zoning districts where
the site has been used historically for tree sales.
§ 190-57 FLAG § 190-57
164:563
§ 190-58. Utility structures.
See Part 6.
F. Temporary business use. The Administrative Officer may approve the
temporary use of a mobile home for living quarters, office, storeroom or
shop in connection with construction work in any zoning district,
provided that:
(1) A permit for temporary business use is required from the
Administrative Officer. To obtain a permit, the construction firm or
its representative shall file a statement which shall include the
name of the firm, its home office address, the estimated period of
stationing requested and the proposed use of the mobile home.
Such permit may be extended upon request for sufficient reason.
(2) Any sanitary facilities to be used shall be sewer-connected to a
disposal system approved by the Plumbing Inspector and the
Health Officer.
(3) The Administrative Officer shall be notified upon the removal of a
mobile home stationed for a temporary business use.
§ 190-57 NASHUA CODE § 190-58
164:564
ARTICLE VII
Floodplain Management
§ 190-59. Title.
This article, adopted pursuant to the authority of RSA 674:16, shall be
known as the "City of Nashua Floodplain Development Ordinance."
§ 190-60. Applicability.
The regulations in this chapter shall overlay and supplement the regulations
in Part 2 of this chapter and shall be considered part of Part 2 for purposes
of administration and appeals under state law. If any provision of this
chapter differs or appears to conflict with any provision of the Zoning
Ordinance or other ordinance or regulation, the provision imposing the
greater restriction or more stringent standard shall be controlling.
§ 190-61. District delineation. [Amended 9-8-2009 by Ord. No.
O-09-66; 3-8-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-52]
The following regulations in this chapter shall apply to all lands designated
as special flood hazard areas by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) in its "Flood Insurance Study for the County of
Hillsborough, N.H." dated September 25, 2009, together with the
associated Flood Insurance Rate Maps dated September 25, 2009, including
the revised map panels 33011C0514E and 3011C0652E dated April 18,
2011, which are declared to be a part of this chapter and are hereby
incorporated by reference, and any subsequent revisions thereto.
§ 190-62. Definition of terms.
The following definitions shall apply only to this Floodplain Development
Ordinance, and shall not be affected by the provisions of any other
ordinance of the City of Nashua.66
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO Zone on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one-percent or greater annual possibility
of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined
channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and
where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by
ponding or sheet flow.[Amended 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-66]
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within the
City of Nashua subject to a one-percent-or-greater possibility of flooding in
any given year. The area is designated as Zone A, AO, and AE on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map.[Amended 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-66]
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent possibility of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of a building having its floor subgrade on all sides.
66.Editor's Note: See also § 190-264, Definitions.
§ 190-59 FLAG § 190-62
164:565
BUILDING — See "structure."
DEVELOPMENT (FLOOD MANAGEMENT) — Any man-made change to
improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings
or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation
or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.[Amended
9-8-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-66]
FEMA — The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official maps incorporated
with this chapter, on which FEMA has delineated both the special flood
hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the City of Nashua.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water
surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of
mudslide or flood-related erosion hazards.[Amended 9-8-2009 by Ord.
No. O-09-66]
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source. (See definition of "flooding.")
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — See "regulatory floodway."
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water. The term includes only docking and port facilities that are necessary
for the loading/unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building/repair
facilities but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.67
B.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
A.
67.Editor’s Note: The former definitions of "Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (Floodway
Map)" and "flood elevation study," which immediately followed this definition, were
repealed 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-66.
§ 190-62 NASHUA CODE § 190-62
164:566
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such
an enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities. For floodplain management purposes, the term "manufactured
home" includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles
placed on site for greater than 180 consecutive days. This includes
manufactured homes located in a manufactured home park or
subdivision.[Amended 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-66]
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.[Added 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-66]
MEAN SEA LEVEL — The National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of
1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a
communities Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — For the purpose of determining insurance rates,
structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the
effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is
later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For
floodplain management purposes, new construction means structures for
which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of
a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes
any subsequent improvement to such structures.[Added 9-8-2009 by Ord.
No. O-09-66]
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 190-62 FLAG § 190-62
164:567
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — See "base flood."
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle that is:
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation. These areas
are designated as floodways on the Flood Insurance Rate Map.[Amended
9-8-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-66]
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — See "area of special flood
hazard."[Amended 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-66]
STRUCTURE — For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed
building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above
ground, as well as a manufactured home.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvements, and
means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start
of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on site, such as
A. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
B.
Designed to be self propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
C.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal
use.
D.
§ 190-62 NASHUA CODE § 190-62
164:568
the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or part of the main structure.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its prior condition would
equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT —
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's Floodplain Management Regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
§ 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to
be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.[Added
9-8-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-66]
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION — The height, in relation to the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified)
of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains.
Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or
improvements to a structure in which the cumulative cost equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure. The market value of
the structure should equal:
The appraised value prior to the start of the initial repair or
improvement; or
(1)
In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the
damage occurring.
(2)
A.
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor,
or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. This
term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage,
regardless of actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include any project for improvement of a structure required
to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions or any
alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not
preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
B.
§ 190-62 FLAG § 190-63
164:569
§ 190-63. Construction requirements.
The Building Department shall review all building permit applications for
new construction or substantial improvements to determine whether
proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed
building site is located in a special flood hazard area, all new construction
or substantial improvements shall:
§ 190-64. Water and sewer systems.
Where new or replacement water and sewer systems (including on-site
systems) are proposed in a special flood hazard area, the applicant shall
provide the Administrative Officer with assurance that these systems will
be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters, and on-site
waste disposal systems will be located to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during periods of flooding.
§ 190-65. Certification.
A. Be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent
floatation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
B. Be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
C. Be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages;
and
D. Be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air
conditioning equipment, and other service facilities that are designed
and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
A. For all new or substantially improved structures located in Zones A, AE
or AO, the applicant shall furnish the following information to the
Building Department: [Amended 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-66]
(1) The as-built elevation (in relation to NGVD) of the lowest floor
(including basement) and include whether or not such structures
contain a basement.
(2) If the structure has been floodproofed, the as-built elevation (in
relation to NGVD) to which the structure was floodproofed.
(3) Any certification of floodproofing.
B. The Building Department shall maintain the aforementioned
information for public inspection, and shall furnish such information
upon request.
§ 190-63 NASHUA CODE § 190-66
164:570
§ 190-66. Other permits. [Amended 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-66]
All proposed development in any special flood hazard area shall require a
permit. The Administrative Officer shall not grant a building permit until
the applicant certifies that all necessary permits have been received from
those governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or
state law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972, 33 U. S.C. 1334.
§ 190-67. Watercourses.
A. Notice. In riverine situations, prior to the alteration or relocation of a
watercourse the applicant for such authorization shall notify the
Wetlands Bureau of the New Hampshire Environmental Services
Department and submit copies of such notification to the Administrative
Officer, in addition to the copies required by RSA 482-A:3. Further, the
applicant shall submit copies of said notification to those adjacent
communities as determined by the Administrative Officer, including
notice of all scheduled hearings before the Wetlands Bureau.
B. Certification. The applicant shall submit to the Administrative Officer, a
certification provided by a registered professional engineer, assuring
that the flood carrying capacity of an altered or relocated watercourse
can and will be maintained.
C. Watercourses within regulatory floodways. Along watercourses with a
designated regulatory floodway, no encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, and other development, are
allowed within the floodway unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with
standard engineering practices that the proposed encroachment would
not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during
the base flood discharge. [Amended 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-66]
D. Until a regulatory floodway is designated along watercourses, no new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development
(including fill) shall be permitted within Zone AE on the FIRM, unless it
is demonstrated by the applicant that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation
of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community.
[Amended 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-66]
E. The Administrative Officer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize
any floodway data available from federal, state or other sources as
criteria for requiring that all development located in Zone A meet the
following requirement: [Added 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-66]
§ 190-66 FLAG § 190-67
164:571
§ 190-68. Special flood hazard areas.
No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development are allowed within the floodway
that would result in any increase in flood levels within the community
during the base flood discharge.
A. Determination of flood elevation. In special flood hazard areas the
Administrative Officer shall determine the one-hundred-year flood
elevation in the following order of precedence according to the data
available:
(1) In Zone AE, refer to the elevation data provided in the community's
Flood Insurance Study and accompanying FIRM. [Amended
9-8-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-66]
(2) In Zone A, the Administrative Officer shall obtain, review, and
reasonably utilize any one-hundred-year flood elevation data
available from any federal, state or other source, including data
submitted for development proposals submitted to the community
(i.e., subdivisions, site approvals). [Amended 9-8-2009 by Ord.
No. O-09-66]
(3) In Zone AO, the flood elevation is determined by adding the
elevation of the highest adjacent grade to the depth number
specified on the FIRM or, if no depth number is specified on the
FIRM, at least two feet.
B. Criteria. The Administrative Officer's one-hundred-year flood elevation
determination will be used as criteria for requiring in Zones A, AE and
AO that: [Amended 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-66]
(1) All new construction or substantial improvement of residential
structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to
or above the one-hundred-year flood elevation.
(2) That all new construction or substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to or above the one-hundred-year flood level or,
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:
(a) Be floodproofed so that below the one-hundred-year flood
elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water;
(b) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy; and
(c) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions
of this section.
§ 190-67 NASHUA CODE § 190-68
164:572
(3) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within special flood hazard areas shall be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is
at or above the base flood level; and be securely anchored to resist
floatation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring
may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties
to ground anchors.
(4) All recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A and AE
shall either:
(a) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(c) Meet all standards of Section 60.3(b)(1) of the National Flood
Insurance Program Regulations and the elevation and
anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Paragraph
(c)(6) of Section 60.3.
(5) For all new construction and substantial improvements, fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding
are permitted, provided that they meet the following requirements:
(a) The enclosed area is unfinished or flood-resistant, usable solely
for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage;
(b) The area is not a basement;
(c) Shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood
forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must either
be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding shall be provided.
[2] The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
[3] Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwater.
(6) Proposed structures to be located on slopes in special flood hazard
areas, Zones AH and AO shall include adequate drainage paths to
guide floodwaters around and away from the proposed structures.
§ 190-68 FLAG § 190-69
164:573
§ 190-69. Special requirements for subdivisions and site plans.
The requirements of this article apply to applications for subdivision and
site plan approval. Requirements for subdivisions/site plans having land
designated as special flood hazard areas (SFHA) by the National Flood
Insurance Program (NFIP) are as follows:
§ 190-70. Variances and appeals.
A. The Planning Board shall review the proposed development to assure
that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental
agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law,
including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1334.
B. The Planning Board shall require that all proposals for development
greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, include base
flood elevation (BFE) data within such proposals (i.e., floodplain
boundary and one-hundred-year flood elevation).
C. The Planning Board shall require the applicant to submit sufficient
evidence (construction drawings, grading and land treatment plans) so
as to allow a determination that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage;
(2) All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and
water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damage; and
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
A. Appeals. Any order, requirement, decision or determination of the
Administrative Officer made under this chapter may be appealed to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment as set forth in RSA 676:5 and Part 3 of this
chapter.
B. Variances. If the applicant, upon appeal, requests a variance as
authorized by RSA 674:33 I(b), the applicant shall have the burden of
showing in addition to the usual variance standards under state law
that:
(1) The variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional
threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense.
(2) If the requested variance is for activity within a designated
regulatory floodway, no increase in flood levels during the base
flood discharge will result.
(3) The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood
hazard, to afford relief.
§ 190-69 NASHUA CODE § 190-70
164:574
C. Notice to applicant.
(1) The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall notify the applicant in
writing that:
(a) The issuance of a variance to construct below the base flood
level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance;
and
(b) Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to
life and property.
(2) Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance
actions.
D. Records. The Administrative Officer shall:
(1) Maintain a record of all variance actions, including the justification
for their issuance; and
(2) Report such variances issued in its annual or biennial report
submitted to FEMA's Federal Insurance Administrator.
§ 190-70 FLAG § 190-70
164:575

ARTICLE VIII
Impact Fees
§ 190-71. Authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to New Hampshire RSA 674:17, 674:21,
674:35, 674:36, 674:43, and 674:44.
§ 190-72. Intent and purpose.
This article is intended to:
§ 190-73. Findings.
The City of Nashua finds, determines and declares that:
A. Implement and be consistent with the City of Nashua's Master Plan and
capital improvement program and zoning, site plan and subdivision
regulations;
B. Allocate a fair and equitable share of the cost of certain new public
facilities for education to new development;
C. Require new development to contribute some of its proportionate share
of funds spent or to be spent by the City to accommodate the new
development's impact on certain public facilities for education having a
rational nexus to the new development; and
D. Implement the relevant portions of the Nashua subdivision regulations
and site plan review regulations.68
A. The City of Nashua is committed to the provision of public educational
facilities and services at levels necessary to support continued
residential and nonresidential growth and development, including lowand
moderate-income housing.
B. Such facilities and services have been and will, in appropriate cases, be
provided by the City utilizing funds consistent with the capital
improvements program and other plans and programs adopted by the
City.
C. Recent and anticipated growth rates would necessitate an excessive
expenditure of public funds in order to maintain adequate facility
standards and to promote and protect the public health, safety and
welfare.
D. Each of the types of new development described in this Public Schools
Capital Facilities Impact Fee Ordinance will create a need for the
construction, equipping, or expansion of public capital facilities for
education.
68.Editor's Note: See Part 3, Procedures, particularly Articles XVI (§ 190-138 et seq.) and
XVII (§ 190-146 et seq.), regarding subdivision and site plan procedures, respectively.
§ 190-71 FLAG § 190-73
164:577
§ 190-74. Applicability and rules of construction.
This article shall be uniformly applicable to all new development that occurs
within the corporate boundaries of the City of Nashua. This article does
not apply to capital infrastructure other than schools and it is not intended
to eliminate, reduce or limit impact or other development fees that may
be collected or collectible by the City, the collection of which is hereby
continued to be authorized, on account of the need for other infrastructure
occasioned by development, including, without limitation, those roads,
sewers, street lighting, sidewalks, police and fire services, City government
and public works services, or any other thing.
§ 190-75. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following special definitions shall apply:
AER REPORT — The report entitled "Analysis of Development Impact Fees
in Nashua," October 1994, prepared by Applied Economics Research, Inc.
DETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY — A residential building containing not more
than one dwelling on a single lot.
DETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY CONDOMINIUM — A residential use
consisting of two or more single-family detached dwellings on a single lot.
DUPLEX — See Article XLII, § 190-264.[Amended 8-8-2017 by Ord. No.
O-17-036]
DWELLING — See Article XLII, § 190-264.
E. The imposition of impact fees is one of the methods of ensuring that
public expenditures are not excessive, and that new development bears
a proportionate share of the cost of public capital facilities necessary to
accommodate such development.
F. The fees set forth in the Public Schools Capital Facilities Impact Fee
Table are derived from, and do not exceed the cost of:
(1) Providing additional public capital facilities for education
necessitated by or benefiting the new development for which the
fees are levied; or
(2) Compensating the City of Nashua for expenditures made for
existing public facilities for education that were constructed in
anticipation of new growth and development.
G. This article sets forth and is based upon a reasonable methodology and
analysis for the determination of the impact of new development on the
need for and costs of public capital educational facilities in the City of
Nashua and provides a rational nexus between new development and
the assessment of fees pursuant to this article. The AER report was
considered in developing this article.
§ 190-73 NASHUA CODE § 190-75
164:578
FEEPAYER — The person (as defined in RSA 424:1, V) who has applied for
the issuance of a building permit.
LIVING AREA — Those areas (in square feet) of a dwelling suitable for
year-round occupancy, not including unfinished basements, decks, garages,
three-season porches, or unfinished attics.
MANUFACTURED HOUSING — See the definition outlined in RSA 673:31.
MANUFACTURED HOME — See Article XLII, § 190-264.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — See Article XLII, § 190-264.
NEW DEVELOPMENT —
PUBLIC CAPITAL FACILITIES — All assets, facilities, and equipment
relating to public education services that are described in RSA 674:21, V.
TOWNHOUSE — At least two dwellings that share a common wall in which
each dwelling has living space on the ground floor and a separate, groundfloor
entrance.
§ 190-76. Assessment of impact fees.
§ 190-77. Computation of the amount of impact fees.
Any building permit application that is submitted to the City that results
in:
(1) The construction of a new dwelling(s);
(2) The conversion of an existing nonresidential use to a dwelling(s).
A.
New development does not include:
The reconstruction of a structure that has been destroyed by fire
or natural disaster, and natural deterioration, provided that there
is no change in the size, density, or use of the structure;
(1)
(2) The replacement of a manufactured home; or
The construction of an accessory structure to a dwelling that would
not increase the demand for public capital educational facilities by
the owner or user of the dwelling.
(3)
(4) The addition/renovation(s) to an existing dwelling(s).
B.
A. Any person who seeks to undertake new development within the City of
Nashua, New Hampshire, shall be liable to pay impact fees in the
manner and amount set forth in §§ 190-77 and 190-78 of this article.
B. The exact impact fee due and payable at issuance of a certificate of
occupancy will be determined prior to the issuance of the building
permit with the applicant being notified of such.
§ 190-75 FLAG § 190-77
164:579
§ 190-78. Payment of impact fee.
A. The amount of the impact fee shall be determined by multiplying the
livable area by the appropriate dwelling fee appearing in the table
below.
Table 77-1
Impact Fee Table
Residential
(per dwelling)
School
Facilities
(per square
feet)
Maximum Fee
Possible
Detached single family $1.00 $3,600
Manufactured housing $0.50 $1,800
Attached townhouse duplex
dwellings detached single family
Condo (condominium or
apartment)
$0.50 $1,100
Multifamily dwelling (garden-style
or multistory condominium or
apartment)
$0.50 $500
All other $0.50 $500
B. Section 190-15, Permitted uses, shall be used by the Administrative
Officer to determine which fee category applies to development. If the
type of proposed new development is not specified, the Administrative
Officer shall establish applicable impact fees by using the most nearly
comparable type of land use listed in § 190-15. The decision of the
Administrative Officer may be appealed to the Planning Board.
C. In the case of a change of a nonresidential use to a residential use, the
impact fee shall be assessed per Subsection A.
D. In the case of a change from one type of residential use to another type
of residential use, the impact fee shall be the difference (if positive)
between the calculation of the impact fee for the existing use and the
calculation of the impact fee for the new use.
A. The feepayer shall pay the impact fee required by this article to the City
of Nashua prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
B. All unpaid fees shall constitute a lien on the affected property and an
obligation of the property owner, and may be collected in the same
manner as uncollected property taxes. The lien shall run with the land.
§ 190-77 NASHUA CODE § 190-79
164:580
§ 190-79. Administration of funds collected.
All impact fees collected shall be held by the City Treasurer and shall
be properly identified by and promptly transferred for deposit in the
appropriate public capital educational facilities impact fee accounts as
determined in § 190-80 of this article and used solely for the purposes
specified in this article. Impact fee accounts shall be special revenue fund
accounts, and under no circumstances will impact fee revenues accrue to
the general fund.
§ 190-80. Custody and maintenance of fund accounts.
§ 190-81. Use of funds.
A. There are hereby established one separate public capital educational
facilities impact fee account: the School Facilities Account. This shall be
a nonlapsing, interest-bearing account that is not commingled with
other City funds.
B. At the end of each fiscal year, the City Treasurer shall make a report
giving a particular account of all impact fee transactions during the
year. Said report may be a portion of the City's annual report or audit.
C. Funds withdrawn from this account must be used in accordance with
the provisions of §§ 190-81, 190-82 and 190-83.
D. The City Treasurer shall have custody of all accounts and shall pay out
the same only upon written request of the Mayor and Board of
Aldermen.
A. Funds withdrawn from any of the public capital educational facilities
impact fee accounts shall be used solely for the purpose of acquiring,
constructing, equipping, or making improvements to the particular
public capital educational facilities for which the account is designated
or for making refunds as provided in § 190-82 of this article.
B. In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments have been issued for
public capital educational facilities that were constructed in
anticipation of current growth, or are issued for advance provision of
public capital facilities for which impact fees may be expended, impact
fees may be used to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt
instruments to the extent that the facilities provided are of the type for
which the impact fees were collected.
C. The periodic updates of the City's capital improvement program shall
contain a methodology for assigning funds, including any accrued
interest, from the public capital educational facilities impact fee
accounts to specified public capital educational facilities improvement
projects and related expenses. Monies, including any accrued interest,
not assigned in any fiscal period, shall be retained in the same public
capital educational facilities impact fee accounts until next fiscal period
except as provided in § 190-82 of this article.
§ 190-79 FLAG § 190-82
164:581
§ 190-82. Refund of fees paid.
§ 190-83. Credits against payment of impact fees.
The Board of Aldermen may abate the impact fee in whole or in part, if
the feepayer elects to construct, at their expense, the public capital facility
listed in the capital improvements program. If the feepayer elects to make
such an improvement, the feepayer must enter into an agreement with the
City prior to the issuance of a building permit. In no event shall the City
provide a credit in an amount greater than the applicable impact fee.
§ 190-84. Additional requirements.
Payment of impact fees does not restrict the City to require a feepayer to
pay for or provide other municipal public improvements, fees, assessments
or charges that are allowed by law in accommodating new development
such as road improvements, sewer fees and charges, sidewalks, government
service fees, easements, of other reasonable requirements.
§ 190-85. Waiver of impact fee.
An applicant may petition the Board of Aldermen for a full or partial
waiver of the fee imposed by this article if the proposed new development
consists of low- or moderate-income housing or elderly housing which can
be reasonably expected not to require additional educational facilities. For
purposes of this section, "low-income housing" is housing considered lowincome
housing by federal legislation and regulations governing eligibility
for housing assistance. The Planning Board and Administrative Officer shall
evaluate the request and forward written findings and recommendations
to the Mayor and Board of Aldermen for consideration. The amount of
the impact fee waived shall be proportional to the amount of the new
development which is dedicated to low-income or elderly housing.
A. The current owner of record of property for which an impact fee has
been paid shall be entitled to a refund of that fee, plus accrued interest
where:
(1) The building permit has expired without the commencement of
construction, the voiding of a building permit, or the project for
which the building permit has been issued has been altered,
resulting in a decrease in the amount of the impact fee due.
(2) The impact fee has not been expended or encumbered for public
capital facilities for which it was collected within the period of six
years from the payment of the impact fee.
B. In the event of transfer of title to land from an owner who has paid an
impact fee to a new owner, the parties to said conveyance shall be
responsible for allocating any potential refund between themselves, as
the City shall only be responsible for paying over any statutorily
required refund to the then current property owner.
§ 190-82 NASHUA CODE § 190-86
164:582
§ 190-86. Planning Board authority.
Nothing in this article shall be construed so as to limit the existing authority
of the Planning Board to provide against development which is scattered
or premature, requires an excessive expenditure of public funds for capital
facilities or improvements that are not public capital facilities, or otherwise
violates the City of Nashua's site plan review regulations, subdivision
regulations, or Zoning Ordinance.
§ 190-87. Appeals.
Any application or administration decision of this article shall be appealed
to the Planning Board.
§ 190-86 FLAG § 190-87
164:583

ARTICLE IX
Lighting
Purpose and findings. The benefits of good outdoor lighting are increased
safety, energy efficiency, enhancement of the City's evening character and
improved security. New technologies have created extremely powerful
lights which can inadvertently lead to excessive glare, light trespass and
higher energy use. Concerns resulting from excessive glare and light
trespass include safety issues, loss of privacy and increased energy costs
for everyone. The goal of this lighting section of the chapter is to recognize
the benefits of outdoor lighting and provide clear guidelines for its
installation. Appropriately regulated and properly installed outdoor
lighting will maintain and complement the City's character and contribute
to the safety and welfare of the residents of the City.
The intent of this article is to reduce the problems created by improperly
designed and installed outdoor lighting by establishing regulations which
limit the area that certain outdoor lighting luminaries can illuminate and
by limiting the total allowable illumination of lots located in the City of
Nashua.
§ 190-88. Applicability.
A. Generally.
(1) All public and private outdoor lighting installed in the City of
Nashua shall be in conformance with the requirements established
by this article.
(2) This section does not apply to applications within the D-1 or D-3
Downtown Zoning Districts, except as provided in § 190-20B(7).
B. Waivers. A waiver from the requirements of this section may be filed
with the Planning Board pursuant to § 190-148.
C. Exceptions.
(1) Any luminaire with a lamp or lamps rated at a total of 1800 lumens
or less, and all flood or spot luminaries with a lamp or lamps rated
at 900 lumens or less, may be used without restriction to light
distribution or mounting height, except that if any spot or flood
luminaire rated 900 lumens or less is aimed, directed, or focused so
as to cause direct light from the luminaire to be directed toward
residential buildings on adjacent or nearby land, or to create glare
perceptible to persons operating motor vehicles on public ways, the
luminaire shall be redirected or its light output controlled as
necessary to eliminate such conditions.
(2) Luminaires used for public street illumination may be installed at a
maximum height of 25 feet and may be positioned at that height up
to the edge of any bordering property.
§ 190-88 FLAG § 190-88
164:585
§ 190-89. Control of glare; luminaire design factors.
(3) All temporary lighting required for construction projects, related to
road construction and repair, installation of sewer and water
facilities, and other public infrastructure.
(4) All temporary emergency lighting needed by the Police or Fire
Departments or other emergency services, as well as all vehicular
luminaires, shall be exempt from the requirements of this article.
(5) All hazard warning luminaires required by federal regulatory
agencies are exempt from the requirements of this article, except
that all luminaries used must be red and must be shown to be as
close as possible to the federally required minimum lumen output
requirement for the specific task.
(6) Subject to the restrictions of the sign provisions of this chapter,69
luminaires used primarily for sign illumination may be mounted at
any height to a maximum of 25 feet, regardless of lumen rating.
(7) Luminaires used for the lighting of areas used exclusively or
primarily for outdoor recreation may be mounted at any height.
A. Light levels shall not exceed 0.2 footcandles at any property line. This
subsection does not apply if any property line that separates two or
more lots or parcels under common ownership or similar adjacent uses,
including:
(1) Multiple and single lots held in common ownership and separate
ownership that are subject to a common site plan approval; and
(2) Contiguous parcels, with or without an approved site plan (common
to both or separate), that share common access or parking.
B. Any luminaire with a lamp or lamps rated at a total of more than 1800
lumens, and all flood or spot luminaires with a lamp or lamps rated at a
total of more than 900 lumens, shall not emit more than 3% direct light
above a horizontal plane through the lowest direct-light-emitting part of
the luminaire.
C. Any luminaire with a lamp or lamps rated at a total of more than 1800
lumens, and all flood or spot luminaires with a lamp or lamps rated at a
total of more than 900 lumens, shall be mounted at a height equal to or
less than the value 3 + (D/3), where D is the distance in feet to the
nearest property boundary. The maximum height of the luminaire shall
not exceed 25 feet.
D. Any temporary outdoor lighting that conforms to the requirements of
this section of this section is permitted.
E. The applicant shall submit a lighting plan as required by § 190-275.
69.Editor's Note: See Art. X, Signs, of this chapter.
§ 190-88 NASHUA CODE § 190-90
164:586
§ 190-90. Nonconforming lighting.
A. Nonconforming luminaires. All luminaires lawfully in place prior to the
effective date of this section of the chapter may continue to be used.
However, any luminaire that replaces a nonconforming luminaire or any
nonconforming luminaire that is moved must meet the standards of this
section of the chapter.
B. Nonconforming temporary outdoor lighting. Nonconforming temporary
outdoor lighting may be permitted by conditional use permit from the
Planning Board under the approval criteria listed in § 190-133 and after
considering:
(1) The public and/or private benefits that will result from the
temporary lighting;
(2) Any annoyance or safety problems that may result from the use of
the temporary lighting; and
(3) The duration of the temporary nonconforming lighting.
C. The applicant shall submit a detailed description of the proposed
temporary nonconforming lighting to the Planning Board.
§ 190-90 FLAG § 190-90
164:587

ARTICLE X
Signs
§ 190-91. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Sign Ordinance of Nashua, New
Hampshire."
§ 190-92. Interpretation.
§ 190-93. Prohibited signs.
Any sign not specifically authorized by this chapter is prohibited unless
required by law. The following signs and conditions are prohibited:
A. Definitions. The "Applicability" subsection of each sign structure
described in §§ 190-96 to 190-110 provides a definition of the type of
sign subject to this section. See § 190-264 for additional definitions. To
the extent that a provision of this article and another section of the
Code of the City of Nashua conflict, the provisions of this article control.
B. No content restrictions. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
chapter, no sign shall be subject to any limitation based on the content
of the message contained on such sign. Any sign authorized in this
article may contain any noncommercial copy in lieu of any other copy.
A. Any sign located within, on, or projecting over a property line which
borders a public or private street, highway, alley, lane, parkway, avenue,
road, sidewalk, or other right-of-way, except as provided in this chapter.
The Administrator may cause to be removed any temporary or portable
sign erected or displayed upon or projecting into public property.
B. Any sign attached to any public utility pole or structure, streetlight,
tree, fence, fire hydrant, bridge, curb, sidewalk, park bench, or other
location on public property, except as provided herein.
C. Any sign placed, which by reason of its location, will obstruct the view
of any authorized traffic sign, signal or other traffic control device or
which by reason of shape, color, or position interferes with or could be
confused with any authorized traffic signal or device.
D. Any sign which is placed so as to prevent or inhibit free ingress to or
egress from any door, window, or any exit way required by the Building
Code or the Fire Code.70
E. Any flashing sign or other sign or lighting device, whether on the
exterior of the building, or on the inside of a window which is visible
beyond the boundaries of the lot or parcel, or from any public right-ofway,
with intermittent, flashing, rotating, scintillating, blinking, or
strobe light illumination, including an electronic message device,
70.Editor's Note: See Ch. 105, Building Construction, and Ch. 156, Fire Prevention.
§ 190-91 FLAG § 190-93
164:589
§ 190-94. Sign permits.
except as provided in § 190-97B, or the regulations applicable to a
particular sign structure.
F. Any sign with unshielded incandescent, metal halide, or fluorescent
light bulbs.
G. Any sign which emits audible sound, odor, smoke, steam, laser or
hologram lights, or other visible matter, including any sign that employs
any stereopticon or motion-picture projection.
H. Any sign animated by any means, including fixed aerial displays,
balloons, pennants, including strings of flags, streamers or devices
affected by the movement of the air.
I. Any rotating sign.
J. Any banners or temporary signs, except as provided for in § 190-106.
K. Any portable sign or attention-getting device, including but not limited
to sandwich, A-frame, tire rim, animated sign, stuffed animal, or vehicle
used as a sign or sign structure; and/or string of lights arranged in the
shape of a product, arrow, or any commercial message, except as
provided for in § 190-106, or where permitted in the D Downtown
District. A-frame signs may be used on a public sidewalk in the D
Downtown District where approved by the Board of Public Works.
L. Any sign mounted, attached or painted on a trailer, boat, or motor
vehicle when parked, stored, or displayed conspicuously on the public
right-of-way or private premises in a manner intended to attract
attention of the public for advertising purposes. Such signs or devices
are considered portable signs within the meaning of these regulations
and are prohibited. This provision expressly excludes business signs
that are permanently painted on or magnetically attached to motor
vehicles or rolling stock that are regularly and consistently used to
conduct normal business activities.
M. Any sign painted, attached or mounted on fuel tanks, outdoor storage
containers and/or solid waste receptacles or their enclosures.
N. Any unauthorized sign attached to existing signs, outdoor light poles, or
other structures.
A. Applicability. No sign may be established without a sign permit issued
by the Administrator, unless exempted by this subsection.
B. Permit not required. The following signs do not require sign permits
and are permitted in all zoning districts:
(1) Signs installed by government bodies.
(2) Utility signs.
§ 190-93 NASHUA CODE § 190-94
164:590
(3) Real estate signs not to exceed eight square feet for single-family
residential properties, 16 square feet for multifamily residential
properties and 32 square feet for all other uses in all other zoning
districts. Real estate signs are limited to one per each side of the
property abutting a public right-of-way and must be removed
within 30 days after the sale, rental or lease.
(4) National, state or corporate flags. Corporate flags shall not exceed
a maximum area of 40 square feet.
(5) Nameplates and historic markers, a maximum area of two square
feet.
(6) Building name sign, a maximum sign area of 12 square feet.
(7) Alterations that include repainting, changing copy, or replacement
of the existing sign face, except this shall not apply to signs located
in the Historic District. [Amended 11-13-2012 by Ord. No.
O-12-024]
(8) Signs that are clearly shown on a site plan approved by the
Planning Board.
(9) Charitable and public service signs.
(10) Political signs.
(11) Contractor signs not to exceed 32 square feet, except on projects
that exceed one acre in size where the maximum sign area shall be
64 square feet. Such sign shall be removed within 30 days after
completion of the project.
(12) Directional, directory and on-site, internal, traffic control signs in
accordance with § 190-100.
(13) Temporary signs, no greater than 12 square feet, advertising onsite
employment opportunities.
(14) Signs affixed to the interior side of a window so as to be visible
from the exterior that advertise products or services available
within the building, prices, payment methods, or sales. However,
such signs shall not cover more than 25% of the total visible
window area.
(15) Lettering, logos or graphics affixed to products or packaging
displayed for on-site sales.
(16) Lettering, logos or graphics identifying or describing products or
their manufacturers, vendors or distributors which are affixed to
the exterior of equipment such as vending machines, gasoline
pumps and other similar equipment.
§ 190-94 FLAG § 190-94
164:591
(17) Lettering, logos or graphics affixed to registered motor vehicles or
equipment that identify the business owners or operators of the
vehicle or equipment or their manufacturers.
(18) Temporary signs, which advertise garage or yard sales or lost pets.
(19) On-site temporary signs advertising the opening of a new business.
(20) Customary signs that give warning, no larger than two square feet
in area, bearing messages such as "Beware of Dog" or "No
Trespassing."
C. Initiation. A sign permit application shall be submitted to the
Administrative Officer. The application shall include a sign plan as set
forth in Article XLIII.
D. Completeness review. The Administrative Officer shall determine
whether the sign permit application is complete (as provided in
§ 190-125) within 10 days after the application is filed.
E. Notice. No notice is required for a sign permit application.
F. Decision.
(1) The Administrative Officer shall approve or deny the application
within the time periods prescribed below after it is determined to
be complete. Applications found to be incomplete shall be denied. If
the application is denied, the Administrative Officer shall provide
notice to the applicant in writing, which notice shall explain any
deficiencies in the application and how an applicant may proceed
under this section and Part 3 of this chapter.
(2) Upon a finding by the Administrative Officer that the application
complies with the provisions of this article, the Administrator shall
cause to be issued a sign permit for installation by the applicant.
Such issuance shall be made within 15 working days of the City's
receipt of the completed application unless a variance is requested.
(3) If a sign permit for the sign location or design applied for shall be
denied, the applicant shall be notified within 15 working days of the
City's receipt of the completed application. The Administrator shall
advise the applicant of the specific cause of such denial, and may
suggest alternative locations or design modifications.
(4) Any aggrieved individual may appeal the decision of the
Administrative Officer regarding the interpretation of this article or
subsequent action with respect to the issuance or denial of a
permit. All appeals must be submitted within 30 calendar days after
a decision or action. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall consider
the appeal and shall render a decision approving or denying the
sign application within 45 days after the notice of appeal is filed. If
a decision is not rendered within this time period, the application
shall be deemed approved.
§ 190-94 NASHUA CODE § 190-94
164:592
§ 190-95. Sign requirements by district.
G. Approval criteria. The Administrative Officer shall issue the requested
sign permit if the sign permit application complies with this article.
Otherwise the Administrative Officer shall deny the sign permit
application as specified above in § 190-94F(1).
H. Subsequent applications. When a sign permit application is denied by
the Administrative Officer, an applicant may resubmit the application
when the specific cause(s) for denial by the Administrative Officer have
been addressed in a revised application. The revised sign permit
application must include revised drawings, measurements,
illumination, and any other items required by Article XLIII to remedy
the causes for initial denial.
I. Amendments. No new sign or modification of the size, materials, or
design characteristics of a sign shall occur unless a new sign permit is
issued in accordance with the procedures established in Subsections A
through F above.
J. Scope of approval. Following issuance of a sign permit, the applicant
shall comply with the requirements of the Sign Ordinance.
A. Number of signs per district. The maximum cumulative number and
maximum cumulative area of all sign structures permitted for any lot,
parcel or business within a zoning district is set forth in the following
sections.
B. Exemption. This section does not apply to political signs or any other
sign displaying a noncommercial message.
C. Historic District.
Purpose and findings: the Historic District is an overlay district
distinguished by a large number of houses of the late Federal, Greek
Revival, Italianate, second Empire and Queen Anne styles of
architecture, and some Italianate commercial buildings. The scale,
type and materials of signs should respect the unique character of the
district and architectural integrity of the historic structures.
D. The following signage is not permitted within the Historic District:
(1) Internally illuminated signs.
(2) Electronic message centers.
(3) Portable, changeable copy signs.
(4) Flashing signs and changing signs (electronic).
E. Any change to the size, location, design, color, texture, lighting,
materials or outer appearance of a sign will require a sign permit, and
§ 190-94 FLAG § 190-95
164:593
§ 190-96. Sign structure standards.
Sections 190-97 through 190-108 contain standards for different types of
sign structures. These standards regulate the dimensions, location and
design of signs based upon their structural characteristics or location. Each
section follows a common format in order to enhance readability.
§ 190-97. Changing signs.
Historic District Commission review for approval. [Added 11-13-2012
by Ord. No. O-12-024]
A. Applicability. This section applies to any sign that is either
electronically or electrically controlled to illustrate different copy
changes on the same sign. This sign's message may be changed by
electronic switching or automatic switching of lamps or alteration in
the level of illumination or other illumination source to form words,
letters, designs, figures, numerals and pictures often through the
apparent vertical or horizontal movement of light. Such signs shall not
include a flashing light source. In the case of a changing sign
(electronic), "flashing" shall be defined as an interval of illumination
less than five seconds in duration. These signs are commonly used to
display time, temperature, date and message centers or reader boards,
indexing signs, and those known as electronic message centers.
B. Electronic message center. Where electronic message centers are
permitted, they shall be subject to all of the following restrictions:
(1) The changing sign (electronic) may not exceed 50% of the area of
the sign or 52 square feet, whichever is smaller.
(2) The changing sign (electronic) shall be restricted to three lines of
text only, and no additional symbols, graphics or images shall be
allowed. Signs which are restricted to the display of the current
local time and the current local temperature shall be restricted to
one line of text.
(3) All illumination elements on the face of a changing sign (electronic)
shall remain at a fixed level of illumination for a period of not less
than five seconds.
(4) Changes from one message to another shall be accomplished by the
change of all illumination elements on the face of a changing sign
(electronic) simultaneously, with the provision that the sign may
fade to complete darkness and then re-illuminate with or fade to
the new message.
(5) Changing signs (electronic) shall be equipped with the ability to
adjust the brightness of the sign and shall not be operated at a
brightness which is substantially greater than other sources of
illumination in the area.
§ 190-95 NASHUA CODE § 190-97
164:594
§ 190-98. Awning, canopy and marquee signs.
(6) The applicant for a sign permit for a changing sign (electronic)
under the provisions of this chapter shall provide with his
application an affidavit, sworn or attested by the land owner and by
the applicant, attesting to the facts that:
(a) The sign to be installed meets all of the criteria set forth in this
chapter; and
(b) That the sign shall be operated in a manner consistent with the
criteria set forth in this chapter; and
(c) That the land owner and applicant agree to be held liable,
separately or collectively, if these provisions are not met, for
any fines arising from such violation. This provision shall not
be construed to relieve any other responsibility or remedy for
such violation set forth in this chapter.
A. Applicability. Nonelectric awning, canopy and marquee signs are
permitted in all nonresidential zoning districts. A building permit is
required.
B. R-B and R-C Districts. In the R-B and R-C Districts, an awning or canopy
sign not exceeding five feet in horizontal width is permitted for
quadruplexes and apartments.
C. Copy area.
(1) The copy area on any awning sign, canopy sign, electronic awning
sign, or marquee sign is computed as all or a portion of the allowed
wall sign area.
(2) Copy located on the canopy or awning sign shall not exceed 1/2 of
the area bounded by the edges of the canopy or awning visible from
the public right-of-way. If copy is only found in fringe drip-flap
portion of the canopy, the entire portion of said area may be utilized
for signage.
D. Right-of-way. If the awning or canopy sign projects into the right-of-way,
an encroachment permit may be required by the Board of Public Works.
E. Electric awning signs.
(1) A fireproof space frame structure with translucent covering
designed in awning form, but whose purpose and use is signage.
Such signs are internally illuminated by fluorescent or other light
sources in fixtures approved under national and local Electrical
Codes.
(2) Electric awning signs shall be located on multistory buildings
between the first- and second-story windows or, on single-story
buildings, above the first-story windows. Electric awning signs
§ 190-97 FLAG § 190-98
164:595
§ 190-99. Banner sign.
located on multiple storefronts shall be allowed copy space no more
than 80% of the individual storefront width, in order to maintain
adequate separation between tenant spaces.
(3) A fireproof space frame structure with translucent covering
designed in awning form, but whose purpose and use is signage.
Such signs are internally illuminated by fluorescent or other light
sources in fixtures approved under national and local Electrical
Codes.
F. Height/clearance. Awning, canopy and marquee signs shall not exceed
five feet in height and shall maintain a minimum of eight feet clearance.
A. Applicability. A banner sign is a temporary sign of lightweight material
(paper, plastic or fabric) hung either with or without frames. A
permanent banner sign is a sign constructed of lightweight material
(paper, plastic or fabric) attached by means of rigid frames to a pole in a
permanent or semipermanent fashion.
Comment: Flags and insignias containing markings of any government,
corporation or business are not considered banners, and are defined
separately as flags.
B. Generally. Permanent banner signs are only permitted on properties
that have a minimum of 10,000 square feet of exterior display space for
retail sales as delineated on a site plan approved by the Nashua
Planning Board in accordance with Part 3, Procedures, of this chapter
and only if they meet the following conditions:
(1) Signs must be located within an outside display area as delineated
on an approved site plan.
(2) Properties containing at least 10,000 square feet of outside display
area for retail sales shall be allowed to install no more than two
such signs.
(3) One additional sign shall be permitted for each additional 10,000
square feet of outside display area, to a maximum of four per
property.
C. Size. Each sign shall be no larger than nine feet in the vertical
dimension and no larger than three feet in the horizontal dimension.
D. Location and orientation. Such signs shall be installed on single vertical
poles, in a vertical orientation. Such signs shall be located 10 feet
further from a public right-of-way than any permanent ground sign on
the property. Signs must be located within an outside display area as
delineated on an approved site plan. No permanent banner sign shall be
located closer than 100 feet to any other such sign.
§ 190-98 NASHUA CODE § 190-99
164:596
§ 190-100. Directional signs.
Table 99-4
Banner Signs
Zoning District
Standard Residential LB GB HB PI/AI GI
D-1/
D-3
A. Permitted? N P P P N N N
B. Permit
required?
— — Y Y — — —
C. Number per
site
0 0 2 2 0 0 0
Dimensions
E. Area per
sign
— — 27 27 — — —
F. Height — — 9 9 — — —
Location
G. Clearance
(minimum)
— — 7 7 — — —
H. Clearance
(maximum)
— — 20 20 — — —
I. Right-of-way
setback
— — 20 20 — — —
A. Applicability. A "directional sign" means a sign that is necessary for onsite
public safety and convenience. Examples include signs located next
to a driveway and reading "in," "out," "entrance," "parking," or "exit."
B. Supplemental standards for directional signs.
(1) These signs are allowed in addition to other permitted signage on
site.
(2) A sign permit is required for directional signs that are setback less
than 15 feet from a property line, or located so as to be visible from
a public right-of-way.
(3) Directional signs may be located adjacent to a driveway, provided it
does not impede sight visibility.
(4) Corporate emblems or logos on directional signs must be incidental
and must not exceed 33% of the total area of the sign.
(5) Directional signs shall conform to the Manual of Uniform Traffic
Control Devices where applicable.
§ 190-99 FLAG § 190-100
164:597
§ 190-101. Ground sign (also known as "detached, freestanding,
pole or pylon sign").
Table 100-6
Directional Signs
Zoning District
Standard ResidentialLB GB HB
PI/
AI GI
D-1/
D-3
A. Permitted? P P P P P P P
B. Permit
required?
Dimensions
C. Area per
sign
6 6 9 9 9 9 6
A. Applicability. This section applies to any ground sign. A ground sign is a
sign established on a freestanding frame, mast or pole and not attached
to any building. Where such signs are established back to back, the
larger face shall be calculated for the purposes of determining
allowable area.
B. Reduction in setbacks. The minimum setback of the signs may be
reduced to 10 feet from right-of-way where the sign does not exceed 20
feet in height.
C. Nonresidential districts abutting residential districts. The maximum
sign height shall be reduced to 15 feet when a lot within a
nonresidential district abuts a residentially zoned lot.
D. Landscaping. All ground signs shall be installed in a landscaped area of
not less than 12 square feet.
E. Supplemental standards for General Business (GB), Highway Business
(HB) and Park Industrial (PI) Districts. For a corner lot, a permitted
ground sign may be replaced with two ground signs, each meeting all of
the following conditions:
(1) Each sign shall be visible from a different right-of-way.
(2) The maximum area of each sign is restricted to 100 square feet for
the GB and HB Districts and 75 feet for the PI District, provided
that the cumulative area of all signs is subject to § 190-95 and this
section.
(3) The signs shall not be located closer than 75 from an intersection,
as measured from the point of intersecting rights-of-way.
(4) The minimum setback may be reduced to 20 feet from the right-ofway
where the sign does not exceed 30 feet in height.
§ 190-100 NASHUA CODE § 190-101
164:598
§ 190-102. Identification sign.
F. Supplemental standards for PI and AI Districts. Within the PI or AI
Districts, where the lot frontage does not abut a residential zoning
district, the sign height may be increased to 20 feet.
G. Supplemental standards for General Industrial (GI) District. If the
district does not abut a residential zoning district, the maximum area
for a ground sign may be increased to 100 feet.
Table 101-7
Ground Signs
Zoning District
Standard Residential LB GB HB PI/AI GI
D-1/
D-3
A. Permitted? P P P P P P P
B. Permit
required?
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
C. Number per
site*
1 1 1* 1* 1* 1 1
D. Frontage — 50 90 90 100 100 100
Dimensions
E. Area per
sign
10 32 150 150 100 75 50
F. Height 6 6 40 40 15 20 10
Location
G. Right-of-way
setback
10 10 20 20 20 10 10
H. Intersection
setback
(feet)
25 25 25 25 25 25 25
I. Exterior
wall plane
setback
— — — — — — —
Design Characteristics
J. Electronic
message
center
— — P P — — —
K. Changeable
copy
— — P P P P —
* See § 190-101E for corner lots.
§ 190-101 FLAG § 190-102
164:599
A. Generally. This section applies to any identification sign. An
"identification sign" means any sign meeting the dimensional and
design restrictions below that is necessary for indicating the name and
purpose of a religious, educational, medical, public or quasi-public
facility located on site.
B. Subdivision identification signs. See § 190-101 (ground signs).
C. Park industrial signs. A "park industrial sign" means a signs located
adjacent to and intended to identify the entrance to multibuilding park
industrial developments situated. In lieu of the requirements below,
park industrial signs are permitted only on lot(s) or parcel(s) with a
minimum land area of three acres. Minimum frontage shall be 300 feet
on a public right-of-way. Maximum sign area shall be 200 square feet for
one sign, or 125 square feet for each of two signs, and shall be allowed
in addition to any ground signs for individual owners or tenants.
Table 102-8
Identification Signs
Zoning District
Standard
R-A, R-B, RC
R-C
(Nonresidential
Uses Only) LB GB HB PI/AI GI
D-1/
D-3
A. Permitted? P P P P P P P
B. Permit
required?
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
C. Number
per site
1 1 1 1 1 1 1
Dimensions
E. Area per
sign
12 20 20 20 20 20 20
H. Height 8 8 8 8 8 8 8
Location
L. Intersection
setback
(feet)
25 25 25 25 25 25 25
§ 190-102 NASHUA CODE § 190-103
164:600
§ 190-103. Off-premises signs.
Purpose and findings: For the purpose of regulating excess signage,
encouraging the positive economic development of the City, promoting
the safety of the traveling public, protecting existing property values in
both residential and nonresidential areas, preventing the overcrowding of
land, promoting a positive community appearance as part of a concerted
City-wide effort to protect and enhance the aesthetics of the City for the
enjoyment of all citizens of New Hampshire, outdoor advertising signs are
herein regulated.
The regulations are designed to prevent their overconcentration, improper
placement, and excessive height, bulk, number, and area. It is recognized
that, unlike on-premises identification signs which are in actually a part of
a business, outdoor advertising is a separate and distinct use of the public
thoroughfare. With a view to this distinction, outdoor advertising signs are
regulated differently from on-premises signs. It is intended that outdoor
advertising signs be located away from residential areas, and that such
signs be regulated to protect the character of the area wherein outdoor
advertising signs are located, and to conserve property values in these
areas.
A. Applicability.
(1) This section applies to any outdoor advertising sign. An "outdoor
advertising sign" means any billboard or off-premises sign. A
"billboard" means any off-premises sign on a permanent structure
on which the copy is periodically changed and which is not located
on the premises to which such advertising copy pertains. An "offpremises
sign" means any sign or structure, pictorial or otherwise,
regardless of size or shape which directs attention to a business,
commodity, attraction, profession, service or entertainment
conducted, sold, offered, manufactured, existing, or provided at a
location other than the premises where the sign is located or to
which it is affixed (sometimes called "non-point-of-sale sign").
(2) All outdoor advertising signs shall be consistent with all definitions
and shall comply with all standards and regulations of this code.
Except for ordinary maintenance and repair, poster panel
replacements, copy changes, or repair not involving structural,
material, or electrical changes, no outdoor advertising signs, or
part thereof, shall be erected, altered, constructed, changed,
converted, re-erected, additionally illuminated, reduced in size,
enlarged, or moved unless the entire outdoor advertising sign and
structure are brought into conformity with this code.
B. Dimensional standards. See Table 103-10 below.
C. Construction standards.
(1) Compliance with Building Codes. All signs shall comply with the
appropriate detailed provisions of the Nashua Building Code and
§ 190-103 FLAG § 190-103
164:601
Nashua Electrical Code (Chapter 105 of the City Code) and other
provisions of the City Code of the City of Nashua.
(2) Clearance from high-voltage power lines. Outdoor advertising
signs shall be located in such a way that they maintain horizontal
and vertical clearance of all overhead electrical conductors in
accordance with the Nashua Electric Code provided that no
outdoor advertising sign shall be erected closer than 10 feet in any
direction to any conductor or public utility guy wire.
D. Location and spacing.
(1) Corner lots. No part of an outdoor advertising sign may be located
within a triangular area formed by the street right-of-way lines and
a line connecting them at points 50 feet from the right-of-way
intersection.
(2) Spacing of signs.
(a) No part of any outdoor advertising sign shall be located less
than 1,000 feet from any part of another outdoor advertising
sign when located within either of two two-hundred-foot
corridors along each side of a roadway. The two corridors shall
be delineated by connecting perpendicular measurements
from all points along the road rights-of-way. No part of any
permitted outdoor advertising sign which is located outside of
the two-hundred-foot corridor areas may be located within a
one-thousand-foot radius of any other outdoor advertising sign.
(b) No part of any outdoor advertising sign is permitted within 400
feet of a residential zoning district.
Table 103-10
Outdoor Advertising Signs
Zoning District
Standard ResidentialLB GB HB
PI/
AI GI
D-1/
D-3
A. Permitted? N N P P P P N
B. Permit
required?
— — Y Y Y Y—
C. Number
per site
— — 1 1 1 1 —
D. Frontage — — 90 90 100 100 —
Dimensions
§ 190-103 NASHUA CODE § 190-103
164:602
§ 190-104. Projecting sign (also known as "suspended signs").
Table 103-10
Outdoor Advertising Signs
Zoning District
Standard ResidentialLB GB HB
PI/
AI GI
D-1/
D-3
E.1Area per
sign, signs
facing
streets
with 4 or
more
traffic
lanes
— — 150 150 150 150 —
E.2Area per
sign, signs
facing
streets
with
fewer
than4
traffic
lanes
— — 75 75 75 75 —
F. Height — — 30 30 30 30 —
Location
G. Right-ofway
setback
— — 20 20 10 10 —
H. Intersection
setback
(feet)
— — 25 25 25 25 —
Design Characteristics
J. Electronic
message
center
— — N N N N —
K. Changeable
copy
— — N N N N —
A. Applicability. A projecting sign is a sign, other than a wall sign, which is
attached to and projects in a perpendicular fashion more than 12 inches
beyond the surface to which it is affixed. A projecting sign is meant to
be viewed from a position other than directly facing the building.
B. Height.
§ 190-103 FLAG § 190-104
164:603
§ 190-105. Roof sign.
(1) For purposes of this section, "height" shall mean the distance from
the top of the sign to the finished grade.
(2) Projecting signs shall not extend above parapet or roofline.
C. Clearance. Minimum clearance shall be 10 feet, except where a sign
projects over a traffic area, such as a driveway, then the minimum
clearance between the bottom of the sign and the ground shall be no
less than 14 feet.
D. Projection. Maximum sign projection shall be five feet and shall not
project closer than three feet to the curbline.
Table 104-11
Projecting Signs
Zoning District
Standard Residential LB GB HB PI/AI GI
D-1/
D-3
A. Permitted? N P P P P P P
B. Permit
required?
— Y Y Y Y Y Y
C. Number per
site
— 1 1 1 1 1 1
D. Frontage — — 90 90 — 100 —
Dimensions
E. Area per
sign
— 10 24 24 24 24 10
H. Height (see
special rules
below)
— 19 30 30 30 30 19
Location
I. Clearance
(minimum)
— 10 10 10 10 10 10
J. Right-of-way
setback
— 10 10 10 10 10 10
K. Intersection
setback
(feet)
— 25 25 25 25 25 25
A. Applicability. A roof sign is a sign established upon, against, or directly
above a roof, or on the top of or above the parapet of a building. See
definition of "parapet" in § 190-264.
§ 190-104 NASHUA CODE § 190-105
164:604
§ 190-106. Temporary sign.
Table 105-13
Roof Signs
Zoning District
Standard Residential LB GB HB PI/AI GI
D-1/
D-3
A. Permitted? N N P P N N N
B. Permit
required?
— — Y Y — — —
C. Number per
site
— — 1 1 — — —
Dimensions
D. Area per
sign
— — 150 150 — — —
E. Height
(measured
from roof)
— — 10 10 — — —
Location
F. Exterior
wall plane
setback
— — 3 3 — — —
A. Applicability. A building permit is required for all temporary signs
except for those specifically excluded under § 190-94.
B. General standards. The following restrictions apply to all temporary
signs, unless otherwise indicated in § 190-94:
(1) Only one ground or wall sign used as a temporary sign is permitted
per premises. However, there is no restriction on the number of
signs used for political speech.
(2) No temporary sign shall be located in the public right-of-way or on
public property.
(3) Minimum setback shall be 10 feet from public right-of-way and 25
feet from point of intersecting street rights-of-way.
(4) No temporary sign shall be located so as to obstruct traffic or
create a hazard.
(5) Height and setbacks shall comply with the underlying zoning
district, unless otherwise indicated. [Amended 3-28-2006 by
Ord. No. O-06-05]
(6) The maximum duration is 30 days.
§ 190-105 FLAG § 190-106
164:605
§ 190-107. Time-and-temperature sign.
A time-and-temperature sign is a sign that typically refers to the current
time and temperature only. Such signs are permitted in all zoning districts
except residential. Maximum area of such signs shall not exceed 50% of the
total allowable sign area.
§ 190-108. Wall sign (also known as "fascia sign" or "facade sign").
(7) Maximum sign area shall not exceed 32 square feet.
(8) The sign shall not be flashing.
(9) Maximum height shall be eight feet as measured from grade.
(10) The date of establishment of the temporary sign shall be clearly
posted on the sign.
A. Applicability. A "wall sign" means any sign attached parallel to the
building wall, false wall or false roof, or other facade surface that does
not extend more than 12 inches from said surface, or does not vary
more than 30° from the plane of the building's parallel wall, and that
has only one sign face that is intended to be read parallel to the wall or
other surface to which it is mounted. A wall sign includes any sign
established on a penthouse above the roof of a building, as long as the
wall of the penthouse is on a plane parallel to the wall of the building.
B. Supplemental standards:
(1) Wall signs shall be located in those areas designed for signage on a
site plan or building permit.
(2) Wall signs shall not cover or obliterate windows, doors, or
architectural details. Architectural details shall include but not be
limited to arches, sills, moldings, cornices and transoms, or any
features that are identified on the City's cultural resource survey
sheets.
C. Copy:
(1) In the GB Zone, the maximum sign area measured in square feet
shall be two times the building frontage if there are no other sign
types; 1 1/2 times the building frontage if there is a ground sign;
one times the building frontage if there is a wall sign or projecting
sign; or 150 square feet, whichever is smallest.
(2) In the HB Zone, the maximum sign area measured in square feet
shall be two times the building frontage if there are no ground,
projecting or freeway-oriented; 1 1/2 times the building frontage if
there is a ground sign or freeway-oriented sign; one times the
building frontage if there is a projecting sign; or 150 square feet,
whichever is smallest. The maximum sign area shall be further
§ 190-106 NASHUA CODE § 190-108
164:606
reduced to 125 square feet if a roof or freeway-oriented sign is
utilized.
(3) In the PI Zone, the maximum sign area measured in square feet
shall be two times the building frontage if there are no other sign
types; 1 1/2 times the building frontage if there is one other sign
type; or 150 square feet whichever is smallest. The maximum sign
area shall be further reduced to 150 square feet if a ground or
freeway-oriented sign is utilized.
(4) In the AI Zone, the maximum sign area measured in square feet
shall be two times the building frontage if there are no other sign
types; 1 1/2 times the building frontage if there is one other sign
type; or 150 square feet, whichever is smallest.
(5) In the GI Zone, the maximum sign area measured in square feet
shall be two times the building frontage if there are no other sign
types; 1 1/2 times the building frontage if there is one other sign
type; or 100 square feet, whichever is smallest.
(6) In the D/H Zones, the maximum sign area per City right-of-way
shall be 1 1/4 times the building frontage, or 100 square feet,
whichever is smallest.
(7) In the LB Zone, the maximum sign area shall be one times the
building frontage, or 32 square feet, whichever is smaller. The
maximum sign area shall be further reduced to 12 square feet if a
ground sign is utilized.
(8) In the residential zones, each premises located in the residential
district and that is a legally authorized business use may have one
wall sign with a maximum sign area of six square feet established in
lieu of a ground sign.
D. Height.
(1) Wall signs may not project above the top of a parapet, wall or the
roofline at the wall, whichever, is highest.
(2) Within LB, D-1, D-3, H, or FU Zoning District, the top of a wall sign
shall be located within 20 feet of ground level unless the sign
identifies the name of the building or project name.
E. Alternative number and area restrictions:
(1) A building with or proposing more than one business establishment
within the LB, GB, HB, PI, AI, GI, or D-1, D-3 Zoning Districts is
permitted wall sign area, measured as set forth above, in
proportion to the total building frontage occupied by the individual
business. Every business shall be allowed at least one wall sign
with a maximum of 40 square feet in the GB and HB Zoning
Districts, 32 square feet in the PI or GI Zoning Districts, and 12
square feet in the D or LB Zoning Districts.
§ 190-108 FLAG § 190-108
164:607
§ 190-109. Sign master plans (optional).
(2) As an alternative, the total allowed wall sign area for any one
business may be subdivided into a maximum of three separate wall
signs, except in the LB and AI Districts, where only one wall sign
per business is allowed.
F. Supplemental standards in Downtown (D1 and D3) Districts. For a
building with or proposing more than one business establishment, the
allowable wall sign area, measured as set forth above, shall be
proportionate to the total building length occupied by the individual
business, except that every business shall be allowed at least one wall
sign per street frontage.
G. Supplemental standards for PI or AI District:
(1) Where the lot frontage zoned PI or AI does not abut a residential
zoning district, the sign area may be increased to the lesser of (1)
two times the building frontage if there are no other sign types; or
(2) 1 1/2 times the building frontage if there is one other sign type;
or (3) 150 square feet.
(2) For a building with or proposing more than one business
establishment, the allowable wall sign area, measured in
accordance with Subsection C above, shall be in proportion to the
total building frontage length occupied by the individual business,
except that every business shall be allowed at least one wall sign
with a maximum sign area of 50 square feet. Where the lot frontage
abuts residential districts the maximum wall sign area shall be 32
square feet.
H. Supplemental standards for General Industrial (GI) District. If the
district does not abut a residential zoning district, the maximum area
for a wall sign may be increased to 100 feet.
A. Applicability. Where groups of three or more contiguous commercial or
industrial units are to be located together in a development, where a
lesser number of businesses total not less than 20,000 square feet of
gross leasable area, or where three or more individual businesses on
contiguous lots so elect, the development may adopt a sign master plan
to govern advertising. The intent of this section is to promote a uniform
and aesthetic message presentation that is designed to provide
information to the general public through its design and coordination of
elements.
B. General requirements:
(1) Total sign area permitted for the entire development or center shall
be calculated at the rate of two square feet of sign per foot of lineal
building front.
§ 190-108 NASHUA CODE § 190-109
164:608
(2) Each master planned development may have one common
freestanding sign denoting the name of the facility not exceeding
80 square feet per side and with bottom panel not less than five feet
above road level and a maximum height of 15 feet.
(3) All other signs shall be awning signs, canopy signs, or wall signs.
(4) All signs shall be coordinated in material, shape, lettering, color
and/or decorative elements.
(5) Information and directional signage, with the exception of uniform
traffic control devices, shall be consistent with the general sign
design of the development and is exempt from the sign area
calculation provided that it does not contain advertising.
(6) The master sign plan shall include standards designed to achieve
the following objectives:
(a) Signs shall be appropriate to the architectural character of the
building on which they are placed.
(b) Sign panels and graphics should relate with and not cover
architectural features, and should be in proportion to them.
(c) Signs should be appropriate to the types of activities they
represent.
(d) Layout should be orderly and graphics should be of simple
shape, such as rectangle, circle or oval.
(e) The number of colors used should be the minimum consistent
with the design and must provide a reference or relationship to
the enterprise or activity being advertised.
(f) Illumination should be appropriate to the character of the sign
and surrounding and shall bear a relationship to the operating
hours of the enterprise or activity being advertised.
Illumination of signs permitted only from one hour before
opening until one hour after closing.
(g) Groups of related signs shall express uniformity, create a
harmonious appearance, and provide a visual and aesthetic
coordination of the information presented to the public.
(h) Height and physical placement shall be consistent throughout
the master planned area.
C. Procedures:
(1) The sign master plan shall be approved by the Planning Board as
part of an application for site plan approval. The sign master plan
shall depict the placement, design, color coordination, visibility,
information messages and compatibility with the general design of
the development.
§ 190-109 FLAG § 190-109
164:609
§ 190-110. Nonconforming signs.
(2) The master sign plan shall include the following elements:
(a) Proposed sign locations.
(b) Materials.
(c) Type of illumination.
(d) Design of freestanding sign structures.
(e) Size.
(f) Quantity.
(g) Uniform standards for nonbusiness signage, including
directional and informational signs.
(3) All applications for sign permits on a lot or parcel subject to a
master sign plan shall comply with the master sign plan.
A. Applicability. This section applies to any nonconforming sign. A
"nonconforming sign" means a sign lawfully existing at the time of
adoption or subsequent amendment of this article.
B. Continuance. A nonconforming sign may continue, although such sign
does not conform to the provisions of this article. Portable signs with
permanent and/or changeable copy (including trucks and trailers) are
exempt from treatment under this section for continuance and shall,
therefore, require sign permits and comply with provisions of this
article. In the Historic District, any change to the size, location, design,
color, texture, lighting, materials, or outer appearance of a sign shall
cause that sign to lose any nonconforming status. [Amended
11-13-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-024]
C. Maintenance. A nonconforming sign must be maintained in good repair
for reasons of public safety and aesthetics. Ordinary maintenance and
minor repairs shall not include replacement of the structural framing
and supports, enlargement of the area of a sign face, or relocation of
the sign.
D. Alteration, relocation and replacement. Alterations, relocation, and/or
replacement of a legal nonconforming sign structure is permitted when
damage or deterioration does not exceed 50% of the appraised value of
the sign. Any sign which is structurally altered, relocated or replaced
may exceed the maximum allowable sign area (as prescribed in this
article) by no more than 1/2 the difference between that maximum
allowable sign area and the previously existing nonconforming sign
area. It is the intention that, over time, any nonconforming signs that
are altered will eventually be brought into compliance with the
provisions of this article currently in effect.
§ 190-109 NASHUA CODE § 190-110
164:610
E. Removal.
(1) A nonconforming sign shall be removed with 180 days if any of the
following conditions exist:
(a) If the damage of the sign structure exceeds 50% of the
appraised value.
(b) If the building to which the sign structure is accessory is
damaged or demolished to an extent exceeding 50% of the
building's appraised value and no plans have been submitted
for reconstruction or restoration of the building in accordance
with applicable codes and ordinances.
(c) If the sign has been abandoned for 180 days.
(2) Any sign that has been removed due to any of the above-listed
conditions shall not be replaced, and shall conform to this article. If
any portion of the sign structure is removed, then all parts and
components of the sign shall also be removed.
§ 190-110 FLAG § 190-110
164:611

ARTICLE XI
Wetlands
Purpose and findings: By and through enactment of this article, it has been
determined that the wetlands and buffers within the City of Nashua are
fragile natural resources and, as such, pursuant to the authority granted
under RSA 674:16, 674:17 and 674:20, and 674:21, and any other
applicable laws, the City hereby adopts the following regulations. The
purpose of this article is, in the interest of public health, safety and general
welfare, to:
• Ensure the protection of valuable wetland and buffer resources;
• Prevent the harmful filling, draining, sedimentation, or
alteration of wetlands and buffers;
• Prevent the destruction or significant degradation of wetlands
and buffers which provide flood and storm control by the
hydrologic absorption and storage capacity of the wetland and
buffer;
• Protect fish and wildlife habitats by providing breeding, nesting,
and feeding grounds for many forms of plant and animal life
including rare, threatened, or endangered species;
• Protect subsurface water resources and provide for the
recharging of groundwater supplies;
• Provide pollution treatment to maintain water quality;
• Prevent expenditures of municipal funds for the purpose of
providing and/or maintaining essential services and utilities
which might be required as a result of misuse or abuse of
wetlands and buffers;
• Provide for those compatible land uses in and adjacent to
wetlands and buffers or surface waters which serve to enhance,
preserve, and protect wetland and buffer areas as natural
resources.
§ 190-111. Generally.
A. Regulation of land uses. The regulation of land uses both within and
adjacent to wetlands, having been determined to be in the best interest
of the City, shall be done in a manner consistent with the review
procedures and performance standards identified below which reflect
the relative importance, value, and function of a particular wetland.
B. Definitions. A "wetland" is defined by RSA 482-A:2. Wetlands generally
include areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal conditions does support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. The location of a
wetland boundary in any particular case must be determined by a
certified wetlands scientist, licensed by the State of New Hampshire,
§ 190-111 FLAG § 190-111
164:613
§ 190-112. Wetlands buffer.
through an on-site inspection of all three characteristics of wetlands,
namely hydrology, hydric soils, and hydrophytic plants. Said inspections
shall conform to the standards established by the New Hampshire
Department of Environmental Services in Administrative Rules (Wt
301). These standards are derived from three sources: the Corps of
Engineers Wetlands Delineation Manual, Technical Report Y-87-I,
Environmental Laboratory, Department of the Army, (January, 1987),
Field Indicators for Identifying Hydric Soils in New England, Version
2, New England Interstate Water Pollution Control Commission, (July
1998) and subsequent updates, and Chapters Wt 100-800 of the NH
Code of Administrative Rules, April 21, 1997, as amended. The
applicable criteria and review process are established in this Article XI,
§§ 190-112 to 190-117 below.
C. Shoreland exemption. All areas granted a shoreland exemption
pursuant to RSA 483-B:12 from the Comprehensive Shoreland
Protection Act, RSA 483-B, shall not be designated as a prime wetland
pursuant to RSA 482-A:15 or Article XI, Wetlands. Any inconsistent
provisions of the Prime Wetland Map as prepared by the Nashua
Conservation Commission and adopted by Resolution R-90-84 are
hereby repealed. Proposed development in the exempt area requiring
Planning Board approval shall be referred to the Nashua Conservation
Commission for its review and comment prior to the Planning Board
decision. [Added 3-8-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-53]
A. Special exceptions shall be reviewed for any use, building, structure, or
development within the wetland areas or buffers defined in Table 112-1
below.
B. For purposes of Table 112-1, Column C, the buffer shall be measured
horizontally outward and perpendicular to the edge of the delineated
wetland.
§ 190-111 NASHUA CODE § 190-112
164:614
Table 112-1
Wetland Classifications and Buffers
(A)
Wetland
Category
(B)
Definitions
(C)
Buffer
(feet)
Primary
wetland
Areas designated as "prime wetlands" in
accordance with RSA 483-A:7 and areas
that have been documented as satisfying
the criteria for designation as prime
wetlands in accordance with RSA 483-A:7.
"Primary wetlands" are defined by
Resolution R-90-84, and generally depicted
on maps entitled "Prime Wetlands, Nashua,
New Hampshire" prepared for the Nashua
Conservation Commission. R-90-84 defines
primary wetlands as:
75
The Merrimack River and its wetlands
The Nashua River and its wetlands
Salmon Brook and its wetlands
Pennichuck Brook, Bowers Pond, Harris
Pond, Holts Pond, Pennichuck Pond,
Supply Pond and its wetlands
Lovewell's Pond and its wetlands
Horse Pond and its wetlands
Old Ridge Road wetland
Nashua Canal
Nahsua Cove
Critical
wetlands
Critical wetlands are the following water
bodies and watercourses and their
wetlands. Critical wetlands also include
any perennial streams that are tributaries
to prime wetlands.
40
Boire Brook Mill Pond
Coburn Pond Muddy Brook
Cold Brook Old Maid's Brook
Colerain Brook Round Pond
Hales Brook Spectacle Brook
Harris Brook Spit Brook
Hassells Brook Trout Brook
Lincoln Brook Sandy Pond
§ 190-112 FLAG § 190-112
164:615
§ 190-113. Administration.
The provisions of these wetlands regulations shall be administered and
enforced by the Administrative Officer. Where the provisions of these
regulations are superimposed over the zoning district, the more restrictive
regulations apply. The Administrative Officer shall institute, or cause to
be instituted, such actions necessary to ensure compliance with these
provisions, and/or the conditions placed upon any required special
exception permit or other approval. The Administrative Officer shall also
have the authority to cause whatever actions are necessary at a site or
location where a violation of this chapter has occurred to ensure that it is
returned to its original quality and function, and the same cause of action
shall be at no cost to the City and shall be assessed to the violator.
§ 190-114. Wetlands application.
Table 112-1
Wetland Classifications and Buffers
(A)
Wetland
Category
(B)
Definitions
(C)
Buffer
(feet)
Lyle Reed Brook
Other
wetlands
over 9,000
square feet
Any wetland other than a primary or a
critical wetland over 9,000 square feet in
area
40
Other
wetlands
from 3,000
to 9,000
square feet
and
intermittent
streams
Any wetland other than a primary or
critical wetland between 3,000 and 9,000
square feet in area. Intermittent streams
require a twenty-foot buffer from both
banks, measured from top of bank.
Intermittent streams are streams with a
defined channel but that may not flow the
entire year. Isolated man-made drainage
ditches are not included.
20
Vernal
pools
Twenty-foot minimum buffer. Buffer to be
determined from recommendations in a
protection plan submitted by a
professional biologist. The buffer will be
measured from the edge of the average
annual high-water mark.
20
A. Applicability. The section applies to any activity proposed within a
wetland or a wetland buffer, except for erosion control measures and
the regular use, maintenance or repair of existing buildings, structures,
or the improved portions of an existing developed site such as roads,
§ 190-112 NASHUA CODE § 190-114
164:616
parking lot or sidewalks. It includes any application for development
approval, including any building permit applications; land use permit
application; Zoning Board of Adjustment applications; Planning Board
applications; Board of Health application, or any other any other land
use requiring a permit or approval as required by and within the
Nashua City Code.
B. Initiation. As part of the initiation of any application listed in Subsection
A above, the Administrative Officer shall determine whether the land
area in which the proposed use, development or activity lies is within a
wetland or buffer area as described in § 190-112. If the Administrative
Officer determines that the proposed use, development or activity is
within a wetland or buffer area, the Administrative Officer shall notify
the applicant in writing that the Conservation Commission must review
a wetlands application. The Administrative Officer shall provide
notification within two weeks after submittal of a complete application.
If such notification is provided to the applicant, the applicant shall
submit a Wetlands Application Review Form with the information
required by § 190-284 of this chapter to the Administrative Officer.
Upon receipt of such an application and payment of applicable fees, the
Administrative Officer shall forward a copy of the application to the
Conservation Commission.
C. Wetlands data.
(1) Primary or critical wetlands. Applications submitted for uses
proposed within or adjacent to primary or critical wetlands shall be
accompanied by sufficiently detailed information and plans. Such
plans shall clearly show the extent of the wetland and buffer areas
located on or immediately adjacent to the subject property, and the
uses proposed to be located on the subject property. Primary
wetlands must be delineated as shown on the Nashua Prime
Wetlands Maps. In determining the sufficiency of the information to
be provided, the applicant shall consult with the Administrative
Officer regarding the nature of the proposed uses and their
relations and proximity to any potentially affected wetlands located
on or immediately adjacent to the subject property. The applicant
shall also clearly note on the plan any and all sources of wetland
delineation information used to determine the wetlands boundary
and shall provide documentation regarding the status of any other
permits required under local, state or federal laws.
(2) Other wetlands. For development or other regulated activity
proposed on sites abutting other wetlands as defined in Table
112-1, the applicant shall be required to denote the boundary and
methods used to locate it. The Administrative Officer may consult
with the applicant regarding the application regulations.
D. Submittal procedures.
§ 190-114 FLAG § 190-114
164:617
(1) The applicant shall review the Nashua Conservation Commission
Wetland Review Process as set forth in § 190-284.
(2) The applicant shall provide the Conservation Commission and
Administrative Officer with a completed wetlands application two
weeks in advance of the Conservation Commission meeting at
which the proposed project will be discussed.
(3) Upon receipt of the wetlands application by the Conservation
Commission and Administrative Officer, the applicant may be asked
to provide additional technical information.
(4) The applicant shall schedule a preliminary presentation with the
Commission. At that time, the Conservation Commission may
schedule a site walk. At the site walk, the Commission members
may request additional information for the applicant to present at
the next Conservation Commission meeting, such as a wetlands and
buffer delineation and protection plan. The members may provide
other informal guidance.
(5) The Conservation Commission may request a review of the project
by planning staff prior to providing their recommendation.
Sufficient time will be provided to allow the Conservation
Commission to provide a recommendation on the project to the
Administrative Officer.
E. Recommendation. The Conservation Commission shall consider the
application at a public meeting and shall prepare a written
recommendation as to whether the proposed development lies within
an area subject to § 190-112, and whether the proposed development
complies with this section. The recommendation shall be provided to
the Zoning Board of Adjustment. In rendering its decision, the Zoning
Board of Adjustment or Building Department Manager shall give due
consideration to the recommendations of the Conservation Commission
so as to avoid or minimize the detrimental impacts which the proposed
use may have on the wetland or wetland buffer. Any amendments to a
plan following a Conservation Commission decision but before the
Zoning Board of Adjustment review shall be reviewed again by the
Conservation Commission. Decisions rendered by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment are final but subject to appeal as set forth in Article XIX.
F. Approval criteria. See §§ 190-284 and § 190-115 below.
G. Amendments. The applicant may modify the wetlands application at any
time before the final recommendations of the Conservation Commission
are made.
H. Scope of approval. The wetlands application shall be deemed a part of
the underlying application for development approval and a condition of
any permit or land use decision subject to this section.
§ 190-114 NASHUA CODE § 190-114
164:618
§ 190-115. Wetlands standards.
I. Recording procedures. The wetlands application shall be recorded with
the underlying application for development approval.
J. Exceptions. A property owner who intends to undertake routine annual
maintenance that has been previously approved by the Conservation
Commission is not required to return to the Conservation Commission
or obtain a special exception.
A. Review for conformity.
(1) Uses proposed in any wetland or within the required buffer area
shall be reviewed by the Conservation Commission for conformity
with this section. A wetlands-related special exception is required
prior to and in addition to other relevant approvals.
(2) For uses or activities proposed outside of and adjacent to any
wetland or buffer area, the Administrative Officer shall review the
proposal for consistency with this section to demonstrate that what
is being proposed is reasonable or necessary, and can be
implemented without undue harm to the wetland or buffer area
being impacted. Upon receipt of a complete application, the
Administrative Officer shall determine whether a special exception
is required prior to other necessary reviews/approvals.
B. Wetland or buffer encroachments. For uses proposed to encroach into
wetlands or required buffer areas, including but not necessarily limited
to road and utility line crossings, water dependent uses (e.g., docks),
bridges or other road and passive recreational facilities or activities,
the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall find the following prior to
approval:
(1) That the use or activity proposed and its attendant impacts cannot
reasonably be avoided.
(2) That the least damaging route and methodology have been
selected, and that which is being proposed is the best practicable
alternative available.
(3) That reasonable and acceptable impact mitigation measures have
been incorporated where necessary and appropriate to minimize
wetland loss or degradation.71
(4) That the overall impact of encroaching into wetland or buffer areas
is necessary for the productive use of adjoining buildable land and,
as such nonencroachment, is outweighed by the benefits thereby
derived.
71.Note: The removal of invasive species may be an appropriate mitigation technique.
Invasive species are listed in the most recent State of New Hampshire Prohibited Invasive
Species List.
§ 190-114 FLAG § 190-115
164:619
(5) That no significant impact on the habitat of rare or endangered
species or exemplary communities, as listed by the State of New
Hampshire or federal government, will result.
(6) That the best available adequate erosion and sedimentation control
methods are incorporated.72
(7) That the proposed activity or use shall not significantly impair
wetland capacity to provide important wildlife and fishery
functions, including habitat, food, shelter, breeding, migratory and
over-wintering.
(8) That the project shall not impair the stability of a water body's
bank.
(9) That the wetland and buffer function of hydrologic absorption
capacity and storage shall not be impaired.
C. Uses adjacent to wetlands or buffer areas. Any use or activity proposed
within 100 feet of a wetland shall be reviewed by the Administrative
Officer for compliance with the following performance standards:
(1) That no significant impact on the habitat of rare or endangered
species or exemplary communities, as listed by the State of New
Hampshire or the Federal government, will result.
(2) That the filtration of stormwater runoff is adequately provided for
and controlled both during and after construction.
(3) That the topography and required regrading of the subject
property accounts for and adequately reflects the proximity of a
nearby wetland area.
(4) All landscaping requirements and maintenance regiments for a
project will ensure that fertilizer and chemical runoff shall not
enter the wetland.
(5) For any wetland area utilized for water runoff, the applicant shall
demonstrate that excess flow on wetlands shall not cause excessive
ponding and retention, thereby causing environmental damage to
existing flora or fauna.
(6) Where land is proposed to be subdivided, the applicant shall
demonstrate that there is adequate nonwetland area to contain all
proposed uses, structures, and utilities in accordance with these
regulations.
72.Note: Some appropriate erosion control standards are: Stormwater Management and
Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Urban and Developing Areas in New
Hampshire, New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services, Rockingham County
Conservation District, USDA Soil Conservation Service (August 1992), and Stormwater
Management for Construction Activities, Environmental Protection Agency (September
1992).
§ 190-115 NASHUA CODE § 190-115
164:620
§ 190-116. Wetland buffer monumentation.
§ 190-117. Trees unlawfully cut or damaged within a wetland buffer.
D. Prohibited uses. No use or activity shall be located within 125 feet or
sited in such a manner so as to pose a serious environmental hazard to a
nearby wetland. Uses prohibited include, but are not limited to, septic
systems, underground storage tanks not within approved enclosures,
junkyards or salvage yards, or the uncontained or uncontrolled
stockpiling of any material which may contaminate the wetland.
A. Applicability. The Nashua Conservation Commission may require
wetland buffers to be marked in order to prevent future encroachment.
This section applies to:
(1) Any development subject to an application for building permit,
subdivision or site plan approval;
(2) Any development approved before the effective date of this section
that is determined to be in violation of any wetland buffer required
that existed at the time the development was approved; or
(3) Any activity within a wetland or wetland buffer that was
undertaken without obtaining a required special exception.
B. Requirements. Wetlands (prime, critical, and other) shall be delineated
by a State of New Hampshire certified wetland scientist. The wetland
buffer shall be located and flagged by an engineer or surveyor. The
markers shall follow the contour of the buffer, generally not more than
50 feet apart. The engineer or surveyor shall take all necessary
precautions to ensure that said markers disturb no asbestos-fill sites.
Where the buffer intersects the property line, markers should be placed
on the property line. Markers should be placed along the buffer contour
at the point closest to any adjacent structure. The requirements for
placing markers are further described in the pamphlet "Requirements
for Construction and Installation of Conservation Easement, Wetland
Buffer, and Conservation Land Plaques."
A. Applicability. A tree that has been substantially damaged or unlawfully
removed from a wetland buffer that is protected by City ordinances
must be replaced with its equivalent replacement in trees. Replacement
trees shall be a type of species having shade potential and other
positive values at least equal to that of the tree that was removed and
shall be a minimum of six feet in height when planted.
B. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) — The measurement of a tree's
trunk diameter in inches at breast height 4 1/2 feet above ground level.
For trees with less than 4 1/2 feet of clear trunk, the diameter shall
be of the largest leader measured 4 1/2 feet above ground level. For
§ 190-115 FLAG § 190-117
164:621
multitrunk trees it shall be the sum of the diameter of the individual
trunks measured 4 1/2 feet above ground level. If the DBH is not
determinable because cut trees have been removed from the site, DBH
shall be determined from the "DBH in Relation to Stump Diameter"
tables found in the Forestry Handbook, 2nd ed., 1984, by the Society of
American Foresters, edited by Karl Wenger, published by John Wiley &
Sons Publishers.
EQUIVALENT REPLACEMENT — The replacement of a removed or
damaged tree to compensate for that tree's removal or its damage with
one tree the same diameter or a combination of smaller trees that will
equal that removed tree's DBH as defined herein.
TREE — Any living, self-supporting woody perennial plant at maturity,
which attains a trunk diameter of at least three inches or more when
measured at a point 4 1/2 feet above ground level and which normally
attains an overall height of at least 15 feet, usually with one main stem
or trunk and many branches.
TREE-FOR-TREE REPLACEMENT — Replacing a removed tree with
a tree or trees with a minimum of three inches in cumulative trunk
diameter at breast height. The replacement species shall be native
trees as defined in Trees and Shrubs in New Hampshire, A Guidebook
for Natural Beauty Projects, by Cooperative Extension Service,
University of New Hampshire, Durham, NH. Replacement species shall
not include those species that are not recommended in the guidebook.
C. Replacement trees. A removed tree must be replaced with its
equivalent replacement in trees.
D. Maintenance of replacement trees. The property owner must replace
trees within 30 days from receipt of a written notice of violation for
unlawful tree removal. The Administrative Officer may grant a time
extension for tree replacement if the thirty-day requirement would
mean that trees would be planted outside the appropriate planting
season (April-June and September-November).
E. Financial security for tree replacement. A financial security shall be
held by the City of Nashua for one year to ensure tree replacement in
the event that tree replacement results in the death of any replacement
trees. The security amount shall be assessed at three times the fair
market value of the required replacement tree(s).
F. Landscape (tree replacement) plan. Prior to installation of the required
replacement trees, a proposed landscape plan must be prepared by a
professional landscape architect and approved by the Administrative
Officer, who shall consult with the City's Conservation Commission.
Replacement trees shall be true to the botanical names and standards
of size, culture and quality for the highest grades and standards as
sponsored by the American Association of Nurserymen, Inc., in the
American Standard for Nursery Stock, latest edition.
§ 190-117 NASHUA CODE § 190-117
164:622
G. Exemptions. During emergency conditions caused by a hurricane or
other disaster, or to protect public safety, the Administrative Officer
may suspend provisions of this section.
H. Penalties. The removal of each tree in a buffer zone shall constitute a
separate zoning violation, punishable in a court of competent
jurisdiction per RSA Chapter 676.
§ 190-117 FLAG § 190-117
164:623

ARTICLE XII
Nonconformities
Purpose: This article implements RSA 674:19 (Applicability of Zoning
Ordinance) and other provisions of New Hampshire law that protect legal
nonconforming uses, legal dimensional nonconformities, and legal
nonconforming lots. These principles relate to zoning (Part 2).
§ 190-118. Applicability.
This article applies to nonconforming uses, structures and lots created by
the initial enactment of this section or by any subsequent amendment.
Unless otherwise specifically provided in this chapter and subject to the
restrictions and qualifications set forth in this Part, nonconforming
situations that were otherwise lawful on the effective date of this chapter
may be continued. Except as specifically provided in this article, no person
may engage in any activity that causes an increase in the extent of
nonconformity.
§ 190-119. Nonconforming uses.
A. Expansion.
(1) No nonconforming use shall be extended, expanded, or increased
except as specifically provided below.
(2) An existing nonconforming use may expand subject to the approval
of a special exception (§ 190-134).
(3) The volume, intensity, or frequency of a nonconforming use within
its original structure may increase without requiring a special
exception provided that all of the criteria set forth in Subsections
A(3)(a) through (c) below are met.
(a) The increase shall reflect the natural expansion and growth of
the existing use's trade.
(b) The increase does not substantially change the use's effect on
the neighborhood. Whether a proposed use substantially
changes the nature or purpose of the nonconforming use turns
on the facts and circumstances of the particular case. In
conducting this inquiry, the Administrative Officer shall
consider:
[1] The extent the use in question reflects the nature and
purpose of the prevailing nonconforming use;
[2] Whether the use at issue is merely a different manner of
utilizing the same use or constitutes a use different in
character, nature, and kind; and
[3] Whether the use will have a substantially different effect
on the neighborhood.
§ 190-118 FLAG § 190-119
164:625
(c) The increase shall occur only within the existing structure.
(4) A nonconforming use may expand outside of the existing structure
subject to the approval of a special exception as provided in
§ 190-134. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall approve the
special exception only if all of the criteria set forth in Subsection
A(4)(a) through (c) below are met:
(a) The nonconforming use shall not be substantially enlarged or
expanded. Whether a nonconforming use is substantially
enlarged or expanded the nature or purpose of the
nonconforming use turns on the facts and circumstances of the
particular case. In conducting this inquiry, the Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall consider:
[1] The extent the use in question reflects the nature and
purpose of the prevailing nonconforming use;
[2] Whether the use at issue is merely a different manner of
utilizing the same use or constitutes a use different in
character, nature, and kind; and
[3] Whether the use will have a substantially different effect
on the neighborhood.
(b) A nonconforming use shall only be altered where the expansion
is a natural activity, closely related to the manner in which a
piece of property is used at the time of the enactment of the
ordinance creating the nonconforming use; and
(c) Any expansion of a nonconforming use must be evaluated in
the context of the zone in which it is located.
B. Change in use.
(1) Any nonconforming use of a structure may be changed to another
nonconforming use, provided that the changed use is not a
substantially different use as determined by the Administrative
Officer. In determining whether the change is substantially
different, the Administrator shall consider:
(a) The extent to which the use in question reflects the nature and
purpose of the prevailing nonconforming use;
(b) Whether the use at issue is merely a different manner of
utilizing the same use or constitutes a use different in
character, nature, and kind; and
(c) Whether the use will have a substantially different effect on the
neighborhood.
(2) Any nonconforming use that has been changed to a permitted use
shall not again be changed to another nonconforming use.
§ 190-119 NASHUA CODE § 190-119
164:626
§ 190-120. Nonconforming structures.
§ 190-121. Nonconforming lots.
C. Restoration. Any nonconforming use damaged by fire or other natural
cause may be reestablished, provided that such work is completed
within two years of the damage and does not place the use in greater
nonconformity. If the use is not reestablished within two years, it shall
only be rebuilt in accordance with the use, dimensions and density
regulations of this chapter. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may grant
an exemption from this section for designated historical building by a
special exception (§ 190-134).
A. Generally. Any nonconforming structure or portion of the structure that
has come into conformity shall not again become nonconforming.
B. Alteration. Any nonconforming structure may be altered and a
conforming use extended throughout the altered portion, provided that
any resultant alteration shall not cause the structure to violate the
dimensional and density regulations of the district in which it is located.
C. Relocation. Any nonconforming structure shall not be moved to any
other location on the lot or any other lot unless every portion of such
structure, the use thereof, and the lot shall be conforming.
D. Restoration. Any nonconforming structure damaged by fire or other
natural cause may be rebuilt, provided that such work is completed
within two years of the damage and does not place the structure in
greater nonconformity. If the structure is not rebuilt within two years, it
shall only be rebuilt in accordance with the use, dimensions and density
regulations of this chapter. Historical buildings may be exempt by
special exception of the Board.
E. Unsafe structure. Any structure determined to be unsafe due to natural
deterioration or destruction by fire or other act of God may be restored
to a safe condition, provided that such work on any nonconforming
structure shall be completed within one year of the determination that
the structure is unsafe and it shall not place the structure in greater
nonconformity. Should this one-year time period be exceeded, the
structure shall be reconstructed only as a conforming structure and
used only for a conforming use.
A. Applicability. For purposes of this section, a "nonconforming lot" means
a lot legally existing on the effective date of this chapter that does not
comply with the dimensional regulations of the district in which the lot
is located, including but not limited to maximum density, minimum lot
area, minimum lot width, minimum frontage, minimum lot depth, or
open space percentage.
B. Generally.
§ 190-119 FLAG § 190-121
164:627
§ 190-122. Abandonment.
Whenever the use of a nonconforming structure, or portion thereof, has
been discontinued for a continuous period of at least one year in any
residential zoning district, or at least two years in any nonresidential zoning
district, such nonconforming use shall not thereafter be reestablished, and
the future use shall conform to this chapter. The Zoning Board of
Adjustment may, for good cause shown, extend the period of permitted
discontinuance up to three additional years, provided that application in
writing is made to the Board at least 60 days before the commencement
date of such three-year additional period.
§ 190-123. Parking.
(1) Any nonconforming lot that has come into conformity with this
chapter shall not again be changed to a nonconforming lot.
(2) Any nonconforming lot or open space on the lot (yard, setbacks,
courts or area), if already smaller than that required, shall not be
further reduced or decreased so as to be in greater nonconformity.
(3) If the owner of two or more contiguous undeveloped lots with
substandard dimensions wishes to build upon one of the lots, the
lots must be combined to comply with the dimensional
requirements of this chapter and Subsection B(2) shall not apply.
Where any nonconforming contiguous lot or lots were held in
common ownership on or after October 14, 1976, they shall not be
sold, consolidated or transferred to eliminate the common
ownership unless they are sold, consolidated or transferred so as to
create a conforming lot or lots where possible. This subsection does
not apply to a nonconforming lot if a majority of the developed lots
located on either side of the street where such lot is located and
within 500 feet of such lot are also nonconforming.
A. No use lawfully established prior to the effective date of this chapter is
required to provide and maintain or eliminate parking and loading
areas to meet the requirements of Article XXVIII of this chapter.
B. Off-street parking and loading spaces required by any previously
adopted requirement of the City Code shall be continued, and the
existing number of parking and loading spaces shall not be increased or
decreased so as to result in greater nonconformity.
C. A change in use or expansion of a nonconforming structure shall not
further reduce the number of off-street parking or loading spaces, if the
number of spaces is already equal to or less than the number required
to serve their intended use.
D. For any nonconforming use which is hereafter damaged or partially
destroyed, and which is lawfully reconstructed, reestablished or
repaired, off-street parking and loading facilities equivalent to those
§ 190-121 NASHUA CODE § 190-123
164:628
§ 190-124. Appeals.
An appeal relating to a nonconforming use, nonconforming lot, or
dimensional nonconformity shall be filed in accordance with § 190-136.
maintained at the time of such damage or partial destruction shall be
restored and continued in operation. However, in no case shall it be
necessary to restore or maintain parking or loading facilities in excess
of those required by this article for equivalent new uses.
E. In computing the number of required off-street parking spaces for a
change in use of a building or lot which is nonconforming because the
existing use not meeting the current off-street parking requirements,
required off-street parking spaces shall be the sum of the following:
(1) The spaces required for the proposed use under current parking
regulations;
(2) Less the number of parking spaces required for the prior
(nonconforming) use of building or lot under current regulations;
(3) Plus available off-street parking spaces for the prior use of building
or lot.
Comment: The purpose of this provision is to permit a reasonable
reuse of existing buildings, yet ensure that the new use will
provide the incremental parking spaces required for a more
intensive use of the building or lot.
§ 190-123 FLAG § 190-124
164:629

Part 3
Procedures
ARTICLE XIII
Application Review
Purpose: This Part 3 establishes uniform procedures for the processing of
applications for zoning approval, such as rezonings and conditional use
permits; site plans; subdivision plans; and other forms of development
approval. The intent of this article is to consolidate in one area all
procedures for securing development approval.
This Part 3 establishes the following:
• Common elements such as initiation of application process,
completeness review, decision, approval criteria, scope of
approval, and recording procedures.
• Categories of permits including legislative development
orders, quasi-judicial decisions, and ministerial permits.
• Requires building permits and certificate of occupancy
before construction or occupancy.
§ 190-125 FLAG § 190-124
164:631
Subsection Description
A. Applicability Types of situations that require the
permitting or land use action.
B. Initiation How an application is submitted, to whom,
and when.
C. Completeness review Period of time for certifying an application as
complete and ready for a decision.
D. Notice Procedures for providing notice of the
decision.
E. Decision Procedures for reaching a final decision on
the application.
F. Approval criteria Criteria for approving the application.
G. Amendments Procedures for amending the application.
H. Scope of approval What actions the decision authorizes,
including the duration of the permit or
decision.
I. Recording procedures How the action is memorialized.
§ 190-125. Completeness review and acceptance of applications.
Purpose: This section establishes procedures for certifying that an
application is ready to be processed. The intent is to require that
applications contain sufficient information for the agency to make an
informed decision on the application. At the same time, it contains time
limits for certifying completeness in order to avoid unnecessary delay in
the approval process.
A. Applicability. These procedures shall be used to review any application
for completeness unless a different procedure is established elsewhere
in this chapter.
B. Preapplication conference. Before any application is filed with the
Administrative Officer, the applicant may attend a preapplication
meeting with the Administrative Officer or his designee. The purpose of
the preapplication meeting is to discuss, in general, the procedures and
requirements for an application pursuant to this chapter.
C. Application materials.
(1) No application shall be deemed complete unless all of the
information required by Article XLIII for a particular application is
included, a completed checklist indicated that all such items have
been submitted, an engineer's stamp, and all filing fees required by
Article XLIII have been paid. An application that includes such
information shall be deemed complete.
(2) The Administrative Officer shall prepare and make available to
applicants application forms consistent with Article XLIII. Such
§ 190-124 NASHUA CODE § 190-125
164:632
applications shall be filed in advance of any public hearing or
public meeting required pursuant to this chapter or statute. The
Administrative Officer may establish a schedule for filing any
application requiring action by the Planning Board, the Board of
Aldermen, or other agencies assigned review authority by this
chapter. The filing schedule shall provide adequate time for notice
and/or publication consistent with the applicable state statutes and
this chapter. Completed applications shall be filed according to any
published schedule of the Administrative Officer.
D. Review procedures.
(1) Jurisdiction. Unless the provisions pertaining to a particular
application prescribe otherwise:
(a) The Administrative Officer shall review all applications for
approval of a development order or a permit for completeness.
(b) All decisions of the Administrative Officer or other
administrative official pertaining to completeness may be
appealed to:
[1] The Zoning Board of Adjustment, in the case of a zoning
application (Article XV) of this chapter or zoning
compliance review for building permits or certificates of
occupancy; or
[2] The Planning Board for all other applications.
(2) Time limits triggered by complete application. Whenever this Part 3
establishes a time period for processing of an application by the
City, such time period shall not commence until the Administrative
Officer has reviewed such application for completeness in order to
determine whether the application has been properly submitted
and the applicant has corrected all deficiencies in such application.
Review for completeness of application forms is solely for the
purpose of determining whether preliminary information required
for submission with the application is sufficient to allow further
processing, and does not constitute a decision as to whether
application complies with the provisions of this chapter.
(3) Review by Administrative Officer and appeal; default procedure.
(a) Unless a different procedure is described in this Part 3, this
subsection applies to the review of an application for
completeness.
(b) Not later than 10 days after the Administrative Officer has
received an application, the Administrative Officer shall
determine in writing whether the application is complete and
shall immediately transmit the determination to the applicant.
If the written determination is not made within this time
§ 190-125 FLAG § 190-125
164:633
period, the application shall be deemed complete for purposes
of this chapter. Upon receipt of any resubmittal of the
application, a new ten-day period shall begin, during which
period the Administrative Officer shall determine the
completeness of the application. If the application is
determined not to be complete, the Administrative Officer's
determination shall specify those parts of the application which
are incomplete and shall indicate the manner in which they can
be made complete, including a list and thorough description
of the specific information needed to complete the application.
The applicant shall submit materials to the Administrative
Officer in response to the list and description.
(c) If the application together with the submitted materials are
determined not to be complete, the applicant may appeal that
decision in writing. The agency hearing the appeal shall render
a final written determination on the appeal not later than the
next available meeting after receipt of the applicant's written
appeal. Notwithstanding a decision by the Administrative
Officer that the application and submitted materials are not
complete, if the final written determination on the appeal is not
made within that five-day period, the application with the
submitted materials shall be deemed complete for the
purposes of this chapter.
(d) An applicant and the Administrative Officer may mutually
agree to an extension of any time limit provided by this section.
(4) Time limits. If the reviewing agency fails to act within the time
period prescribed for completeness review, the application shall be
deemed complete.
(5) Limitation on further information requests.
(a) After the Administrative Officer accepts an application as
complete or following a determination or appeal that the
application is complete, the Administrative Officer or the
reviewing agency shall not subsequently request of an
applicant any new or additional information which was not
specified in Article XLIII. The Administrative Officer or the
reviewing agency may, in the course of processing the
application, request the applicant to clarify, amplify, correct, or
otherwise supplement the information required for the
application.
(b) This subsection shall not be construed as requiring an
applicant to submit with his or her initial application the
entirety of the information which the reviewing may require in
order to take final action on the application. Prior to accepting
an application, the Administrative Officer shall inform the
applicant of any information included in Article XLIII that is
§ 190-125 NASHUA CODE § 190-125
164:634
§ 190-126. Notice provisions.
Purpose and intent. This section provides the maximum possible notice
of actions relating to parcels of land in the City that may impact the
surrounding neighborhood by requiring the posting of signage on the
subject site giving notice of public hearings on such actions.
subsequently required from the applicant in order to complete
final action on the application.
E. Acceptance of application. Applications shall be accepted as follows:
(1) For administrative procedures (Article XIV of this Part 3), by
written notice if requested by the applicant; or
(2) For other actions, by placing the application on the agenda of the
agency considering the application.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all applications that require public
notice.
B. Generally. The notice requirements for each type of application for
development approval are prescribed in the individual subsections of
this article applicable thereto and/or the New Hampshire Revised
Statutes Annotated (RSA). The notice requirements for certain types of
public hearings are established in Table 126-1 below; provided,
however, that to the extent of any inconsistency between the provisions
of this section and any state statute, the state statute shall govern.
C. Contents of notice. [References: RSA 674:4 I(d)] Other than
applications for subdivision or site plan approval (See §§ 190-138 and
190-146), the notice shall state the time, date and place of hearing and
a description of the property subject to the application which includes,
at a minimum, the following:
(1) Date upon which the application will be formally submitted to the
agency.
(2) A general description of the proposal which is the subject of the
application.
(3) The name and address of the applicant.
(4) The location of the proposal. The street address or, if the street
address is unavailable, the legal description by metes and bounds.
(5) The current zoning classification.
(6) The category of permit requested.
D. Action to be consistent with notice. The reviewing body may take any
action on the application that is consistent with the notice given,
§ 190-125 FLAG § 190-126
164:635
including approval of the application, conditional approval (if
applicable) of the application, or denial of the application.
E. Minor amendments not requiring renotification. The provisions of this
Subsection E shall govern to the extent not inconsistent with provisions
relating to minor amendments for a specific category of permit or
development order. The reviewing body may allow minor amendments
to the application without resubmittal of the entire application. For
purposes of this subsection, "minor amendments" are amendments
that:
(1) Permit equal or fewer dwelling units, floor area or impervious
surface than that requested on the original application;
(2) Reduce the impact of the development; or
(3) Reduce the amount of land involved from that indicated in the
notices of the hearing.
Table 126-1
Notice [Amended 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-25]
(A) (B) (C) (D) (E)
Action PublicationPosting Mail Signage
Official Map
amendment (RSA
674:11)
10 days 10 days N/A N/A
Appeal of permit
denial pursuant to
Official Map (RSA
674:15)
10 days 10 days —
at least 2
public
places
N/A N/A
Building permit N/A N/A N/A N/A
Certificate of
occupancy
N/A N/A N/A N/A
Rezoning (RSA
675:7)
10 days 10 days —
at least 2
public
places
N/A 10 days
Conditional use
permit
10 days 10 days, at
least 2
public
places
N/A 10 days
Special exception
(RSA 676:7)
5 days N/A 5 days 5 days
Zoning variances
or appeals (RSA
676:7)
10 days N/A 5 days 5 days
§ 190-126 NASHUA CODE § 190-126
164:636
Table 126-1
Notice [Amended 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-25]
(A) (B) (C) (D) (E)
Action PublicationPosting Mail Signage
Equitable waiver
(RSA 674:33-a)
5 days N/A 5 days N/A
Historic District
Commission
5 days 10 days 14 days 10 days
Subdivision plan N/A N/A 10 days 10 days
Conceptual plan
(RSA 674:4.II(a))
N/A N/A N/A N/A
Design review
(RSA 674:4.I(d))
N/A 10 days 10 days 10 days
Conditional
approval of a plan
N/A N/A N/A N/A
Construction plans N/A N/A N/A N/A
Plan revocation
(RSA 674:11)
10 days 10 days N/A N/A
Conceptual plan N/A N/A N/A N/A
Minor site plan N/A N/A N/A N/A
Site plan N/A 10 days 10 days 10 days
Communications
towers, regional
notification (RSA
12-K:7)
7-21 days N/A 7-21 days N/A
Developments of
regional impact
(RSA 36:57)
N/A N/A 14 days N/A
Rules of Interpretation for Table 126-1:
In Table 126-1, the type of development order or permit is set
forth in Column (A), and the types of notice are prescribed in
Columns (B) through (E). Nothing in this section prohibits the City
from posting additional notice for such actions, such as posting a
sign or a notice on the City's Internet Web site. Unless otherwise
provided, the time periods referenced above mean the number
of days (or other time period) preceding a public hearing on
the matter. Notice shall conform to RSA 675:7 unless otherwise
provided.
Column (B): "Publication" means publication of notice of such
hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the City.
§ 190-126 FLAG § 190-126
164:637
§ 190-127. Revocation of permit or approval.
See RSA 676: 4-a.
Column (C): "Posting" means posting a notice at the City hall, or in
whatever place other notices required by law in connection with
municipal affairs are posted or customarily displayed.
Column (D): "Mail" means notice to abutters, the applicant,
holders of conservation, preservation, or agricultural preservation
restrictions, and every engineer, architect, land surveyor, or soil
scientist whose professional seal appears on any plan submitted to
the Board by certified mail of the date upon which the application
will be formally submitted to the Board (RSA 676:4(d)). The
number of days refers to the number of days prior to submission
in the case of plans [RSA 676:4(d)], and before the date fixed for
the hearing of the appeal (RSA 676:7). This definition does not
apply to: (1) communications towers, which is governed by RSA
12-K:7 (See § 190-38B), or (2) developments of regional impact,
which are governed by RSA 36:57. For developments of regional
impact, notice of the decision must be provided to the Regional
Planning Commission and affected municipalities within 72 hours
of a decision (RSA 36:57).
Column (E): "Signage" is a sign erected by the applicant along
each principal frontage of the lot, as determined by the
Administrative Officer, providing notice of the impending action.
Such sign shall be of a design, size and color approved by the
Administrative Officer in order to maximize visibility of the sign
and to call attention to its purpose. At a minimum, the sign shall
include the title, a brief description of the requested action, the
time, date, and place of public hearing or hearings on such
actions, and instructions on contacting the Administrative Officer
for further information on the action. Any sign required by this
section shall be erected within 48 hours of the notification of the
applicant of the requirement for posting, and at least 10 days prior
to the hearing on such matter, and shall be kept in good repair (as
determined by the Administrative Officer) by the applicant until
the date and time of the last hearing notified by the sign. The lack
of proper signage shall not be deemed to be insufficient notice
of hearing unless there is a determination by the Administrative
Officer that the applicant has not made a good faith effort to keep
the required signs posted and in good repair.
§ 190-126 NASHUA CODE § 190-127
164:638
ARTICLE XIV
Administrative Procedures
§ 190-128. Land use permit.
A. Applicability. It shall be unlawful for any owner or person to erect,
construct, reconstruct, convert or alter a structure or change the use,
increase the intensity of use, or extend or displace the use of any
building, sign, other structure or lot without applying for on forms
supplied by the Administrative Officer, and receiving from him a permit
therefor. When any change is made in a plot plan as originally
submitted, an application for a revised permit shall be submitted.
B. Initiation. A land use permit shall be initiated by filing an application
with the Administrative Officer. For purposes of administration, such
permit and application procedure involving a structure may be made at
the same time and combined with the permit required under the
building code. In addition to plans and drawings required for
submission under regulations of the Building Code,73 all applications for
permits shall be accompanied by two copies of a plan. One copy of such
plan shall be returned to the applicant if approved by the
Administrative Officer. Such plan shall be drawn to scale showing the
actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the exact size and location
on the lot of the building and accessory buildings to be erected, location
and design of off-street parking and loading spaces, signs and such
other information as may be necessary to determine and provide for the
enforcement of this Part 3. The information required on the plan may be
combined with the information required for any site plan required by
this Part 3. A record of such applications and plans shall be kept in the
office of the Administrative Officer.
C. Decision. The Administrative Officer shall approve, approve with
conditions, or deny the application within 30 days. An appeal may be
filed with the Zoning Board of Adjustment pursuant to § 190-136.
D. Approval criteria. The application shall be approved if it complies with
the applicable provisions of this chapter. The application shall be
denied if it does not conform to the applicable provisions of this chapter.
E. Amendments. An amendment to a land use permit shall be processed in
the same manner as a new application.
F. Scope of approval. Authorization for a permit shall be null and void one
year from date of approval of a land use permit if not used or extended.
G. Recording procedures. The applicant shall maintain custody of the
permit. A copy of the application may be retained in the office of the
Administrative Officer.
73.Editor's Note: See Ch. 105, Building Construction.
§ 190-128 FLAG § 190-129
164:639
§ 190-129. Building permit.
See Chapter 105, Building Construction, of the Code of the City of Nashua.
§ 190-130. Certificate of use and occupancy.
§ 190-131. Minor site plan amendments.
A. New development.
(1) Applicability. It shall be unlawful to use or occupy any structure or
lot for which a permit is required herein without the owner
applying for and receiving from the Administrative Officer a
certificate of use and occupancy. Such certificate may be combined
with the one that may be issued under the Building Code.
(2) Initiation. A certificate of occupancy, either for the whole or a part
of a new building or for alteration of an existing building, shall be
applied for coincidently with the application for a building permit.
(3) Decision. The Administrative Officer shall take action within 30
days after written notification that the erection or alteration of such
building or part has been completed in conformity with the
provisions of this Part 3. Failure of the Administrative Officer to act
within 30 days shall be considered approval.
B. Change of use.
(1) Applicability. A certificate of occupancy is required for the use or
occupancy of vacant land, or for a change in the use of land, or for a
change in the use of an existing building.
(2) Initiation. The certificate of occupancy shall be applied for and
issued before any such land shall be occupied or used, or such land
or building changed in use.
(3) Decision. The Administrative Officer shall take action with 30
working days after application has been made. Failure of the
Administrative Officer to act within 30 working days shall be
considered approval.
C. Recording. A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file
in the office of the Administrative Officer, and a copy shall be furnished
on request to any person having proprietary or tenancy interest in the
building or land affected.
A. Applicability. No changes may be made to any approved site plan or
preexisting as-built plan prior to the Site Plan Ordinance74 adoption
except upon application as follows:
74.Editor's Note: See Art. XVII of this chapter.
§ 190-129 NASHUA CODE § 190-131
164:640
(1) Major amendments. If it is determined by the Planning Director
that the proposed change is not a minor amendment as defined
below, the applicant's amendment shall follow the procedures for
site plans prescribed in § 190-146.
(2) Minor amendments. The Planning Department shall review minor
amendments for overall consistency with the approved site plan or
as-built site for all zoning districts including overlay districts and
for compliance with the standards below. For the purposes of this
section, a minor amendment by definition is an administrative
decision and does not constitute a site plan. The Planning Director
or his authorized designee shall approve, conditionally approve,
disapprove, or refer the request to the Planning Board. The
applicant may appeal the Planning Director's decision to the
Planning Board. The procedures and standards for minor
amendments are as follows:
(a) Minor changes in the color, exterior appearance, lot coverage,
location, siting and height of buildings and structures or
divisional walls may be authorized by the Planning Director if
required for reasons or other circumstances not foreseen at
the time the site plan was approved. No change authorized by
this subsection may increase the dimensions of any building or
structure by more 10% in the aggregate, or permit an
accessory structure whose size is greater than 10% of the area
of the principal building or structure. Changes in landscaping
such as plant materials, minor alterations in the location of
plantings, changes in plant quantities or sizes, changes to the
location of internal sidewalks, or changes in location or
number of parking spaces may be authorized by the Planning
Director.
(b) The Planning Director may require a revised site plan or asbuilt
plan delineating all approved changes.
(c) Temporary structures may be approved by the Planning
Director upon the issuance of a temporary certificate of use for
a period not to exceed 24 months. The structures must be
promptly removed at the conclusion of the approval period,
and the site returned to the approved final development plan
requirements. In no event shall any property owner acquire a
vested right to maintain such temporary structure beyond the
twenty-four-month period provided in this section. This
requirement is in addition to those of the Building Code. The
Planning Director may approve an extension for an additional
24 months.
(d) Changes in uses depicted and permitted on the approved site
plan or approved as-built plan may be approved by the
Planning Director provided it is a permitted use within the
§ 190-131 FLAG § 190-131
164:641
zoning district, or where a special a special exception or use
variance is granted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
B. Appeals. The applicant may appeal the Planning Director's decision to
the Planning Board.
§ 190-131 NASHUA CODE § 190-131
164:642
ARTICLE XV
Zoning Procedures
§ 190-132. Zoning amendments.
The purpose of this section is to provide uniform procedures for the
amendment of this chapter or the Official Zoning Map by the Board of
Aldermen whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or
good zoning practice so requires.
§ 190-133. Conditional use permits.
Purpose: Conditional use permits are authorized by RSA 674:21 II as
an innovative land use control. Conditional use permits are like special
exceptions in that they require discretionary public hearings for
designated uses. Unlike special exceptions, the decision maker is the
Planning Board rather than the ZBA.
A. Applicability. This section applies to an action by the Board of Aldermen
to amend, supplement or change the regulations, restrictions or district
boundaries herein established or subsequently established. Requests
for rezoning shall follow the submittal requirements set out in Article
XLIII. This shall be done only after reference to the Planning Board and
to the aldermanic Planning Committee.
B. Decision. The aldermanic Planning Committee shall conduct a public
hearing for the Board of Aldermen and shall submit its report and
recommendation to the Board of Aldermen. A supermajority vote is
required where a protest petition is filed pursuant to RSA 675:5.
C. Approval guidelines. Rezonings or text amendments are subject to the
following guidelines listed in Subsections C(1) and (2) under New
Hampshire law. The purpose of this section is not to limit or restrict the
items required for a valid rezoning under New Hampshire law, but
rather to provide guidance to applicants, the Planning Board and the
Board of Aldermen in considering a proposed rezoning or text
amendment.
(1) Consistency. The Planning Board and Board of Aldermen shall
consider whether the proposed zoning amendment is consistent
with the Master Plan.
(2) Statutory criteria. After adoption of the zoning amendments, the
zoning ordinances shall be designed pursuant to RSA 674:17.
A. Applicability. This section applies to any building, structure or use
designated as a conditional use in the Use Matrix (§ 190-15, Table 15-1),
or to any other building, structure or use designated as a conditional
use by this chapter. No such building, structure or use shall be
established unless and until a conditional use permit is approved as
provided in this section.
§ 190-132 FLAG § 190-133
164:643
B. Initiation. An application for a conditional use permit shall be filed with
the Administrative Officer. The application may be combined with, and
processed concurrently with, an application for site plan, or subdivision
review.
C. Completeness review. The Administrative Officer shall conduct a
completeness review as set forth in § 190-125 of this chapter. The
appellate agency for purposes of completeness review (See § 190-125C
of this chapter.) shall be the Planning Board. Upon certification by the
Administrative Officer that the application is complete and payment of
required fees, the application shall be deemed complete and referred to
the Planning Board for its review and decision.
D. Notice. See § 190-126.
E. Decision. The Planning Board shall render a decision approving,
approving with conditions or denying the conditional use permit after
conducting a public hearing. The hearing may be conducted
concurrently with the site plan review hearing.
F. Approval criteria. Following a public hearing on the proposed use, the
Planning Board shall issue a conditional use permit, if it finds, based on
the information and testimony submitted with respect to the
application, that:
(1) The building, structure or use is specifically authorized by the Use
Matrix, § 190-15, Table 15-1, as a conditional use;
(2) If completed, the development in its proposed location will comply
with all requirements of this article, and with specific conditions or
standards established in this chapter for the particular building,
structure or use;
(3) The building, structure or use will not materially endanger the
public health or safety;
(4) The building, structure or use will not substantially devalue
abutting property;
(5) The building, structure or use will be compatible with the
neighborhood and with adjoining or abutting uses in the area in
which it is to be located;
(6) The building, structure or use will not have a substantial adverse
impact on highway or pedestrian safety;
(7) The building, structure or use will not have a substantial adverse
impact on the natural and environmental resources of the City; and
(8) Adequate public utilities and community facilities are available to
the property to ensure that the proposed use will not necessitate
excessive public expenditures in providing public services.
§ 190-133 NASHUA CODE § 190-133
164:644
§ 190-134. Special exceptions.
Purpose: Special exceptions are authorized by RSA 674:33.IV. Special
exceptions are like conditional uses in that they require discretionary
public hearings for designated uses. Unlike conditional uses, the decision
maker is the Zoning Board of Adjustment rather than the Planning Board.
(9) That the use of on-street parking in the downtown zoning districts
is consistent or compatible with the existing use of on street
parking in the area. [Added 10-23-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-120]
G. Amendments. An amendment to a conditional use permit may be
approved in the same manner as an application for a new conditional
use permit.
H. Scope of approval. A conditional use permit shall authorize the
applicant to apply for approval of a site plan or subdivision plan, if
required, and a building permit and certificate of use and occupancy.
Conditions to a conditional use permit shall not be reduced or
eliminated unless a new notice is provided prior to the final decision.
I. Recording procedures. All conditional use permits shall be filed with
the Administrative Officer.
A. Applicability. This section applies to any building, structure, use or
activity designated as a special exception by this chapter. The Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall have power to hear and decide on
applications for special exceptions to the terms of this Part 3 upon
which the Board is required to pass. No such building, structure, use, or
activity shall be established unless and until a special exception is
approved as provided in this section.
B. Initiation. An application for a special exception shall be filed with the
Administrative Officer.
C. Completeness review. The Administrative Officer shall conduct a
completeness review as set forth in § 190-125 of this chapter. Upon
certification by the Administrative Officer that the application is
complete and payment of required fees, the application shall be deemed
complete and referred to the Zoning Board of Adjustment for its review
and decision.
D. Notice. See § 190-126.
E. Decision.
(1) The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall render a decision approving,
approving with conditions or denying the special exception after
conducting a public hearing.
(2) The Zoning Board of Adjustment may approve certain items
designated as "special exception for minor encroachments" in
§ 190-16E(3) on a consent agenda. The hearing for each item
§ 190-133 FLAG § 190-134
164:645
placed on the consent agenda, and not removed prior to the
hearing, shall be conducted concurrently. The application for
approval of a special exception, any staff report, notices, and any
comments submitted relating to the application shall become part
of the record for any consent agenda item.
F. Approval criteria.
(1) In applying for a special exception, the applicant need not
demonstrate hardship, since the basis for the action is of general
benefit to the City as a whole. In granting a special exception, the
Zoning Board of Adjustment, with due regard to the nature and
condition of all adjacent structures and uses, and the district within
which the same is located, shall find all of the following general
conditions to be fulfilled:
(a) The requested use is listed as a special exception in the Use
Matrix (§ 190-15, Table 15-1) or is permitted as a special
exception by another provision of this chapter;
(b) The requested use will not create undue traffic congestion or
unduly impair pedestrian safety;
(c) The requested use will not overload any public water, drainage
or sewer system, or any other municipal system to such an
extent that the requested use or any developed use in the
immediate area or in any other area of the City will be unduly
subjected to hazards affecting health, safety or the general
welfare;
(d) Any special regulations for the use set forth in this article are
fulfilled; and
(e) The requested use will not impair the integrity or be out of
character with the district or immediate neighborhood in
which it is located, nor be detrimental to the health, morals, or
welfare of the residents of the City.
(2) Upon finding all of the above conditions to be fulfilled, the Zoning
Board of Adjustment must grant the special exception. In approving
or denying special exceptions, the Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall state all its reasons for approval or denial in writing to the
applicant, a copy of which will be kept on file as a matter of public
record in the Administrative Officer's office.
G. Amendments. An amendment to a special exception may be approved in
the same manner as an application for a new special exception.
H. Scope of approval. A special exception shall authorize the applicant to
apply for approval of a site plan or subdivision plan, if required, and a
building permit and certificate of use and occupancy. The time frame for
the validity of any special exception shall be the minimum required by
§ 190-134 NASHUA CODE § 190-134
164:646
§ 190-135. Concurrent zoning amendment and site plan approval.
Purpose: The purpose of this section is to permit innovative land use
controls, as authorized by RSA 674:21, in the timing of the Planning Board
recommendation on a rezoning request and providing for the concurrent,
conditional approval or disapproval of one or more site plans. A subdivision
request shall accompany a site plan in any case in which a subdivision
would be present. It is the intent of this section to provide for a streamlined
review process that ensures quality, attractive, and compatible
development in accordance with the general purposes of the City's Zoning
Ordinance and the Master Plan. This section is intended to serve as an
alternative procedure for seeking rezoning and is not intended to
supersede § 190-132. This section implements the following Master Plan
policies:
• Consider an amendment to the Nashua City Code to allow
incentive zoning in targeted areas (i.e., the City would allow
residential density in excess of that permitted in the existing
or underlying zoning, and require that a certain percentage of
additional units be affordable).
• Consider a streamlined and creative review and approval
process for industrial uses.
NH RSA 674:33 or any successor statute. Any time to appeal a
determination as to completeness of an application does not count
toward the validity period. [Amended 2-10-2015 by Ord. No.
O-14-037]
I. Recording procedures. All special exceptions shall be filed with the
Administrative Officer.
A. Applicability. This procedure may be applied to any of the following:
(1) Any rezoning that meets the criteria for inclusionary zoning
(§ 190-48); or
(2) Any rezoning to a PI or GI Zoning District in which the Planning
Board determines that the proposed development will generate
significant increases in jobs or employment, establish a base
industry, or generate significant increases in tax revenues without
requiring significant public expenditures for services and
infrastructure; or
(3) Any other situation in which this chapter expressly authorizes a
concurrent rezoning and site plan approval pursuant to this
section. [Examples: Flexible Use District]
B. Initiation. After or contemporaneously with the introduction to the
Board of Aldermen of legislation amending the Zoning Ordinance in
order to accommodate the contemporaneous review, the applicant shall
submit, at a minimum, two separate and completed applications to the
Administrative Officer containing the following information, documents
§ 190-134 FLAG § 190-135
164:647
§ 190-136. Appeals from administrative decision.75
and maps. An incomplete application or unsatisfactory study or report,
shall be cause for not placing the item on the Planning Board agenda.
Prior to submitting an application, the applicant is required to have a
preapplication meeting with the Administrative Officer or designee.
C. Completeness review. See § 190-125.
D. Notice. Abutter notice and public posting of the Planning Board
meeting for requests under this section shall comply with all notice
requirements for both a rezoning action and for a site plan approval,
and for any subdivision request if necessary. See § 190-126 for notice
requirements.
E. Decision.
(1) Meeting. The Planning Board may receive testimony or evidence on
both the rezoning and the site plan at the same time, provided that
the decision/recommendation on each shall be separate and shall
be made relative to the criteria pertinent to each type of review.
(2) Enforcement of conditions. In order to enforce the conditions
relating to the rezoning and site plan approval, the Administrative
Officer and legal department will prepare, or cause the developer
to prepare, to their satisfaction a development agreement
containing at a minimum any Planning Board conditions of
approval of the site plan. The agreement shall be signed by the
applicant/owner of property prior to scheduling final Board of
Aldermen action on the rezoning. The City may require proof of
ownership interests or encumbrances prior to the execution of the
agreement. Any site plan/subdivision approval shall be contingent
upon the approval of the development agreement and rezoning.
F. Approval criteria, amendments, scope of approval and recording
procedures. For procedures applicable to the rezoning, see § 190-146
for procedures applicable to the site plan.
A. Applicability. This section applies to any appeal of a decision of the
Administrative Officer filed pursuant to RSA 676:5.
B. Initiation. A notice of appeal shall be filed with the Zoning Board of
Adjustment within the time period prescribed by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment pursuant to RSA § 676:5.I. The appeal shall contain a
written statement of the reasons for which the appellant claims the final
decision is erroneous. The appeal shall be accompanied by a fee
established by the Board of Aldermen in Article XLIII.
75.Editor's Note: The purpose paragraph of this section was deleted 2-26-2008 by Ord. No.
O-08-07.
§ 190-135 NASHUA CODE § 190-136
164:648
§ 190-137. Variances from zoning.76
C. Completeness review. In order to avoid a conflict of interest, no
completeness review shall be conducted by the Administrative Officer.
The Administrative Officer shall forthwith transmit to the Zoning Board
of Adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon which the
action appealed from was taken.
D. Notice. See § 190-126.
E. Decision.
(1) The ZBA shall hear and decide de novo and review on appeal any
order, requirement, decision or determination made by the
Administrative Officer in the enforcement or application of this
article.
(2) Every rule or regulation, every amendment or repeal thereof and
every order, requirement, decision or determination of the Board
shall immediately be filed in the office of the Administrative Officer
and become a public record. The Board shall file with the City Clerk
for distribution as necessary a complete record of the minutes of
their meetings and public hearings. Included in the minutes shall
be the reasons for the granting or denying of a request for a
variance, together with the vote of each member on each item on
the agenda. The Board shall also forward to the City Clerk a copy of
their agendas prior to their meetings.
(3) Pursuant to RSA 674:33, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may
reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the order,
requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may
make such order or decision as ought to be made and, to that end,
shall have all the powers of the administrative official from whom
the appeal is taken.
(4) The concurring vote of three members of the Board shall be
necessary to reverse or modify any order, requirement, decision or
determination of the administrative official or to decide in favor of
the applicant on any matter on which it is required to pass.
F. Scope of approval. The granting of an appeal by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall not exempt the applicant from any provision of this
article not specifically ruled upon by the Board or specifically set forth
as accepted in this particular case by a provision of this article.
G. Recording procedures. A record of the appeal including the notice of
appeal and the decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be
maintained by the Administrative Officer.
76.Editor's Note: The purpose paragraph of this section was deleted 2-26-2008 by Ord. No.
O-08-07.
§ 190-136 FLAG § 190-137
164:649
A. Applicability. This section applies to any request for a variance for a
particular use or parcel of land or to an existing building thereon from
the terms of Part 2.
B. Initiation. A notice of appeal requesting a variance shall be filed with
the Zoning Board of Adjustment within the time period prescribed by
the Zoning Board of Adjustment pursuant to RSA 676:5. The appeal
shall contain a written statement of the reasons for which the appellant
claims the final decision is erroneous. The appeal shall be accompanied
by a fee established by the Board of Aldermen in Article XLIII.
C. Completeness review. See § 190-125.
D. Notice. See § 190-126.
E. Decision. The ZBA may on appeal authorize a variance for a particular
use or parcel of land or to an existing building thereon from the terms
of this article where, owing to the conditions especially affecting such
parcel or such building, but not affecting generally the district in which
it is located, a literal enforcement of this Part 3 would result in
unnecessary hardship to the appellant, and where desirable relief may
be granted without substantial detriment to the public interest and
without nullifying or substantially derogating from the intent or
purpose of this article. In granting variances, the Board, if it deems it
proper to the carrying out of the intent and purpose of this article, may
impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as
will, in its judgment, better fulfill the purpose of this article. In denying
variances the Board shall state fully its reasons for denial in writing to
the applicant.
F. Approval criteria.
(1) Pursuant to RSA 674:33, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may
authorize a variance from the terms of Part 2 if:
(a) The variance will not be contrary to the public interest;
(b) Special conditions exist such that literal enforcement of the
ordinance results in unnecessary hardship;
(c) The variance is consistent with the spirit of the ordinance;
(d) Substantial justice is done;
(e) The variance does not diminish the value of surrounding
properties.
Comment: See Boccia v. City of Portsmouth, 151 NH 85
(2004), Simplex Technologies v. Town of Newington, 145 N.H.
727, 731-32, 766 A. 2d 713 (2001).
(2) Pursuant to RSA 674:33, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may
grant a variance from the terms of a Zoning Ordinance without
§ 190-137 NASHUA CODE § 190-137
164:650
finding a hardship arising from the condition of a premises subject
to the ordinance, when reasonable accommodations are necessary
to allow a person or persons with a recognized physical disability
to reside in or regularly use the premises, provided that:
(a) Any variance granted under this paragraph shall be in
harmony with the general purpose and intent of the Zoning
Ordinance.
(b) In granting any variance pursuant to this subsection, the
Zoning Board of Adjustment may provide, in a finding included
in the variance, that the variance shall survive only so long as
the particular person has a continuing need to use the
premises.
G. Amendments. It is unlawful for any owner or person to reconstruct,
convert or alter a structure or change the use, increase the intensity of
use, or extend or displace the use of any building, other structure or lot,
or change any required limitations or special conditions imposed by the
Board in authorizing a variance without appealing to the Board as a
new case over which the Board shall have complete administrative
power to deny, approve or modify.
H. Scope of approval. The granting of an appeal by the Board shall not
exempt the applicant from any provision of this chapter not specifically
ruled upon by the Board or specifically set forth as accepted in this
particular case by a provision of this chapter. The time frame for the
validity of any variance shall be the minimum required by NH RSA
674:33 or any successor statute. Any time required to appeal a
determination as to completeness of that application does not count
toward the validity period. [Amended 2-13-2007 by Ord. No.
0-06-71; 2-10-2015 by Ord. No. O-14-037]
I. Recording procedures. A record of the appeal including the notice of
appeal and the decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be
maintained by the Administrative Officer.
§ 190-137 FLAG § 190-137
164:651

ARTICLE XVI
Subdivision Procedures
Purpose: As required by RSA 674:36, the purpose of establishing this
article is to:
• Provide against such scattered or premature subdivision of land
as would involve danger or injury to health, safety, or prosperity
by reason of the lack of water supply, drainage, transportation,
schools, fire protection, or other public services, or necessitate
the excessive expenditure of public funds for the supply of such
services;
• Provide for the harmonious development of the municipality and
its environs;
• Require the proper arrangement and coordination of streets
within subdivisions in relation to other existing or planned
streets or with features of the Official Map of the City;
• Provide for open spaces of adequate proportions;
• Require suitably located streets of sufficient width to
accommodate existing and prospective traffic and to afford
adequate light, air, and access for fire-fighting apparatus and
equipment to buildings, and be coordinated so as to compose a
convenient system;
• Require, in proper cases, that plans showing new streets or
narrowing or widening of such streets submitted to the Planning
Board for approval shall show a park or parks suitably located
for playground or other recreational purposes;
• Require that proposed parks shall be of reasonable size for
neighborhood playgrounds or other recreational uses;
• Require that the land indicated on plans submitted to the
Planning Board shall be of such character that it can be used for
building purposes without danger to health;
• Prescribe minimum areas of lots so as to assure conformance
with local zoning ordinances and to assure such additional areas
as may be needed for each lot for on-site sanitary facilities; and
• Include provisions which will tend to create conditions favorable
to health, safety, convenience, or prosperity; and
• Encourage the installation and use of solar, wind, or other
renewable energy systems and protect access to energy sources
by the regulation of orientation of streets, lots, and buildings;
establishment of maximum building height, minimum setback
requirements, and limitations on type, height, and placement
of vegetation; and encouragement of the use of solar skyspace
easements under RSA 477.
§ 190-138 FLAG § 190-137
164:653
§ 190-138. General requirements.
Purpose: This section establishes general regulations applicable to all
subdivisions, administrative provisions, and procedures for classifying plan
applications as major or minor.
A. Applicability. This article applies to any subdivision, as defined in
§ 190-264, within the corporate limits of the City of Nashua. No person
shall sell or transfer ownership of any lot or parcel of land by reference
to a plan of a subdivision before such plan has been duly recorded with
the Register of Deeds, unless such subdivision was created prior to the
adoption of this chapter and any other subdivision ordinance applicable
thereto. No building permit or certificate of use and occupancy shall be
issued for any parcel or plan of land which was created by subdivision
after the effective date of this chapter, and no construction of any public
or private improvements shall be commenced, except in conformity
with the requirements of this chapter. A final subdivision plan shall be
approved by the Administrative Officer before the subdivision of a
parcel may be recorded.
(1) When a subdivision plan is required. No person shall subdivide land
without making and recording a plan and complying fully with the
provisions of this article and all other state and local laws and
regulations applying to subdivisions.
(2) Recordation of unapproved plan prohibited. No subdivision plan
shall be recorded with the registry of deeds until such plan shall
have been approved, and such approval evidenced thereon, in
accordance with the regulations set forth in this Part 3.
B. Initiation.
(1) Article XLIII specifies what constitutes a completed application
sufficient to invoke jurisdiction to obtain plan approval. A
completed application means that sufficient information is included
or submitted to allow the Board to proceed with consideration and
to make an informed decision.
(2) A completed application sufficient to invoke jurisdiction of the
Planning Board shall be submitted to and accepted by the Board
only at a public meeting of the Planning Board, with notice as
provided in RSA 676:4I(d). (See § 190-126.)
(3) The applicant shall file the application with the Board or its agent
at least 15 days prior to the meeting at which the application will
be accepted.
(4) The application shall include the names and addresses of the
applicant, all holders of conservation, preservation, or agricultural
preservation restrictions as defined in RSA 477:45, and all abutters
as indicated in the City records. Abutters shall also be identified on
any plan submitted to the Board. The application shall also include
§ 190-137 NASHUA CODE § 190-138
164:654
the name and business address of every engineer, architect, land
surveyor, or soil scientist whose professional seal appears on any
plan submitted to the Board.
(5) The applicant may, but is not required, file a preapplication
conceptual plan pursuant to § 190-139 prior to filing a design
review or a conditional plan.
C. Completeness review and acceptance of application.
(1) The Administrative Officer shall review an application for
subdivision plan approval consistent with § 190-125. After
completeness review by the Administrative Officer, the applicant
may choose to resubmit the application or to present it to the
Planning Board.
(2) The Board shall, at the next regular meeting or within 30 days
following the delivery of the application, for which notice can be
given in accordance with the requirements of Subsection B,
determine if a submitted application is complete according to
Article XLIII and shall vote upon its acceptance. Upon
determination by the Board that a submitted application is
incomplete according to the Board's regulations, the Board shall
notify the applicant of the determination in accordance with RSA
676:3, which shall describe the information, procedure, or other
requirement necessary for the application to be complete. The
Board may, upon motion of any member, determine that an
application is complete and begin formal consideration of the
application.
D. Decision.
(1) Upon determination by the Board that a submitted application is
complete according to Article XLIII, the Board shall begin formal
consideration.
(2) The Planning Board shall act to approve, conditionally approve as
provided in § 190-141, or disapprove the plan within 65 days,
subject to extension or waiver as provided in Subsection D(3).
(3) The Planning Board may apply to the Board of Aldermen for an
extension not to exceed an additional 90 days before acting to
approve or disapprove an application. The applicant may waive the
requirement for Planning Board action within the time periods
specified in Subsection D(2) and consent to such extension as may
be mutually agreeable.
(4) Upon failure of the Board to approve, conditionally approve, or
disapprove the application, the Board of Aldermen shall, upon
request of the applicant, immediately issue an order directing the
Board to act on the application within 30 days. If the Planning
Board does not act on the application within that thirty-day time
§ 190-138 FLAG § 190-138
164:655
period, then within 40 days of the issuance of the order, the Board
of Aldermen shall certify on the applicant's application that the
plan is approved pursuant to this subsection , unless within those
40 days the Board of Aldermen has identified in writing some
specific subdivision regulation or zoning or other ordinance
provision with which the application does not comply. Such a
certification, citing this subsection, shall constitute final approval
for all purposes including filing and recording under RSA 674:37
and 676:18, and court review under RSA 677:15.
(5) In case of disapproval of any application submitted to the Planning
Board, the ground for such disapproval shall be adequately stated
upon the records of the Planning Board.
E. Notice. The Planning Board shall provide notice as provided in RSA
676:4.I(d) and § 190-126. Any subdivision plan other than a lot-line
relocation that does not create additional lots shall require on-site
notice in accordance with § 190-126 of this chapter, with the title of the
action to read "SUBDIVISION."
F. Decision. The Planning Board shall approve or deny the plan after
conducting a public hearing on the application. In the event of
disapproval, the Board shall state the reasons for disapproval in writing
to the applicant or his agent.
G. Approval criteria. In reviewing the subdivision plan, the Board shall at a
minimum make the following determinations:
(1) That the subdivision plan is consistent with the goals, objectives
and strategies adopted as part of the City's Master Plan.
(2) The subdivision complies with all applicable standards of Part 2 and
Parts 4 through 8 of this chapter.
(3) That the unique aesthetic, architectural and visual character of
nearby buildings or cluster of buildings is maintained, and that the
subdivision plan is in harmony with such character.
(4) That the subdivision plan attempts to balance with the allowed use
the preservation of natural features such as knolls, rock
outcroppings, ravines unique views, large trees, clusters of
vegetation, and areas of vegetation which would serve as buffer
areas between dissimilar adjacent land uses.
(5) That the proposed subdivision shall not generate excessive traffic
or demands on parking.
(6) That adequate municipal services exist to support the proposed
use.
(7) That the subdivision plan provides adequate means of handling
stormwater runoff, and meets the criteria for stormwater handling
and treatment set forth in Article XXXI. For sites which are outside
§ 190-138 NASHUA CODE § 190-138
164:656
of the Water Supply Protection District, the Board may waive the
requirements for recharge if the applicant demonstrates that
meeting the recharge standard is not practicable.
(8) That all areas provided for detention, treatment, infiltration, or
other handling of stormwater are designed so as to be safe, and in
keeping with the surrounding character of the site. For sites which
are outside of the Water Supply Protection District, the Board may
allow the use of alternate methods of stormwater handling if the
applicant demonstrates that such methods would be more in
keeping with the intent of this section and with the character of the
site.
(9) That the subdivision is compatible with the existing character of
the neighborhood, and to ensure that it preserves natural character
features of the area or neighborhood.
(10) That the subdivision does not constitute scattered or premature
development as would involve danger or injury to health, safety, or
prosperity by reason of the lack of water supply, sewage disposal,
drainage, transportation, schools, fire protection, or other public
services which necessitate the excessive expenditure of public
funds for the supply of such services. If it is determined by the
Planning Board that the proposed subdivision is scattered or
premature, the subdivision may be disapproved or special site
changes, on or off site, may be required to address any items of
concern. Changes to the plan may be required to mitigate those
impacts that caused the subdivision to be declared scattered or
premature. The Planning Board may require the applicant to make
said improvement(s) prior to, or as a condition of, approval of the
subdivision.
H. Public hearing.
(1) Except as provided in this section, no application may be denied or
approved without a public hearing on the application. At the
hearing, any applicant, abutter, holder of conservation,
preservation, or agricultural preservation restriction, or any person
with a direct interest in the matter may testify in person or in
writing. Other persons may testify as permitted by the subdivision
regulations or the Board at each hearing.
(2) Public hearings are not required when the Board is considering or
acting upon:
(a) Minor lot line adjustments or boundary agreements which do
not create buildable lots, except that notice to abutters and
holders of conservation, preservation, or agricultural
preservation restrictions shall be given prior to approval of the
application in accordance with Subsection D, and any abutter
or holder of conservation, preservation, or agricultural
§ 190-138 FLAG § 190-138
164:657
§ 190-139. Preliminary conceptual consultation.
preservation restrictions may be heard on the application upon
request; or
(b) Disapprovals of applications based upon failure of the
applicant to supply information required by the regulations,
including identification of abutters or holders of conservation,
preservation, or agricultural preservation restrictions; or
failure to meet reasonable deadlines established by the Board;
or failure to pay costs of notice or other fees required by the
Board.
I. Scope of approval.
(1) After approval and recording of the plan, the applicant may
proceed with: site preparation/grading (subject to obtaining any
permit required in Part 8); and the installation of required
improvements (subject to approval of construction plans as
described in § 190-142, below).
(2) The Planning Board Chair, Vice Chair or Secretary shall sign the
plan.
(3) In the event the applicant is unable to complete the required
improvements, and such improvements are deemed necessary for
the preservation of the public health and safety, the City of Nashua
may compel the delivery of the deed and guarantees in order to
complete the improvements as required.
(4) The applicant shall deliver a full covenant and warranty deed to all
dedicated lands and improvements in proper form for recording.
J. Recording procedures. See RSA 674:37.
K. Coordination of flexible zoning applications with subdivision approval.
An application for a rezoning (§ 190-132) or a conditional use permit
(§ 190-133) may be initiated concurrent with the initiation of an
application for approval of a preliminary subdivision plan.
A. Prior to the filing of an application for plan approval, the applicant may,
and is encouraged to, submit to the Planning Board and the
Administrative Official a preliminary conceptual plan. The purpose of
preliminary conceptual consultation is to review of the basic concept of
the proposal and suggestions that might be of assistance in resolving
problems with meeting requirements during final consideration.
B. Preliminary conceptual consultation does not bind either the applicant
or the Board. Statements made by Planning Board members shall not
be the basis for disqualifying said members or invalidating any action
taken. The Board and the applicant may discuss proposals in conceptual
§ 190-138 NASHUA CODE § 190-139
164:658
§ 190-140. Preapplication design review.
§ 190-141. Conditional approval.
form only and in general terms such as desirability of types of
development and proposals under the Master Plan.
C. The applicant should provide general subdivision information outlining
conditions of the site and the proposed development, including means
of providing water and sewerage, topography of site, layout of streets,
lots and other features, and the relationship of the proposed subdivision
to existing streets, highways and community facilities. Submission of
the conceptual plan and supporting information does not require formal
application.
D. Preliminary conceptual consultation may occur without giving formal
public notice as required under § 190-138E, but such discussions may
occur only at formal meetings of the Board.
E. Preapplication review is optional. It is separate and apart from formal
consideration under § 190-138. The time limits for acting under
§ 190-138 do not apply until formal application is submitted under
§ 190-138B.
A. Prior to submission of an application for Board action, an applicant may
request to meet with the Board or its designee for nonbinding
discussions beyond the conceptual and general stage, involving more
specific design and engineering details of the potential application.
B. The design review phase may proceed only after proper notification, as
set forth in § 190-138E.
C. Statements made by Board members shall not be the basis for
disqualifying said members or invalidating any action eventually taken
on the application.
D. A rough sketch of the site should be provided, showing:
(1) Location of lot lines;
(2) Lot measurements; and
(3) The streets surrounding the site.
E. Preapplication review is optional. It is separate and apart from formal
consideration under § 190-138. The time limits for acting under
§ 190-138 do not apply until formal application is submitted under
§ 190-138B.
A. Applicability. The Board may grant conditional approval of an
application, but the plan will not be signed or recorded until all of the
conditions have been met.
§ 190-139 FLAG § 190-141
164:659
§ 190-142. Construction plans.
Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide uniform standards and
procedures for the preparation and inspection of subdivision
improvements.
B. Decision.
(1) Conditional approval shall be rendered in accordance with
§ 190-138.
(2) Per RSA 676:4 I(i), a conditional plan shall be certified to the
Planning Board by the Administrative Officer where:
(a) The plan involves only minor plan changes whether or not
imposed by the Board as a result of a public hearing,
compliance with which is administrative and which does not
involve discretionary judgment; or
(b) Conditions which are in themselves administrative and which
involve no discretionary judgment on the part of the Board; or
(c) Conditions with regard to the applicant's possession of permits
and approvals granted by other Boards or agencies or
approvals granted by other Boards or agencies.
(3) Approval shall be in the form of a written letter to the applicant (or
contact person as listed on the application) advising that the
conditional plan meets all requirements of this chapter and that the
original conditional plan may be submitted to the Administrative
Officer.
C. Scope of approval. If the applicant has not complied with the conditions
of approval within one year, the approval is considered null and void
and the applicant must submit a new subdivision application. The
Planning Board may extend this time period at the request of the
applicant.
A. Applicability.
(1) Following approval of the subdivision or site plan, the applicant
shall have prepared, by a New Hampshire licensed registered
professional engineer, construction plans, consisting of complete
construction drawings and specifications of all easements, streets,
traffic control devices, street lights, sanitary sewers, stormwater
facilities, water system facilities, sidewalks and other
improvements required by this chapter and the Board of Public
Works specifications.
(2) Before the Administrative Officer approves the land use permit, the
applicant shall comply with either Subsection A(2)(a) or (b) below:
§ 190-141 NASHUA CODE § 190-142
164:660
(a) The applicant shall complete all required street and utility
improvements to the satisfaction of the City Engineer,
consistent with Part 4. The City Engineer shall submit a written
statement to the Board that the improvements comply with the
standards required by this section; or
(b) The applicant shall provide performance guarantees pursuant
to § 190-143. Regardless of whether performance guarantees
are provided, the applicant shall complete all improvements
consistent with Subsection A(3) below, before any building on a
lot on an approved conditional plan or portion thereof to be
served by such improvements is sold for occupancy or is
occupied as set out in each subsection below.
(3) No certificate of use and occupancy shall be issued until:
(a) The applicant completes all required street improvements
except curbing, sidewalk paving, final wearing coat of asphalt
on streets, and stone bounds; and
(b) All sidewalk areas are paved. A certificate of use and
occupancy may be issued during the winter months if the
sidewalks remain unpaved if the applicant posts security for
completion of the sidewalks consistent with § 190-143.
Sidewalks on lots occupied during winter conditions shall be
paved prior to the completion of the lot's landscaping or the
next succeeding June 1, whichever is earlier.
(c) Telephone service is available to the dwelling. A certificate of
use and occupancy may be issued if a prospective purchaser of
the dwelling waives the requirement for telephone service in
writing.
B. Initiation. No installation of public infrastructure shall commence until
a permit to construct is issued by the City Engineer. The applicant shall
pay all permit and inspection fees as authorized by Board of Public
Works. Upon issuance of the permit, the applicant shall arrange for a
preconstruction meeting with the City Engineer's office.
C. Completeness review. Construction plans shall include the information
required by Article XLIII to this chapter.
D. Notice. No notice is required for the approval of construction plans.
E. Inspections. The applicant shall request approval of all improvements
required by this chapter. The City Engineer shall inspect such
improvements, and shall approve or deny the construction plans
consistent with the criteria established in this chapter. The City
Engineer shall have 20 calendar days from the date of request to grant
or deny the requested approval. Failure of the City Engineer to grant or
deny the requested approval within the 20 calendar days shall be
deemed to constitute approval. In the event of disapproval a written
§ 190-142 FLAG § 190-142
164:661
notice shall be given stating the reasons for disapproval with a
complete list of deficiencies to be corrected by the applicant. Upon
mutual agreement of both parties, this time period may be modified.
The Administrative Officer shall set forth on each approved conditional
plan the substance of the foregoing requirements, if applicable, and
the City Engineer shall furnish his approval on a form suitable for
recording. If approval or disapproval is not given within 20 days the
City Clerk shall furnish approval on a form suitable for recording.
F. Standards.
(1) All installations of improvements shall conform to the approved
construction plans. The applicant shall not modify the design and/
or specifications prior to construction, unless the City Engineer
approves such changes. The applicant shall notify the City
Engineer in advance of any changes to be made from the approved
drawings. In the event that actual construction work deviates from
that shown on the approved construction plans, such unapproved
work shall constitute a violation of this chapter and shall be
remedied in accordance with § 190-157. The applicant shall correct
the installed improvements to conform to the approved
construction plans. In addition, the Planning Board or
Administrative Officer may take such other actions as may be
deemed appropriate, including but not limited to revocation of
permits already issued and/or withholding of future approvals and
permits until the violation is corrected.
(2) Prior to final inspection of the required improvements, the
applicant shall submit to the City Engineer one reproducible copy
and two prints of as-built engineering drawings for each of the
required improvements that have been completed. Each
reproducible copy shall be mylar or other media approved by the
City Engineer. The applicant shall also submit as-built drawings in
an electronic format approved by the City Engineer. Each set of
drawings shall be recertified by the applicant's surveyor indicating
the date when the as-built survey was made. As-built drawings shall
show following:
(a) The constructed vertical elevation, horizontal location and size
of all sanitary and storm sewers, manholes, inlets, junction
boxes, detention basins and other appurtenances or elements
of the sewerage and storm drainage systems constructed to
serve the subdivision.
(b) All grading, excavations, open cutting and similar land surface
disturbances to be mulched, seeded, sodded or otherwise
protected to ensure compliance with Article XXVI of this
chapter.
(c) Water lines, valves, fire hydrants and other appurtenances or
elements of the water distribution system constructed to serve
§ 190-142 NASHUA CODE § 190-142
164:662
the project. Such information shall include the horizontal
location and size of waterlines and location and description of
valves with dimensional ties.
(d) The location of all street rights-of-way, alignments, widths and
vertical elevations.
(e) All control points and monumentation.
G. Acceptance of improvements.
(1) Approval of the installation of improvements by the City Engineer
shall not constitute acceptance by City of Nashua for dedication
purposes. The installation of improvements in any subdivision shall,
in no case, serve to bind City of Nashua to accept such
improvements for maintenance, repair or operation thereof. Such
acceptance is subject to the existing regulations concerning the
acceptance of each type of improvement.
(2) The specific standards for acceptance of easements are subject to
the technical design standards of this chapter and any other
adopted policy or manual of City of Nashua or state agency with
jurisdiction over such improvements. All easements shall comply
with this chapter prior to acceptance.
(3) City of Nashua is not responsible for any street, or other
improvement, or the delivery or provision of public services, even if
a street is used by the public, unless and until the dedication of
those improvements has been accepted by the City.
(4) When improvements are constructed in accordance with the
requirements and conditions of these regulations and the
specifications of this article, and the applicant submits as-built
drawings to the City Engineer, the City shall accept the
improvements for maintenance by City of Nashua. This subsection
does not apply to improvements maintained by another entity.
(5) These provisions do not relieve the applicant or his authorized
agent or contractor of any responsibility to notify any agency for
City of Nashua of completed work and formal request for
inspection of same. The agency having jurisdiction shall inspect
and approve all completed work prior to the release of any applied
performance sureties.
H. Site cleanup. The applicant shall remove all equipment, material, and
general construction debris from the subdivision and from any lot,
street, public way or property therein or adjacent thereto. Dumping of
such debris into sewers, onto adjacent property or onto other land in
the City of Nashua is prohibited.
§ 190-142 FLAG § 190-143
164:663
§ 190-143. Financial guarantees. [Amended 11-23-2010 by Ord. No.
O-10-35]
Purpose: This section establishes procedures for bonding, subdivision
improvement agreements or other guarantees where improvements are
not completed before final approval as provided by RSA 674:36.III(b).
This section also establishes guarantees to warrant and to ensure proper
maintenance of the improvements.
A. Financial guarantees. No subdivision plat shall be recorded prior to the
applicant providing an acceptable financial guarantee for all public and/
or common private improvements, together with easements for any
public rights-of-way, utility or storm drainage easements, slope and
access easements, conservation easements, agreements to provide a
private easement, public improvement guarantee or any other required
legal document.
B. Acceptable financial guarantee. The following types of financial
guarantees are acceptable to assure the completion of the required
improvements.
(1) A nonlapsing letter of credit drawn on a bank authorized to do
business in New Hampshire payable to the City and deposited with
it.
(2) A nonlapsing surety bond issued by a surety company authorized to
do business in New Hampshire, to be filed with the City.
(3) Cash or a certified check to be deposited with the City under an
escrow agreement.
C. Amount of financial guarantee. The amount of the financial guarantee
shall be approved by the City Engineer as sufficient to secure to the City
the satisfactory construction and installation of the required public and
private improvements, including contingency and inflation factors. A
licensed professional engineer shall submit a construction cost estimate
acceptable to the City Engineer which includes breakdowns by quantity
of material and unit costs, along with contingencies, prior to the
presentation of any financial guarantee.
D. Legal provisions. All financial guarantees shall comply with all statutory
requirements and shall be satisfactory to Corporation Counsel as to
form, sufficiency and manner of execution as set forth in these
regulations.
E. Duration. Construction of the required improvements shall be
completed within two years of approval. If construction is not
completed during this time period, the City Engineer may grant an
extension of up to one additional year. Failure to complete all street and
utility improvements to the satisfaction of the City Engineer within the
time specified shall mean forfeiture of the bond, certified check or
deposit in escrow.
§ 190-143 NASHUA CODE § 190-143
164:664
§ 190-144. Revocation of recorded approval.
A plan may be revoked as provided in RSA 676:4-a.
§ 190-145. Approved subdivision exemption; active and substantial
development.
Approved subdivisions shall be protected from future changes in
regulations and ordinances in accordance with NH RSA § 674:39 as
summarized by the following:
F. Reduction of financial guarantees. A reduction of a financial guarantee
may be authorized by the City Engineer upon completion of a significant
portion of the subdivision, and then only to the ratio that the public or
private secured improvement so completed relates to the current total
cost of the improvements for the subdivision plat. In no event shall a
financial guarantee be reduced below 25% of the principal amount until
all public improvements are completed and, if required, accepted by the
Board of Aldermen, and all required private improvements are
complete. For private improvements a financial guarantee shall be
reduced upon satisfactory completion of the required private
improvements and then only to the ratio that the private improvement
so accepted bears to the total required private improvements for the
subdivision plat. In no event shall a financial guarantee be reduced
below 25% of the principal amount until all public or secured private
improvements are completed to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.
G. Release of financial guarantees. The release of a financial guarantee
shall not be undertaken until the City Engineer has submitted a
certificate stating that all required improvements have been
satisfactorily completed, an acceptable as-built plan has been
submitted, a maintenance guarantee has been provided pursuant to
Subsection H, Maintenance guarantee, and, if required, the public
improvements have been accepted by the Board of Aldermen.
H. Maintenance guarantee. The applicant shall be required to file a
maintenance guarantee with the City at the time of release of the
financial guarantee. The maintenance guarantee shall be in an amount
considered adequate by the City Engineer and in a form satisfactory to
Corporation Counsel in order to assure the satisfactory condition of the
required improvements, including all lot improvements on the
individual subdivided lots. The maintenance guarantee shall be in an
amount reflecting 10% of the cost of the completed improvements, and
shall in no event be less than 10% of the original financial guarantee.
The maintenance guarantee shall be for a period of two years after the
date of the acceptance of the improvements by the Board of Aldermen,
if required, or by the City Engineer. Unsatisfactory condition of the
improvements as determined by the City Engineer within the time
specified shall mean forfeiture of the bond, certified check or deposit in
escrow.
§ 190-143 FLAG § 190-145
164:665
A. Approved subdivision exemption. Every subdivision approved by the
Planning Board shall be exempt from all subsequent changes in
subdivision regulations and zoning ordinances adopted by the City of
Nashua, except those regulations and ordinances which expressly
protect public health standards, such as water quality and sewage
treatment requirements, for a period of four years after the date of
certification of the subdivision by the Planning Board; provided,
however, that once substantial completion of the improvements as
shown on the plans have occurred in compliance with the approved
plans, or the terms of said approval or unless otherwise stipulated by
the Planning Board, the rights of the owner or the owner's successor in
interest shall vest and no subsequent changes in site plan regulations
or zoning ordinances shall operate to affect such improvements; and
further provided that:
(1) Active and substantial development or building has begun on the
site by the owner or the owner's successor in interest in
accordance with the approved plans within 12 months after the
date of approval (certification by the Planning Board), or in
accordance with the terms of the approval, and, if a bond or other
security to cover the costs of roads, drains, or sewers is required in
connection with such approval, such bond or other security is
posted with the City, at the time of commencement of such
development;
(2) The development remains in full compliance with the public health
regulations and ordinances of the City of Nashua; and
(3) At the time of approval (certification of the plans by the Planning
Board), the subdivision conforms to the subdivision regulations,
and zoning ordinances then in effect at the site of such plan.
B. Active and substantial development.
(1) For purposes of these regulations, "active and substantial
development" shall be defined as:
(a) Construction of and/or installation of basic infrastructure to
support the development (including all of the following: at least
one building foundation wall/footing, roadways, accessways,
etc., to a minimum of gravel base; and utilities placed in
underground conduit ready for connection to proposed
buildings/structures) in accordance with the approved plans;
and
(b) Construction and completion of drainage improvements to
service the development (including all of the following:
detention/retention basins, treatment swales, pipes,
underdrain, catch basins, etc.) in accordance with the
approved plans; and
§ 190-145 NASHUA CODE § 190-145
164:666
(c) All erosion control measures (as specified on the approved
plans) must be in place and maintained on the site; and
(d) Items in Subsection B(1)(a), (b) and (c) shall be reviewed and
approved by the Department of Public Works or designated
agent.
(2) Movement of earth, excavation, or logging of a site without
completion of items in Subsection B(1)(a), (b), (c) and (d) above,
shall not be considered active and substantial development. Plans
approved in phases shall be subject to this definition for the phase
currently being developed. The Planning Board may, for good
cause, extend the twenty-four-month period set forth in Subsection
A(1) above.
§ 190-145 FLAG § 190-145
164:667

ARTICLE XVII
Site Plan Procedures
Purpose: The site plan review provisions and regulations of this section
are intended to promote the safe, functional, and aesthetically pleasing
development of property and to ensure that new structures, utilities,
streets, parking, circulation systems, yards, and open spaces are developed
in conformance with the standards of this chapter. The site plan review
considers the siting of structures and related site improvements to promote
harmonious relationships with adjacent development.
§ 190-146. Site plan procedures generally.
Purpose: This section establishes general regulations applicable to all site
plans and associated administrative provisions.
A. Applicability.
(1) This article applies to any development or change or expansion of
use of tracts for nonresidential uses or for multifamily dwelling
units containing at least four dwelling units, whether or not such
development includes a subdivision or resubdivision of the site.
(Reference: RSA 674:43)
(2) Detached single-family dwelling units, duplex and triplex
developments on individual lots of record are exempt from this
section.
(3) Development activities subject to the requirements of this section
may be carried out only in substantial conformance with the
approved site plan and any conditions or restrictions to the site
plan approval.
(4) Any substantial deviation from the approved site plan, unless
approved in advance and in writing by the Administrative Officer, is
a violation of this chapter.
(5) No certificate of compliance shall be issued if the development
activities do not conform to the approved site plan.
B. Initiation. The site plan shall be filed with the Administrative Officer
and shall include the information required by Article XLIII.
C. Decision.
(1) The Planning Board shall conduct a public hearing before acting on
a site plan.
(2) If the Planning Board does not approve or disapprove a site plan
within 65 days after the submission thereof to it, it shall be deemed
to have been approved, and the certificate of the City as to the date
of submission of the site plan for approval and the failure to take
action thereon within such time shall be issued on demand and
§ 190-146 FLAG § 190-146
164:669
shall be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other
evidence of approval herein required. The applicant may waive this
requirement and consent to an extension of such period. The City
Clerk shall be the officer who shall issue the certificate in case of
the failure of the Board to approve or disapprove the site plan.
(3) The grounds for disapproval of a site plan shall be adequately
stated upon the records of the Planning Board. Any proposed site
plan disapproved by the Planning Board shall be returned to the
applicant with a written statement giving the reason for the
disapproval.
(4) Site plan approval, approval with modification or disapproval must
be decided on an individual-case basis. The Planning Board shall
not disapprove a proposed site plan for reasons other than those
listed or referred to in Subsection F of this section below. Any
modifications or reasons for disapproval must be clearly described
to the applicant in writing.
(5) The Administrative Officer will sign and date the site plan to
indicate approval. Approval shall become effective immediately.
D. Approval criteria. In determining the acceptability of a proposed site
plan, the Board shall take into consideration the effect of the proposed
development on health, safety, nuisance, property values, aesthetics,
traffic conditions and future highway improvements. The site plan shall
conform to each of the following criteria unless a waiver from a
particular standard is granted pursuant to § 190-148:
(1) The site plan shall be consistent with the goals, objectives and
strategies adopted as part of the City's Master Plan.
(2) The site plan shall comply with all applicable requirements of Parts
2 and 4 through 8 of this chapter.
(3) Unique aesthetic, architectural and visual character of nearby
buildings or cluster of buildings shall be maintained, and that the
site plan shall be in harmony with such character.
(4) The proposed use shall be able coexist with the surrounding uses,
and the proposed use shall not have significant impact on the
surrounding uses.
(5) The proposed use shall not have significant health and safety
impacts on surrounding properties or on the general population of
the City.
(6) The proposed use shall not generate excessive traffic or demands
or parking as determined in accordance with Article XXIII. If the
Planning Board determines that the development contemplated by
the proposed site plan would generate substantial traffic into and
out of the proposed development, the Board may require the
§ 190-146 NASHUA CODE § 190-146
164:670
owners of the proposed development to make improvements to
the street or streets from which access will be gained to the
development site. Such improvements may include construction
of additional street width for additional vehicle capacity, turning
lanes, median dividers and/or traffic-control signals and signage
but shall be limited only to those streets which directly abut the
development site or are no more than 500 feet from a property line
of the proposed development. All traffic control devices (pursuant
to RSA 47:17, VIII) and all traffic-calming measures must be
approved by the Board of Aldermen through legislation. Any
pavement widenings shall only be required within an existing rightof-
way and/or on land under the control of the developer. In order
to reduce the number of driveway access points on major arterial
streets, the Planning Board may require the use of common
driveways by adjoining properties, unless such requirements would
be unduly burdensome or inhibit traffic circulation. [Amended
10-26-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-33]
(7) Adequate municipal services exist to support the proposed use.
(8) The site plan attempts to balance with the allowed use the
preservation of sensitive site features as described in
§ 190-174B(1).
(9) The site plan provides a means of handling stormwater runoff that
meets the criteria set forth in Article XXXI. For sites that are
outside of the Water Supply Protection District, the Board may
waive the requirements for recharge if the applicant demonstrates
that meeting the recharge standard is not practicable.
(10) All areas provided for detention, treatment, infiltration, or other
handling of stormwater shall be in keeping with the surrounding
character of the site. For sites which are outside of the Water
Supply Protection District, the Board may allow the use of alternate
methods of stormwater handling if the applicant demonstrates that
such methods would be more in keeping with the intent of this
section and with the character of the site.
(11) The site plan provides adequate means of handling on-site
vehicular ingress and egress movements in relation to traffic
movements along the abutting streets.
(12) The site plan provides adequate means of capturing, containing
and treating wastewater or excess water used on the site and
preventing the discharge of any such water onto any adjacent
property, street, water body or waterway.
(13) The site plan provides adequate means of handling parking and
loading, and number of off-street parking and loading spaces;
(14) The site plan provides coordination with future highway
improvements, including but not limited to right-of-way expansion,
§ 190-146 FLAG § 190-146
164:671
jug-handles, access roads and service roads, for any street within
the City which has been adopted and included as a part of the
major street plan (RSA 674:9 — 674:10).
(15) The site plan provides adequate protection from encroachment on
adjoining residential land uses.
(16) The site plan provides adequate consideration for handling
pedestrian circulation, lighting and location of signs.
(17) Landscaping shall conform to the requirements of Article XXVII.
(18) The hours of operation for the proposed development does not
create adverse impacts on surrounding neighborhoods. The
Planning Board shall review the hours of operation proposed in any
site plan, including but not limited to hours during which the site is
occupied by employees, hours during which the site is open for
business, hours during which deliveries are made to the site, hours
during which shipments are made from the site, and the hours
during which refuse removal or other services involving truck
traffic on the site are performed for any businesses located within
the site to ensure that the character of nearby neighborhoods is not
adversely impacted. The Board may stipulate limitations on such
hours if it deems that such stipulation would preserve the character
of impacted neighborhoods.
(19) The Planning Board, prior to final approval of any plan, may require
the posting of a bond or escrow agreement in such amount as is
approved by the Board as being reasonably necessary to ensure
completion of all public improvements required as conditions of
approval of such plan, in such form as may be approved by the City
Solicitor/Corporation Counsel.
E. Scope of approval.
(1) After the site plan is approved, a building permit must be issued by
the Administrative Officer or the use must be established within 12
months from the date of site plan approval. Failure to do so within
the twelve-month period shall make approval null, and void and no
building permit shall be issued. This section shall apply to all site
plans previously approved by the Planning Board that have yet to
expire. The Planning Board may approve a longer period of time
where warranted by economic conditions, development phasing, or
other unique circumstances.
(2) The Administrative Officer shall inspect the site for compliance
with the approved site plan before a building permit is issued for
the project. The Administrative Officer shall write a letter to the
applicant stating any deficiencies.
§ 190-146 NASHUA CODE § 190-146
164:672
§ 190-147. Performance guarantees.
In lieu of the completion of street work and utility installations prior to the
final approval of a plan, the applicant may provide performance guarantees
as set forth in § 190-143.
§ 190-148. Waiver of site plan standards.
Purpose: This section establishes the rules of procedure for the Planning
Board for waiver of site plan standards as set forth in Parts 3 through 6, as
authorized by RSA 674:44.III.(e).
(3) The owner of a use or property subject to the site plan will be
notified if site plan approval must be suspended. Suspension is
caused by:
(a) Violation of any applicable provision of this section; or
(b) Failure to comply with any applicable required conditions.
(4) A change in ownership of the property or structures subject to the
site plan does not affect its validity.
(5) The applicant shall not alter, expand, intensify, extend or increase
any use or structure approved pursuant to the site plan unless the
site plan is amended pursuant to Subsection G below.
(6) Approval of a site plan is deemed to constitute approval of any
minor plan amendment authorized by § 190-131, unless otherwise
expressly provided in the conditions to the site plan approval.
F. Recording procedures. A copy of an approved site plan shall be
maintained on file with the Administrative Officer.
G. Amendments. A minor amendment shall be processed as an
administrative permit pursuant to § 190-131. If it is determined by the
Planning Director that the proposed change is not a minor amendment
as defined in § 190-131, the applicant's amendment shall follow the
procedures for site plans prescribed in this section.
A. Applicability. Pursuant to RSA 674:44 III(e), the Planning Board may
waive of any portion of the site plan regulations (Parts 3 through 6).
B. Initiation. An application for a waiver may be filed with the application
for subdivision or site plan review, along with a statement of the
grounds for granting the waiver. The applicant shall submit in writing to
the Administrative Officer a letter specifying the section for which a
waiver is requested and stating the grounds for the request along with
all supportive facts upon which he/she believes a waiver is warranted.
The letter shall be transmitted along with the application for approval
of a site plan or subdivision plan.
§ 190-146 FLAG § 190-148
164:673
§ 190-149. Approved site plan exemption; active and substantial
development.
Approved site plans shall be protected from future changes in regulations
and ordinances in accordance with NH RSA 674:39 as summarized by the
following:
C. Decision. The Planning Board shall approve, deny, or approve with
conditions, a waiver at the same time as the decision relating to the
related application.
D. Approval criteria. The Planning Board shall not approve a waiver unless
it finds, based on substantial competent evidence presented at the
public hearing, that:
(1) Strict conformity would pose an unnecessary hardship to the
applicant; and
(2) The waiver would not be contrary to the spirit and intent of the
regulations.
E. Completeness review, notice, amendments, scope of approval, and
recording procedures. See procedures applicable to site plan approval.
A. Approved site plan exemption. Every site plan approved by the Planning
Board shall be exempt from all subsequent changes in site plan
regulations and zoning ordinances adopted by the City of Nashua,
except those regulations and ordinances which expressly protect public
health standards, such as water quality and sewage treatment
requirements, for a period of four years after the date of certification of
the site plan by the Planning Board; provided, however, that once
substantial completion of the improvements as shown on the plans have
occurred in compliance with the approved plans, or the terms of said
approval or unless otherwise stipulated by the Planning Board, the
rights of the owner or the owner's successor in interest shall vest and
no subsequent changes in site plan regulations or zoning ordinances
shall operate to affect such improvements; and further provided that:
(1) Active and substantial development or building has begun on the
site by the owner or the owner's successor in interest in
accordance with the approved plans within 12 months after the
date of approval, or in accordance with the terms of the approval,
and, if a bond or other security to cover the costs of roads, drains,
or sewers is required in connection with such approval, such bond
or other security is posted with the City at the time of
commencement of such development;
(2) The development remains in full compliance with the public health
regulations and ordinances of the City of Nashua; and
§ 190-148 NASHUA CODE § 190-149
164:674
(3) At the time of approval, the site plan conforms to the site plan
regulations, and zoning ordinances then in effect at the site of such
plan.
B. Active and substantial development.
(1) For purposes of these regulations, "active and substantial
development" shall be defined as:
(a) Construction of and/or installation of basic infrastructure to
support the development (including all of the following:
foundation walls and footings of proposed buildings; roadways,
accessways, parking lots, etc., to a minimum of gravel base;
and utilities placed in underground conduit ready for
connection to proposed buildings/structures) in accordance
with the approved plans; and
(b) Construction and completion of drainage improvements to
service the development (including all of the following:
detention/retention basins, treatment swales, pipes,
underdrain, catch basins, etc.) in accordance with the
approved plans; and
(c) All erosion control measures (as specified on the approved
plans) must be in place and maintained on the site; and
(d) Items in Subsection B(1)(a), (b) and (c) shall be reviewed and
approved by the Department of Public Works or designated
agent.
(2) Movement of earth, excavation, or logging of a site without
completion of items in Subsection B(1)(a), (b), (c) and (d) above
shall not be considered "active and substantial development." Plans
approved in phases shall be subject to this definition for the phase
currently being developed. The Planning Board may, for good
cause, extend the twelve-month period set forth in Subsection A(1)
above.
§ 190-149 FLAG § 190-149
164:675

ARTICLE XVIII
Other Review Processes.
Purpose: This article provides procedures or cross references for review
processes that may apply to any application for development approval.
Because these processes may affect both zoning and subdivision/site plan
approval, they are classified separately.
§ 190-150. Wetlands application.
The Conservation Commission reviews and submits a recommendation on
wetlands applications before final action is taken by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment. See Article XI.
§ 190-151. Certificate of approval from Historic District
Commission.
See § 190-22.
§ 190-150 FLAG § 190-151
164:677

ARTICLE XIX
Appeals, Variances and Waivers
Purpose: This section establishes procedures and time limits for
challenging decisions.
§ 190-152. Appeals from zoning ordinances.
See § 190-136.
§ 190-153. Variances from zoning ordinances.
See § 190-137.
§ 190-154. Planning Board waivers.
See § 190-148.
§ 190-152 FLAG § 190-154
164:679

ARTICLE XX
Enforcement Procedures
§ 190-155. Generally.
This chapter shall be enforced as provide in RSA Chapter 676. For purposes
of this Part 3, the Administrative Officer is hereby granted authority to
enforce the provisions of this chapter in addition to any other official,
agency or board enumerated in RSA Chapter 676.
§ 190-156. Zoning violations.
See RSA 676: 11-676:13 and 676:15-676:19.
§ 190-157. Subdivision and site plan violations.
In addition to the authority cited in § 190-155, see RSA 676: 16 and 676:18.
§ 190-155 FLAG § 190-157
164:681

Part 4
Development Standards For Site And Subdivisions Plans
ARTICLE XXI
General
Purpose: This Part 4 consolidates the regulations applicable to most
subdivision plans and site plans. (The remaining Parts 5 through 8 either
contain material relating to unique situations, such as floodplain
management, materials highlighted for ease of reference, or materials that
may apply to permitting situations in addition to subdivision plans or site
plans.)
§ 190-158. Applicability.
§ 190-159. Official Map.
A. This article applies to any application for subdivision plan or site plan
approval.
B. A waiver or appeal from the requirements of this article may be filed
with the Planning Board pursuant to § 190-148.
A. Applicability. Pursuant to RSA 674:10 through 674:11, the plan
identified as Major Street Plan, Amherst Street, dated November 20,
1972, over the signatures of the Chairman of the Planning Board, City
Engineer and Administrative Officer, the following plans are officially
adopted by the City as a part of the major street plan and are
established as the official map of that portion of the City described
thereon: Rural Road Improvements - Spit Brook Road, East Dunstable
Road, Lamb Road, Middle Dunstable Road, Searles Road, New Searles
Road; dated May 12, 1972, by Hamilton Engineering Associates.
B. Subdivision plans. Subdivision plans shall be approved and endorsed by
the Planning Board as provided in RSA 674:10.
C. Building permits.
(1) For the purpose of preserving the integrity of the official map of the
City, no permit shall be issued for any building or structure or part
thereof, in the bed of or on any land located between the mapped
lines of any streets as shown or laid out on the map except as
provided in this section.
(2) Whenever denial of a permit would entail practical difficulty or
unnecessary hardship, and where the circumstances of the case do
not require the building, structure or part thereof to be related to
existing or proposed streets, the applicant for a permit may appeal
from the decision of the Administrative Officer having charge of the
issuance of permits to the Zoning Board of Adjustment. In passing
on such appeal, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may make any
§ 190-158 FLAG § 190-159
164:683
§ 190-160. Bonds.
reasonable exception and shall have the power to authorize or issue
a permit, subject to such conditions as it may impose, where the
issuance of the permit would not tend to distort the Official Map or
increase the difficulty in carrying out the Master Plan upon which it
is based. Pursuant to RSA 674:13, the Zoning Board of Adjustment,
by vote of a majority of its members, may upon an appeal filed
with it by the owner of any such land, grant a permit, based on
considerations of justice and equity, for a building or structure or
part thereof, in such mapped-street location, when, based upon
the evidence and arguments presented to it on appeal, the Board
finds that the property of the appellant of which such mappedstreet
location forms a part will not yield a reasonable return to
the owner unless a permit is granted, or that balancing the interest
of the City in preserving the integrity of the Official Map and in
not increasing too greatly the cost of later opening such street, and
the interest of the owner in the use and benefits of his property,
the grant of a permit is required by considerations of justice and
equity. The Board shall refuse a permit where the applicant will
not be substantially damaged by placing his building outside the
designated mapped-street location.
(3) If the Board decides to authorize or issue a building permit, it shall
have the power to specify the exact location, ground area to be
used or occupied, height and other reasonable details and
conditions of extent and character, and also the duration of the
building, or part thereof, permitted. Such requirements shall be
designed to promote the health, convenience, safety or general
welfare of and shall inure to the benefit of the City.
(4) Before taking any action authorized by this section, the Board shall
hold a public hearing at which parties in interest and others shall
have the opportunity to be heard. At least 10 days' notice of the
time and place of hearing shall be published in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City, and by posting a notice to the same
effect at the City Hall.
(5) Upon refusal of approval of a site plan by the Planning Board, or
upon refusal of a building permit on appeal to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, because approval of a building permit would tend to
distort the Official Map or increase the difficulty of carrying out the
Master Plan upon which it is based, the matter shall be referred to
the Mayor and Board of Aldermen for action. The ninety-day period
for action by the Mayor and Board of Aldermen specified in
§ 190-146E does not apply to any proposed development affected
by this section.
D. Amendments to Official Map. The Official Map may be amended as
provided in RSA 674:11.
§ 190-159 NASHUA CODE § 190-160
164:684
§ 190-161. Standard specifications.
All construction shall meet the requirements as set forth in the Board of
Public Works specifications, to the extent not inconsistent with this chapter,
which document is hereby incorporated by reference as if set forth in its
entirety herein. Copies of the document are on file in the office of the
City Clerk. To the extent that there is any inconsistency between these
specifications and the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this
chapter shall govern.
A. Generally. The Planning Board, prior to final approval of any plan, may
require the posting of a bond or escrow agreement in such amount as is
approved by the Board as being reasonably necessary to ensure
completion of all improvements required as conditions of approval of
such plan, in such form as may be approved by the City attorney.
B. Subdivision and site plan approval. See § 190-143.
§ 190-160 FLAG § 190-161
164:685

ARTICLE XXII
Site Design
§ 190-162. Applicability.
This article applies to the creation of new lots in subdivision plans, the
development of lots subject to site plan or building permit approval, and the
expansion or change in use of buildings or structures on existing lots.
§ 190-163. Lot layout and configuration.
§ 190-164. Blocks.
See § 190-208, Table 208-1 and explanatory notes.
§ 190-165. Frontage.
A. The arrangement of lots shall be appropriate for the location of the
subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated.
B. Land of such character that it cannot be safely used for building
purposes because of exceptional danger to health or peril from fire,
flood or other menace shall not be platted for an occupancy or use
which may increase danger to health, life or property until appropriate
measures to eliminate the hazards have been taken by the owner or his
agent.
C. Lot sizes and dimensions shall conform to the requirements of Part 2
(zoning). Lot sizes shall be adequate to provide off-street parking and
loading facilities required by the zoning ordinances.
D. Where land is subdivided into lots of an acre or more, the Board may
require an arrangement of lots and streets which will permit a later
resubdivision in conformity with the requirements of these regulations.
E. Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited except
where their control is definitely placed in the City under conditions
approved by the Planning Board.
F. The Planning Board may prohibit lot configurations other than a
standard square, rectangular or trapezoidal design for lots that are less
than 110% of the minimum lot size required by § 190-16. In considering
whether to approve a configuration other than those designated in this
section, the Planning Board shall consider whether the alternative
configuration provides usable and functional open space and yards.
Nothing in this section authorizes the Planning Board to approve lots
that are less than the required minimum lot size.
A. Frontage on public streets. The subdividing of land shall provide, by
means of a public street or a street shown on a subdivision plan
approved by the Planning Board, satisfactory access for each lot to an
existing public street.
§ 190-162 FLAG § 190-165
164:687
B. Double or reverse frontage. Double frontage and reverse frontage lots
are not permitted except where essential to provide separation of
residential development from major traffic arteries or to overcome
specific disadvantages of topography and orientation.
C. Frontage on private streets or parking areas.
(1) Frontage on a public street is not required in the following
situations, provided that the site plan or subdivision plan conforms
to the criteria established in Subsection C(2) through (4) below:
(a) Parcels within commercial or industrial zoning districts.
Access shall be internalized using the shared circulation
system of the principal use or structures (such as a shopping
center).
(b) Multifamily dwellings.
(2) The parent parcel shall comply with the minimum dimensional
requirements of § 190-16. The parent parcel may be subdivided
with individual buildings or structures internal to the parent parcel
having smaller setbacks that those required by § 190-16, Table 16-3
and frontage abutting a private street, if:
(a) The required setbacks from the boundaries of the parent
parcel are complied with; and
(b) The entire front lot line abuts a private street or an easement
that complies with the standards of Subsection C(3) and (4)
below.
For purposes of this subsection, the "parent parcel" means the
original lot or parcel from which smaller lots or parcels are
subdivided.
(3) An easement providing direct, unobstructed access to a public
street shall be recorded and submitted with the site plan or
subdivision plan approval.
(4) In order to provide access for vehicles, utilities and emergency
vehicles, the easement described in Subsection C(3) shall have a
§ 190-165 NASHUA CODE § 190-165
164:688
§ 190-166. Utility or conservation lots.
minimum width equal to the required driveway or aisle surface.
(See § 190-193, Table 193-1).
A. Subdivision of land for location of utilities (i.e., water towers,
telephone, telecommunications, electric, sewer, etc.) and not used for
human occupancy are exempt from this article. Any lot created for
utility use shall either have permanent access to, or usable frontage on,
a City street.
B. The Planning Board may approve, solely for conservation purposes, lots
with no frontage on either a public or private street. A conservation
restriction shall be recorded that prevents further development or
subdivision of such lots.
C. Any installation of structures on land subdivided under this section
shall require site plan approval by the Planning Board. The site plan
shall require adequate landscaping to lessen the visual impact of such
structures on surrounding uses. The Planning Board shall also review
and approve or approve with modifications, elevation designs for such
structures to insure reasonable compatibility with surrounding land
uses.
§ 190-165 FLAG § 190-166
164:689

ARTICLE XXIII
Adequate Public Facilities
Purpose: This article is adopted pursuant to RSA 674:21 (Innovative Land
Use Controls) as a timing incentive and phased development. The purpose
and intent of this article is:
• To ensure that public facilities needed to support new
development meet or exceed the level of service standards
established herein.
• To avoid premature subdivision or site plan approval.
• To provide a reasonable and realistic framework for the
preparation of a capital improvements program needed to
accommodate the City's anticipated growth and development.
• To avoid reduction in the levels of service for any public facilities
below the adopted level of service established in this article.
• To ensure that adequate public facilities needed to support new
development are available concurrent with the impacts of such
development, as defined in this chapter.
• To establish uniform procedures for the review of development
applications subject to the standards and requirements of this
article.
• To provide standards and predicable criteria for use by
applicants for subdivision and site plan approval.
• To facilitate implementation of goals and policies set forth in the
Nashua Master Plan, any master plans for the provision of public
facilities and services, and the capital improvements program.
• To ensure that all applicable legal standards and criteria are
properly incorporated in these procedures and requirements.
In adopting this chapter, the City hereby finds and determines as follows:
• The public facilities subject to this chapter are necessary for the
general public health, safety, and welfare.
• New growth and development within the City has impacts on the
availability and capacity of the public facilities subject to this
chapter, and those impacts can be mitigated by the timing and
sequencing of development as provided herein.
• The City has prepared and adopted a capital improvements
program (CIP) in order to provide the public facilities needed to
accommodate reasonably anticipated growth and development.
The CIP will be updated from time to time to reflect changes in
the City's growth rate, available financial resources, and other
relevant factors.
§ 190-167 FLAG § 190-166
164:691
• The level of service (LOS) standards adopted for each public
facility in this chapter are necessary for the protection of the
public health, safety and welfare, and will not unduly inhibit new
growth and development within the City of Nashua.
This section implements the following Master Plan policies:
Minimize the traffic congestion and conflicts that often accompany
commercial development by careful attention to traffic issues and crossaccess
easements in the site plan review process.
§ 190-167. Applicability.
This article applies to any application for subdivision or site plan approval.
No application subject to this chapter shall be accepted, approved, granted
or issued unless it provides sufficient information to determine whether
the capacity of public facilities is adequate to support the proposed
development, as set forth in this article. This article shall not apply to any
use, development, project, structure, fence, sign or activity that does not
create a demand for streets.
§ 190-168. Procedures for processing applications.
A. Completeness review. Applications subject to § 190-167 shall include an
analysis of whether public facilities and services are adequate, as
defined in § 190-169. The Administrative Officer shall determine
whether the application is complete in accordance with the
requirements of § 190-125.
B. Decision. The Planning Board shall not approve a site plan or
subdivision plan unless it determines that:
(1) Adequate public facilities and services are available at the adopted
level of service; or
(2) Improved public facilities and services are proposed as a part of the
application that are adequate to meet the adopted level of service
for the entire proposed development.
C. Advancement of capacity.
(1) In order to avoid undue hardship, the applicant may propose to
construct or to secure funding for the public facilities necessary to
provide capacity to accommodate the proposed development at the
adopted level of service and at the time that the impact of the
development will occur as an alternative to the deferral of
development or building permits.
(2) No advancement of capacity for public facilities needed to avoid a
deterioration in the adopted levels of service shall be accepted by
the Planning Board unless appropriate conditions are included to
ensure that the applicant will obtain any necessary approvals for
construction of the public facilities from any agency with
§ 190-166 NASHUA CODE § 190-168
164:692
§ 190-169. Methodology and criteria for determining availability
and adequacy of public facilities.
The Planning Board shall determine the adequacy of available public
facilities and services based on standards provided in the Master Plan,
capital improvements program or prevailing industry guidelines.
jurisdiction thereof prior to or concurrent with the issuance of a
final subdivision plan or other subsequent development permit, or
a building permit.
(3) The commitment to construction of public facilities prior to the
issuance of a building permit pursuant to Subsection C(1) above
shall be included as a condition of the determination and shall
contain, at a minimum, the following:
(a) An estimate of the total financial resources needed to construct
the proposed public facilities or expansion thereof, and a
description of the incremental cost associated therewith.
(b) A schedule for commencement and completion of construction
of the planned improvement with specific target dates for
multiphase or large-scale improvement projects.
(c) A statement that the planned improvement is consistent with
the Master Plan.
(4) The construction or funding of only a portion of a public facility
needed to meet the adopted level of service shall be approved by
the Planning Board only where:
(a) The public facility will be able to provide the capacity need to
meet the adopted level of service, and will be fully usable and
operational, due to the characteristics of the facility; or
(b) The construction or funding of the balance of the public facility
that is needed to meet the adopted level of service is identified
in the capital improvements program to be funded from public
revenues, or will be accomplished from other guaranteed
sources.
§ 190-168 FLAG § 190-169
164:693

ARTICLE XXIV
Building Design
Purpose: The purpose of the building design standards is to:
• Provide for high-quality architecture which respects universal
design principles, enhances the appearance of Nashua,
reinforces pedestrian character where appropriate, and is
sensitive to neighboring buildings, the broader setting, and
natural and cultural resources.
• Protect and enhance the positive visual qualities of Nashua's
downtown, residential neighborhoods, commercial corridors,
industrial parks, and scenic and rural landscapes.
• Encourage design that is compatible with the traditional
character of Nashua and New England.
• Enhance property values and foster civic pride.
• Minimize potential aesthetic conflicts between residential and
nonresidential uses and between single-family and multifamily
uses.
The Planning Board finds and determines that many national and regional
chain businesses seek to build a standard design across the country or
region without regard to local conditions. However, the Planning Board
will evaluate all proposed designs for their compatibility with the unique
community character of Nashua and for conformance with the goals of
these regulations. This section requires applicants to develop designs that
are compatible with our community character; the City need not make
adjustments to accommodate these template designs.
This article is adopted pursuant to the City of Nashua Land Use Plan and
New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated Sections 674:21 (Innovative
Land Use Controls) and 674:44 (Site Plan Review Regulations).
This section implements the following Master Plan recommendations:
• Enhance existing commercial areas with improved landscaping,
aesthetics, signage, nighttime light pollution, architectural
design, traffic flow and coordination with abutting land uses
whenever the opportunity presents itself.
§ 190-170. Applicability.
A. This article applies to any application for site plan review that meets the
elements prescribed in Subsections B and C below, or as further limited
in the particular sections of this article.
B. This article applies to new construction, building additions, and
alterations to buildings if those alterations would affect the exterior
appearance of the building visible from a public street or right-of-way,
or from neighboring residential properties.
C. This article does not apply to:
§ 190-170 FLAG § 190-170
164:695
§ 190-171. Multifamily dwelling units.
§ 190-172. Nonresidential buildings.
(1) Single-family, two-family or three-family dwellings; or
(2) Routine repair or maintenance of structures; or
(3) Any work on the interior of a building; or
(4) Any existing structures for which no exterior alterations are
proposed; or
(5) Modifications solely for the purpose of providing safe means of
egress or access in order to meet requirements of the Building
Code.77
(6) Minor site plan amendments. (See § 190-131.)
D. A waiver or appeal from the requirements of this section may be filed
with the Planning Board pursuant to § 190-148.
A. Applicability. This section applies to any application for site plan
approval for a multifamily building that includes at least four dwelling
units.
B. Submittal requirements. The applicant shall submit the external
elevations depicting architectural design of the proposed development
to ensure that it complies with the goals of harmonious existence with
the neighborhood and the environment. Application materials shall be
supplemented by photographs, material samples, color charts,
sketches, models, or other materials that will assist the Board in
gaining a visual understanding of the application.
C. Standards. Materials, colors, and building facades shall be compatible
with the character of the neighborhood.
A. Applicability.
(1) This section applies to any nonresidential building.
(2) This section applies to all building facades and exterior walls that
are visible from adjoining public streets or properties. These
standards are intended to reduce the massive scale of large
buildings which, without application of these standards, would be
incompatible with the City's desired character. These standards are
also intended to ensure that buildings incorporate architectural
features and patterns that provide visual interest at the pedestrian
scale, reduce massive aesthetic effects, and reflect the local
character.
77.Editor's Note: See Ch. 105, Building Construction.
§ 190-170 NASHUA CODE § 190-172
164:696
B. Facades.
(1) Facades exceeding 150 feet in length, measured horizontally, shall
incorporate wall plane projections or recesses having a depth of at
least 3% of the length of the facade and extending at least 20% of
the length of the facade. No uninterrupted length of any facade
shall exceed 150 horizontal feet.
(2) Ground floor facades that face public streets shall have arcades,
display windows, entry areas, awnings, or other such features
along no less than 50% of their horizontal length.
C. Roofing. The following standards are intended to foster variations in
rooflines to add interest to, and reduce the massive scale of large
buildings, and to ensure that roof features complement the character of
adjoining development. Roofs shall have the feature in Subsection C(1)
below and one other of the following features:
(1) Parapets concealing flat roofs and rooftop equipment, such as
HVAC units from public view. The average height of such parapets
shall not exceed 15% of the height of the supporting wall and such
parapets shall not exceed, at any point, 1/3 of the height of the
supporting wall. Such parapets shall feature three-dimensional
cornice treatment and shall not be of a constant height for a
distance of greater than 150 feet.
(2) Overhanging eaves, extending no less than three feet past the
supporting walls, for no less than 30% of the building perimeter.
(3) Sloping roofs that do not exceed the average height of the
supporting walls, with an average slope greater than or equal to
one foot of vertical rise for every three feet of horizontal run and
less than or equal to one foot of vertical rise for every one foot of
horizontal run.
(4) Three or more roof slope planes.
D. Materials and colors. Applicants shall comply with the following
standards in order to respect the historic design vernacular of the City:
(1) The following elements shall be integral parts of the building
fabric, and not superficially applied: trim, graphics, paint, color
changes, material changes, texture changes and relief features
(such as offsets, projections and reveals).
(2) Exterior building materials shall include, without limitation:
(a) Brick;
(b) Wood;
(c) Sandstone;
§ 190-172 FLAG § 190-172
164:697
(d) Concrete block or split-faced block except as provided in
Subsection D(4) below;
(e) Other stone masonry native to the State of New Hampshire; or
(f) Other materials of similar appearance and durability as
determined by the Planning Board.
(3) Facade colors shall be low reflectance, subtle, neutral or earth-tone
colors. The use of metallic, black or fluorescent colors is prohibited.
Building trim and accent areas may feature brighter colors,
including primary colors.
(4) Predominant exterior building materials shall not include the
following:
(a) Smooth-faced concrete block;
(b) Smooth-faced tilt-up concrete panels; or
(c) Prefabricated steel panels.
(5) Industrial park areas may use fabricated metal wall panels and
undressed concrete or cinder block as well as reflective glass.
E. Entryways. Buildings shall include multiple entrances because they
reduce walking distances from cars, facilitate pedestrian and bicycle
access from public sidewalks, and provide convenience where certain
entrances offer access to individual stores, or identified departments of
a retail establishment. Multiple entrances also mitigate the effect of the
unbroken walls and neglected areas that often characterize building
facades that face bordering land uses.
(1) All sides of a principal building that directly face an abutting public
street shall feature at least one customer entrance, except where
pedestrian access is not practical. Where a principal building
directly faces more than two abutting public streets, this
recommendation would apply only to two sides of the building,
including the side of the building facing the primary street, and
another side of the building facing a second street.
(2) Applicants are encouraged to provide entryway design elements
and variations which provide orientation and aesthetically pleasing
character to the building. The following standards identify
desirable entryway design features. Each principal building on a
site shall have clearly defined, highly visible customer entrances
featuring not less than three of the following:
(a) Canopies or porticos;
(b) Roof overhangs;
(c) Recesses/projections;
§ 190-172 NASHUA CODE § 190-172
164:698
(d) Arcades;
(e) Raised corniced parapets over the door;
(f) Peaked roof forms;
(g) Arches;
(h) Outdoor patios;
(i) Display windows;
(j) Architectural details such as tile work and moldings which are
integrated into the building structure and design; or
(k) Integral planters or wing walls that incorporate landscaped
areas and/or places for sitting.
F. Mechanical appurtenances. Mechanical appurtenances shall be located
within the structure, except as provided herein. External mechanical
appurtenances such as heating and air-conditioning equipment may be
located on the exterior portion of the structure, but shall be screened
and finished to match the colors of adjacent building materials.
Mechanical appurtenances shall include any necessary sound buffer
and/or noise attenuation equipment sufficient to reduce sound levels to
50 decibels during the daytime hours (7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.) and 45
decibels during the nighttime hours (8:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.) along any
lot line abutting a residential zoning district.
§ 190-172 FLAG § 190-172
164:699

ARTICLE XXV
Conservation Regulations.
Purpose: This Part 4 establishes standards and regulations governing
environmental constraints. See also Article VII (Floodplain Management).
This article is designed to minimize the negative effects of grading steep
slopes and to encourage applicants to avoid erosion, sedimentation, or
other impacts resulting from development in significant natural areas.
In addition, this article implements the following requirements of the
Conservation Element of the Master Plan:
• Provides for the protection of existing vegetation (especially
large trees) in development sites in the site plan and subdivision
regulations (Conservation Element).
• Clear cutting or near clear-cutting of vegetation should be
prohibited (Conservation Element).
§ 190-173. Applicability.
§ 190-174. Sensitive site features.
A. This Part 4 applies to subdivision plans or site plans, as more
particularly described in each section or article of this Part 4.
B. A waiver or appeal from the requirements of this article may be filed
with the Planning Board pursuant to § 190-148.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all applications for subdivision and
site plan approval except applications within the D-1/MU and D-3
Downtown Zoning Districts.
B. Application submittal requirements.
(1) An application subject to this section shall include the location and
extent of any knolls, ravines, unique views or slopes exceeding
15%, stone walls, rock outcroppings, woodlands or stands of trees,
cluster of vegetation, trees exceeding 10 inches diameter at breast
height, endangered species or fauna, highly erodible soils, or
similar significant natural or historic features.
(2) Applicants shall consider impacts to sensitive site features. For
purposes of this subsection, "impacts" may include erosion,
sedimentation, water quality, or stormwater runoff.
C. Incentives.
(1) As an incentive to encourage the protection of sensitive site
features, the Planning Board may grant a full or partial waiver from
the minimum lot size requirements and dimensional requirements
of § 190-16, so long as the proposed development does not exceed
the maximum density required for the applicable zoning district.
§ 190-173 FLAG § 190-174
164:701
§ 190-175. Conservation area and common open space
monumentation.
(2) Sensitive site features may be included as part of the parks, open
space, landscaping or buffers required for subdivision or site plan
approval where permitted by Article XXIX.
A. Applicability. This section applies to any development subject to an
application for subdivision or site plan approval.
B. Requirements.
(1) Any conservation area or common open space established pursuant
to the regulations for a conservation subdivision (§ 190-40), a
planned residential development (§ 190-26), or a buffer established
pursuant to Article XI (Wetlands) shall be indicated by a
permanent, freestanding marker at the edge of the conservation
area or common open space. This requirement applies to each lot of
record to be created by any subdivision plan.
(2) The marker height shall be at least three feet above the ground. It
shall indicate that it marks the edge of a conservation area,
common open space or wetland buffer and shall contain the
following language: "Conservation Area: Restrictions Apply." The
marker shall be composed of a post with a metal plaque. The post
shall be constructed of composite treated wood, granite, recycled
plastic, pressure treated posts that do not contain arsenic. The
plaques may purchased from the Planning Department.
(3) If markers have been located on an approved subdivision or site
plan, they should be located according to the plan, unless site
conditions warrant an exception.
§ 190-174 NASHUA CODE § 190-175
164:702
ARTICLE XXVI
Grading and Removal of Soil
Purpose: This article regulates soil removal incidental to construction. It is
distinguishable from Part 5, which regulates extractive industries.
§ 190-176. Applicability.
§ 190-177. Excavation standards.
Applicants shall comply with RSA 155:E.
§ 190-178. Grading standards.
Grading activities shall comply with § 105-1 of the City Code and the
Building Code.
§ 190-179. Erosion control.
See § 190-215, Stormwater management standards.
A. Loam, clay, sod, sand and gravel may not be taken from land except
after application and issuance of a permit from the Administrative
Officer after consultation with the City Engineer. The application shall
be processed as an administrative permit pursuant to Article XIV.
B. Any area being excavated for buildings, farm ponds, man-made lakes,
land contouring, swimming pools, streets and driveways does not
require a permit for the removal of loam.
C. Activities referenced in Subsection A and authorized by another permit
required by the City or state, including but not limited to site specific
approval for significant alteration of terrain under RSA 485-A:17 and
New Hampshire Code of Administrative Rules part Env-Ws 415.
D. Any person violating any provision of this article shall, for each
violation, upon conviction thereof, be subject to punishment as provided
in § 1-11.
§ 190-176 FLAG § 190-179
164:703

ARTICLE XXVII
Landscaping
This article implements the following Master Plan policies:
• Review the commercial site landscaping provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance and update if deemed necessary. Special emphasis
should be placed on ensuring adequate buffers between
noncompatible land uses.
• Enhance existing commercial areas with improved landscaping,
aesthetics, signage, nighttime light pollution, architectural
design, traffic flow and coordination with abutting land uses
whenever the opportunity presents itself.
• Ensure adequate buffers between all commercial development
and abutting noncommercial land uses.
• Harmonize industrial expansion or revitalization with
surrounding land uses.
• Enhance the visual quality of new and existing industrial areas
through improved building design, landscaping, signage and
control of nighttime light pollution.
• Encourage attractive, landscaped, and sensitively sited
industrial development that is compatible with surrounding land
uses.
• The landscaping section of the Zoning Ordinance should be
reassessed to see if it can be strengthened to provide more
attractive and well-designed residential, commercial and
industrial development.
§ 190-180. Applicability.
A. Generally. This article applies to any application for subdivision or site
plan, except as provided below.
B. Planning Board discretionary powers. The Planning Board may waive
any requirement of this article when existing vegetation, topography or
other features already ensure proper landscape treatment. The
Planning Board may require the applicant to offset a waiver in the
amount and type of landscaping on one part of a site with additional
landscaping on another part of the site.
§ 190-180 FLAG § 190-181
164:705
§ 190-181. Screening and buffers.
Purpose: These screening and buffer requirements are intended to mitigate
the impacts of light, noise, odor, vibration, and visual blight from
nonresidential development in nonresidential districts on adjacent
residential districts. These requirements are intended to preserve, protect,
and restore the quality of life and property values for residential
neighborhoods that share a boundary with a nonresidential district. The
requirements of this section shall be incumbent upon both residential and
nonresidential uses on both sides of the boundary between residential
and nonresidential districts. All buffers shall be provided on the premises
within the nonresidential district immediately adjacent to a residential
district boundary.
A. Applicability.
(1) Screening and buffers are required for:
(a) Any lot in any industrial or commercial district that abuts a
residential district; or
(b) Any use allowed in any industrial or commercial district that
abuts a residential district.
(2) Structures, pavement, utility construction, signage and similar
hardscape improvements shall not be permitted to encroach on any
buffer unless specifically permitted by the Planning Board.
B. Buffer landscape and improvement standards.
(1) Required buffers. The buffer is intended to be landscaped and
improved in order to provide effective visual screening on a yearround
basis for uses in residential districts at a boundary with a
nonresidential district. Buffers shall employ existing vegetation, or
nursery stock, or both, as well as fences, walls, earth berms, or
grade changes, in accordance with these standards. These
standards are intended to create a dense or opaque screen for the
first six feet above the ground elevation of the residential district
immediately adjacent to the district boundary, and a semiopaque
screen from the sixth to 30th foot above that ground elevation.
Table 181-1 describes the type of buffer required for abutting
zoning districts:
§ 190-181 NASHUA CODE § 190-181
164:706
Table 181-1
Required Buffer Yards
Adjoining Zoning Districts
Zoning
District
of
Applicant* R-40 R-30R-18 R-9
RA
RB
RC
LB GB D HB PI GI CI
R-40 N/
A
N/A N/
A
N/A N/
A
N/
A
N/
A
B D E E E E E
R-30 N/
A
N/A N/
A
N/A N/
A
N/
A
N/
A
B D E E E E E
R-18 N/
A
N/A N/
A
N/A N/
A
N/
A
N/
A
B D E E E E E
R-9 N/
A
N/A N/
A
N/A N/
A
N/
A
N/
A
B D E E E E E
R-A N/
A
N/A N/
A
N/A N/
A
N/
A
N/
A
B D D E E E E
R-B N/
A
N/A N/
A
N/A N/
A
N/
A
N/
A
A D D D D E D
R-C N/
A
N/A N/
A
N/A N/
A
N/
A
N/
A
A D C D C E C
LB B B B B B A A N/A D B D D E D
GB D D D D D D D D N/
A
C C C E E
D E E E E D D C B C N/A C C E C
HB E E E E E D D D C C N/
A
C E D
PI E E E E E D C D C C C N/A E D
GI E E E E E E E E E E E E N/
A
E
CI E E E E E D C D D D D D E N/
A
* This includes any application for subdivision, site plan or
building permit approval.
(2) Buffer types. There are six types of buffer yards. Table 181-2 shows
the minimum width and number of plantings trees and/or shrubs
required for each 100 lineal feet for each buffer yard. The Applicant
may either plant new trees or plants, or preserve existing trees or
plants, within the required buffer that meet the requirements of
this subsection.
§ 190-181 FLAG § 190-181
164:707
Table 181-2
Minimum Plant Materials Required for Each Buffer Yard
Type
Trees
Buffer
Type
Minimum
Width
(feet) Large
Medium/
Small Shrubs
Fence (F),
Berm (B),
or Wall
(W)
(optional)
A 10 2 2 20
B 15 2 2 20 F or W
C 20 2 3 20 F, W or B
D 30 2 3 20 F, W or B
E 40 2 4 20 F, W or B
N1 20%
reduction
Any combination of trees or shrubs is
acceptable where the proposed plantings
provide equivalent benefits to the
normally required plantings, as
determined by the Planning Board.
Note 1: "N" means an area of natural vegetation or plant
substitutes.
(3) Size and type of plant materials. Plant materials shall comply with
§ 190-189, Landscape design, and this subsection.
(a) Trees. The mixture of evergreen and deciduous trees shall be
such that no more than 60% of the trees are deciduous and no
less than 40% of the trees are evergreens. At the time of
planting, deciduous trees shall have a trunk caliper of 2 1/2
inches when measured six inches above grade, and evergreen
trees shall be at least six feet in height.
(b) Shrubs. The mixture of evergreen and deciduous shrubs shall
be such that no more than 40% of the shrubs are deciduous
and no less than 60% of the shrubs are evergreens. Shrubs
shall be at least two feet in height at the time of planting, and
all shrubs shall be of a species that will attain a mature height
of at least six feet and width of at least four feet within five
years of the time of planting. Shrubs shall be planted such that
a dense visual screen will be established by the mature shrubs.
(4) Fences and walls. The required fence or wall shall be solid or
opaque, at least six feet in height, and shall be installed parallel to,
and for the entire length of the district boundary. Where a buffer
containing a fence has been established on one side of a residential
district boundary, a fence may not be used to fulfill this
§ 190-181 NASHUA CODE § 190-181
164:708
requirement on the side of the district boundary which is directly
opposite such a fence or wall.
(5) Earth berms.
(a) Earth berms shall be installed with the highest point being at
least two feet above existing grade.
(b) Side slopes of the earth berm shall not exceed a grade steeper
than three feet horizontally for each one foot of vertical
change. Retaining walls may be used to truncate the side
slopes.
(c) Earth berms shall be seeded with grass or wild flower seed
mix.
(d) For buffers with berms that are at least six feet above grade, no
shrub plantings are required.
(e) For buffers with berms that are less than six feet above grade,
shrubs shall be provided in accordance with the requirements
of Subsection B(2). The required height of the shrubs may be
reduced such that the height of the berm plus the height of the
shrubs is equal to six feet, provided that no shrub may be less
than 1 1/2 feet in height.
(f) In the event that buffers on both sides of a district boundary
are developed simultaneously, an earth berm may be
positioned in part or in whole over the district boundary.
(6) Change in grade. If there is a change in grade of at least four feet
above existing grade on the other side of the district boundary, and
the change in grade occurs within the required width of the buffer,
then shrubs shall be provided in accordance with the requirements
of Subsection B(2) of this section. The required height of the shrubs
may be reduced such that the height of the berm plus the height of
the shrubs is equal to six feet, provided that no shrub may be less
than 1 1/2 feet in height. For a change in grade that is at least six
feet above grade within the required width of the buffer, no shrubs
are required.
C. Buffers for district boundaries in collector or local streets. Where a
boundary between a nonresidential district and a residential district is
located within or along the edge of a right-of-way of a collector or local
street, a nonresidential use in the nonresidential district that fronts on
such a street shall incorporate a minimum fifteen-foot wide buffer in the
front yard along the front lot line adjacent to the edge of the right-ofway.
This buffer may vary between 10 to 20 feet in width, provided that
an average width of 15 feet is maintained along the entire front lot line.
The buffer shall include at least two large trees, two medium or small
trees, and 20 shrubs for each 100 lineal feet.
§ 190-181 FLAG § 190-181
164:709
D. Buffer use restrictions. Buildings, impervious surfaces, and parking, as
well as the storage and display of vehicles, goods, and materials, are
prohibited within the buffers required pursuant to this section.
E. Screening and orientation of mechanical equipment. All appurtenant
mechanical equipment, including heating, ventilating, and airconditioning
equipment, as well as exhaust fans and vents, shall be
visually screened from adjacent residential districts and the public
right-of-way. Noise and odors emanating from the equipment, fans, and
vents shall be directed away from residential district boundaries by
means of location of the equipment on the building or through the
installation of baffles or deflectors.
F. Implementation of the buffer requirements. Where lots abutting a
residential district boundary have been previously developed, the
standards and requirements of this section shall be implemented at
such time as a change in use classification occurs, or an existing use is
expanded or intensified in such a manner that there is an increase in
the parking demand based on the current parking standards contained
within this chapter.
G. Conditional use permits required for buffers. The Planning Board may
grant a waiver pursuant to § 190-148 of this chapter, for alternative
buffer arrangements where certain specific requirements of this section
cannot be met, as follows:
(1) Where the location of existing buildings precludes compliance with
the buffer width and yard setback standards, the Planning Board
may allow a buffer that provides the maximum separation and
screening possible given the location of such buildings. In granting
a conditional use permit, the Board may require the buffer to be
wider where not obstructed by buildings, or require additional
fencing or walls, or require additional or larger landscape
materials; and
(2) Where the land for a required buffer is encumbered by an
easement, covenant, or other recorded legal instrument that
prohibits or disallows thereon the planting and maintaining of trees
and shrubs, or limits tree growth to less than 20 feet in height, such
land shall not be deemed to fulfill the requirements of this section.
The Planning Board may grant a conditional use permit that will
allow an alternate buffer location which will provide the maximum
screening possible taking in to consideration any use of the
easement that is incompatible with the intent of this section. In
granting a conditional use permit, the Board may require additional
fencing or walls, or require additional or larger landscape
materials.
§ 190-181 NASHUA CODE § 190-182
164:710
§ 190-182. Screening of service or storage areas.
This section applies to refuse storage areas, storage areas, service
entrances, service yards, stockpiled materials, garbage receptacles, fuel
tanks, electric and gas meters utility or service equipment, and other
materials and objects used for service, utilities or storage and situated
on any nonresidential or multifamily residential site. These items shall be
located: (1) so as not to be visible from abutting properties; and (2) so as
not to be visible from public streets (except alleys), or placed in a location
abutting an alley. Where such positioning is not possible, those items shall
be screened from view at the right-of-way line or the property line of
any abutting residential zoning district. Screening may include landscape
plantings, fencing or enclosures of a height at least as tall as the item or
items to be screened.
§ 190-183. Additional screening requirements for industrial and
business uses.
This section applies to screening requirements for industrial and business
uses abutting residential land uses, community facilities or along public
streets. The Planning Board may require a fence of at least six feet in height
in the following situations:
§ 190-184. Surface parking lots.
A. Where an industrial or business use is proposed adjoining property
housing an existing nonconforming dwelling unit, unless the Planning
Board finds that the dwelling unit is unlikely to be converted to
industrial or business use.
B. Where a residentially zoned property is proposed to be developed for an
industrial or business use, and it adjoins residentially zoned properties.
C. Where an industrial or business use adjoins a community facility such
as a school, playground or park or a historic site.
A. Applicability. This section applies to any parking areas that include
more than five spaces.
B. Generally.
(1) Parking medians, islands, and strips shall be curbed for proper
traffic control and safety.
(2) Corner clearance and sight lines shall be observed regarding all
landscaping or buffers/screens.
(3) All trees and other vegetation within parking lot landscaped areas
are subject to the protection during construction (§ 190-187) and
maintenance (§ 190-188) requirements of this article.
(4) Landscaped areas may be included within any parks or open space
required by this chapter.
§ 190-182 FLAG § 190-184
164:711
C. Perimeter landscaping.
(1) A minimum five-foot buffer strip abutting a public right-of-way shall
be landscaped. This requirement does not apply to areas within
required driveway or other access points.
(2) In all zoning districts landscaping shall be required along all sides
of a parking lot or paved drive that abuts adjoining property or a
public right-of-way.
(3) The perimeter landscape buffer along a street shall consist of
planting materials or planting materials and man-made features to
create at a minimum three-foot high visual relief screen in the form
of a hedge, fence, planter box, berm, dividers, shrubbery or trees,
or a combination thereof. All landscaping to form such visual relief
shall create a two-foot-tall minimum screen at planting.
D. Interior landscaping.
(1) Median or islands required. Parking aisles shall not contain more
than 10 spaces in a row unless a planted median and/or island is
provided. The Planning Board may approve an alternative
landscaping plan provided equivalent landscaping is provided.
(2) Medians.
(a) Surface parking lots shall not have more than four parking
aisles without a continuous planted median with a minimum
width of 10 feet.
(b) In order to avoid traffic conflicts, an island extending the
length of the parking stalls shall be provided at end each end of
the median.
(c) The median shall be planted with at least one tree, plus one
tree for each 40 feet of median length. The trees shall include
suitable ground cover.
(d) The median shall be planted with at least one shrub, plus one
shrub per five feet of median length.
(e) The median shall contain adequate ground cover.
(f) Medians shall not be paved or contain sidewalks except as
approved for safe pedestrian circulation.
§ 190-184 NASHUA CODE § 190-184
164:712
§ 190-185. Landscaped yard area requirements.
E. Islands.
(1) Landscaped islands shall include a minimum of two shade trees and
at least one shrub, plus one shrub per five feet of island length.
(2) Landscape islands within the aisles and at the end of the aisles
shall be a minimum of 300 square feet and have a minimum width
of nine feet.
(3) Required islands and medians shall be evenly distributed
throughout such parking areas. The distribution and location of
landscaped areas may be adjusted to accommodate existing trees
or other natural features so long as the total area requirement for
landscaped islands, peninsulas and medians for the respective
parking area is satisfied.
A. The existing natural landscape character shall be preserved to the
extent reasonable and feasible. As an example of this, in a yard area
containing a stand of trees, the developer shall use care to preserve
such trees. In determining whether there is compliance, the Planning
Board shall consider topographical constraints on design, drainage,
access and egress, utilities and other factors reasonably related to the
health, safety and welfare of the public which necessitated disturbance
of the property without the disturbance of its natural character, the
nature and quality of the landscaping installed to replace it and such
other factors as may be relevant and proper. Clearing and stripping of
the natural vegetation on a lot is prohibited prior to obtaining an
approved landscaping plan.
B. The landscaping shall include a mix of tree species with a minimum
trunk caliper of 2 1/2 inches. The total number of trees necessary will
be determined as follows:
(1) There shall be one shade per 40 linear foot of frontage along public
streets and major private streets.
(2) Two ornamental trees per 40 linear foot of frontage may be used as
accent trees in the front yards.
(3) Two ornamental trees may be substituted for one shade tree and
vice versa if approved by the Planning Board.
(4) Residential zoning districts (multifamily dwellings only).
(a) One shade tree for every two dwelling units (multifamily
dwellings).
(b) Two flowering or evergreen trees may be substituted for each
shade tree up to 30% of the required number, if approval by the
Planning Board.
§ 190-184 FLAG § 190-185
164:713
§ 190-186. Subdivision areas.
During the development and construction process, wooded natural and
nonwooded natural areas will be maintain as a healthy vegetative cover to
maintain the soil structure, minimize soil erosion and enhance the quality of
the proposed community. In wooded natural areas, the healthy forest cover
will be retained to reduce the amount of stormwater running across the
ground surface.
(c) Ground plane planting. For multifamily units, a minimum of
10% of the green area of a lot or parcel shall consist of planting
beds with shrubs, flowers, or ground cover.
(5) Ground cover. Suitable ground cover shall be provided in the front
yard area in all zones except where no front yard is proposed.
C. One shrub, plus one shrub per five lineal feet of frontage shall be
planted. Effective use of earth berms, existing topography and existing
trees is also encouraged as a component of the landscape plan and shall
be considered as a part of the landscaping requirement.
D. All newly planted trees shall be planted in a permeable area of no less
than a three-foot-wide radius from the base of the tree.
E. The requirements of this section do not apply to the portion of
properties in the D-1/MU Districts where buildings are constructed
directly adjacent to a public right-of-way.
A. Wooded natural areas.
(1) Plant community groupings or forest types will be identified.
(2) Trees targeted for harvest/removal shall be clearly marked.
(3) Trees to be protected during clearing operations and construction
shall be clearly marked to caution operators.
(4) Trees of special interest, historic trees or trees having unusual
silvicultural characteristics shall be flagged and located on the
landscaping plan. These existing trees shall be protected during
construction as outlined in § 190-187.
(5) The landscape plan will include a reforestation plan to establish
trees in appropriate places, not to attempt to design finished
landscaping near home sites. The plan is intended to establish and
enhance forest cover in certain areas and/or create screens and
buffer strips in critical locations, i.e., sewer/water easements.
(6) A site inspection by the Administrative Officer of trees marked for
saving, cutting or clear-cutting is required prior to cutting of the
lot.
§ 190-185 NASHUA CODE § 190-186
164:714
§ 190-187. Protection during construction.
The protection during construction section, as outlined below, will apply to
commercial, subdivision, parking lot, street slopes and buffer/barrier zone
sections of this chapter.
§ 190-188. Maintenance requirements.
The maintenance requirements as outlined below shall apply to commercial,
subdivision, parking lot areas, street slopes and buffer/barrier zone sections
of this chapter.
B. Nonwooded natural areas. For subdivisions in open fields and other
nonwooded areas, the landscape plan will include a mix of tree species
to be planted on thirty-foot centers to provide for a tree canopy. The
trees will be planted within the City right-of-way or on the private
property boundary line adjacent to the City right-of-way. This section
does not apply if the Planning Board determines that the open field is a
significant natural feature pursuant to Article XXV.
C. Street slopes. In cases where the sloped areas extend more than 10 feet
from the shoulder to the ditch line, the sloped areas must be landscaped
and planted as per § 190-185.
A. Fencing or other protective barrier shall be used around trees near
construction sites.
B. Changes in the normal drainage patterns shall be avoided, and
appropriate protection shall be provided for trees if a grade change is
necessary in the surrounding area.
C. Pedestrian and other traffic patterns should be kept away from trees to
avoid soil compaction.
D. Ensure the proper protection of trees with a caliper of six inches or
greater.
A. Maintenance of landscaping. The owners and their agents shall be
responsible for providing, protecting and maintaining all landscaping in
healthy and growing conditions, replacing it when necessary to ensure
continuous conformance with these guidelines and keeping it free of
refuse or debris.
B. Maintenance of required open space area. The open space area of the
lot as required by the Zoning Ordinance shall generally be left
undisturbed and in its natural state except where necessary to install
utility structures. Where this is not practical due to extensive site
development as cutting and filling, this disturbed open space area shall
be returned to as near a natural state as possible and in accord with the
other requirements outlined herein. It is the intent of this section to
dissuade the unnecessary clearing and disturbing of land so as to
preserve, insofar as practical, the natural and existing growth of
§ 190-186 FLAG § 190-188
164:715
§ 190-189. Landscape design.
The following requirements apply to the implementation of any landscape
plan:
vegetation and to replace when necessary the removed vegetation with
new vegetation indigenous to southern New Hampshire.
C. All newly planted vegetative material shall be guaranteed to meet
minimum American Standard for Nursery Stock standards at the time
of planting and for one year thereafter.
D. The applicant shall establish a maintenance program that addresses the
following:
(1) Vegetation replacement.
(2) Irrigation.
(3) Pruning, fertilizing and insect and disease protection.
(4) Litter or debris cleanup.
(5) Drainage and tree protection if there is a grade change.
E. Pruning should be started early and kept up at regular intervals. Trees
should be pruned and shaped to avoid splitting later in life. Broken tops
and branches should be removed as soon as possible after injury.
Broken, weak or diseased branches should be removed first, dead
branches second and healthy branches last.
F. Trees and shrubs should be protected against damage incurred with
lawn mowers and garden equipment. Keeping grass away from tree
trunks with the use of mulch is recommended.
G. The use of road salt around the trees and shrubs should be avoided or
minimized.
H. Required landscaped areas shall be routinely maintained free of debris
and litter and in good condition, with regular mowing of grass, so as to
present a neat, healthy and orderly appearance. Maintenance shall
include the replacement of all dead plant material within the
guaranteed contract period.
A. Generally.
(1) Examples of permitted trees and shrubs are set forth in Tables
189-1 below. The Administrative Officer may permit substitutions
based on the recommendation of the qualified landscape
professional preparing the plan. In addition, if a listed species is
being invaded or infested by fungi, disease or pests, a substitution
shall be recommended. In no case shall monoculture be permitted.
Plant materials shall show a variety of texture, color, shape and
other characteristics.
§ 190-188 NASHUA CODE § 190-189
164:716
(2) Shrubbery, ground cover and other planting materials shall be used
to complement the tree planting but shall not be the sole
contribution to the landscaping. Effective use of earth berms,
existing topography and existing trees is also encouraged as a
component of the landscape plan and shall be considered as a part
of the planting requirements.
(3) All shade trees to be used shall have a minimum trunk caliper of
2 1/2 inches. Inclusion in the landscape design of existing trees is
encouraged. All shade trees to be planted shall be hardy for the
Nashua botanical zone.
(4) Shrubs shall have a minimum height measured from finished grade
of 24 inches. The Planning Board may permit plants with a lower
growing habit than 24 inches.
(5) All required landscaping shall be provided with either:
(a) An underground sprinkling system; or
(b) An outside hose attachment.
(6) All landscaping which is in required landscaped areas and which is
adjacent to pavement shall be protected with concrete or granite
curbs or equivalent barriers (such as car bumpers, railroad ties,
continuous border plants or hedgerows) when necessary to protect
the vegetation from vehicular damage.
(7) Landscaping in landscaped areas shall not obstruct the view
between the street and the access drives and parking aisles near
the street yard entries and exits, nor shall any landscaping which
creates an obstruction of view be located in the radius of any curb
return. (See § 190-16K.)
(8) Plant materials used in conformance with the provisions of this
article shall be of specimen quality and conform to the reference
shall be made to American Nursery and Landscape Association
(ANLA) [formerly the American Association of Nurserymen], the
American Standard for Nursery Stock (1996) [ANSI Z60.1-1996],
which document is hereby incorporated by reference.
(9) Native species and low-maintenance design are encouraged.
B. Trees. Examples of permitted trees are set forth in Table 579-1, below.
§ 190-189 FLAG § 190-189
164:717
Table 189-1
Examples of Permitted Trees
Category Definition Examples of Permitted Species
Large or
shade trees
A tree of a
species that
normally
reaches a
height of 50
feet or more
upon maturity
Basswood
Beech
Black oak
European larch
Hemlock
London plane
tree
Pin oak
Red maple
Red oak
Red pine
Scarlet oak
Scotch pine
Sugar maple
Thornless
honeylocust
White ash
White oak
White pine
Medium
trees/
ornamental
trees
A tree of a
species that
normally
reaches a
height
exceeding 20
feet upon
maturity
Arborvitae
Austrian pine
Black birch
Black locust
European
white birch
Ginkgo
Larch
Little-leaf
linden
Norway spruce
Pitch pine
White birch
White spruce
Small
trees/
ornamental
trees
A tree of a
species that
normally
reaches a
height of less
than 20 feet
upon maturity
Amur maple
Carolina
silverbell
Cornelian
cherry
dogwood
European
mountain ash
Flowering
dogwood
Hop
hornbeam
Hornbeam
Pin cherry
Red cedar
Shadblaw
Serviceberry
Washington
hawthorn
C. Shrubbery. Required shrubs shall measure at least two feet in height at
the time of planting, when measured from the grade to the top
horizontal plane of the shrub. Examples of permitted shrubs are as
follows:
Nannyberry Black alder Japanese yew
Rosebay
rhododendron
Bayberry Panicled dogwood
Highbush cranberry Mapleleaf viburnum Peegee hydrangea
Highbush blueberry Hobblebush Mountain laurel
Arrowwood Red osier dogwood Witch hazel
§ 190-189 NASHUA CODE § 190-189
164:718
ARTICLE XXVIII
Parking
Purpose: This article ensures that new development provides adequate offstreet
parking to minimize spillover into residential areas and to protect
emergency access, while avoiding the blighting and environmental effects
of excessive parking. This article implements the following Master Plan
policy:
• The City's commercial parking standards should be reassessed
in light of the most recent parking standards for all types of
commercial land uses. For some commercial land use types, the
present parking standards appear to require too few parking
spaces, while for other land uses too many parking spaces may
be required. In the latter situation, unnecessarily large parking
lots are built, which are underutilized for most of the year.
§ 190-190. Applicability.
§ 190-191. Off-street parking and loading required.
A. This Part 4 applies to subdivision plans or site plans.
B. A waiver or appeal from any requirement of this article may be filed
with the Planning Board pursuant to § 190-148. The Planning Board
may waive the construction of some of the parking areas required by
this article, provided that all of the following conditions are met:
(1) That the site plan indicates where all parking would be constructed
in order to meet the general requirements set forth in this article;
(2) That such required space is reserved for use if such parking
requirements must be met in the future;
(3) That the applicant demonstrates that the current use of the site
shall not require additional parking beyond what is proposed to be
built; and
(4) That such plan stipulate that a site plan amendment shall be
necessary if the use of the site changes.
A. Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided for every new
structure, the enlargement of an existing structure, the development of
a new land use or any change in an existing use in its entirety in
accordance with the Parking Matrix (§ 190-198, Table 198-1, below).
B. Required off-street parking or loading spaces shall continue to serve the
uses or structures for which they were intended so long as such use or
structure remains.
C. Required off-street loading spaces shall not be construed as being part
of the required off-street parking spaces.
§ 190-190 FLAG § 190-191
164:719
§ 190-192. Location.
§ 190-193. Parking space dimensions.
D. When the computation of required parking or loading spaces results in
the requirement of a fractional space, any fraction over 1/2 shall
require one space.
A. Required off-street parking spaces shall be provided on the same lot as
the principal use they are required to serve. The Planning Board may
permit parking spaces to be established as a separate lot, provided that:
(1) They shall be established no further than 300 feet from the closest
lot line to which they are appurtenant; and
(2) The lot is either owned by the applicant or there is a permanent
easement or agreement to use the separate lot.
B. The loading spaces required for the uses listed in § 190-199 shall in all
cases be on the same lot as the use they are intended to serve.
C. Any off-street parking on a lot containing five or less spaces may not be
situated in a front yard unless such parking is located on a driveway no
wider than 24 feet and having an area not to exceed 50% of the area of
the front yard.
A. Each required off-street parking space shall be at least nine feet in
width and at least 20 feet in length, exclusive of access drives, aisles,
ramps and columns, or areas utilized for other purposes, except that
the spaces required for grocery stores of more than 5,000 square feet
shall be at least 10 feet in width.
B. All parking spaces provided for retail sales establishments shall have
two painted stripes at least two inches wide one foot apart, separating
each parking stall.
C. For parallel parking, the length of the parking space shall be 23 feet.
D. Except on lots occupied by one- and two-family dwellings, each offstreet
parking space shall open directly upon an aisle or driveway. The
width of the aisle or driveway, excluding the curb cut or frontage
location, shall conform to Table 193-1 below. Driveway spacing and
width is governed by § 190-209.
E. The aisle or driveway shall be unobstructed and allow for the passage of
emergency vehicles at all times.
§ 190-191 NASHUA CODE § 190-193
164:720
§ 190-194. Multiple parking and loading area standards.
All parking and loading areas containing over five spaces, including
automotive and drive-in establishments of all types shall be either contained
within structures or subject to the following:
Table 193-1
Aisle or Driveway Width
Parking Angle
(degrees)
Aisle/Driveway Width
(feet)
45 12
60 18
90 20
The angle shall be measured between the center line of the parking
space and the center line of the aisle.
A. The area shall comply with the parking lot landscaping standards in
§ 190-184.
B. The area and access driveways thereto shall be surfaced with
bituminous or cement concrete material and shall be graded and
drained so as to dispose of all surface water accumulation in
accordance with acceptable engineering practices. The Planning Board
may authorize use of pervious surfaces for driveways and parking areas
under appropriate circumstances.
C. A bumper of masonry, steel or heavy timber, or a concrete or bituminous
concrete curb or berm curb which is backed shall be placed at the edge
of surfaced areas except driveways in order to protect abutting
structures, properties and sidewalks, when such surface areas are
within four feet of the abutting structure, properties or sidewalks.
D. Any fixture used to illuminate any area shall be so arranged as to direct
the light away from the street and away from adjoining premises used
for residential purposes.
E. There shall not be any motor vehicle repair or gasoline or oil service
facilities for profit except on a lot occupied by a permitted automotive
use. Any aboveground gasoline or oil facilities shall be at least 25 feet
from any lot line.
F. There shall not be any storage of materials or equipment or display of
merchandise within a required parking area except as part of approved
building operations.
G. Parking shall not be located within the required front yard area in any
district.
§ 190-193 FLAG § 190-194
164:721
§ 190-195. Municipal lot substitutions.
The Planning Board may allow the substitution of space within municipal
parking lots in lieu of the parking requirements of this article, provided they
are located within 1,000 feet of the building which is intended to be served.
§ 190-196. Increase or change of use.
§ 190-197. Nonconforming parking.
See § 190-123.
§ 190-198. Number of off-street parking spaces.
H. Parking and loading spaces shall be so arranged as not to permit
backing of automobiles onto any street.
I. Driveway spacing and width is governed by § 190-209.
J. The Planning Board may grant a conditional use permit to permit the
reduction of the parking space requirements to 80% of that required in
the table of off-street regulations where conditions unique to the use
will reasonably justify such a reduction.
A. When the intensity of use of any building, structure or premise shall be
increased through the addition of dwelling units, floor area, beds,
seating capacity or other unit of measurement, parking and loading
facilities, as required, shall be provided for such increase in intensity of
use.
B. Whenever the existing use of a building, structure or premise is
changed or converted to a new use permitted by this article, parking
and loading facilities shall be provided, as required, for the new use.
A. Number of required off-street parking spaces for any use within the City
shall be as set forth in the Parking Matrix, Table 198-1.
§ 190-194 NASHUA CODE § 190-198
164:722
§ 190-198 FLAG § 190-198
164:723
§ 190-198 NASHUA CODE § 190-198
164:724
§ 190-198 FLAG § 190-198
164:725
§ 190-198 NASHUA CODE § 190-198
164:726
§ 190-198 FLAG § 190-198
164:727
§ 190-198 NASHUA CODE § 190-198
164:728
§ 190-198 FLAG § 190-198
164:729
§ 190-198 NASHUA CODE § 190-198
164:730
§ 190-198 FLAG § 190-198
164:731
§ 190-198 NASHUA CODE § 190-198
164:732
§ 190-198 FLAG § 190-198
164:733
§ 190-198 NASHUA CODE § 190-198
164:734
§ 190-198 FLAG § 190-198
164:735
§ 190-198 NASHUA CODE § 190-198
164:736
§ 190-199. Off-street loading spaces.
B. In determining the minimum required number of off-street parking
spaces, the following shall apply:
(1) In sports arenas, churches and other places of assembly in which
patrons occupy benches, pews or other similar seating facilities,
each 20 inches of such seating shall be construed as one seat.
(2) In the case of open space floor areas used for temporary seating
purposes, an area of 16 square feet usable for seating shall be
counted as one seat.
A. The following table of number of required off-street loading spaces shall
apply throughout the City:
§ 190-198 FLAG § 190-199
164:737
§ 190-200. Handicapped parking requirements.
Table 199-1
Number of Required Off-Street Loading Regulations
Use Category
Minimum Number of Loading
Spaces per Unit
(1) Retail trade, manufacturing
and hospital establishment
with over 5,000 square feet
of gross floor area
1 per 20,000 square feet or fraction
thereof of gross floor area up to 2
spaces; 1 additional space for each
60,000 square feet or fraction
thereof of gross floor area over
40,000 square feet; space used for
ambulance receiving at a hospital is
not to be used to meet these loading
requirements
(2) Business services, other
services, community facility
(school, church, City
building, recreation, etc.) or
public utility establishment
with over 5,000 square feet
of gross floor area
1 per 75,000 square feet or fraction
thereof of gross floor area up to 2
spaces; 1 additional space for each
200,000 square feet or fraction
thereof of gross floor area floor area
over 150,000 square feet
B. Loading spaces shall be at least 12 feet in width and 45 feet in length
and with a vertical clearance of at least 14 feet, and shall have an area
of not less than 600 square feet plus access and maneuvering space.
The dimensions of the loading space may be reduced by the
Administrative Officer when it is clearly evident that service vehicles
utilizing the space will not require the area listed above, not to be less
than 200 square feet.
A. Properly signed or designated parking spaces for the physically
handicapped shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of this
section, and shall be located as close as possible to elevators, ramps,
walkways and entrances.
B. Each required handicapped space shall conform to the requirements of
the Americans with Disabilities Act. Designated handicapped spaces
shall be provided in all parking areas of five or more spaces (as required
in § 190-198) in conformance with the following table:
§ 190-199 NASHUA CODE § 190-200
164:738
§ 190-201. Parking structures.
§ 190-202. Shared parking.
Table 200-3
Required Handicapped Parking Spaces
Number of Spaces Required
(See § 190-198)
Required Number of
Handicapped Spaces
5-25 1
26-50 2
51-75 3
76-100 4
101-150 5
151-200 6
201-300 7
301-400 8
401-500 9
501-1,000 2% of total
Over 1,000 20 plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000
C. Parking spaces required by this section shall be properly signed or
otherwise designated and shall be counted toward the number of
spaces required by § 190-198.
A. Applicability. This section applies to the construction or alteration of
any parking structure.
B. Criteria.
(1) Parking structures shall be designed to have horizontal versus
stepped or sloping levels at areas of public view.
(2) Sloped roofs are not required for parking structures, however:
(a) The upper and lowest level of parking shall incorporate
sufficient screening to shield cars from public view.
(b) Parapet treatment is required to terminate the deck and given
proper architectural finish to the structure. Cornices,
overhands and other devices which are consistent with the
design of historical buildings may be employed.
(3) The design of parking decks shall be complementary to the design
of buildings in the area.
§ 190-200 FLAG § 190-202
164:739
A. Parking required for two or more buildings or uses may be provided in
combined facilities on the same or adjacent lots, subject to the criteria
established in Subsections B through E below.
B. The parking areas shall be approved by the Administrative Officer,
subject to the criteria established in this section.
C. The parking areas shall be available and reserved for the several
buildings or uses by a contract or other legally binding agreement.
D. The number of such spaces shall comply with the minimum parking
ratios established in Table 198-1 or, where approved by the
Administrative Officer, an alternative ratio established under
Subsection E below.
E. Developments that contain a mix of uses on the same parcel, as set
forth in Table 202-1 below, may reduce the amount of required parking
in accordance with the following methodology:
(1) Determine the minimum parking requirements in accordance with
Table 198-1 for each land use as if it were a separate use,
(2) Multiply each amount by the corresponding percentages for each
of the five time periods set forth in Table 202-1,
(3) Calculate the total for each time period, and
(4) Select the total with the highest value as the required minimum
number of parking spaces.
Table 202-1
Shared Parking
Parking Ratio Reduction Factors
Weekday Weekend
(A)
Land Use
(B)
Daytime
(9:00
a.m. to
4:00
p.m.)
(C)
Evening
(6:00
p.m. to
midnight)
(C)
Daytime
(9:00
a.m. to
4:00
p.m.)
(E)
Evening
(6:00
p.m. to
midnight)
(F)
Nighttime
(midnight
to 6:00
a.m.)
Office/
industrial
100% 10% 10% 5% 5%
Retail 60% 90% 100% 70% 5%
Hotel 75% 100% 75% 100% 75%
Restaurant 50% 100% 100% 100% 10%
§ 190-202 NASHUA CODE § 190-202
164:740
Table 202-1
Shared Parking
Parking Ratio Reduction Factors
Weekday Weekend
(A)
Land Use
(B)
Daytime
(9:00
a.m. to
4:00
p.m.)
(C)
Evening
(6:00
p.m. to
midnight)
(C)
Daytime
(9:00
a.m. to
4:00
p.m.)
(E)
Evening
(6:00
p.m. to
midnight)
(F)
Nighttime
(midnight
to 6:00
a.m.)
Entertainment/
commercial
40% 100% 80% 100% 10%
§ 190-202 FLAG § 190-202
164:741

ARTICLE XXIX
Parks, Recreation, and Civic Spaces
Purpose: Parks and open space provide a valuable asset to the urban
form of the City, its historical development, and the general welfare of its
residents. It is the intent of this section that parks and open space should
provide focal points for new communities. A central square or green, for
example, may comprise a majority of the area required for dedication. The
standards of this article ensure that all designated parks and/or open space
has suitable size, location, dimension, topography and general character,
and proper road and/or pedestrian access.
This section implements the following Master Plan recommendations:
A. Encourage the protection of wildlife habitats through improved land
use regulations (Conservation Element).
B. Ensure that an adequate amount of open space is set aside for the
enjoyment of citizens, as a relief from the built environment, and as
wildlife habitat (Conservation Element).
C. Require developers to set aside adequate amounts of accessible and
usable recreational land within subdivisions and on large
nonresidential tracts, where advisable, through the subdivision and
site plan approval processes (Conservation Element).
§ 190-203. Applicability.
§ 190-204. Required open space, parks or civic space.
A. This section shall apply to any application for subdivision plan or site
plan approval encompassing at least 10 acres, unless exempt pursuant
to Subsection C below.
B. The location and extent of parks and/or open space shall be indicated on
any design review or concept plan.
C. This section does not apply to any subdivision not exceeding three lots,
and where the parent parcel is not under common ownership with an
abutting parcel that can be subdivided.
A. Required open space, parks or civic space shall be reserved at a ratio of
700 square feet per dwelling unit for residential zoning districts, or that
portion of mixed use development containing dwelling units.
B. In order to ensure that spaces required by this action are accessible
and provide value to the subdivision residents, required open space,
parks or civic space shall:
(1) Have direct access to a public street or to a private street
maintained by a homeowners' association or condominium
association; and
§ 190-203 FLAG § 190-204
164:743
§ 190-205. Maintenance and preservation.
(2) Include at least 40 feet of frontage on a public or private street;
and
(3) For passive open space, shall include trails, park benches, and
similar facilities needed for common access; and
(4) For active open space, shall include playground equipment, golf
courses, bicycle trails, baseball or softball fields, football or soccer
fields, basketball courts, tennis courts, picnic areas, playgrounds,
or landscaped sitting areas; and
(5) For passive open space, shall include resource-based recreation
facilities such as boating, fishing, camping, enhancement areas,
nature trails, nature study, or trails.
C. The Planning Board may approve lots that do not conform to the
dimensional standards of the zoning regulations exclusively for
conservation purposes. See § 190-166.
A. Generally. Land designated as a park or open space shall be maintained
as a park or open space and may not be separately sold, subdivided, or
developed except as provided below. Natural areas, greenways or
greenbelts shall not be cleared except as needed to provide trails as
permitted by § 190-208, Table 208-1. Areas designated as common open
space shall not be subdivided, but shall be shown as a "park" or "open
space" on a plan or a site plan. Common open space areas may be
owned, preserved, and maintained by any of the mechanisms described
in Subsections C through H below, or combinations thereof. The
instruments creating the dedication, homeowners association,
condominium association, easement, transfer, or improvement district
shall be provided with the application for subdivision plan approval.
B. Common open space plan. A common open space plan shall be
submitted as a part of the application for development approval
including the project phasing schedule. This plan shall designate and
indicate the boundaries of all proposed parks or open space required by
this section. The plan shall designate areas to be reserved as a park or
open space.
(1) Designate the type of park or open space which will be provided.
(2) Specify the manner in which the park or open space shall be
perpetuated, maintained, and administered.
C. Dedication of land to City. Dedication of the park or open space to the
City shall satisfy the requirements of this subsection. Dedication shall
take the form of a fee simple ownership. The City shall accept undivided
parks and/or open space, provided that:
(1) Such land is accessible to the residents of the City; and
§ 190-204 NASHUA CODE § 190-205
164:744
(2) There is no cost of acquisition other than any costs incidental to the
transfer of ownership such as title insurance.
D. Homeowners' association.
(1) Common ownership of the parks and/or open space may be
assumed by a permanent homeowners' association that accepts full
responsibility for its maintenance. The restrictive covenants shall
provide that, in the event that any private owner of parks and/or
open space fails to maintain same according to the standards of
this chapter, the Board of Aldermen may, following reasonable
notice and demand that deficiency of maintenance be corrected,
enter the parks and/or open space to maintain same. The cost of
such maintenance shall be charged to those persons having the
primary responsibility for maintenance of the parks and/or open
space. The association shall be formed and operated under the
following provisions:
(a) The developer shall provide a description of the association,
including its bylaws and methods for maintaining the parks
and/or open space.
(b) The association shall be organized by the developer and shall
be operated with a financial subsidy from the developer, before
the sale of any lots within the development.
(c) Membership in the association shall be automatic (mandatory)
for all purchasers of homes therein and their successors. The
conditions and timing of transferring control of the association
from developer to homeowners shall be identified.
(d) The association shall be responsible for maintenance of
insurance and taxes on undivided parks and/or open space. The
homeowners' association shall be authorized under its bylaws
to place liens on the property of residents who fall delinquent
in payment of such dues or assessments. Such liens may
require the imposition of penalty interest charges. Should any
bill or bills for maintenance of undivided parks and/or open
space by the City be unpaid by November 1 of each year, a late
fee of 15% shall be added to such bills and a lien shall be filed
against the premises in the same manner as other municipal
claims.
(e) A proposed operations budget and plan for long-term capital
repair and replacement of the parks or open space shall be
submitted with the conditional plan. The members of the
association shall share the costs of maintaining and developing
such undivided parks and/or open space. Shares shall be
defined within the association bylaws. The operations and
budget plan shall provide for construction of any
improvements relating to the parks and/or open space within
three years following recordation of the plan.
§ 190-205 FLAG § 190-205
164:745
(f) In the event of a proposed transfer, within the methods here
permitted, of undivided parks and/or open space land by the
homeowners' association, notice of such action shall be given
to all property owners within the development.
(g) The association shall have or hire staff to administer common
facilities and properly and continually maintain the undivided
parks and/or open space.
(2) The homeowners' association may lease parks and/or open space
lands to any other qualified person, or corporation, for operation
and maintenance of park and/or open space lands, but such a lease
agreement shall provide: 1) that the residents of the development
shall at all times have access to the park and/or open space lands
contained therein; 2) that the undivided parks and/or open space to
be leased shall be maintained for the purposes set forth in this
chapter; and 3) that the operation of parks and/or open space
facilities may be for the benefit of the residents only, or may be
open to the residents of the City, at the election of the developer
and/or homeowners' association, as the case may be. The lease
shall be subject to the approval of the Board and any transfer or
assignment of the lease shall be further subject to the approval of
the Board. Lease agreements so entered upon shall be recorded
with the Recorder of Deeds within 30 days of their execution and a
copy of the recorded lease shall be filed with the City.
(3) Failure to adequately maintain the undivided parks and/or open
space in reasonable order and condition constitutes a violation of
this chapter. The City is hereby authorized to give notice, by
personal service or by United States mail, to the owner or
occupant, as the case may be, of any violation, directly the owner to
remedy the same within 30 days.
E. Condominiums. The undivided parks and/or open space and associated
facilities may be controlled through the use of permanent condominium
agreements, approved by the City. Such agreements shall be in
conformance with the RSA Chapter 356. All undivided parks and/or
open space land shall be held as a "common element." A proposed
operations budget and plan for long term capital repair and
replacement shall be submitted with the application for development
approval.
F. Dedication of easements. The City may, but shall not be required to,
accept easements for public use of any portion or portions of undivided
parks and/or open space land, title of which is to remain in ownership
by condominium or homeowners' association, provided that: 1) such
land is accessible to City residents; 2) there is no cost of acquisition
other than any costs incidental to the transfer of ownership, such as
title insurance; and 3) a satisfactory maintenance agreement is reached
between the developer, condominium or homeowners' association, and
the City. Land dedicated as a natural area, greenway, or greenbelt shall
§ 190-205 NASHUA CODE § 190-205
164:746
be subject to a duly executed conservation restriction meeting the
requirements of and enforceable in accordance with RSA 477:45, which
easement shall be unlimited in duration.
G. Transfer of easements to a private conservation organization. An owner
may transfer perpetual easements to a private, nonprofit organization,
among whose purposes it is to conserve parks and/or open space and/or
natural resources (such as a land conservancy), provided that:
(1) The organization is a bona fide conservation organization with
perpetual existence;
(2) The organization is financially capable of maintaining such parks
and/or open space;
(3) The conveyance contains legally enforceable provisions for proper
reverter or retransfer in the event that the organization becomes
unwilling or unable to continue carrying out its functions;
(4) The organization shall provide a proposed operations budget and
plan for long term capital repair and replacement; and
(5) A maintenance agreement is entered into by the developer and the
organization.
H. Improvement districts. A special assessment district adopted pursuant
to RSA 49-C:25 et seq.
§ 190-205 FLAG § 190-205
164:747

ARTICLE XXX
Street Design and Transportation
The purpose of these regulations is to:
A. Ensure that the design of streets conforms to the recommendations of
the Nashua Master Plan.
B. Provide for the safety for both vehicular and pedestrian or nonvehicular
traffic.
C. Provide for livable residential and commercial environments.
D. Provide economy of land use, construction, and maintenance.
E. Provide safe and efficient access to property.
Unlike the situation in traditional subdivision regulations, one intent of
this section is to permit narrower street widths while requiring greater
connectivity in order to more efficiently disperse traffic, protect
pedestrians from high vehicular speeds, and to enhance the streetscape.
This Part 4 implements the following Master Plan recommendations:
(1) Ensure that new subdivision roads tie into the existing road network
in a way that eases the flow of traffic and encourages the optimal
distribution of trips throughout the City.
(2) Separate through traffic from local traffic to the maximum extent
possible.
(3) Seek to implement techniques such as traffic calming measures as a
preferred alternative to more traffic signals and stop signs.
(4) Ensure adequate on- and off-site traffic circulation associated with
commercial development.
(5) Minimize curb cuts on collector and arterial roads.
(6) Ensure that every neighborhood in the City has access to schools,
community centers, parks and open space areas via sidewalks or other
trails.
(7) Encourage pedestrian-oriented, mixed-use neighborhoods as new
subdivisions and developments are proposed.
(8) Ensure proper site planning in order to accommodate uses with a high
level of pedestrian activity.
(9) Adopt standard designs for sidewalks to be included in subdivision
regulations and in the site plan review process.
§ 190-206. Applicability.
Street design standards apply to applications for subdivision approval or
to site plans involving the construction of public or private streets. Access
management and driveway standards apply to both subdivision plans and
site plans.
§ 190-206 FLAG § 190-207
164:749
§ 190-207. Required improvements and circulation system design
principles.
The standards of this article are based on the following design principles.
The intent of this section is to explain the rationale for the standards of this
article, rather than to impose independent standards for subdivision plan
or site plan approval. However, any request for a waiver from this article
shall include an explanation of how the alternative standards proposed by
the applicant relate to the principles discussed below.
A. Generally. The arrangement and coordination of streets shall be
considered in their relation to existing or planned streets,
topographical conditions, public convenience and safety, the
preservation of natural character features, inclusion of pedestrian
amenities, and the proposed uses of the land to be served by such
streets and shall conform to the Official Map and the Master Plan.
B. Acceptance of streets. See §§ 285-21 and 285-22 (Chapter 285 of the
City Code).
C. Required improvements.
(1) Applicants for subdivision plan approval shall provide internal
street improvements as required by this Part 4.
(2) Where a proposed development subject to subdivision or site plan
approval borders on or contains a limited-access highway right-ofway,
a railroad right-of-way, or an open watercourse, the Board may
require a street approximately parallel to and on one side of such
right-of-way or watercourse, at a distance suitable for the
appropriate use of the intervening land for park, residential,
commercial, industrial or other purpose. Such distance shall also
be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach
grades and future intersection grade separations.
D. Circulation system design principles.
(1) The street system shall respect the function of streets as the shared
domain of drivers, pedestrians, and bicyclists. Street widths shall
be adequate to accommodate vehicles and emergency services, but
not excessively wide so as to encourage speeding. The street
system shall incorporate pedestrian amenities such as sidewalks,
center medians, landscaping, street trees, and narrow intersection
radii so as to improve the walkability of the streetscape.
(2) The street network shall respect the context of the land use and
design of the neighborhood it serves.
(3) The street system shall balance the public goal of connectivity with
market demands for privacy.
(4) The street system shall be designed to permit the safe, efficient,
and orderly movement of traffic; to meet, the needs of the present
§ 190-207 NASHUA CODE § 190-207
164:750
and future population served; to have a simple and logical pattern;
to respect natural features and topography; and to present an
attractive streetscape.
(5) In residential subdivisions, the street system shall be designed to
serve the needs of the neighborhoods while addressing the needs of
the City-wide circulation pattern necessary to functionally move
traffic.
E. Street hierarchy.
Purpose: This section provides guidelines whereby streets can be
classified in a street hierarchy system with design tailored to function.
(1) This subsection applies only to applications for subdivision
approval.
(2) The street hierarchy system shall fall into a four-category grouping
that, in descending order, includes principal arterial, minor
arterial, collector, and local streets. These streets may be classified
further as alleys, lanes, local streets, conservation streets, avenues,
main streets, boulevards, and parkways in accordance with the
Street Design Criteria, Table 207-1 below. Classification of an
existing or proposed street not already identified in the Master
Plan or an adopted major street plan, for the purpose of
determining the appropriate design of a street or development, or
for the purpose of determining the appropriateness of a location for
a proposed use, shall be done by the Administrative Officer in
consultation with the City Engineer. The functional description of
each of these classes is as set forth in Table 207-1.
(3) All streets shall conform to the geometric design standards in
§ 190-208. These requirements apply to both public and private
streets.
(4) This section applies to internal streets and off-site improvements.
The Planning Board may waive the requirements of this section
where compliance would not be consistent with the purposes of this
section based on topographical conditions, natural or man-made
barriers, or similar conditions.
§ 190-207 FLAG § 190-207
164:751
§ 190-208. Geometric design.
Table 207-1
Street Classification
Class Definition
Principal
arterial
• Provides corridor movement suitable for
substantial state-wide or interstate travel
and provides continuity for all rural
arterials that intercept the urban area.
• Serves the major traffic movements within
urbanized areas such as between central
business districts and outlying residential
areas, between major intercity communities
or between major suburban centers.
• Serves a major portion of the trips entering
and leaving the urban area, as well as the
majority of the through traffic desiring to
bypass the central City.
Minor
arterial
• Serves trips of moderate length at a
somewhat lower level of travel mobility
than principal arterials.
• Provides access to geographic areas
smaller than those served by the higher
system.
• Provides intracommunity continuity, but
does not penetrate identifiable
neighborhoods.
Collector • Collects traffic from local roads and
channels it into the arterial system.
• Provides land access and traffic circulation
within residential neighborhoods,
commercial and industrial area.
Local • Comprises all facilities not on higher
systems.
• Provides access to land and higher systems.
• Through traffic usage discouraged.
Source: Nashua 2000 Master Plan, Transportation Element,
"Functional Classification System" (page X-65).
A. Applicability. This section applies only to applications for subdivision
approval. The Planning Board may approve reductions in the pavement
widths specified in this section if it deems that the deviation shall be in
keeping with the surrounding area or neighborhood.
§ 190-207 NASHUA CODE § 190-208
164:752
B. Curbs.
Purpose: Curbing shall be required for the purpose of drainage,
safety, and delineation and protection of the pavement edge. Curbing
is required:
• For stormwater management.
• To stabilize pavement edge.
• To delineate parking areas.
• Ten feet on each side of drainage inlets.
• At intersections and at tight radii.
(1) Curbing shall be designed to provide a ramp for wheelchairs as
required by federal law. Curbing shall be constructed according to
the Board of Public Works Specifications.
(2) The developer shall construct granite slope curbs on each side of
the required street. Such curbs shall be backfilled opposite the
street side with either gravel, lawn or sidewalk to the top of the
curb grade, extending back a minimum of three feet. The developer
shall also be responsible for the provision of water mains,
manholes, sanitary sewers and catch basins.
C. Pavement section. Street grade and intersection requirements, and
pavement thickness shall comply with the Board of Public Works
Specifications, which document is hereby incorporated by this
reference.
D. Sight distance. All season safe sight distance is defined as a line which
encounters no visual obstruction between two points, each at a height
of three feet nine inches above the pavement, and 10 feet back from the
road pavement as to represent the critical line of sight between the
operator of the vehicle using the access and the operator of vehicle
approaching from either direction. Safe sight distance shall be
compatible with the average observed speed during a normal workday
on the street as indicated in Tables 208-1, 208-2, and 208-3 below:
Comment: See § 190-16E for setback standards. See § 190-208B for
standards relating to the design of access points.
§ 190-208 FLAG § 190-208
164:753
Table 208-1
Minimum Intersection Sight Distance
Stop-Sign and Signal-Controlled Intersections
Sight Distance
(feet)(1)
Posted Speed
(mph)
2-3 Lane Stop
Control(2)
4-5 Lane Stop
Control(2)
2-5 Lane
Signal
Control(3)
20 200 225 225
25 250 275 300
30 300 350 375
35 350 400 475
40 400 450 575
45 450 500 700
50 500 550 850
55 550 625 1,000
60 600 675 1,150
Source: adapted from AASHTO, A Policy on Geometric Design of
Highways and Streets, 1990. All units rounded for design.
Rules of Interpretation for Table 208-1:
(1) Measured along the center of the approaching travel lanes, as
observed from a point 15 feet back from the edge of traveled
way and measured from an eye height of 3.5 feet to a height of
approaching object of 4.25 feet.
(2) Sight distance for a vehicle turning left into a two-lane or four-lane
roadway across a vehicle approaching from the left or right.
(3) Sight distance for a vehicle turning right into a two- or four-lane
roadway and attain 85% of design speed without being overtaken
by a vehicle approaching from the left and reduced to 85% of
design speed.
§ 190-208 NASHUA CODE § 190-208
164:754
Table 208-2
Minimum Intersection Sight Distance
Yield and Uncontrolled Intersections
Sight Distance(1)(2)
(feet)
Posted Speed
(mph) Major Street Minor Street
20 90 90
25 110 110
30 130 130
35 155 155
40 180 180
Source: adapted from AASHTO, A Policy on Geometric Design of
Highways and Streets, 1990. All units rounded for design.
Rules of Interpretation for Table 208-2:
(1) Measured along the center of the approaching travel lanes and
measured from an eye height of 3.5 feet to a height of approaching
object of 4.25 feet.
(2) If minimum sight distance requirements cannot be obtained
because the cost to do so is prohibitive, other traffic control
devices must be used to stop vehicles on one or both roads.
Table 208-3
Minimum Stopping Sight Distance
(Approval by City Engineer or Designee Required)
Stopping Sight Distance(1)
(feet)
Posted
Speed
(mph) -9% -6% -3% Level +3% +6% +9%
20 125 125 125 12 125 125 125
25 175 175 175 150 150 150 150
30 225 225 225 200 200 200 200
35 300 275 275 250 250 250 225
40 400 375 350 325 300 300 300
45 475 450 425 400 375 350 350
§ 190-208 FLAG § 190-208
164:755
Table 208-3
Minimum Stopping Sight Distance
(Approval by City Engineer or Designee Required)
Stopping Sight Distance(1)
(feet)
Posted
Speed
(mph) -9% -6% -3% Level +3% +6% +9%
50 600 550 500 475 450 425 400
55 700 625 575 550 525 500 475
60 825 750 700 650 600 575 550
Source: adapted from AASHTO, A Policy on Geometric Design of
Highways and Streets, 1990. All units rounded for design.
Rules of Interpretation for Table 208-3:
(1) Measured along the center of the approaching travel lanes, as
observed from a point 15 feet back from the edge of traveled
way and measured from an eye height of 3.5 feet to a height of
approaching object of 4.25 feet.
E. Cul-de-sac or dead-end streets.
(1) Dead-end or cul-de-sac streets designed to be permanently closed
at one end shall not exceed 750 feet in length. The distance of the
cul-de-sac shall be measured from the edge of the right-of-way for
the through road and the center point of the turnaround at the end
of the cul-de-sac. A "through road" means a road with more than
one access.
(2) In extreme cases where there are existing limitations which
prevent the construction of a second legal means of access to a
tract of land, the Planning Board may grant a further waiver to the
seven-hundred-fifty-foot maximum length of a cul-de-sac or deadend
street if it determines that a reasonable second means of
§ 190-208 NASHUA CODE § 190-208
164:756
emergency access will be provided and maintained to the property.
This emergency access shall be cleared to a minimum width of 20
feet and parking prohibited on it. The emergency access shall be
maintained by a homeowners' association unless the City formally
accepts the improvement. The Board may also require a divided
pavement of at least 16 feet in either direction with a wider rightof-
way, if necessary, provided for improved access to the properties
along it.
(3) Closed ends of cul-de-sac streets shall be provided with a radialshaped
turnaround having a minimum right-of-way radius of 60 feet
and a minimum radius to the outside edge of pavement or curb of
50 feet. Culs-de-sac that have no potential for future extension may
have a permanent area in the center of the turnaround which shall
be suitably landscaped by the developer prior to street acceptance
in which case the minimum radius to the inside edge of pavement
or curb shall be 30 feet. A covenant, or other suitable legal
instrument, shall be placed on property deeds to all lots abutting
the cul-de-sac turnaround indicating that the owners of such lots
shall maintain the landscaped area. In cases where the center
landscaped area is to be owned and maintained by a homeowners'
or other appropriate organization, the minimum radius to the
inside of the right-of-way shall be 20 feet. Culs-de-sac which have
the potential for future extension need not have landscaped central
areas installed but instead shall have a minimum fifty-foot radius
paved turnaround area.
(4) Tee (T) or ell (L) shaped turnarounds at the closed end of a deadend
street, in lieu of a radial shape, are not permitted unless: 1)
under unique and extreme circumstances of land ownership,
topography or lot layout, the design would provide greater traffic
safety, and 2) the Fire Department certifies that the design would
increase response times or create a fire safety hazard. If permitted,
the design conforms to the Board of Public Works Specifications. In
such cases the minimum turnaround right-of-way width shall be 40
feet with a pavement width of 15 feet.
(5) Turnaround requirements of this subsection may be waived in
whole or in part by the Planning Board for streets of record prior to
the adoption of the subdivision regulations of the City, where the
unavailability of sufficient land or other factors peculiar to the
proposed subdivision would prevent such requirements from being
met.
F. Lighting. The developer shall be responsible for and shall bear any
costs associated with the installation of streetlighting facilities. Such
facilities shall be installed and spaced in accordance with requirements
of Article IX of this chapter with guidance from the generally accepted
practices as established by the Illuminating Engineering Society of
North America, "American National Standard and Practice for Street
Lighting" (ANSI/IES RP-8, 1977).
§ 190-208 FLAG § 190-209
164:757
§ 190-209. Access points and curb cuts.
Purpose: This section establishes requirements for ingress, egress
openings in concrete, street curbing, commonly referred to as "curb cuts"
as well as other means of vehicular access to and from private property
shall be regulated in accordance with the following requirements.
A. Size and design of curb cuts and other access point.
(1) Curb cuts or driveway approaches shall have minimum and
maximum width as follows for two-way driveway as follows,
including two-foot shoulders:
Table 209-1
Size of Curb Cuts
Minimum
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Width
(feet)
One-way 12 15
Two-way (includes two twofoot
shoulders)
24 36
(2) Driveways with four or more lanes planned shall include a planted
medians in order to reduce the visual impact of pavement.
(3) Driveways crossing a sidewalk shall maintain and continue the
sidewalk, including the sidewalk pavement and texture.
(4) The inside turning radii shall be a minimum of 15 feet and a
maximum of 30 feet and meet the minimum and maximum
requirements of Table 209-2.
Table 209-2
Inside Turning Radii
Land Use
Minimum
Inside Turning
Radii
(feet)
Maximum Inside
Turning Radii
(feet)
Residential only 15 20
Commercial/industrial 20 28.3
Mixed uses 15 28.3
B. Sight distance. See § 190-208D above.
C. Driveways on corner lots. Driveways on corner lots shall be located a
minimum of 50 feet from an intersection.
§ 190-209 NASHUA CODE § 190-209
164:758
D. Driveway throat length. Driveway throat length shall be measured from
the edge of the property line to the end of the driveway. The "end of the
driveway" means the point at which a lane or opening in the driveway
permits vehicles to enter or exit the driveway lanes. A minimum
driveway throat length of 25 feet shall be required. Where warranted,
the Planning Board may require additional distance. The purpose of the
driveway throat length is to allow for traffic entering the site to be
stored on site in order to avoid a queue of traffic on the street causing
delays and potentially hazardous situation.
E. Driveway approach angle. The angle of the driveway approach shall be
approximately 90° for two-way driveways and between 60° and 90° for
one-way driveways.
F. Shared access.
(1) Parking lots for single tenant commercial developments shall
utilize shared driveways and shall contact adjacent property
owners to obtain access easements. At the time of planting or site
plan approval, each development shall extend the easement to the
next property. The Planning Board may waive this requirement if it
determines that it is physically impossible to provide shared access
to the lot or if extenuating circumstances can be demonstrated and
are approved by the by the Planning Board.
(2) Wherever a proposed development abuts unplanted land or a
future development phase of the same development, stubs-out shall
be installed in order to provide access to abutting properties or to
logically extend the street system into the surrounding area. All
street stubs shall be provided with temporary turnarounds or culsde-
sac. The restoration and extension of the street shall be the
responsibility of any future developer of the abutting land. These
standards may be waived by the Administrator where specific
finding is made that: 1) the peculiar nature of the property results
in practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships that impede
carrying out the strict letter of the requirement; 2) the property
will not yield a reasonable return or cannot be put to reasonable
use unless relief is granted; and 3) balancing the public interest in
enforcing the setback requirements and the interest of the owner,
the grant of relief is required by considerations of justice and
equity.
§ 190-209 FLAG § 190-209
164:759
§ 190-210. Intersections and layout.
§ 190-211. Private streets.
(3) Multitenant developments shall provide a central drive entrance.
Each development shall provide an "entrance throat" that will
direct traffic and provide for stacking space at intersections with
the corridor. This limited access will permit the City and state to
control traffic at this location. The development shall extend access
to adjacent properties in order to control access to the corridor.
A. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right
angles and no street shall intersect any other street at less than 75°.
B. Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a radius of
at least 20 feet. The Planning Board may require a greater, or allow a
lesser, radius whenever lot layout, safety and convenience will be
served.
C. Street jogs with center line offsets of less than 175 feet shall be
avoided.
D. A tangent shall be included between reverse curves on all but
residential streets. The length of the tangent shall comply with the
requirements of AASHTO, A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways
and Streets (1994), but in no case shall be less than 100 feet long.
E. When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point
by more than 10°, they shall be connected by a curve with a radius
adequate to insure a safe sight distance.
F. Street bounds shall be placed at all street intersections, points of
curves, angle points and at intermediate points as shall be required by
the City Engineer, and shall be of such material, size and length as
prescribed by the City Engineer.
A. Applicability. See § 190-165, Frontage.
B. Design standards. The design standards and construction specifications
of private streets shall be the same as for public streets, subject to the
additional requirements established below.
C. Certification. Upon completion of construction, the applicant shall
provide the City Engineer with written a certification signed by a
licensed professional engineer certifying that the private streets and
sidewalks (as applicable) were designed and installed as required by
the provisions of this chapter. In the case of lots with no frontage,
§ 190-209 NASHUA CODE § 190-211
164:760
access for vehicles, utilities and emergency vehicles shall be insured
through the use of common area agreements or private easements. The
minimum width of access easements shall conform to § 190-209.
D. Maintenance.
(1) Private streets and sidewalks shall be owned and maintained by a
homeowners association, corporation, community association, or
other legal entity established for this purpose. No subdivision or
site plan proposing a private street shall be approved unless
documents establishing the entity are provided to the Planning
Board. A street maintenance agreement to assure private
responsibility of future maintenance and repair shall be approved
as to form and content by the City Attorney and shall be recorded
with the deed of each property to be served by a common private
street. The agreement shall provide for:
(a) A method to initiate and finance a private street and maintain
that street in good condition;
(b) A method of apportioning maintenance costs to current and
future users;
(c) A provision that the City may inspect and, if necessary, require
that repairs be made to the private street to ensure that safe
access is maintained for emergency vehicles. If required
repairs are not made within six months of date of notice, the
City may make the necessary repairs and assess owners of
parcels on the street for the cost of all improvements plus an
administrative fee, not to exceed 25% of total costs;
(d) A provision that the majority vote of all property owners on the
street shall determine how the street is maintained except in
the case of emergency repairs as outlined above;
(e) A statement that no public funds shall be used to construct
repair or maintain the street;
(f) A provision requiring mandatory upgrading of the street if
additional parcels are added to reach the specified thresholds;
and
(g) A provision that property owners along that street are
prohibited from restricting or in any manner interfering with
normal ingress and egress by any other owners or persons
needing to access properties with frontage on that street.
(2) All purchasers of property served by a private street shall, prior to
final sale, be notified that the property receives access from a
private street that shall be maintained collectively by all property
owners along that street; that the City shall not be held responsible
for maintaining or improving the private street; and that a right-of-
§ 190-211 FLAG § 190-211
164:761
§ 190-212. Sidewalks and pedestrian rights-of-way.
way easement to provide the only access to that property has been
recorded in the deed for that property.
(3) By approving private streets, the City does not assume any liability
for snow plowing or other maintenance items, or for any injuries,
damages, or related liabilities associated with maintenance of the
streets. All such responsibilities and liabilities shall remain with the
landowner or homeowners' association.
A. Location.
(1) Sidewalks shall be located on at least one side of the street. In
standard single-family developments, sidewalks shall be placed
parallel to the street, with exceptions permitted to preserve natural
features or to provide visual interest. In planned developments,
sidewalks may be placed away from street systems, but they may
also be required parallel to the street for safety reasons. The
Planning Board may require sidewalks on both sides of the street
on high volume, collector or arterial streets.
(2) Sidewalks may be placed directly over a portion of the utility
easement; and/or behind the planted area provided for street trees.
(3) For parkways, the sidewalks shall take the form of multi-use trails
that may meander at a distance of between six to 15 feet from the
paved section of the street. In planned developments, sidewalks
may be located away from the street system to link dwelling units
with other dwelling units, the street, and on-site recreation areas
and parking areas.
B. Pavement section. Sidewalks and graded areas shall be constructed
according to the Board of Public Works specifications. Sidewalks shall
include additional width where required by the Americans with
Disabilities Act.
C. Pedestrian rights-of-way. Pedestrian rights-of-way not less than 14 feet
wide may be required where deemed essential to provide circulation or
access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation or
other community facilities. Where such pedestrians rights-of-way are
provided, the developer shall clear the areas of obstructing rocks, trees
and undergrowth, bring the right-of-way to suitable grade, and
construct a bituminous concrete sidewalk for bicycle use of at least five
feet in width and a bituminous concrete sidewalk for pedestrian use of
at least five feet in width, or a bituminous concrete sidewalk for
pedestrian and bicycle of at least 10 feet in width in accordance with
the City Board of Public Works specifications.
D. Waivers.
§ 190-211 NASHUA CODE § 190-212
164:762
(1) For commercial, industrial, and office subdivisions in the LB, GB,
D-1, D-3, HB, PI, and GI Zones, the requirements for sidewalks in
the subdivision shall be determined during the review of
subdivision and site plans. The requirements for sidewalks in such
a subdivision may be waived if the Planning Board determines that
the nature and/or intensity of the proposed use or the proposed use
of other pedestrian facilities would obviate the need for these
improvements, and that the burden on the applicant outweighs the
public benefits associated with the sidewalk requirements.
Comment: An example of a sidewalk waiver is multiple frontage
lots. In these situations, sidewalk construction along frontages
other than the principal frontage of the lot. In those situations,
pedestrian access is only from one of the frontages. The sidewalk
requirements may be waived on the other frontages.
(2) For subdivisions in a residential zoning district, or subdivision
applications for residential lots in any zoning district, a
contribution in lieu of the construction of sidewalks along an
existing street may be accepted when all of the following conditions
are met:
(a) None of the lots may be divided into additional buildable lots
under the minimum requirements of the zone. This
requirement is met where:
[1] An additional lot would not conform to the minimum lot
size or other dimensional requirements of § 190-16; or
[2] Further subdivision is precluded by a conservation
easement.
(b) The existing street adjacent to the proposed lots has no
sidewalks for a distance of 250 feet on the same side of the
street as the new lots. This distance shall be measured from
the nearest frontage point within the proposed subdivision.
E. Contribution in lieu of sidewalk construction.
(1) The Planning Board may accept a contribution in lieu of the
construction of sidewalks where:
§ 190-212 FLAG § 190-212
164:763
§ 190-213. Street names, signs and house numbers.
(a) The application proposes a residential subdivision; and
(b) The Planning Board determines that the proposed use or the
proposed use of other pedestrian facilities would obviate the
need for these improvements.
(2) The Planning Board may accept a contribution in lieu of the
construction of sidewalks for culs-de-sac.
(3) All revenues generated by contributions pursuant to this section
shall be deposited in an account created for this purpose. Revenues
so generated shall be separately accounted for each of the four
major quadrants of the City, said quadrants corresponding to the
areas divided to the north and south by the Nashua River and to the
east and west by the F.E. Everett Turnpike, and shall be used solely
for the purpose of construction of new sidewalks in the quadrant
from which the revenue was generated.
(4) The Planning Board is authorized to establish a schedule of fees for
sidewalk contributions in lieu of construction. If the Planning Board
does not establish a fee schedule, the contribution amount shall be
determined by mutual agreement of the Planning Board and the
applicant and included as a condition of plan approval.
A. Board of Aldermen approval. No person shall name a street, place or
highway in the City, or erect a sign designating a name for any street,
place or highway, or select a house number or address on such street,
place or highway, without first obtaining the consent of the Board of
Aldermen.
B. Development identification. All developments of over three buildings
containing private streets must erect and maintain a permanent
location map in the vicinity of the first curb cut or parking area on the
main access drive. Such map shall display street names, building
locations and unit numbers. Such signs shall conform to § 190-102.
§ 190-212 NASHUA CODE § 190-213
164:764
ARTICLE XXXI
Stormwater Management
Purpose: The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance
public health, safety, and general welfare by establishing minimum
requirements and procedures to control the adverse impacts associated
with stormwater runoff, and soil erosion and sedimentation from site
construction and development. Subdivision and site plans shall include
plans for managing stormwater and controlling erosion and sedimentation
as provided herein.
Purpose: This section implements the following Master Plan
recommendations:
The City should strongly consider adopting a soil erosion and sediment
control ordinance, which would comprehensively address many of the
nonpoint sources of water quality degradation discussed in the Water
Resources Protection Plan.
§ 190-214. Applicability.
§ 190-215. Stormwater management standards.
The following stormwater management standards shall be applied to all
subdivision and site plans.
A. The requirements of this Part 4 apply to any subdivision plan or site
plan, except or to the extent provided in Subsection B.
B. The Planning Board may waive the requirement for all or part of a
stormwater management and erosion control plan if it determines that
a plan is unnecessary because of the size, character, or natural
conditions of a site. All requests for waivers and action thereon shall be
submitted pursuant to § 190-148, along with supporting technical
documentation to demonstrate minimal environmental impact.
A. Untreated stormwater.
(1) No new stormwater conveyances may discharge untreated
stormwater directly to or cause erosion into wetlands or water
bodies.
(2) Rooftop runoff is considered uncontaminated for the purposes of
these standards and therefore does not require treatment.
B. Postdevelopment peak discharge rates.
(1) Stormwater management systems must be designed so that the
ten-year, twenty-four-hour postdevelopment peak discharge rate
does not exceed the ten-year, twenty-four-hour predevelopment
peak discharge rates.
(2) In order to meet this standard, controls must be developed for the
two-year, ten-year and fifty-year, twenty-four-hour storm events.
§ 190-214 FLAG § 190-215
164:765
The hundred-year, twenty-four-hour storm event must be evaluated
to demonstrate that there will not be increased flooding impacts off
site. [Amended 6-26-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-015]
(3) Measurement of peak discharge rates shall be calculated using
point of discharge or the downgradient property boundary. The
topography of the site may require evaluation at more than one
location if flow leaves the property in more than one direction. An
applicant may demonstrate that a feature beyond the property
boundary is more appropriate as a design point.
C. Recharge to groundwater. Annual groundwater recharge rates shall be
maintained by providing infiltration by the use of structural and
nonstructural methods. The annual recharge from post development
site conditions shall mimic the annual recharge from predevelopment
site conditions. Best management practice (BMP) techniques to achieve
recharge requirements include infiltration, bioretention, dry swale, and
nonstructural techniques. Alternative techniques may be used if they
meet the performance criteria stated herein and are approved by the
Planning Board.
D. Water quality.
(1) For discharges to the Conservation Zone within the Water Supply
Protection District as defined in § 190-24, the runoff volume to be
treated for water quality is calculated as 1.0 inch of runoff
multiplied by the total impervious area of the postdevelopment
project site.
(2) For all other discharges, the runoff volume to be treated for water
quality is calculated as 0.5 inch of runoff multiplied by the total
impervious area of the postdevelopment project site.
(3) Removal of 80% of the total suspended solids (TSS), floatables,
greases, and oils. For new developments, stormwater management
systems shall be designed to remove 80% of the average annual
load of total suspended solids (TSS), floatables, greases, and oils
after the site is developed. This standard is met when:
(a) The Planning Board determines that suitable nonstructural
practices for source control and pollution prevention are
implemented;
(b) Stormwater management best management practices (BMPs)
capture the prescribed runoff volume; and
(c) Stormwater management BMPs are maintained as designed.
E. Critical areas land uses with higher potential pollutant loads require
the use of specific stormwater management BMPs, as detailed in this
section. The use of infiltration practices without pretreatment is
prohibited. [Amended 6-26-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-015]
§ 190-215 NASHUA CODE § 190-215
164:766
(1) The following uses are considered to create high potential pollutant
loads:
(a) Any use requiring a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit associated with
industrial activity;
(b) Auto salvage yards/auto recycler facilities;
(c) Auto fueling facilities/gas stations;
(d) Fleet storage areas (cars, buses, trucks, public works);
(e) Vehicle service, maintenance and equipment cleaning areas;
(f) Retail parking lots;
(g) Road salt storage or loading areas if exposed to rainfall;
(h) Commercial nurseries;
(i) Metal rooftops, including roofs made from aluminum, tin,
galvanized steel, copper, or rooftops which contribute
significant pollutant loads;
(j) Outdoor storage and loading/unloading areas of hazardous
substances;
(k) SARA 312 generators if materials or containers are exposed to
rainfall; and
(l) The service, repainting, and hull maintenance areas of
marinas.
(2) The following measures are required in addition to BMPs described
in Subsection E(1) above, within areas with high potential pollutant
loads:
(a) Source reduction; and
(b) Pretreatment.
(3) The following are prohibited within areas with high potential
pollutant loads located in a Conservation Zone:
(a) Infiltration trenches;
(b) Infiltration basins; or
(c) Dry wells.
(4) The following restrictions apply to certain BMPs within areas of
high potential pollutant loads: Sand or organic filters, detention
basins, wet ponds or constructed wetlands may be used only if
sealed or lined.
§ 190-215 FLAG § 190-215
164:767
F. Wetland or water bodies.
(1) BMPs approved for use within 300 feet of a wetland or water body
unless otherwise prohibited by § 190-24 are limited to:
(a) Extended detention basins;
(b) Wet ponds;
(c) Constructed wetlands;
(d) Water quality swales;
(e) Sand filters;
(f) Organic filters;
(g) Infiltration basins;
(h) Infiltration trenches; and
(i) Deep sump and hooded catch basins (used with other BMPs).
(2) Stormwater management systems should incorporate designs
which allow for shutdown and containment in the event of an
emergency spill or other unexpected contamination event.
G. Redevelopment. Redevelopment of previously developed sites must
meet the stormwater management standards to the maximum extent
possible to be determined by the Planning Board. The goal is to reduce
impervious area by a minimum of 20% or meet the open space
requirement in that zoning district. The application shall include a
certification by a registered professional engineer as to compliance
with this standard. [Amended 6-26-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-015]
H. Erosion and sedimentation plans. [Amended 6-26-2018 by Ord. No.
O-18-015]
(1) Erosion and sedimentation controls must be implemented to
prevent impacts during construction or post-construction or land
disturbance activities, and shall be properly installed prior to soil
disturbance in the contributing drainage area, and a plan shall
contain the following:
(a) A project narrative including a description of the development.
(b) Locus map showing property boundaries.
(c) North arrow, scale, date.
(d) Property lines.
(e) Structures, roads, and utilities.
(f) Topographic contours at two-foot intervals.
§ 190-215 NASHUA CODE § 190-215
164:768
(g) Critical areas.
(h) Within the project area and within 50 feet of the project
boundary based on Nashua GIS, surface waters, wetlands, and
drainage patterns and watershed boundaries.
(i) Vegetation.
(j) Extent of 100-year floodplain boundaries if published or
determined.
(k) Easements.
(l) Areas of soil disturbance.
(m) Areas of cut and fill.
(n) Locations of equipment storage and staging.
(o) Highlighted areas of poorly and very poorly drained soils.
(p) Highlighted areas of poorly and/or very poorly drained soils
proposed to be filled.
(q) Location, descriptions, details, and design criteria and
calculations for all structural, nonstructural, permanent, and
temporary erosion and sedimentation control measures and
BMPs.
(r) Identification of all permanent control measures.
(s) Identification of permanent snow storage areas.
(t) Identification of snow management measures during
construction.
(u) Description of the combination of sediment and erosion control
measures which are required to achieve maximum pollutant
removal such as:
[1] Sediment basins. For common drainage that serves an
area with 10 or more acres disturbed at one time, a
temporary (or permanent) sediment basin must provide
storage for a calculated volume of runoff from a drainage
area from a two-year, twenty-four-hour storm, or
equivalent control measures must be provided, where
attainable, until final stabilization of the site. Where no
such calculation has been performed, a temporary (or
permanent) sediment basin providing 3,600 cubic feet of
storage per acre drained, or equivalent control measures,
must be provided where attainable until final stabilization
of the site. When computing the number of acres draining
to a common location, it is not necessary to include flows
from off-site areas and flows from on-site areas that are
§ 190-215 FLAG § 190-215
164:769
either undisturbed or have undergone final stabilization
where such flows are diverted around both the disturbed
areas and the sediment basin. In determining whether a
sediment basin is attainable, the operators may consider
such factors as site soils, slope, available area on-site, etc.
In any event, the operator must consider public safety,
especially as it relates to children, as a design factor for
the sediment basin, and alternative sediment controls
must be used where site limitations would preclude a safe
design.
[2] Drainage locations which serve 10 or more disturbed acres
at one time and where temporary sediment basins or
equivalent controls are not attainable, smaller sediment
basins and/or sediment traps should be used. At a
minimum, silt fence, vegetative buffer strips, or equivalent
sediment controls are required for all downslope
boundaries (and for those side slope boundaries deemed
appropriate as dictated by individual site conditions).
[3] Drainage locations serving less than 10 acres may utilize
smaller sediment basins and/or sediment traps. At a
minimum, silt fence, vegetative buffer strips, or equivalent
sediment controls are required for all downslope
boundaries (and for those side slope boundaries deemed
appropriate as dictated by individual site conditions) of the
construction area unless a sediment basin providing
storage for a calculated volume of runoff from a two-year,
twenty-four-hour storm or 3,600 cubic feet of storage per
acre drained is provided.
(2) Whenever practical, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected
or supplemented. Priority shall be given to preserving natural
drainage systems, including perennial and intermittent streams,
wetlands, swales, and drainage ditches for conveyance of runoff
leaving the project area.
(3) Examples of BMPs for erosion and sedimentation control are
staked straw bales, filter fences, hydroseeding, and phased
development. Many stormwater BMP technologies (e.g., infiltration
technologies) are not designed to handle high concentrations of
sediments typically found in construction runoff and must be
protected from construction-related sediment loadings.
Construction BMPs must be maintained while construction or land
disturbance activities continue.
(4) Measures shall meet as a minimum the best management practices
set forth in the "New Hampshire Stormwater Manual, Volumes 1
through 3" and any published DES regulations.
§ 190-215 NASHUA CODE § 190-215
164:770
(5) Off-site surface water and runoff from undisturbed areas shall be
diverted away from disturbed areas where feasible or carried
nonerosively through the project area. Integrity of downstream
drainage systems shall be maintained.
(6) All temporary erosion and sediment control measures shall be
removed after final site stabilization. Trapped sediment and other
disturbed soil areas resulting from the removal of temporary
measures shall be permanently stabilized within 30 days.
I. Stormwater management measures.
(1) Structural stormwater management measures to achieve recharge,
water quality, and peak discharge control shall be structural BMPs
designed in accordance with the requirements of the following:
(a) New Hampshire Stormwater Manual, Volumes 1 through 3.
[Amended 6-26-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-015]
(b) Best Management Practices for Urban Stormwater Runoff,
published by NH DES, 1996, as amended.
(c) Innovative Stormwater Treatment Technologies Best
Management Practices Manual, published by NH DES, May
2002, as amended [Reference: http://www.des.state.nh.us/
wmb/was/manual/]
(2) The performance criteria specified in the Design Manual with
regard to general feasibility, conveyance, pretreatment,
environment and landscaping, and maintenance shall be
considered in the selection of a structural BMP.
(3) Structural stormwater management practices shall be selected to
accommodate the unique hydrologic and geologic conditions of the
site. Design computations must document these conditions.
(4) Nonstructural management measures may reduce or eliminate the
need for structural BMPs to meet recharge, water quality, and peak
discharge control requirements. These techniques shall include
runoff prevention methods (RPMs), are encouraged and shall be
designed in accordance with the guidelines in the documents listed
in Subsection I(1) above. These techniques may include
disconnection of rooftop and nonrooftop runoff, vegetated bio-cells
and bio-islands, infiltration edges, dividers, or islands, planters,
and raingardens.
J. Allowable nonstormwater discharges. The following nonstormwater
discharges are authorized, provided it has been determined that they
are not significant contributors of pollutants to the MS4. If these
discharges are identified as significant contributors to the MS4, they
must be addressed in the illicit discharge detection and elimination
§ 190-215 FLAG § 190-215
164:771
§ 190-216. Easements.
Where a subdivision is traversed by or requires the construction of a
watercourse or a drainage way, an easement of adequate width shall be
provided for such purpose.
minimum control measure described. [Added 6-26-2018 by Ord. No.
O-18-015]
(1) Water line flushing;
(2) Landscape irrigation;
(3) Diverted stream flows;
(4) Rising groundwaters;
(5) Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration [as defined at 40 CFR
35.2005(20)];
(6) Uncontaminated pumped groundwater;
(7) Discharge from potable water sources;
(8) Foundation drains;
(9) Air-conditioning condensation;
(10) Irrigation water, springs;
(11)Water from crawl space pumps;
(12) Foot drains;
(13) Lawn watering;
(14) Individual resident car washing;
(15) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
(16) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges;
(17) Street wash water;
(18) Residential building wash waters, without detergents; and
(19) Discharges or flows from firefighting activities that occur during
emergency situations. The permittee is not expected to evaluate
firefighting discharges with regard to pollutant contributions.
Therefore, these discharges are authorized as allowable
nonstormwater discharges, unless identified by EPA as significant
sources of pollutants to waters of the United States.
K. Litter, debris, yard waste, and all other nonstormwater discharges
except for those listed in Subsection J above are prohibited. [Added
6-26-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-015]
§ 190-215 NASHUA CODE § 190-217
164:772
§ 190-217. Operation and maintenance plans.
A. Applicability. All stormwater management systems shall have an
operation and maintenance plan (O&M plan) to ensure that systems
function as designed. This plan shall be reviewed and approved as a
part of the site plan or subdivision plan. If the system is not dedicated to
the City pursuant to a perpetual offer of dedication, the Planning Board
may require an applicant to establish a homeowners' association for
residential projects or private entity to maintain the stormwater
management system. [Amended 6-26-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-015]
B. Minimum requirements. The operation and maintenance plan shall, at a
minimum, identify:
(1) Stormwater management system(s) owner(s);
(2) The party or parties responsible for operation and maintenance;
(3) A schedule for inspection and maintenance;
(4) The routine and nonroutine maintenance tasks to be undertaken;
and
(5) A certification signed by the owner(s) attesting to their
commitment to comply with the O&M plan.
C. Establishment of O&M plan. The stormwater management system
owner is generally considered to be the landowner of the property,
unless other legally binding agreements are established. Execution of
the operation and maintenance plan shall be considered a condition of
approval of any subdivision plan or site plan.
D. Recording.
(1) The owner shall provide covenants for filing with the registry of
deeds, in a form satisfactory to the Planning Department, which
provide that the obligations of the maintenance plan run with the
land. [Amended 6-26-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-015]
(2) The owner shall file with the registry of deeds such legal
instruments as are necessary to allow the City or its designee to
inspect or maintain the stormwater management systems for
compliance with the O&M plan.
E. Modifications. The owner shall keep the O&M plan current, including
making modifications to the O&M plan as necessary to ensure that best
management practices (BMPs) continue to operate as designed and
approved. Proposed modifications of O&M plans shall be submitted to
the Planning Department for review and approval. Also, the owner must
notify the Planning Department within 30 days of a change in owner or
party responsible for implementing the plan. Proposed changes in
inspection frequency, maintenance schedule, or maintenance activity
shall also be submitted, along with appropriate documentation, for
§ 190-217 FLAG § 190-217
164:773
review and approval. As part of the Planning Board review, the Division
of Public Works may, in its discretion, approve a reduction in the
frequency of inspection or maintenance or a change in maintenance
activity, provided that the owner has demonstrated that such changes
will not compromise the long-term function of the stormwater system.
The Division of Public Works shall notify the owner of acceptance of
the plan modification, or request additional information, within 60 days.
No response from the Division of Public Works at the end of the 60
days shall constitute acceptance of the plan modification. The currently
approved plan shall remain in effect until notification of approval has
been issued, or the sixty-day period has lapsed. The owner shall provide
covenants for filing with the registry of deeds, in a form satisfactory to
the Planning Department, any changes and/or modifications to the plan.
[Amended 6-26-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-015]
F. Recordkeeping.
(1) The owner shall retain records (such as maintenance logs and
contractor receipts) demonstrating compliance with the scheduled
maintenance activities for a period of not less than three years. The
City may request copies of such records, or may request inspection
of such records on the property. Failure to produce such records or
copies of such records within 14 days of such a request shall
constitute a condition of noncompliance with site plan approval,
subject to enforcement as outlined under § 190-157.
(2) The owner shall ensure that an annual report is provided to the
Planning Department on or before the first day of January of each
year. Such reports shall, at a minimum, include: [Amended
6-26-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-015]
(a) The location of the property;
(b) The name, address, and phone number of the owner;
(c) The name, address, and phone number of the party responsible
for maintenance if other than the owner;
(d) A brief description of the site uses and stormwater
management system;
(e) A summary of inspections completed and the results of such
inspections; and
(f) A summary of any maintenance activities or corrective actions
undertaken.
(3) Annual reports shall be signed by the owner or other legally
responsible party, and shall attest to the accuracy of information
provided in the report. Failure to submit annual reports shall
constitute a condition of noncompliance with site plan approval
subject to enforcement as outlined under § 190-157.
§ 190-217 NASHUA CODE § 190-218
164:774
§ 190-218. Plan review and approval.
The Planning Board shall indicate approval of the stormwater management
and erosion control plan, as filed, if it complies with the requirements and
objectives of this article. Such approval shall be a component of subdivision
or site plan approval. If disapproved, a list of plan deficiencies and the
procedure for filing a revised plan will be given to the applicant.
§ 190-218 FLAG § 190-218
164:775

ARTICLE XXXII
Utility Standards for Subdivisions and Site Plans
§ 190-219. Applicability.
This article applies to subdivision plans and site plans. Applicants shall also
comply with the following chapters of the City Code: Chapter 255 (Sewage
Disposal) and Chapter 285 (Streets and Sidewalks).
§ 190-220. Approval required.
§ 190-221. Standards.
A. No subdivision or portion thereof shall be sold, offered for sale, leased
or rented by any person, and no permanent building shall be erected
thereon, until the provisions of the state and the City relating to
subdivisions have been met and a plan or plot of such subdivision and
related data have been filed with and approved by the Board of Health
or its authorized representatives. The plan and data shall show methods
for obtaining and furnishing adequate and approved water supply and
sewerage facilities to the subdivision, provision for proper surface
water drainage for each lot on which a residence, community building
or similar structure is proposed, probable nature of the terrain after
proposed grading, filling and other similar alterations from its original
state are completed, garbage and rubbish disposal services and
facilities and other pertinent matters including the results of any soil
and percolation tests performed. The installation of facilities required
under the terms of this article shall be in accordance with such plan as
approved by the Health Officer or any approved revision thereof. Upon
receipt of the plan and data required herein, the Health Officer shall
issue a receipt of filing compliance and within 30 days of issuance of the
receipt of filing compliance shall approve or disapprove the subdivision
plot or plan. In the event of disapproval, notice of disapproval shall be in
writing, listing all reasons for disapproval.
B. Where all or a portion of a subdivision is not served by either a public
water supply or a public sewer, the lots shall conform to the regulations
of the DES [Env-Ws 1005 (Subdivisions)].
A. Utilities such as electrical, cable TV, telephone, and sewer shall be
provided underground within the public right-of-way if spacing is
available or a utility easement adjacent to the street right-of-way.
B. Utilities shall generally be located within the street right-of-way on both
sides of and parallel to the street. However, in order to allow flexibility
based on terrain, and to achieve a maximum street tree canopy, utilities
may be placed in a separate utility easement outside the right-of-way
and parallel to the street.
C. All electric, telephone, cable television, and other communication lines,
both main and service connections, servicing new developments shall
§ 190-219 FLAG § 190-221
164:777
§ 190-222. Review of subdivision plans.
In reviewing subdivision plots and plans for the approval required under
this Part 4, the Health Officer shall consider engineering data on soils,
slopes, depth to bedrock, percolation rates, as well as the proximity and
availability of existing municipal sewers.
§ 190-223. Individual sewage disposal systems.
No subdivision contemplating the installation of individual sewage disposal
systems will be approved by the Health Officer unless the subdivision
conforms to one of the following:
be provided by underground wiring within easements or dedicated
public rights-of-way, installed in accordance with the Board of Public
Works specifications. The placement of public utilities within service
lanes or alleys is encouraged as a way of promoting the installation of
street trees and sidewalks in residential neighborhoods.
A. The individual lots to be served by individual sewage disposal systems
shall all be at least 40,000 square feet in area and shall be at least 500
feet from an existing gravity flow public sewer or forced main pumping
station capable of sewering said lots. This 500 feet shall be measured
along streets, alleys or easements of the public sewer system. Approval
shall be for a fixed limited time as a temporary measure pending the
installation by the applicant of a community sewerage system. The
individual sewage disposal systems constructed under this approval
shall be disconnected from the plumbing systems of the premises and
the plumbing systems of those premises will be forthwith connected to
the community sewerage system. When the applicant desires to install a
community sewerage system for a subdivision, the proposal must have
Board of Public Works and Health Officer approval and be so
engineered as to be compatible with and acceptable to future
connection with the municipal sewerage system. The Board of Public
Works approval for the community sewerage system must be obtained
prior to application for Health Officer approval for temporary individual
sewage disposal systems. The applicant shall post sufficient bond or
escrow account to assure the construction of, and proper operating,
continuity and duration of operations, and maintenance of the
community sewerage system for a period of at least 10 years, prior to
approval of any individual sewage disposal systems to be served
thereby. The installation of the community sewerage system shall be
deemed payment in full of all betterment and connection charges
associated with the subdivision. All applicable entrance charges shall
be paid at such time as the subdivision's community sewerage system is
connected to the public sewer in accordance with the fee schedule in
effect at the time the connection is made.
B. The individual lots to be served by individual sewage disposal systems
shall all be at least 40,000 square feet in area and shall be at least 500
§ 190-221 NASHUA CODE § 190-223
164:778
feet from an existing gravity flow public sewer or forced main pumping
station capable of sewering such lots. The 500 feet shall be measured
along streets, alleys or easements of the public sewer system. Adequate
and appropriate street mains complete with house connection stubs to
the lot alleys, and easements or rights-of-way, in a manner acceptable
to the City Engineer, shall be obtained, designed, engineered and
constructed as to be compatible with and acceptable to future
connections with the municipal sewerage system, prior to approval of
such individual sewage disposal systems. The Health Officer's approval
shall be contingent upon the applicant either completing the
installation of mains and house connections to the lot lines to the
satisfaction of the City Engineer who shall submit a written statement
to the Board of Health to that effect, or posting a performance bond,
certified check or deposit in escrow in a sum sufficient in amount
to assure completion of the mains and house connection stubs. The
installation of the mains and house connection stubs shall be deemed
payment in full of all betterment and connection charges. All applicable
entrance charges shall be paid at such time as the street mains are
connected to the public sewer in accordance with the fee schedule in
effect at the time connection is made.
C. The individual lots to be served by individual sewage disposal systems
shall all be at least 40,000 square feet in area and shall be at least 500
feet from an existing gravity flow public sewer or forced main pumping
station capable of sewering said lots. The 500 feet shall be measured
along streets, alleys or easements of the public sewer system. It shall be
the opinion of the Health Officer that the present and/or potential
pollution effects of the proposed individual disposal system will not
create a danger to the public health. In addition, the City's basic
engineering data necessary for the implementation of Subsection A or B
of this section shall not currently be in existence, and such data shall
not have been provided to the applicant by the City within six months of
his filing a request in writing for the same with the City Engineer.
D. The individual lots to be served by individual sewage disposal systems
shall all be at least 40,000 square feet in area and shall be at least 100
feet from an existing gravity flow public sewer or forced main pumping
station capable of sewering said lots. The 100 feet shall be measured
along streets, alleys or easements of the public sewer system. The
proposed individual sewage disposal system shall be incidental in
nature and not part of a development plan of two or more lots; and it
shall be the opinion of the Health Officer that the present and/or
potential pollution effects of the proposed individual disposal system
will not create a danger to the public health. Any parcel having been
subdivided under the provisions of this paragraph shall not be further
subdivided for a period of two years except as provided under
Subsections A through C of this section.
E. The individual lots shall all be at least 250,000 square feet in area.
§ 190-223 FLAG § 190-224
164:779
§ 190-224. Shared septic systems.
If a proposed subdivision includes a shared septic system, the applicant
shall provide a maintenance plan addressing the method and frequency of
inspections, the method and frequency of cleaning and disposal and the
drainfield area boundaries. For purposes of this section, a "shared septic
system" means a single septic system that accepts waste from more than
one dwelling unit or business establishment.
§ 190-225. Refuse disposal.
Before Board of Health approval of any new subdivision plot or plan can be
received, a system or systems of refuse disposal acceptable to the Health
Officer must be indicated thereon. The system may rely on municipal or
private operation or both and must be in operation prior to the occupancy of
any house, residence, sales office or community building in the subdivision.
§ 190-226. Easements.
Easements across lots or centered on rear or inside lot lines shall be
provided for utilities where necessary and shall be at least 12 feet wide.
§ 190-224 NASHUA CODE § 190-226
164:780
Part 5
Excavation Regulations
ARTICLE XXXIII
Rules and Regulations
Purpose: This Part 5 implements the following Master Plan
recommendations-
• Consider revisions to the excavation provisions in the Nashua
City Code, if deemed necessary to improve excavation and closure
operations.
§ 190-227. Applicability.
§ 190-228. Operational standards.
A. This article applies to any site plan or subdivision plan authorizing an
excavation. All excavations shall comply with the requirements of this
section as well as the provisions of RSA 155-E, Local Regulation
Excavations.
B. A waiver or appeal from the requirements of this section may be filed
with the Planning Board pursuant to § 190-148.
A. All equipment, except mobile equipment, for sorting, washing,
crushing, grading, drying, processing and treating, and other operation
machinery, shall not be used closer than 100 feet to any public street or
any adjoining property line.
B. Off-street parking shall be provided as required in the table of number
of required off-street parking spaces in § 190-198 of this chapter.
C. Any access to excavated areas or areas in the process of excavation
shall be adequately posted with "Keep Out-Danger" signs.
D. Lateral support shall be maintained for adjacent properties.
E. A substantial fence shall enclose the excavation or quarry where any
excavation or quarry will extend under original ground level or will
have a depth of 10 feet or more and create a slope of more than one in
two. Such fence shall be located 10 feet or more from the edge of the
excavation or quarry, and shall be at least six feet in height.
F. The use of explosives shall comply with the regulations for storage or
handling of explosives as published by the New Hampshire Department
of Safety.
Comment: See New Hampshire Code of Administrative Rules, Chapter
Saf-C 1600. Explosives.
G. All operations shall be conducted in such a manner so as to comply with
the laws of the state regulating water pollution and air pollution.
§ 190-227 FLAG § 190-229
164:781
§ 190-229. Sketch plan.
Sketch plans required pursuant to RSA 155-E:3 shall be filed with the
Administrative Officer and shall be prepared by a registered professional
engineer or a registered land surveyor, at a scale of 200 feet to the inch, and
shall indicate the requirements of RSA 155-E:3 in addition to the following:
§ 190-230. Reclamation plan.
It is recognized that land reuse of a removal site is in the public interest;
therefore, a reclamation plan, as described in RSA 155:E-5 and 155:E-5-a,
must be submitted to and approved by the Administrative Officer following
review by the Planning Board, subject to the following regulations:
A. Adjacent public streets;
B. Water supply and sanitary sewerage systems and temporary and
permanent drainage systems for the site;
C. Topographic mapping showing contours at intervals of not more than
10 feet;
D. Submission of plan for lighting if night operation is permitted by Zoning
Board of Adjustment;
E. Proper provision for vehicular traffic, service roads and control of
entrances and exits to highways;
F. The relocations of existing and future buildings and operations
machinery to the removal areas;
G. Delineation of the existing removal areas and the proposed area for
removal in the immediate future;
H. Location of fencing if applicable.
A. The Administrative Officer may require that the reclamation plan show
up to three alternative future land reuses.
B. Any land reuse must correspond to a situation which could reasonably
occur in the immediate future (zero to five years), and be revised as
necessary as to the existing physical character as the removal area
changes.
C. The reclamation bond, required pursuant to RSA 155-E: 4-a, shall
specify the time for completion of all the applicable requirements of this
Part 5 and shall be of an amount determined by the City Engineer and
Administrative Officer as sufficient to ensure compliance of the
requirements.
§ 190-229 NASHUA CODE § 190-230
164:782
Part 6
Utility Structures
ARTICLE XXXIV
Rules and Regulations
Purpose: This Part 6 establishes requirements for utility structures
pursuant to RSA 674:30.
§ 190-231. Applicability.
This article applies to public utility structures. For purposes of this article,
a "public utility structure" means any line, pipe, building, pump station, or
other structure used to deliver or provide public utilities such as water,
sewer, telephone, gas, electric, cable, or other public utility services to the
extent permitted by New Hampshire law.
§ 190-232. Planning Board waivers.
The Planning Board may waive any requirement contained in an ordinance,
code or regulation for any unoccupied structure which is less than 200
square feet in area consistent with RSA 674:30.
§ 190-233. Standards for utility structures.
In accordance with RSA 674:30.II, the following standards apply to public
utility structures:
A. The storage of vehicles or equipment used in the maintenance of a
utility is not permitted unless such activities are permitted in the
applicable zoning district. (See § 190-15.)
B. No equipment causing unreasonable noise, vibration, smoke, odor or
hazardous effect shall be installed.
C. The external design of the building shall conform to the buildings in the
surrounding area.
D. The minimum lot size, frontage, and lot width requirements of § 190-16
do not apply to utility structures. However, public utility structures
shall comply with the front, side and rear yard setbacks of the
applicable zoning district, except for maximum front setbacks.
E. All utility lines, pipes, cables, or similar structures shall be located
underground, unless the Planning Board determines that unfavorable
site conditions warrant aboveground installation.
Comment: Compare Article XXXII which addresses utility
requirements for subdivision and site plan approval. This article differs
from Article XXXII in that it applies to the utility providers, rather
than the mandatory utility requirements for subdivision or site plan
applicants.
§ 190-231 FLAG § 190-234
164:783
§ 190-234. Dimensional standards.
Utility facilities not used for human occupancy are only required to meet
the minimum front, side and rear yard setbacks and the maximum height
requirements, of § 190-16, Table 16-3 (Dimensional Matrix), except as
provided for § 190-16I. Any lot created or developed under this subsection
shall provide open space in all areas required by the minimum yard
setbacks except for necessary access drives to the facility.
§ 190-234 NASHUA CODE § 190-234
164:784
Part 7
Administrative Agencies
ARTICLE XXXV
Staff
§ 190-235. Administrative Officer.
An Administrative Officer shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed
by the Board of Aldermen, and upon taking office shall be authorized to
administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter except for sections or
articles within this Part 7 that are construed as innovative land use controls
(RSA 674:21) that provide for the appeal, administration, or enforcement
by another person or Board as designated within that section or article.
Nothing herein prohibits the Administrative Officer from holding other
appointed office.
§ 190-235 FLAG § 190-235
164:785

ARTICLE XXXVI
Planning Board
§ 190-236. Established; composition; terms; compensation.
[Amended 12-28-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-59]
A. Pursuant to the authority granted in RSA 673:2, there is hereby
established a Planning Board for the City.
B. The Planning Board shall consist of the Mayor or his appointed
representative who shall be confirmed by the Board of Aldermen, the
City Engineer, and a member of the Board of Aldermen appointed by the
President of the Board of Aldermen who shall be selected from the
members of its aldermanic Planning and Economic Development
Committee and confirmed by the Board of Aldermen, all as members ex
officio, and six residents of the City who shall be appointed by the
Mayor, and confirmed by the Board of Aldermen.
C. The Mayor shall appoint up to five, but not less than three alternate
members who are residents of the City and who shall be confirmed by
the Board of Aldermen. An alternate member shall vote in the absence
of a member. The President of the Board of Aldermen shall appoint an
alternate to the aldermanic member, who shall be selected from the
members of its aldermanic Planning and Economic Development
Committee and confirmed by the Board of Aldermen, and who shall vote
in absence of the aldermanic member.
D. The Mayor shall submit a new appointment or a reappointment of a
member or alternate to the Board of Aldermen not later than three
months prior to expiration of the current term of office. If confirmation
is denied or the appointment is withdrawn, the Mayor shall submit a
different appointment to the Board of Aldermen not later than on the
last day of expiration of the member or alternate current term of office.
E. Any mayoral appointment or appointment from alternate to regular
membership shall be interviewed in public by the appropriate
aldermanic committee. Reappointments shall only be interviewed in
public by the appropriate aldermanic committee at the request of any
member of the Board of Aldermen. [Amended 3-22-2011 by Ord. No.
O-11-54; 5-13-2014 by Ord. No. O-14-014]
F. The terms of the ex officio members shall correspond to their respective
official tenures, except in the case of the appointed representative
selected by the Mayor, whose term shall terminate with the term of the
Mayor selecting him. The terms of each member and alternate member
not ex officio shall be three years. All terms of the appointed members
shall begin on the first day of April.
G. The appointed members shall hold no other municipal office, except
that one appointed member may be a member of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, one appointed member may be a member of the
§ 190-236 FLAG § 190-236
164:787
§ 190-237. Removal of members.
Members of the Planning Board other than the member selected by the
Board of Aldermen may, after public hearing, be removed by the Mayor for
inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office. The Board of Aldermen
may, for like cause, remove the member selected by them.
§ 190-238. Vacancies. [Amended 12-28-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-59]
§ 190-239. Staff; finances.
§ 190-240. Organization; meetings; rules. [Amended 3-27-2007 by
Ord. No. O-06-63]
Conservation Commission, and one appointed member may be a
member of the Historic District Commission.
A. Vacancies in the membership of the Planning Board occurring
otherwise than through expiration of term shall be filled for the
duration of the unexpired term by the Mayor, in the case of members
appointed by him. Such appointments by the Mayor are to be confirmed
by the Board of Aldermen. The Board of Aldermen shall make
appointments in the case of the aldermanic members.78
A. Subject to any limitations in this chapter, the Planning Board may
appoint such employees as it may deem necessary for its work.
Appointment, promotion, demotion and removal shall be subject to the
same provisions of law as govern other corresponding civil employees
of the City.
B. The Board of Aldermen may provide such funds, equipment and
accommodations as it may deem necessary or advisable for the
Planning Board's work. All expenditures of the Planning Board,
exclusive of gifts or reimbursements, shall be within the amount
appropriated for the purpose by the Board of Aldermen.
A. The Planning Board shall elect a Chairman from the appointed
members and create and fill such other offices as it may deem
necessary for its work. The term of the Chairman shall be one year, with
eligibility for reelection.
B. Pursuant to RSA 673:10, the Board shall hold at least one regular
meeting each month, adopt rules for the transaction of business, keep a
public record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and
determinations, and forward a copy of the minutes of its meetings to the
City Clerk for distribution to each member of the Board of Aldermen.
78.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, which immediately followed, regarding staying in
office more than 90 days after expiration of term, was repealed 3-8-2011 by Ord. No.
O-11-49.
§ 190-236 NASHUA CODE § 190-240
164:788
§ 190-241. Duties.
C. A quorum of the Planning Board consists of five members, unless the
membership, accounting for members and alternate members, falls
below nine members in which case a quorum consists of a majority of
the membership remaining.
D. A quorum shall be necessary to convene a meeting in order to transact
any business. All decisions made by the Planning Board, whether
negative or affirmative, shall require a majority of members present
and voting. The Chairman shall designate an alternate to hear the case
and to vote on the case in event of an absence or a vacancy or a
disqualification of a member, except that an alternate aldermanic
member can only serve in the absence of the aldermanic member.
E. The Planning Board shall, subject to and conditional on annual funding
from the Board of Aldermen publish in a newspaper of general
circulation the Planning Board's agenda for any public meeting or
hearing held by the Board less than five days prior to the meeting or
hearing. Lack of such publication shall not create a legal notice
deficiency.
F. All meetings shall be open to the public subject to RSA 91-A, the New
Hampshire Right-to-Know Law.
A. It shall be the duty of the Planning Board to prepare and amend from
time to time a Master Plan to guide the development of the municipality.
A Master Plan may include consideration of any areas outside the
boundaries of the municipality which in the judgment of the Planning
Board bear a relation to or have an impact on the planning of the
municipality. Every Planning Board shall from time to time update and
amend the adopted Master Plan with funds appropriated for that
purpose by the Board of Aldermen. In preparing, amending, and
updating the Master Plan:
(1) The Planning Board shall have responsibility for promoting interest
in, and understanding of, the Master Plan of the municipality. In
order to promote this interest and understanding, the Planning
Board may publish and distribute copies of the Master Plan, copies
of any report relating to the Master Plan, and may employ such
other means of publicity and education as it may deem advisable.
(2) The Planning Board shall also have authority to make any
investigations, maps and reports, and recommendations which
relate to the planning and development of the municipality.
B. The Planning Board may from time to time report and recommend the
appropriate public officials and public agencies programs for the
development of the municipality, programs for the erection of public
structures, and programs for municipal improvements. Each program
shall include recommendations for its financing. It shall be part of the
§ 190-240 FLAG § 190-241
164:789
Planning Board's duties to consult with and advise public officials and
agencies, public utility companies, civic, educational, professional,
research and other organizations, and to consult with citizens, for
the purpose of protecting or carrying out of the Master Plan as well
as for making recommendations relating to the development of the
municipality.
C. Members of the Planning Board, when duly authorized by the Board as
a whole, may attend municipal planning conferences or meetings, or
hearings upon pending municipal planning legislation. The Planning
Board may by majority vote authorize the payment of reasonable
expenses incident to such attendance.
D. The Planning Board, its members, officers, and employees, in the
performance of their functions may enter upon any land and make such
examinations and surveys as are reasonably necessary, and place and
maintain necessary monuments and marks.
E. The Planning Board may, from time to time, recommend to the Board of
Aldermen, amendments of the Zoning Ordinance or Zoning Map or
additions thereto.
F. The Planning Board shall not do any act or acts pursuant to its power
and duties which contemplate or necessitate the expenditure of
municipal funds by resolution, inclusion in the municipal budget,
appropriations or supplementary appropriations, or otherwise, without
authorization by the Board of Aldermen.
G. The Planning Board shall have all authority and powers granted to
Planning Boards by Title LXIV of the New Hampshire Revised Statutes
Annotated and RSA 155-E, and for any other pertinent state statutes as
amended, from time to time, whether or not such authority is specified
in local ordinances, including but not limited to Articles XVI and XVIII
and Parts 4 through 8 of this chapter.
H. The Planning Board is prohibited from making decisions involving
construction, interpretation or application of the Nashua zoning
ordinances. The Administrative Officer or his designee is duly
authorized to decide compliance with the Nashua zoning ordinances
prior to placing an application on the Planning Board's agenda.
I. In cases in which the Board grants approval conditional upon the
applicant dedicating land or easements in land and improvements
thereon to the City for stormwater drainage, widening of existing street
right-of-way, public recreation, conservation, sanitary sewer, public
vehicular and pedestrian access or other valid public purpose, the
Board is authorized to accept and record on behalf of the City the
appropriate deeds, plans, etc., without specific approval by the Board of
Aldermen. Whenever such a dedication is contemplated, the Planning
Director or his/her designee shall, on the basis of an appropriate
investigation, report in writing as to the suitability of the land for the
intended purpose, including, but not limited to, the presence of
§ 190-241 NASHUA CODE § 190-241
164:790
§ 190-241.1. Training. [Added 12-26-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-138]
hazardous waste or other sources of undesirable obligations or liability
risks. This authority shall not extend to the formal acceptance of new
public streets or extensions of public streets. [Added 6-26-2007 by
Ord. No. O-06-57]
A. The City Planning Department shall annually provide a list of
mandatory and available training opportunities for newly appointed
members and ongoing members of the Planning Board, as well as the
attendance record for mandatory training sessions for the previous
year.
B. All persons appointed to the Planning Board, including alternate
members and ex officio members, shall attend mandatory training
sessions. New member training shall be completed within six months of
confirmation of appointment to the Planning Board.
C. The cost of mandatory training for the Planning Board shall be provided
for in the annual budget.
§ 190-241 FLAG § 190-241.1
164:791

ARTICLE XXXVII
Regional Planning Commission
§ 190-242. Established.
Pursuant to the authority granted in RSA 36:45 through 36:53, the City
hereby joins with the Town of Hudson and other municipalities in the
Nashua metropolitan area in the establishment of a Regional Planning
Commission.
§ 190-243. Composition.
The Regional Planning Commission shall consist of two representatives
from member municipalities with a population less than 10,000, three
representatives from member municipalities with a population between
10,000 and 25,000, and four representatives from Nashua. Nashua
representatives shall be nominated by the Planning Board and appointed by
the Board of Aldermen.
§ 190-244. Qualifications; terms.
The term of each Nashua representative appointed to the Regional Planning
Commission shall be four years. All Nashua representatives shall serve
without compensation and at least one representative shall be a member of
the Planning Board. Alternate representatives may also be appointed in the
same manner as for regular members.
§ 190-245. Removal of representatives.
Nashua representatives of the Regional Planning Commission may be
removed by the Board of Aldermen for inefficiency, neglect of duty or
malfeasance in office.
§ 190-246. Vacancies.
Vacancies in representation on the Regional Planning Commission,
occurring other than through the expiration of term, shall be filled for
the remainder of the unexpired term in the same manner as original
appointments.
§ 190-247. Organization; meetings; bylaws.
The Regional Planning Commission shall elect annually from among its
members a Chairman, Vice Chairman and such other officers as it deems
necessary. Meetings shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at such
other times as the Commission may determine. The Commission shall adopt
bylaws for the conduct of its business and shall keep a public record of
its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations and shall forward
a copy of the minutes of its meetings to the local Planning Board of each
member municipality.
§ 190-242 FLAG § 190-248
164:793
§ 190-248. Finances.
The Regional Planning Commission may accept and receive funds, grants
and services from federal, state and municipal governments and their
agencies or from private and civic sources. The Commission shall
determine, on a reasonable and equitable basis, the proportion of its costs
to be borne respectively by each member municipality. Failure on the part
of any member municipality to pay its proportionate share of the costs
of the Commission shall constitute a termination of such municipality's
membership on the Commission. Within the amounts so appropriated to
it or with other funds placed at its disposal, the Commission may engage
employees and professional consultants, may use such funds in conjunction
with other public or private funds available, and may obtain such goods and
services as are necessary to it in carrying out its proper functions.
§ 190-249. General powers and duties.
The Regional Planning Commission's powers shall be advisory, and shall
generally pertain to the development of the region within its jurisdiction as
a whole. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to reduce or limit any of
the powers, duties or obligations of the City's Planning Board. The area of
jurisdiction of the Regional Planning Commission shall include the areas of
the municipality within the delineated planning region. It shall be the duty
of the Regional Planning Commission to prepare a comprehensive Master
Plan for the development of the region within its jurisdiction, including
the Commission's recommendations, among other things, for the use of
land within the region; for the general location, extent, type of use, and
character of highways, major streets, intersections, parking lots, railroads,
aircraft landing areas, waterways and bridges, and other means of
transportation, communication, and other purposes; for the development,
extent, and general location of parks, playgrounds, shorefront
developments, parkways, and other public reservations and recreation
areas; for the location, type, and character of public buildings, schools,
community centers, and other public property; and for the improvement,
redevelopment, rehabilitation, or conservation of residential, business,
industrial and other areas; including the development of programs for
the modernization and coordination of buildings, housing, zoning and
subdivision regulations of the City and their enforcement on a coordinated
and unified basis. The Regional Planning Commission may authorize its
employees or consultants to render assistance on local planning problems to
any municipality or county which is not a member of the Regional Planning
Commission. The cost of such assistance shall be paid entirely by the
municipality or county to which the service is rendered or partly by such
municipality or county and partly by any gift, grant, or contribution which
may be available for such work or by combination thereof. Such Commission
shall keep a strict account of the cost of such assistance and shall provide
such municipality or county with an itemized statement.
§ 190-248 NASHUA CODE § 190-249
164:794
ARTICLE XXXVIII
Business and Industrial Development Authority
§ 190-250. Created; Board of Directors. [Amended 8-12-2008 by
Ord. No. O-08-24]
The Business and City Industrial Development Authority is hereby created
to consist of a Board of Directors of at least nine but no more than 15
members appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Board of Aldermen,
which shall have full power, duties and responsibilities authorized under
RSA Chapter 162-G.
§ 190-251. Membership.
§ 190-252. Organization.
Organization of the Business and Industrial Development Authority shall
take place immediately following confirmation of its members, annually in
the month of January by the choice of one of its members as Chairman. It
shall also elect a clerk and any other necessary officers to serve for one year
or until their successors are chosen.
§ 190-253. Voting.
All action by the Business and Industrial Development Authority shall be
authorized by resolutions of the Board passed on the affirmative votes of at
least 2/3 of the Board members present and voting.
§ 190-254. Minutes; voting records; annual report.
Minutes of all meetings and records of all votes of the Business and
Industrial Development Authority shall be filed with the City Clerk within
15 days of the meeting or vote. The Authority shall at the close of each year
make a detailed report to the Board of Aldermen of its activities for that
year.
A. All Business and Industrial Development Authority Directors shall be
appointed for terms of three years, and each Director shall serve until
his successor shall have been appointed. At all times, there shall be a
majority of the Directors residing within the boundaries of the City.
B. In addition to the directors to be appointed by the Mayor, the President
of the Board of Aldermen, or his/her aldermanic designee, the City
Treasurer and the Mayor shall serve as ex officio members of the Board.
[Amended 8-12-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-24]
§ 190-250 FLAG § 190-254
164:795

ARTICLE XXXIX
Zoning Board of Adjustment
§ 190-255. Zoning Board of Adjustment; membership. [Amended
12-28-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-60]
§ 190-256. Meetings. [Amended 3-27-2007 by Ord. No. O-06-63]
A. Pursuant to the authority granted in RSA 673:3, there is hereby
established a Zoning Board of Adjustment for the City.
B. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall consist of five members who are
residents of the City appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the
Board of Aldermen. Five alternates shall be chosen in a like manner. An
alternate shall vote in the absence of a member. [Amended 5-27-2008
by Ord. No. O-08-17]
C. Members and alternates shall serve for a term of three years. Members
and alternates in office on the effective date of this section shall
continue in office.
D. As terms expire or vacancies occur, the Mayor, subject to the
confirmation of the Board of Aldermen, shall make such appointments
as necessary to comply with this section and RSA 673:3. Vacancies shall
be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term. [Amended
5-27-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-17]
E. 79The Mayor shall submit a new appointment or a reappointment of a
member or alternate to the Board of Aldermen not later than three
months prior to expiration of the current term of office. If confirmation
is denied or the appointment is withdrawn, the Mayor shall submit a
different appointment to the Board of Aldermen not later than on the
last day of expiration of the member or alternate current term of office.
[Amended 5-27-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-17]
F. Any appointment or reappointment shall be interviewed in public by the
appropriate aldermanic committee at the request of any member of the
Board of Aldermen.
G. Members and alternates shall be removable, after a public hearing, for
inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office upon vote of the
Board of Aldermen which shall make written findings of fact and cause
the same to be filed with the City Clerk.
A. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall elect a Chairman from the
appointed members and create and fill such other offices as it may
deem necessary for its work. The term of the Chairman shall be one
year, with eligibility for reelection.
79.Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, regarding staying in office more than 90 days after
expiration of term, was repealed, and former Subsections F through H were renumbered
as Subsections E through G, respectively, 3-8-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-49.
§ 190-255 FLAG § 190-256
164:797
§ 190-257. Powers and duties.
The Board shall have the following powers and duties:
B. Meetings of the Board shall be held at such times as the Board may
determine under its rules, or upon call of the Chairman.
C. All meetings shall be open to the public subject to RSA 91-A, the New
Hampshire Right-to-Know Law.
D. A quorum of the Zoning Board of Adjustment consists of three
members, unless the membership, accounting for members and
alternate members, falls below five members in which case a quorum
consists of a majority of the membership remaining.
E. A quorum shall be necessary to convene a meeting in order to transact
any business.
F. The Chairman shall designate an alternate to hear the case and to vote
on the case in event of an absence or a vacancy or a disqualification of a
member.
G. Pursuant to RSA 674:33, III, the concurring vote of three members of
the Board shall be necessary to reverse any action of the administrative
official or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter on which it is
required to pass.
H. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall make no rule permitting the
applicant to require more members than a quorum to make a decision
on its application. The applicant may withdraw his application at any
time and refile subject to a refiling fee set by the Board under its rules.
I. The Board shall adopt its own rules of procedure after a public hearing
duly advertised in a local news source, and shall keep a record of its
proceedings, showing the vote of each member on each question or if
absent or failing to vote, and shall keep records of its examinations and
other official actions. Every rule or regulation, every amendment or
repeal thereof and every order, requirement, decision or determination
of the Board shall immediately be filed in the office of the
Administrative Officer and become a public record. The Board shall file
with the City Clerk for distribution as necessary a complete record of
the minutes of their meetings and public hearings. Included in the
minutes shall be the reasons for the granting or denying of a request for
a variance or special exception, together with the vote of each member
on each item on the agenda. The Board shall also forward to the City
Clerk a copy of their agendas prior to their meetings.
A. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any
order, requirement, decision or determination made by an
Administrative Officer in the enforcement of this article except for
sections or articles within this Part 7 that are construed as innovative
land use controls (RSA 674:21) that provide for the appeal,
§ 190-256 NASHUA CODE § 190-257
164:798
§ 190-257.1. Training. [Added 12-26-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-139]
administration, or enforcement by another person or Board as
designated within that section or article;
B. To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this article upon
which the Board is required to pass under this Part 7;
C. To authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, such variances from the
terms of this Part 7 as will not be contrary to the public interest where,
owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of
this Part 7 will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of
this article shall be observed and substantial justice done.
D. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have all authority granted to
zoning boards by Title LXIV of the New Hampshire Revised Statutes
Annotated, as amended from time to time, whether or not such powers
and authorities are specifically listed in the local ordinances, including
but not limited to Part 2 and Part 3, Article XV, of this chapter.
E. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may, upon perceiving lack of clarity in
or any deficiency of provisions in this chapter, recommend amendments
or additions thereto to the Board of Aldermen. [Added 10-24-2006 by
Ord. No. O-06-38]
F. In cases in which the Board grants approval conditional upon the
applicant dedicating land or easements in land and improvements
thereon to the City for stormwater drainage, widening of existing street
right-of-way, public recreation, conservation, sanitary sewer, public
vehicular and pedestrian access or other valid public purpose, the
Board is authorized to accept and record on behalf of the City the
appropriate deeds, plans, etc., without specific approval by the Board of
Aldermen. Whenever such a dedication is contemplated, the Planning
Director or his/her designee shall, on the basis of an appropriate
investigation, report in writing as to the suitability of the land for the
intended purpose, including, but not limited to, the presence of
hazardous waste or other sources of undesirable obligations or liability
risks. This authority shall not extend to the formal acceptance of new
public streets or extensions of public streets. [Added 6-26-2007 by
Ord. No. O-06-57]
A. The City Planning Department shall annually provide a list of
mandatory and available training opportunities for newly appointed
members and ongoing members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, as
well as the attendance record for mandatory training sessions for the
previous year.
B. All persons appointed to the Zoning Board of Adjustment, including
alternate members, shall attend mandatory training sessions. New
member training shall be completed within six months of confirmation
of appointment to the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
§ 190-257 FLAG § 190-257.1
164:799
C. The cost of mandatory training for the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall
be provided for in the annual budget.
§ 190-257.1 NASHUA CODE § 190-257.1
164:800
ARTICLE XL
Conservation Commission
§ 190-258. Conservation Commission.
Chapter 12, Article I, of the City Code establishes the Conservation
Commission. (See also RSA Chapter 36-A.) It shall be the duty of the
Conservation Commission to submit a recommendation relating to any
proposed development requiring a wetlands application pursuant to Article
XI of this chapter.
§ 190-258 FLAG § 190-258
164:801

ARTICLE XLI
Historic District Commission
§ 190-259. Historic District Commission established.
There is hereby established a Historic District Commission for the City
having all of the powers and duties set forth in RSA 31:89-f in effect as of
July 9, 1980. Any subsequent amendments to the RSA shall not affect this
article unless such amendments are first approved by the Mayor and Board
of Aldermen.
§ 190-260. Membership of Commission.
§ 190-261. Organization, meetings and rules of Commission.
A. Composition. The Historic District Commission shall consist of seven
members appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Board of
Aldermen, one member who is an Alderman, appointed by the President
of the Board of Aldermen, and one member who is the Mayor or the
Mayor's designee. All members shall be residents of the City. One
member shall be a representative of a local nonprofit historical
organization, one member shall be a registered architect, one member
shall be an Alderman, one member shall be the Mayor or the Mayor's
designee, one member shall be a member of the Planning Board, one
member shall be a resident of a designated Historic District, if possible,
and there shall be one other member.
B. Terms. The members of the Commission shall be appointed for threeyear
terms. Initial appointments shall be staggered so that subsequent
appointments shall not occur at the same time.
C. Vacancies. If a vacancy is created, an interim appointment for the
remainder of the term shall be made in accordance with the procedures
hereinbefore described.
D. Qualifications. In determining the qualifications of a member of the
Commission, the Mayor and Board of Aldermen shall take into
consideration the individual's demonstrated interest and ability to
understand, appreciate and promote the purposes of this article.
E. Alternates. There shall be three alternates appointed by the Mayor and
confirmed by the Board of Aldermen.
A. The Historic District Commission shall annually elect a Chairman and
secretary from among the appointed members and create and fill such
other offices as it may deem necessary to fulfill its work. The
Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairman, and at such other
time as the Commission may determine, and shall adopt rules for the
orderly conduct of meetings. Minutes of all meetings shall be kept, and
all records and meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public.
§ 190-259 FLAG § 190-261
164:803
§ 190-262. Powers and duties of Commission.
B. In order for the Commission to take any action, at least four members
shall be present to constitute a quorum. A simple majority of the
quorum shall be sufficient to approve or deny any motion to come
before the Commission.
A. The Historic District Commission shall develop a policy to accomplish
the purposes of this section within the historic districts and to relate
that policy to the Master Plan. The Commission shall have the power to
accept, review and act upon all applications for building permits in
reference to properties situated within the boundaries of any Historic
District established herein. Such power of review and approval or
disapproval shall be limited to those considerations which affect the
relationship of the applicant's proposal to its surroundings, to the
locating and arrangement of structures, to the architectural treatment
of the exterior features and finish of structures, and to the compatibility
of land uses within the district as they may be deemed to affect the
character and integrity of the district to achieve the purposes of this
article.
B. The Commission may request reports and recommendations regarding
the feasibility of an applicant's proposal from any administrative official
of the City. The Commission may seek advice from, or engage through
contract, such technical assistance and consultants, and accept and use
gifts, grants or other contributions as may be deemed necessary to
carry out the purposes of this article, provided that no financial or other
commitment or obligation is incurred without having first received the
consent and approval of the Mayor and Board of Aldermen in
accordance with the Charter of the City. The Commission shall file with
the Building Department Manager a certificate of approval or notice of
disapproval following the review and determination of an application.
The Commission shall review the physical, social and cultural assets of
the City and recommend the establishment of areas in the City for
designation as Historic Districts to the Mayor and Board of Aldermen.
[Amended 2-26-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-07]
§ 190-261 NASHUA CODE § 190-262
164:804
Part 8
Definitions And Submittal Requirements
ARTICLE XLII
Definitions
§ 190-263. Rules of interpretation generally.
A. This Part 8 establishes the rules of interpretation and definition of
terms for this chapter.
B. The Planning Board shall interpret this Part 8 as applied to a site plan or
subdivision plan.
C. An appeal from the interpretation of this Part 8 as applied to the zoning
ordinances (Part 2 of this chapter) may be filed with the Zoning Board
of Adjustment pursuant to § 190-436.
D. For the purposes of this chapter:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future.
(2) The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the
singular.
(3) The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "designed,"
"arranged," "intended" and "offered" to be used or occupied.
(4) The words "building," "structure," "lot," "land" and "premises" shall
be considered as though followed by the words" or any portion
thereof".
(5) The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
(6) Terms and words not defined in this section but defined in the City
Building Code shall have the meanings given therein unless a
contrary intention clearly appears; and words not defined in either
place shall have the meaning given in Webster's Unabridged
Dictionary.
(7) Uses listed in the Use Matrix (§ 190-15) shall have the meanings
provided in this Article XLII and as further refined by the Land-
Based Classification Standards (LBCS) and the North American
Industrial Classification System (NAICS) referenced § 190-15D.
(8) The words "see" or "refer to" in reference to an external source
mean that the external source is adopted and incorporated by
reference into this chapter, unless otherwise provided. All
references to NH Revised Statutes Annotated (RSA) include those
statutes as amended.
§ 190-263 FLAG § 190-263
164:805
§ 190-264. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ABANDONED SIGN — The cessation of the use of a sign as indicated by the
visible or otherwise apparent intention of an owner to discontinue the use
of a sign and/or structural framework; or the removal of the characteristic
equipment or furnishing of the sign, without its replacement by similar
equipment or furnishings; or the replacement of a nonconforming sign with
a conforming sign.
ABANDONMENT — The discontinuance of a use or structure for a
continuous period of at least one year in any residential zoning district, or
at least two years in any nonresidential zoning district. See § 190-122.
ABUTTER — See RSA 672:3.
ABUT or ABUTTING — Adjoining or directly across the street or a stream.80
Example, the definition of "subdivision" is "See RSA 672:14." This
means that the definition of "subdivision" listed in the referenced
state statute constitutes the definition of subdivision as used in
this chapter.
(9) The provisions of this article shall be interpreted to be the
minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the health,
safety, morals and the general welfare of the City.
(10) Paragraphs beginning with the statement "purpose," "comment,"
or "commentary" are not considered to be binding standards,
unless the standards provide otherwise. Paragraphs beginning with
the statement "comment:" or "commentary:" are not considered a
part of this chapter, but instead are added by the Planning
Department as a way to interpret this chapter, provide examples, or
references to external resources to assist applicants,
decisionmakers and the general public.
E. Time periods shall be computed as provided in RSA 21:35, unless
otherwise provided.
F. Effective date of this chapter. For purposes of Article XII
(Nonconformities), whenever this article refers to the effective date of
this chapter, the reference shall be deemed to include the effective date
of any amendments to this chapter if the amendment, rather than this
chapter as originally adopted, creates a nonconforming situation.
80.Editor’s Note: The former definition of "accessory apartment," which immediately followed
this definition, was repealed 8-8-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-036.
§ 190-263 NASHUA CODE § 190-264
164:806
Comment: Compare "contiguous." Properties adjoining at a common
property line are both abutting and contiguous. However, a property lying
across the street from another property is considered abutting, but not
contiguous, to that property.
ACCESSORY BUILDING — See "building, accessory."
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — See "structure, accessory."
ACCESSORY USE — See "use, accessory."
ACTIVE OPEN SPACE — See "open space, active."
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — An officer of the City appointed by the
Mayor subject to confirmation of the Board of Aldermen pursuant to
§ 190-235. The term "Administrative Officer" shall also include the
designees of the Administrative Officer.
ADVERTISING MESSAGE — Copy, symbols or wording on a sign describing
products or services being offered to the public.
ADT (AVERAGE DAILY TRAFFIC) — The average number of cars per day
that pass over a given point.
AER REPORT — The report entitled Analysis of Development Impact Fees in
Nashua, October 1994, prepared by Applied Economics Research, Inc. See
§ 190-73.
AGRICULTURAL PRESERVATION RESTRICTION — See RSA 477:45.
AIRPORT — See RSA 424:1.
AIRPORT HAZARD — See RSA 424:1.
ALLEY — A minor right-of-way not intended to provide the primary means
of access to the abutting lots, which is used for vehicular service access to
the back or sides of properties otherwise abutting on a public street.
ALTERATION — Any change or rearrangement in structural parts or exit
facilities or an enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by
increasing in height.
ANIMATED SIGN — Any sign which includes action or motion, such as
changing electronic sign or electronic message center. For purposes of this
article, this term does not refer to flashing, changing or indexing.
ANTENNA — Any structure or device used for the purpose of collecting or
transmitting electromagnetic waves, including but not limited to directional
antennas, such as panels, microwave dishes, and satellite dishes, and
omnidirectional antennas, such as whip antennas.
Comment: Excluded from the regulations enacted by Ord. No. 0-97-185 are
antennas for television and radio reception, antennas used in the amateur
radio service, antennas used for municipal, state, or federal emergency
service, and any tower used exclusively for such antennas, or that part of
any towers used partially or principally for those antennas.
§ 190-264 FLAG § 190-264
164:807
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL — Any application for
approval of a building permit, certificate of occupancy, rezoning, conditional
use permit, variance, special exception, subdivision plan, site plan, or any
other permit or decision required by this chapter.
ARCADE — An area contiguous to a street or plaza that is open and
unobstructed to a height of not less than 12 feet, which is supported on one
side by columns or piers, and which is accessible to the public at all times.
The term "arcade" does not include off-street loading areas, driveways,
or off-street parking area. The floor of any arcade shall be level with the
adjoining street or plaza.
ARCADE, INTERNAL — A street arcade that fronts on and adjoins a plaza
or other space internal to a building lot rather than the front lot line.
ARCADE, STREET — An arcade that adjoins a front lot line.
AREA, SIGN — The space, on the largest single face of a sign, within
and including a perimeter which forms the outside shape of a sign. Where
signs are established back to back the larger face shall be calculated for
purposes of determining allowable area. The space of a sign having no such
perimeter or border shall be computed by enclosing the entire copy area
within the outline of either a parallelogram, triangle, circle or any other
easily recognized geometric shape and then computing the area. Where a
sign is of a three-dimensional, round or irregular shape, the largest cross
section shall be used in a flat projection for the purpose of computing sign
area.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO Zone on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one-percent or greater annual possibility
of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined
channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and
where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by
ponding or sheet flow. See § 190-62.[Amended 9-8-2009 by Ord. No.
O-09-66]
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
the City of Nashua subject to one-percent-or-greater possibility of flooding
in any given year. The area is designated as Zones A, AO, and AE on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map. See § 190.[Amended 9-8-2009 by Ord. No.
O-09-66]
ARTERIAL STREET — (See § 190-207E, Table 207-1.) Includes the
following:
Any "principal arterial." A "principal arterial" provides corridor
movement suitable for substantial statewide or interstate travel and
provides continuity for all rural arterials that intercept the urban area,
serves the major traffic movements within urbanized areas such as
between central business districts and outlying residential areas,
between major intercity communities, or between major suburban
centers, and serves a major portion of the trips entering and leaving
A.
§ 190-264 NASHUA CODE § 190-264
164:808
AWNING — A shelter of canvas, metal or similar material extending over a
doorway or window to provide shelter from natural elements.
AWNING SIGN — A sign painted on or attached flat or flush against the
surface of the awning, but not extending above, below or beyond the awning
or attached to the underside. See § 190-97.
BACKGROUND AREA — The total area of a sign face on which copy could
be placed, often referenced in connection with wall signs.
BANNER SIGN — A temporary sign of lightweight material (paper, plastic
or fabric) hung either with or without frames. See § 190-99.
BANNER SIGN, PERMANENT — A sign constructed of lightweight material
(paper, plastic or fabric) attached by means of rigid frames to a pole in a
permanent or semipermanent fashion. See § 190-99.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent possibility of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year. See § 190-62.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building that is partly or completely below
grade.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — An establishment operating primarily in a singlefamily
detached dwelling, or a building designated on the National Register
of Historic Places and originally devoted to another use, that supplies
temporary accommodations to overnight guests for a fee.
BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS SPECIFICATIONS — The document entitled
"Board of Public Works, Standard Specifications," most recent revision.
BOARDINGHOUSE — See "lodging unit."
BUFFER — An area of land separating distinct zoning districts or land uses
that acts to soften or mitigate the effects of one land use on the other.
BUILDING — A combination of any materials, whether portable or fixed,
having a roof, to form a structure for the shelter of persons, animals or
property.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A detached building, the use of which is
customarily incidental and subordinate to that of the principal building, and
which is located on the same lot as that occupied by the principal building.
BUILDING AREA — The aggregate of the maximum horizontal cross-section
area of all buildings on a lot exclusive of cornices, eaves, gutters, chimneys,
unenclosed porches, bay windows, balconies and terraces, expressed as a
percentage of total lot area.
the urban area, as well as the majority of the through traffic desiring to
bypass the central City.
Any "minor arterial." A "minor arterial" serves trips of moderate length
at a somewhat lower level of travel mobility than principal arterials,
provides access to geographic areas smaller than those served by the
higher system, and provides intracommunity continuity, but does not
penetrate identifiable neighborhoods.
B.
§ 190-264 FLAG § 190-264
164:809
BUILDING, ATTACHED — A building having any portion of one or more
walls in common with adjoining buildings.
BUILDING, DETACHED — A building having open space on all sides, and
that is not an attached building.
BUILDING FACE OR WALL — All window and wall or facade area of a
building in one plane or elevation.
BUILDING FRONTAGE — The linear length of a building parallel to or
closely facing the right-of-way.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building that contains the principal use of the
lot on which it is located.
BULLETIN BOARD SIGN — A sign erected by a charitable, educational
or religious institution or a public body, which is erected upon the same
property as such institution, for purposes of announcing events which are
held on the premises of such institution. See § 190-96.
CALIPER — The minimum diameter of a tree measured six inches above the
ground for trees up to and including four inches in diameter and 12 inches
above the ground for trees having a larger diameter.
CAMPER — A temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation use
including:
CAMPING TRAILER — See "camper."
CANOPY (or MARQUEE) — A permanent roof-like shelter extending from
part or all of a building face over a public or nonpublic right-of-way and
constructed or a durable material such as metal, glass or plastic.
CANOPY OR MARQUEE SIGN — Any sign attached to or part of a canopy or
marquee. A canopy or marquee is a permanent roof-like shelter extending
from part or all of a building face over a public right-of-way and constructed
of a durable material such as metal, glass or plastic. See § 190-98.
CELLAR — A portion of a building, partly or entirely below grade, which has
more than 1/2 of its height measured from finished floor to finished ceiling,
below the average established finished grade of the ground adjoining the
building. A cellar is not deemed a story. See also "basement."
TRAVEL TRAILER — A vehicle which is towed, identified by the
manufacturer as a travel trailer, built on a chassis eight feet or less wide
and 30 feet or less in length and designed to move on a highway.
A.
PICKUP COACH — A structure designed to be mounted on a truck
chassis or cut-down car.
B.
MOTOR HOME — A self-propelled vehicle with a dwelling constructed
as an integral part of the vehicle.
C.
CAMPING TRAILER — A canvas or other foldable structure built on a
chassis with wheels and designed to move on the highway.
D.
§ 190-264 NASHUA CODE § 190-264
164:810
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A statement signed by the Administrative
Officer, setting forth either that a building or structure complies with this
chapter or that a building, structure or parcel of land may lawfully be
employed for specified uses, or both.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN (MANUAL) — A sign that is designed so that the
message, characters, letters or illustrations can be manually (as opposed
to electronically) changed or rearranged without altering the face or the
surface of the sign. (Also see "changing sign," "electronic message center,"
"temporary sign" and "portable sign.")
CHANGING SIGN — See "electronic message center."
CHARITABLE AND PUBLIC SERVICE SIGNS — A sign used for the purpose
of publicizing a fund-raising event for a nonprofit agency or established
to provide information for the purpose of the public's welfare such as a
community event, parade or festival.
CHICKEN — The common domestic fowl, Gallus Domesticus.[Added
12-11-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-019]
CLUSTER SUBDIVISION — See "conservation subdivision."
CO-LOCATION — Locating additional antennas on an existing
communications tower or other site where one or more antennas are
already present.
COLLECTOR STREET — A street that collects traffic from local roads and
channels it into the arterial system, and provides land access and traffic
circulation within residential neighborhoods, commercial and industrial
area. See § 190-207E, Table 207-1.
COLONNADE — A series of regularly spaced columns that support an
entablature. A colonnade may also support a roof structure.
COMMERCIAL USE — Any use listed within the "commercial" classification
in the Use Matrix (§ 190-15, Table 15-1).
COMMERCIAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES — Licensed
commercial wireless telecommunication services including cellular,
personal communication services (PCS), specialized mobilized radio (SMR),
enhanced specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging, and similar services
that are marketed to the general public.
COMMITTED DEVELOPMENT — Proposed development pursuant to any
approved, but unbuilt, conditional plan or site plan.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — Active or passive open space specifically
reserved for common use and enjoyment by a homeowners' association
condominium, and restricted only for such recreational and conservation
uses as tot-lot, park, playground, playfield, swimming, golf course and
conservation area.
COMMON OWNERSHIP — Ownership by the same person, corporation,
firm, entity, partnership, or unincorporated association; or ownership by
different corporations, firms, partnerships, entities, or unincorporated
§ 190-264 FLAG § 190-264
164:811
associations, in which a stockbroker, partner, or associate, or a member of
his family owns an interest in each corporation, firm, partnership, entity, or
unincorporated association.
COMMUNICATIONS TOWER — Any ground or roof-mounted pole, spire,
structure, or combination thereof higher than 50 feet freestanding or 20
feet from the tower's point of contact with a roof or water tank, including
supporting lines, cables, wires, braces, and masts, intended primarily for
the purpose of mounting an antenna, meteorological device, or similar
apparatus above grade.
Comment: Excluded from the regulations enacted by Ord. No. 0-97-185 are
antennas for television and radio reception, antennas used in the amateur
radio service, antennas used for municipal, state, or federal emergency
service, and any tower used exclusively for such antennas, or that part of
any towers used partially or principally for those antennas.
COMMUNICATIONS TOWER, MULTI-USER — A tower to which is attached
the antennas of more than one commercial wireless telecommunication
service provider or governmental entity.
COMMUNICATIONS TOWER, SINGLE-USER — A tower to which is
attached only the antennas of a single user, although the tower may be
designed to accommodate the antennas of multiple users as required in this
chapter.
CONSERVATION EASEMENT — See "conservation restriction."
CONSERVATION RESTRICTION — See RSA 79-B:2 and RSA 477:45.
CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION — A subdivision that conforms to the
requirements of § 190-40.
CONTIGUOUS — Adjoining at a common property line.
Comment: Compare "abut."
CONTRACTOR JOB SIGN — A temporary sign that provides information
about active on-site construction work including the name(s), address(es),
and phone number(s) of principal contractor(s), architect(s), landscape
architect(s), engineer(s) and/or and lending institution(s).
CONVENIENCE STORE — Any retail establishment whose principal activity
is offering for sale prepackaged food products, household items,
newspapers and magazines, and freshly prepared foods, such as salads or
sandwiches, for off-site consumption. A convenience store does not include
retail dispensing or sales of vehicular fuels as an accessory use.
Comment: Compare definition of "multi-use gas station/convenience store."
COPY — The wording or message on a sign surface in either permanent or
temporary (removable/changeable) letter, electronic, or organic form.
COPY AREA — The area in square feet of the smallest geometric figure
which describes the area enclosed by the actual copy of a sign. When
referring to a wall sign or facia sign, the copy area refers to the actual
§ 190-264 NASHUA CODE § 190-264
164:812
message or total area within a border or area highlighted within a
contrasting background, not to the illuminated background. Also see "area,
sign."
COURTYARD — A pedestrian arcade, patio, promenade, or mall, whether
covered by a roof or not, within or between any structure or buildings
upon which the principal or main entrance to one or more retail businesses
therein are located. A courtyard does not include buildings with one or more
retail businesses having their principal or main entrance off and adjacent
to a parking lot or parking facility and with no direct public access to any
public street or alley.
CRITICAL AREAS — Disturbed areas of any size within 50 feet of a stream,
bog, water body, or poorly or very poorly drained soils; disturbed areas
exceeding 2,000 square feet in highly erodible soils; or disturbed areas
containing slope lengths exceeding 25 feet on slopes greater than 15%.
DAY CARE, FAMILY — Any "family day-care home" or a "family group daycare
home" as defined in RSA § 170-E:2.
DENSITY — The number of dwelling units within a designated land area.
For purposes of this chapter, "density" means gross density unless
otherwise provided.
DENSITY, GROSS — The number of dwelling units divided by the total land
area subject to an application for development approval, stated as dwelling
units per gross acre.
DENSITY, MAXIMUM — The maximum number of permitted densities
where indicated in this chapter, stated as gross density unless otherwise
indicated.
DENSITY, MINIMUM — The minimum number of dwelling units that must
be constructed where indicated in this chapter, stated as gross density
unless otherwise indicated.
DENSITY, NET — The number of dwelling units divided by the net
developable area. The "net developable area" means the land area of the
site after deducting unbuildable areas including street rights-of-way, parks
or open space required by Article XXV and areas restricted from
development pursuant to Article XXV stated as dwelling units per net acre.
DETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY — A residential building containing not more
than one dwelling on a single lot. See § 190-75.
DETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY CONDOMINIUM — A residential use
consisting of two or more single-family detached dwellings on a single lot.
See § 190-75.
DETACHED SIGN — See "ground sign."
DEVELOPED RECREATION FACILITIES — See "open space, active."
DEVELOPMENT (FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT) — Any man-made change
to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
§ 190-264 FLAG § 190-264
164:813
excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. See
§ 190-62.[Amended 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-66]
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) — Diameter at breast height of the
tree trunk diameter measured in inches at a height of 4.5 feet above ground
level.
DIMENSIONAL NONCONFORMITY — A nonconforming situation that
occurs when the height, size, or minimum floor space of a structure or the
relationship between an existing building or buildings and other buildings
or lot lines does not conform to the regulations applicable to the zoning
district in which the property is located. See § 190-120A.
DIRECT LIGHT — Light emitted directly from the lamp, off of the reflector
or reflector diffuser, or through the refractor or diffuser lens, of a luminaire.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — A sign that is necessary for on-site public safety and
convenience. Examples include signs located next to a driveway and reading
"in," "out," "entrance," "parking," or "exit." See § 190-100.
DISTRICT — A zoning district as established by § 190-11 of this chapter.
DISTURBED AREA — An area where the natural vegetation has been
removed exposing the underlying soil, or vegetation has been covered.
DRIVE-IN EATING ESTABLISHMENT — A commercial establishment
wherein food is usually served to and consumed by patrons while they are
seated in parked cars.
DRIVEWAY — A private, vehicular access connecting a house, carport,
parking area, garage, or other buildings to the street.
DRIVEWAY APPROACH — A way or place including paving and curb returns
between the street travel lanes and private property that provides vehicular
access between the street and such private property.
DRIVEWAY, FRONT-LOADED — A driveway that begins at or abuts the front
property line of a lot or parcel.
DRUG REPLACEMENT THERAPY — Treatment for addiction to illicit drugs
with medication prescribed by a physician.[Added 4-13-2010 by Ord. No.
O-10-13]
DRUG REPLACEMENT THERAPY FACILITY — Clinic or other facility under
the supervision of a trained medical professional and used primarily for
drug replacement therapy.[Added 4-13-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-13]
DUPLEX — See "dwelling, two-family."
DWELLING (or DWELLING UNIT) — One or more rooms providing
complete living facilities for one family, including kitchen facilities or
equipment for cooking or provisions for the same, and including room or
rooms for living, sleeping, bathing and eating.
DWELLING UNIT, ACCESSORY — A second dwelling unit contained within
or attached to the same building as a single-family dwelling.[Amended
8-8-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-036]
§ 190-264 NASHUA CODE § 190-264
164:814
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — See "dwelling, single-family."
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED — A one-family dwelling that is
not attached to any other dwelling by any means and is surrounded by open
space or yards.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY (DUPLEX) — A structure consisting either of
two separate dwelling units on separate floors; or of two separate dwelling
units connected and separated by a common wall connecting living spaces,
perpendicular to the longest dimension of the structure, and having a
common length equal to at least: (i) 90% of the widest part of each structure
measured perpendicular to the longest dimension, if the longest dimensions
are parallel; or (ii) 90% of the widest part of one unit measured
perpendicular to the longest dimension, and 50% of the longest dimension
of the other unit, if the longest dimensions are perpendicular to each
other.[Amended 2-27-2007 by Ord. No. O-06-51]
DWELLING, THREE-FAMILY (TRIPLEX) — A detached house designed for
and occupied exclusively as the residence of not more than three families,
each living as an independent housekeeping unit. A triplex is a form of
multifamily dwelling.
DWELLING, FOUR-FAMILY (QUADRUPLEX) — A detached house with
common walls between the units, designed for and occupied exclusively as
the residence of not more than four families, each living as an independent
housekeeping unit. A quadruplex is a form of multifamily dwelling.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A dwelling or group of dwellings on one
lot containing separate living units for three or more families, but which
may have joint services or facilities. Triplexes (three-family dwellings) and
quadruplexes (four-family dwellings) are considered multifamily dwellings.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A building containing one dwelling unit.
EFFECTIVE IMPERVIOUS AREA (EIA) — Impervious area that is directly
connected to wetlands, waterways or water bodies, not including man-made
ponds for the purpose of stormwater management.
EXTERIOR INSULATION AND FINISH SYSTEMS (EIFS) — A multilayered
exterior wall system consisting of the following components:
ELECTRONIC AWNING SIGN — A fireproof space frame structure with
translucent covering designed in awning form, but whose purpose and use
is signage. Such signs are internally illuminated by fluorescent or other
light sources in fixtures approved under national and local Electrical Codes.
Insulation board constructed of, made of polystyrene or
polyisocyanurate foam secured to the exterior wall surface with an
adhesive and/or mechanical attachment;
A.
A water-resistant base coat applied on top of the insulation and
reinforced with fiberglass mesh; and
B.
C. A finish coat consisting of acrylic co-polymer materials.
§ 190-264 FLAG § 190-264
164:815
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER — (Also known as an "electronic
changing sign, time, temperature, date and message centers; boards; or
indexing signs." Also see "flashing sign.") A sign that is either electronically
or electrically controlled to illustrate different copy changes on the same
sign. This sign's message may be changed by electronic switching or
automatic switching of lamps or alteration in the level of illumination or
other illumination source to form words, letters, designs, figures, numerals
and pictures often through the apparent vertical or horizontal movement of
light.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice, or gravity.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — Services provided by public utility or
governmental agencies through erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance of gas, electrical, telephone, steam or water transmission
or distribution systems, and collection, communication, supply or disposal
systems, whether underground or overhead. Facilities necessary for the
provisions of essential services include poles, wires, drains, sewers, pipes,
conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals,
hydrants, pumping stations and other similar equipment and accessories
in connection therewith. Specifically excluded from this definition are
buildings necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such public
utility or governments agencies for the public health, safety or general
welfare.
ESTABLISH — To attach, alter, build, construct, reconstruct, enlarge, move,
hang, place, suspend, affix, erect, manufacture, and includes the painting of
wall signs, but does not include copy changes on any permitted sign.
EVENT — An activity that occurs only during a designated time period
scheduled in advance. An event may include a grand opening, election,
a grand opening of a completely new business, the grand opening of a
business that has relocated, the remodeling of an existing business (that
requires a building permit), a cultural, sporting, carnival or other transitory
event, or similar event.
EXISTING — The conditions, features or other characteristics of a building,
structure or use that exists as of the effective date of this article or, for a
zoning district, the date of any rezoning.
FACE OF SIGN — The entire area of the sign on which copy could be placed.
Also see "copy area" and "area."
FACIA SIGN — See "wall sign."
FAMILY — See "household."
FEMA — The Federal Emergency Management Agency. See § 190-62.
FIRE CODE — Any standard contained in Chapter 156 of the City Code or
the Fire Code adopted by Chapter 156 of the City Code.
FIRE SEPARATION STANDARDS — The required separation of buildings
imposed by the Fire Code.
§ 190-264 NASHUA CODE § 190-264
164:816
FIXTURE — The assembly that houses the lamp or lamps and can include
all or some of the following parts: a housing, a mounting bracket or pole
socket, a lamp holder, a ballast, a reflector or mirror, and/or a refractor or
lens.
FLAG — Any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors,
patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political
subdivision, or other entity.
FLASHING SIGN — A flashing sign contains an intermittent light source
or includes the illusion of intermittent light by means of animation or an
externally mounted intermittent light source.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland
or tidal waters, or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source. See § 190-62.
FLOODLIGHT OR SPOTLIGHT — Any light fixture or lamp that incorporates
a reflector or a refractor to concentrate the light output into a directed
beam in a particular direction.81
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official maps incorporated
with this chapter, on which FEMA has delineated both the special flood
hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the City of Nashua.
See § 190-62.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water
surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of
mudslide or flood-related erosion hazards. See § 190-62.[Amended
9-8-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-66]
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source. (See definition of "flooding").
See § 190-62.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation
facilities, structures and their contents. See § 190-62.
FLOODWAY — See "regulatory floodway." See § 190-62.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of the gross horizontal area or the several
floors of a building and its accessory buildings on the same lot, measured
from the exterior faces of the walls. It does not include cellars, unenclosed
porches or attics not used for human occupancy or for commercial and/
or industrial use, or malls within a shopping center utilized purely for
pedestrian circulation and/or decorative purposes between individual shops
of the center.
81.Editor’s Note: The former definitions of "Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (Floodway
Map)" and "flood elevation study," which immediately followed this definition, were
repealed 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-66.
§ 190-264 FLAG § 190-264
164:817
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The ratio of the gross floor area to the total lot area.
FOOTCANDLE — A unit of illumination lighting a surface, on which there is
uniformly distributed a light flux of one lumen over an area of one square
foot. A "lumen" is a unit of measure of the quantity of light energy emitted
by a light source without regard to the effectiveness of its distribution. A
"candela" is the unit of intensity of a light source in a specific direction.
One candela directed perpendicular to a surface one foot away generates
one footcandle of light. A light source of one candela emits a total of 12.57
lumens. For purposes of this chapter, the lumen output values shall be the
initial lumen output ratings of a lamp.
FORECOURT — An area that includes open space surrounded by a portion
of a building facade that abuts a frontage line, and a portion of a building
facade that is set back further. A forecourt may include a driveway, sidewalk
or pedestrian pathway, but not a parking area.
FREESTANDING SIGN — See "ground sign."
FREEWAY — A divided arterial highway with four or more lanes available
for through traffic, with full control of access and grade separation at
interchanges; namely, the F. E. Everett Turnpike.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water. The term includes only docking and port facilities that are necessary
for the loading/unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building/repair
facilities but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing
facilities. See § 190-62.
GARAGE — A building or structure or a portion thereof, the principal use of
which is or may be to store, house, keep, repair or service a motor vehicle or
vehicles containing a flammable fluid or other propellant in its fuel storage
tank. This does not include a new-car salesroom.
GARAGE, COMMUNITY — A group of private garages, either detached or
under one roof, arranged in a row or around common means of access.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A garage for housing motor vehicles only, with a
capacity of not more than four vehicles.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — Any garage not included in the definition of a private
garage or a community garage.
GAS STATION — A building or part thereof whose principal activity is the
selling of gasoline, oil and related products for motor vehicles, provided
§ 190-264 NASHUA CODE § 190-264
164:818
that light maintenance activities such as engine tune-ups, lubrication, and
minor repairs may also be provided if incidental to such principal use.
A gas station may also include areas not exceeding 1,000 square feet
within the principal building that sell prepackaged food products for offsite
consumption, household items, newspapers and magazines, incidental
or accessory to the activities listed above. However, any such establishment
that exceeds 1,000 square feet of gross floor area shall be classified as a
convenience store rather than a service station.
GLARE — Light emitting from a luminaire with an intensity great enough to
reduce a viewer's ability to see and, in extreme cases, causing momentary
blindness.
GRADE or GRADE PLANE — A reference plane representing the average
of finished ground level adjoining a building or structure along its exterior
walls. Where the finished ground level slopes away from the exterior walls,
the reference plane shall be established by the lowest points within the area
between the building and the lot line or, where the lot line is more than
six feet (1829 mm) from the building, between the building and a point six
feet (1829 mm) from the building. [Reference: International Building Code
2000]
GREEN — An improved, passive open space surrounded by streets, and that
is triangular or irregular in shape.
GREENWAY or GREENBELT — Passive open space improved only with trails
or other pedestrian or bicycle passageways. Greenways link subdivisions
to other subdivisions and to activity centers. Greenbelts are located on the
edge of a subdivision or a community.
GROUND COVER — Any planting of low plants that cover the ground and
shall include grass and all other plants adapted for such use. The use
of wood chips, bark mulch, crushed stone and similar substances may be
deemed ground cover where approved by the Planning Board.
GROUND SIGN — A sign established on a freestanding frame, mast or pole
and not attached to any building. Where such signs are established back
to back, the larger face shall be calculated for the purposes of determining
allowable area. See § 190-101A.
GROUNDWATER — As defined in NHRSA 485-C:2,VIII, subsurface water
that occurs beneath the water table in soils and geologic formations.[Added
10-22-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-050]
GUEST HOME or GUESTHOUSE — An attached or detached building that:
A. Has no kitchen or cooking facilities;
B. Is located on the same lot as the principal dwelling unit;
C. Is not rented or leased; and
Is occupied for the sole use of members of the family, temporary guests,
or persons permanently employed on the premises.
D.
§ 190-264 FLAG § 190-264
164:819
HALFWAY HOUSE — Any residence where two or more people reside for
the purpose of their rehabilitation, behavioral modification or therapeutic
counseling. A halfway house may include a facility for the care and
supervision of delinquent youth, persons with mental health illnesses, or
substance abusers (e.g., alcoholism, drug addiction), or any other facility
where persons are aided in readjusting to society following a period of
imprisonment or institutionalized treatment. See § 190-46A.
HARD SURFACE — An asphalt or concrete surface that complies with any
pavement thickness required in the Board of Public Works specifications,
or other surface approved in the Board of Public Works Specifications, but
excluding rock, gravel, grass or dirt.
HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the adjacent grade to the top of the
structure, the highest roof beams of a flat roof, the deck of a mansard roof,
or the mean level of the highest gable or slope of a hip roof.
HEIGHT OF LUMINAIRE — The height of a luminaire shall be the vertical
distance from the ground directly below the center line of the luminaire to
the lowest direct-light-emitting part of the luminaire.
HEIGHT OF SIGN — The vertical distance measured from the adjacent
undisturbed grade (unless otherwise indicated) of the sign to the highest
point of the sign.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. See
§ 190-62.
HIGHLY ERODIBLE SOILS — Any soil with an erodibility class (K factor)
greater than or equal to 0.43 in any layer as found in Table 3-2 of the
"Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for
Urban and Developing Areas in New Hampshire."
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
D.
§ 190-264 NASHUA CODE § 190-264
164:820
HISTORICAL MARKER SIGN — Signs which may be placed only by a
historical organization or by a governmental agency. Maximum area shall
be two square feet. These signs are allowed in all districts, and no permit is
required.
HOME OCCUPATION — An accessory use of a dwelling unit for gainful
employment involving the manufacture, provision or sale of goods and/or
services.
HOME OCCUPATION SIGN — A sign used to draw attention to a home
occupation or for noncommercial speech associated with a home
occupation.
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION — A corporation, trust, or unincorporated
association, the members of which consist of the owners of the development
units or lots within a development, which owns and manages all private
interior ways and the land not occupied by residential, commercial or
industrial structures and lots, including facilities and structures thereon, in
perpetuity; an association which individual owners share common interest
in common open space and/or facilities. The association is in charge of
preserving, managing and maintaining the common open space and/or
facilities and will enforce certain covenants and restrictions.
HOSPITAL — An institution providing organized inpatient diagnostic and
nursing care for persons suffering from acute or chronic illness, injury or
deformity requiring obstetrical or other care, including both inpatient and
outpatient emergency services as may be required.
HOTEL — A building or any part of a building containing rooming units
without individual cooking facilities, for transient occupancy and having
a common entrance or entrances, including an inn, motel, motor inn and
tourist court, but not including a boardinghouse, lodging house or rooming
house.
HOUSEHOLD — A group of occupants of a dwelling unit restricted to the
following two categories:
IDENTIFICATION, SIGN — See § 190-102.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — Any sign which emanates light either by means of
exposed tubing, electrical bulbs, fluorescent lights, neon tubes or lamps
on its surface, or by means of illumination transmitted through the sign
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
FAMILY — An individual or two or more persons related within the
second degree or kinship or by marriage or adoption living together as
a single housekeeping unit, including necessary domestic help such as
nurses or servants not to exceed three in number.
A.
UNRELATED HOUSEHOLD — A household not conforming to the
definition of a "family." (See § 190-16 for occupancy restrictions relating
to nonfamily households).
B.
§ 190-264 FLAG § 190-264
164:821
faces. Any decorative lighting that is used expressly for the purpose of
advertisement shall be construed as a sign.
ILLUMINATION, DIRECT — Signs that provide artificial light through
exposed lighting on the sign face.
ILLUMINATION, INDIRECT — Any sign which reflects light from a source
intentionally directed upon it, for example, by means of floodlights or
externally mounted fluorescent light fixtures.
ILLUMINATION, INTERNAL — Signs that provide artificial light through
transparent or translucent material from a light source within the sign.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Material or structure on, above, or below the
ground that does not allow precipitation or surface water to penetrate
directly into the soil.
INDEXING — The action of a multiprism sign designed to show several
messages in the same area by a turning and stopping action of the
triangular vertical plane sections of the sign components. (Also see
"changing electronic sign" and "flashing sign.")
INDIRECT LIGHT — Direct light that has been reflected or has scattered off
of other surfaces.
INDIVIDUAL LETTER SIGN — Any sign made of self-contained letters that
are mounted individually. See "copy area."
INDUSTRIAL USE or INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURE — Any use listed under the
category "industrial and manufacturing" in the Use Matrix (§ 190-15, Table
15-1).
INDUSTRIAL PARK — A comprehensively planned and unified, industrially
oriented development containing at least two separate buildings and
protected by covenants and restrictions designed to control such things as
architectural design or building facades, landscaping, screening, buffering,
and environmental protection. Industrial parks typically have a mixture of
industrial, service, office, and commercial activities and are designed to
incorporate aesthetic and service amenities for the employees and patrons
of the uses located within the park.
INFILTRATION — The entry of water from precipitation, irrigation, or runoff
into the soil.
INNOVATIVE LAND USE CONTROL — A land use control authorized by
RSA 674:21.
JUNK — Any worn-out, cast-off or discarded articles or material ready
for destruction or collected or stored for salvage or conversion to some
use. Any article or material which is unaltered or unchanged and, without
further reconditioning, can be used for its original purpose as readily as
when new shall not be considered junk.
JUNKYARD (or JUNK YARD) — See RSA 236:112.
LAMP — The component of a luminaire that produces the actual light.
§ 190-264 NASHUA CODE § 190-264
164:822
LANDSCAPING — The practice of adding and arranging trees, shrubs and
ground cover over a tract of land for aesthetic purposes.
LASER — A device which produces an intense, coherent, directional beam
of light by stimulating electronic or molecular transitions to lower energy
levels. An acronym for Light Amplification by Stimulated Emission of
Radiation.
LEVEL OF SERVICE — Indicates the capacity per unit of demand for each
public facility. It is an indicator of the extent or degree of service provided
by a facility based upon and related to the operational characteristics of the
facility.
LEVEL OF SERVICE, ADOPTED — The level of service established in the
adequate public facilities standards (see Article XXIII) as a standard for
subdivision and site plan applications and the capital improvements
program. (See § 190-168.)
LEVEL OF SERVICE, EXISTING — The actual level of service that exists
when an application for subdivision or site plan approval is filed.
LIGHT TRESPASS — The shining of light produced by a luminaire beyond
the boundaries of the property on which it is located.
LIVING AREA — See § 190-75.
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space used exclusively for loading and
unloading of goods and materials from one vehicle.
LOCAL STREET — See § 190-207E, Table 207-1.
LOCATION — For purposes of Article X, any lot, premises, building,
structure, wall, or any place upon which a sign is located.
LODGING HOUSE — A building containing lodging units.
LODGING UNIT — One or more rooms for the semipermanent use of one
or more individuals not living as a single housekeeping unit and not having
cooking facilities. A lodging unit shall include rooms in boardinghouses,
lodging houses, tourist homes and rooming houses.
LOT — An area or parcel of land or any part thereof, not including water
area, in common ownership, designated on a plan filed with the
Administrative Officer by its owner or owners as a parcel to be used,
developed or built upon as a unit under single ownership or control.
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the point of intersection of, and abutting on, two or
more intersecting streets, the interior angle of intersection of the street lot
lines or, in case of a curved street, extended lot lines, being not more than
135°. Each street frontage shall be considered a front yard.
LOT DEPTH — The mean horizontal distance between a front lot line and a
rear lot line.
LOT FRONTAGE — The horizontal distance measured along a front lot line
between the points of intersection of the side lot lines with the front lot
§ 190-264 FLAG § 190-264
164:823
line; the length of the closest adjacent property line parallel or substantially
parallel to an adjoining public right-of-way.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot in which the side lot lines do not abut a street.
LOT LINE — The lot lines bounding a lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The property line dividing a lot from a street right-ofway.
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line opposite from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line that is not a front or rear lot line.
LOT, NONCONFORMING — A lot lawfully existing on the effective date
of this chapter or any subsequent amendment hereto, which is not in
accordance with all the provisions of this chapter.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot that has at least two opposite lot lines that abut
streets.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the side lot lines as
measured at the minimum front yard depth required by this article, and
parallel to the street line.
LOUNGE — Portion of a restaurant intended primarily for consumption of
beverages.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such
an enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter. See § 190-62.
LUMEN — A unit of luminous flux. One footcandle is one lumen per square
foot. For the purposes of this section of the chapter, the lumen output values
shall be the initial lumen output ratings of a lamp.
LUMINAIRE — A complete lighting system, and includes a lamp or lamps
and a fixture.
MAINTAIN — To permit a sign, sign structure or any part of each to
continue; or to repair or refurbish a sign, sign structure or any part of each.
A sign shall be maintained in good repair for reasons of public safety and
aesthetics.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities. For floodplain management purposes, the term “manufactured
home” includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles
placed on site for greater than 180 consecutive days. This includes
manufactured homes located in a manufactured home park or subdivision.
See § 190-62.[Amended 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-66]
§ 190-264 NASHUA CODE § 190-264
164:824
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale. See § 190-62.[Added 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-66]
MANUFACTURED HOUSING — Any structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width
and 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected on site is 320 square
feet or more, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected
to required utilities, which include plumbing, heating and electrical heating
systems contained therein. Manufactured housing as defined in this section
shall not include presite built housing as defined in RSA 674:31-a. [Source:
RSA 674:31.]
MARINA — A commercial waterfront facility whose principal use is the
provision of publicly available services such as the securing, launching,
storing, fueling, servicing and repairing of watercraft.
MARQUEE — See "canopy."
MARQUEE SIGN — See "canopy or marquee sign."
MEAN ANNUAL HIGH-WATER MARK — The line from visible markings and
changes in soils and vegetation from the prolonged presence of water which
distinguishes between predominantly aquatic and terrestrial land.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — The National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of
1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a
communities Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. See § 190-62.
MECHANICAL OR ELECTRONIC AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any
mechanized or electronic game, entertainment or amusement device
requiring insertion of coins, currency or tokens, or payment to an attendant
and is intended to entertain the operator(s). Such devices include, but shall
not be limited to, video games, pinball machines, and coin-operated pool
tables, but shall not include jukeboxes or other devices used solely for the
reproduction of music.
MEMBERSHIP CLUB — A social, sports or fraternal association or
organization used exclusively by members and their guests and not
conducted as a gainful business.
MESSAGE — The wording or copy on a sign. See "copy."
MIXED USE BUILDING — A building containing mixed commercial and
residential uses where commercial use are located primary on the first floor,
with dwelling units occupying the second floors or above.
MOBILE HOME — For purposes other than Article VII, a "mobile home" is
a dwelling unit constructed in a factory that does not meet the definition of
a manufactured home or a modular home. For purposes of Article VII, see
definition of "manufactured home" above.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel of land containing at least 15 acres upon
which one or more mobile homes or house trailers are parked or intended
to be parked for living purposes.
§ 190-264 FLAG § 190-264
164:825
MODULAR HOME — A dwelling unit constructed in accordance with the
standards set forth in the City's Building Code applicable to site-built homes
and composed of components substantially assembled in a manufacturing
plant and transported to the building site for final assembly on a permanent
foundation. (See comment under "manufactured housing.")
MOTOR HOME — See "camper."
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — A building containing three or more dwelling
units, including an apartment house, garden apartment house, multifamily
dwelling and townhouse or condominium.
MULTIPRISM SIGN — See "indexing."
MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM — The Pennichuck Water Works (PWW) or
any successor system.
MUNICIPAL SEWER SYSTEM — The sewer system owned by the City of
Nashua and operated by the Board of Public Works.
NAMEPLATE — A nonelectrical sign identifying only the name, occupation
or profession of the occupant of the premises on which the sign is located.
If any premises includes more than one occupant, "nameplate" means all
names and occupations or professions as well as the name of the building
and directional information.
NATURAL AREA — An environmentally sensitive area left undisturbed to
provide an amenity for the development.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — For the purpose of determining insurance rates,
structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the
effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is
later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For
floodplain management purposes, new construction means structures for
which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of
a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes
any subsequent improvement to such structures. See § 190-62.[Added
9-8-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-66]
NEW DEVELOPMENT — See Article VII, Impact Fees.
Any building permit application that is submitted to the City that results
in:
(1) The construction of a new dwelling(s);
(2) The conversion of an existing nonresidential use to a dwelling(s).
A.
New development does not include:
The reconstruction of a structure that has been destroyed by fire
or natural disaster, and natural deterioration, provided that there
is no change in the size, density, or use of the structure;
(1)
(2) The replacement of a manufactured home;
B.
§ 190-264 NASHUA CODE § 190-264
164:826
NONCONFORMING SIGN — A sign lawfully existing at the time of adoption
or subsequent amendment of Article XII. See § 190-110A.
NONCONFORMING SITUATION —
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — Any building, structure, or paved
surface that contains a dimensional nonconformity.
NONCONFORMING USE — The use of property for a purpose or in a
manner made unlawful by the use regulations applicable to the district in
which the property is located. (For example, a commercial office building in
a residential district may be a nonconforming use.) The term also refers to
the activity that constitutes the use made of the property. (For example, all
the activity associated with running a bakery in a residentially zoned area
is a nonconforming use.) See § 190-119A.
NONPROFIT — Entitled to real estate tax exemption under the laws of the
state.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — See "base flood." See § 190-62.
OFFICE USE or OFFICE BUILDING — A place where the business of a
commercial, industrial, service or professional organization is transacted,
but not including retail sales, manufacturing, clinic, financial institution,
personal services, place of amusement or place of assembly. This includes
any use or building listed in LBCS Function Codes 2200-2455, 5140-5160,
or 6800-6820, LBCS Structure 2110 or 2400, or NAICS 51-55 or 61-92.
OPEN SPACE — The space on a lot unoccupied by buildings, unobstructed
to the sky by man-made objects, not devoted to streets, driveways, off-street
parking or loading spaces.
The construction of an accessory structure to a dwelling that would
not increase the demand for public capital educational facilities by
the owner or user of the dwelling; or
(3)
(4) The addition/renovation(s) to an existing dwelling(s).
A situation that occurs when, on the effective date of this chapter, an
existing lot or structure or use of an existing lot or structure does not
conform to one or more of the regulations applicable to the district
in which the lot or structure is located. A nonconforming situation
includes:
(1) Any dimensional nonconformity or nonconforming structure; or
(2) Any nonconforming lot; or
(3) Any nonconforming use; or
Land or buildings are used for purposes made unlawful by this
chapter.
(4)
A.
Nonconforming signs shall not be regarded as nonconforming
situations for purposes of this definition, but instead are governed by
§ 190-110.
B.
§ 190-264 FLAG § 190-264
164:827
OPEN SPACE, ACTIVE — Any park and recreational facility that is not
dependent upon a specific environmental or natural resource, which is
developed with recreation and support facilities that can be provided
anywhere for the convenience of the user.
OPEN SPACE, PASSIVE — Areas in and located due to the presence of
a particular natural or environmental setting and which may include
conservation lands providing for both active and passive types of resourcebased
outdoor recreation activities that are less formalized or programoriented
than activity-based recreation. Resource-based outdoor recreation
means and refers to activities requiring a natural condition that cannot
easily be duplicated by man.
OPEN SPACE PERCENTAGE — The space on a lot unoccupied by buildings,
unobstructed to the sky by man-made objects, not devoted to streets,
driveways, off-street parking or loading spaces. See § 190-16M.
OUTDOOR CAFE — A portion of an eating or drinking place, located on
a public sidewalk, that provides waiter or waitress service and is either
an enclosed or unenclosed sidewalk cafe as defined herein. No portion
of a sidewalk cafe shall be used for any purpose other than dining and
circulation therein. An "enclosed sidewalk cafe" is a sidewalk cafe, which
is contained within a one-story structure constructed predominantly of
light materials such as glass, slow burning plastic, or lightweight metal.
An "unenclosed sidewalk cafe" is a space on the sidewalk, which contains
readily removable tables, chairs, or railings. An unenclosed sidewalk cafe is
open to the sky except that it may have a retractable awning or umbrellas.
For the purposes of this chapter "readily removable" shall mean that no
object which is part of the unenclosed sidewalk cafe, such as a table, chair,
planter, or any other fixture, shall be leaded, cemented, nailed, bolted,
power riveted, screwed in or affixed, even in a temporary manner, to either
the sidewalk in which it is placed, to the building or to any other structure
which it abuts.
OUTDOOR LIGHTING — The nighttime illumination of an outside area or
object by any man-made device located outdoors that produces light by any
means.
OWNER — Any person having vested or equitable interest in the use,
structure or lot in question, or his duly authorized agent, attorney,
purchaser, devisee, trustee or lessee.
PARAPET or PARAPET WALL — The portion of a building wall elevated
above the roof level.
PARCEL — A contiguous lot or tract of land owned and recorded as the
property of the same persons or controlled by a single entity.
PARK INDUSTRIAL SIGN — A sign located adjacent to and intended to
identify the entrance to multibuilding park industrial developments
situated. See § 190-102C.
PARK or PLAYGROUND — An open space improved with playground
equipment or other active open space improvements. These may be
§ 190-264 NASHUA CODE § 190-264
164:828
surrounded by street frontages and building frontages, but this is not
necessarily required.
PARKING LOT — Any area, not within a building or other structure, where
motor vehicles may be stored for the purpose of temporary, daily or
overnight off-street parking to include a motor vehicle display lot and/or a
commercial parking lot.
PARKING SIGNS — See "directional sign."
PARKING SPACE — An off-street space for exclusive use as a parking stall
for one motor vehicle.
PASSAGEWAY — A connector providing access exclusively to pedestrians
and located between buildings. Passageways provide shortcuts through
blocks, or connect rear parking areas with street frontages. An area
between buildings located interior to a block, and which either extends from
the public sidewalk to a public space interior to the block or connects two
streets.
PASSIVE OPEN SPACE — See "open space, passive."
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum instantaneous rate of flow during a
storm, usually in reference to a specific design storm event.
PERMEABLE PAVEMENT — A pavement system with traditional strength
characteristics, but which allows rainfall to percolate through it rather than
running off. A permeable pavement system utilizes either porous asphalt,
pervious concrete, or plastic pavers interlaid in a running bond pattern
and either pinned or interlocked in place. Porous asphalt consists of an
open graded course aggregate held together by asphalt with sufficient
interconnected voids to provide a high rate of permeability. Pervious
concrete is a discontinuous mixture of portland cement, coarse aggregate,
admixtures, and water which allow for passage of runoff and air. Examples
of permeable pavement systems include Grasspave2®, Gravelpave2®,
Turfstone®, and UNI Eco-Stone®. (Reference: Watershed Management
Institute, Inc. and U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Water,
Operation, Maintenance and Management of Stormwater Management
(Aug. 1997), at 2-32; Booth and Leavitt, Field Evaluation of Permeable
Pavement Systems for Improved Stormwater Management, 65 J. Am.
Planning Ass'n 314 (Summer 1999), at 314-325.
PERMIT-ISSUING AGENCY — Any agency, board or commission that issues
or approves any of the land use decisions or permits as described in Part 3.
PERVIOUS SURFACE — See "permeable pavement" above.
PICKUP COACH — See "camper."
PLAN — The map, drawing or chart on which a applicant's final plan of
subdivision is presented to the Board for approval and which, if approved,
will be submitted to the Register of Deeds of the county for recording.
PLAZA — A hard-surfaced area adjoining the front of nonresidential,
multifamily or civic buildings. (Greens and squares, by contrast, are not
§ 190-264 FLAG § 190-264
164:829
hard-surfaced). Buildings directly adjoin the plaza, rather than facing it
across a street.
POLE SIGN — See "ground sign."
POLITICAL SIGN — A sign advertising a candidate or issue to be voted upon
on a specific election day, and that is attached to the ground by a stake or
stakes, but which excludes any other sign defined as a portable sign.
PORCH — A roofed structure projecting from the front, side or rear wall of
a building, either enclosed or open, not used as habitable living space.
PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or a
building.
PORTAL — A building entryway at least 24 feet in height and 12 feet in
width, and which contains decorative architectural treatments.
PORTICO — A porch with a roof supported by columns.
POULTRY — Domesticated fowl commonly raised or kept for eggs or
meat.[Added 12-11-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-019]
PREMISES — A lot or number of lots on which are situated a building or
group of buildings designed as a unit or on which a building or a group of
buildings are to be constructed.
PRETREATMENT — Limited treatment of stormwater runoff provided prior
to discharge of such runoff to the stormwater management system, and
is intended to remove coarse solids, thereby facilitating maintenance and
enhancing the longevity of the stormwater management system.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING or PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE — A building or
structure or, where the context so indicates, a group of buildings or
structures, in which the principal use of a lot or parcel is conducted. This
shall include any buildings which are attached to the principal structure by
a covered structure.
PRINCIPAL DWELLING — A dwelling unit which constitutes the principal
building or principal structure on a lot or parcel.
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE — See principal building or principal structure.
PRINCIPAL USE — See "use, principal."
PROJECT AREA — The area within the subdivision or site plan boundaries.
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign, other than a wall sign, which is attached to
and projects in a perpendicular fashion more than 12 inches beyond the
surface to which it is affixed. A projecting sign is meant to be viewed from a
position other than directly facing the building. See § 190-104A.
PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT — Any development proposed by an
application for development approval.
PUBLIC CAPITAL FACILITIES — All assets, facilities, and equipment
relating to public education services that are described in RSA 674:21 V.
§ 190-264 NASHUA CODE § 190-264
164:830
PUBLIC FACILITIES — Any of the Capital Improvements listed as subject to
Article XXIII (Adequate public facilities).
Commentary: this list is presently confined to streets.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — The portion of a public street dedicated to and
accepted by the City as measured from property line to property line.
PUBLIC UTILITY — Persons, corporations, or governments supplying gas,
electric, transportation, water, sewer, or land line telephone service to
the general public. For the purpose of this article, commercial wireless
telecommunication service facilities shall not be considered public utility
uses, and are defined separately.
PUBLIC UTILITY STRUCTURE — Any structure including a line, pipe,
building, station, or facility used to deliver or provide a public utility to the
general public.
REAL ESTATE RIDER BOARD — A sign that either hangs from the base of
or is established on top of a real estate sign.
REAL ESTATE SIGN — A temporary nonelectrical ground or wall sign that
either:
RECESSED ENTRYWAY — A recess or niche located on the front facade
of a building and which leads to a principal entry. A recessed entryway
is unenclosed on the side adjoining the sidewalk, plaza or public right-ofway,
enclosed on the opposite side with a wall containing a doorway, and
enclosed on the other sides.
RECHARGE — Water that infiltrates into an aquifer, usually from overlying
soils.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — See § 190-62. A vehicle that is:
REDEVELOPMENT — The development, rehabilitation, expansion, and
completion of phased projects on previously developed sites.
Advertises the on-site sale, rental or lease of a premises or a portion
thereof (In such case signs must be removed within 30 days after the
sale, rental or lease.); or
A.
B. The off-site advertising of an open house.
A. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
C.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal
use.
D.
§ 190-264 FLAG § 190-264
164:831
REGISTRATION — For purposes of Article X, the registering of signs shall
consist of an official record maintained by the Administrative Officer as
to the purpose of signage and containing the date of establishment and
removal.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation. These areas
are designated as floodways on the Flood Insurance Rate Map. See
§ 190-62.[Amended 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-66]
REPAIR — Any construction which replaces materials and does not change
the height, number of stories, size, use or location of a structure.
RESTAURANT — Eating and drinking establishment where consumption is
primarily intended to be within the building.
RETAIL USE — A building or part of a building where merchandise, food,
articles, or things are offered or kept for sale directly to the public at
retail. This includes any use listed under the category "commercial" in the
Use Matrix (§ 190-15, Table 15-1) except for the following: 32.33. Bank,
credit union, savings institution, or other finance and insurance services;
flex space; mobile homes as offices; or office uses or office buildings.
ROOF LINE — The top edge of the roof or the top of the parapet, where the
junction of the roof and the perimeter wall of the structure forms the top
line of the building silhouette.
ROOF SIGN — A sign established upon, against, or directly above a roof,
or on the top of or above the parapet of a building. See "parapet." See
§ 190-105A.
ROOMING HOUSE — See "lodging unit."
ROTARY or CIRCLE — A circular area containing a monument or similar
device, and which organizes buildings or movement around a center.
Buildings facing a rotary are concave, while those facing a circle are
convex.
ROTATING SIGN — Any sign or portion of a sign which moves in a revolving
or similar manner, but not including multiprism indexing signs.
RUNOFF — Precipitation, snow melt, or irrigation that flows over the land,
eventually making its way to a surface water such as a stream, river, or
pond.
SCREENING — A visual barrier which blocks out a use on one property from
abutting properties. Screening shall consist of a landscaped area containing
plant materials, walls and/or fences. (Article XXVII)
SEDIMENT — Solid material, either mineral or organic, that is in
suspension, is transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by
erosion.
SERVICE STATION — See definition of "gas station."
§ 190-264 NASHUA CODE § 190-264
164:832
SETBACK — An area lying between the furthest projection of a principal
structure and the property line of the lot on which the structure is located.
Where a yard abuts a street, the setback is the area lying between the
abutting street right-of-way line and the furthest projection of a principal
structure. See § 190-16E(1).
SHORELINE FRONTAGE — The average of the actual natural navigable
shoreline footage and a straight line drawn between property lines, both of
which are measured at the reference line.
SHRUB — A usually several stemmed, woody plant that is maintained in
low-growing habit.
SIGN — A permanent or temporary device, structure, light, letter, word,
two- or three-dimensional object or copy, model, banner, streamer, pennant,
display, insignia, emblem, trade flag, presentation by figures, designs,
pictures, logos or colors visible to the public from outside a building,
from a traveled way or otherwise. The purpose of a sign is to convey
a message to the public, to advertise, direct, invite, announce, or draw
attention to, directly or indirectly, a use conducted, goods, products services
or facilities available, either on the lot or on any other premises. Includes
any permanently installed or prominently situated merchandise. For the
purpose of removal, signs shall also include all sign structures and
appurtenances.
SIGN LABEL —
SIGN STRUCTURE — Any framework, either freestanding or an integral
part of the building, which supports or is capable of supporting any sign,
including decorative cover.
SLOPE — The ratio of elevation change to horizontal distance, expressed
as a percentage. Slope is computed by dividing the vertical distance by the
horizontal distance, and multiplying the ratio by 100. For purposes of this
chapter, a slope shall include only those areas with a horizontal distance of
at least 50 feet.
SPECIAL ASSESSMENT — An assessment for the cost of constructing and/
or maintaining property especially benefited by the improvement pursuant
to RSA 49-C:25 et seq.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A use of a structure or lot, or any action upon a
premises, which may be permitted under this article only upon application
to and the approval of the Zoning Board of Adjustment and in accordance
with this article.
All signs shall have a label affixed to the sign visible from the street
with the following information:
(1) Name of the sign fabricator or installer.
(2) The electrical power consumption, in both volts and amperes.
A.
The information shall be sufficient in size and contrast to be readable
by City officials upon close inspection.
B.
§ 190-264 FLAG § 190-264
164:833
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — See "Area of Special Flood Hazard."
See § 190-62.[Amended 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-66]
SQUARE — An improved, passive open space surrounded by streets and
building frontages, and limited in area to one block.
STABILIZED — When the soil erosion rate approaches that of undisturbed
soils. Soils which are disturbed will be considered stabilized when covered
with a healthy, mature growth of grass or, for a temporary condition only, a
covering of hay or mulch (two tons/acre).
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvements, and
means the date the building permit was issued, provided that the actual
start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The "actual start"
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure
on site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction
does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling;
nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or part of the main structure. See § 190-62.
STEREOPTICON — An optical projection instrument making multiple use
of the "magic lantern," or a projection instrument that uses lenses to
throw on a screen a magnified image from a transparent slide or from an
opaque object such as a photograph or the page of a book. The stereopticon
combines two or three magic lanterns to focus, in the same area of light on
the screen or wall, dissolving views or combinations of images.
STOOP — A raised platform located at the entry of a building and
approached by steps. A stoop may have a roof.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM — A conveyance system for the
capture, treatment, and discharge of stormwater runoff.
STORY — The portion of a building which is between one floor level and the
next higher floor level or the roof. If a mezzanine floor area exceeds 1/3 of
the area of the floor immediately below, it shall be deemed to be a story. A
basement shall be deemed to be a story when its ceiling is six or more feet
above the finished grade. A cellar shall not be deemed to be a story. An attic
shall not be a story if unfinished and without human occupancy.
STORY, HALF — A story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall planes
of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than two feet
above the floor of the story.
STREAM — Areas of flowing water occurring for sufficient time to develop
and maintain defined channels but may not flow during dry portions of the
year; includes but is not limited to all perennial and intermittent streams
located on U.S. Geological Survey Maps.
§ 190-264 NASHUA CODE § 190-264
164:834
STREET — A road, thoroughfare or way that affords the means of access
to adjacent lots and is devoted to vehicular travel, and measured from
property line to property line. Also see "public right-of-way." "Street"
includes any street, avenue, road, lane, viaduct, boulevard, alley, highway
or other way, whether public or private.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials for occupancy or use, such as
a building, bridge, trestle, tower, framework, retaining wall, tank, tunnel,
tent, stadium, reviewing stand, platform, shelters, piers, wharves, bin,
fence, sign or the like.
[Comment: Compare "building."]
STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY — A detached structure, the use of which is
customarily incidental and subordinate to that of the principal use, principal
building or principal structure, and which is located on the same lot as that
occupied by the principal use, principal building or principal structure.
STRUCTURE (FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT) — For floodplain
management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or
liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a
manufactured home. See § 190-62.
SUBDIVISION — Any activity defined in RSA 672:14.
SUBDIVISION IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign intended to identify the
name of a residential subdivision located in a residential district.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
Expressways are generally limited-access highways designed to carry
large volumes of high speed interstate and intercity traffic.
A.
Major streets are streets designed or required to carry large volumes
of traffic to, from or through the central part of the City.
B.
Collector streets are streets designed or required to collect traffic from
minor streets and distribute traffic to major streets.
C.
Commercial streets are streets designed or required to serve industrial
or mercantile concentrations and to carry traffic from these
concentrations to major streets.
D.
Residential streets are streets designed or required to provide
vehicular access to abutting residential properties.
E.
Service streets are streets designed or required to provide vehicular
access to abutting commercial properties.
F.
Access streets are minor ways designed or required to provide
vehicular access to off-street loading or off-street parking facilities.
G.
§ 190-264 FLAG § 190-264
164:835
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any combination of repairs,
reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a structure in which the
cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure.
The market value of the structure should equal: 1) the appraised value
prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or 2) in the case of
damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. For the
purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur
when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of
the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the structure. This term includes structures which have
incurred substantial damage, regardless of actual repair work performed.
The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a
structure required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions or
any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not
preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
TELEPHONE REPEATER STATION — A building used for housing
amplifying equipment along aerial or underground telephone cable routes.
TEMPORARY OUTDOOR LIGHTING — The specific illumination of an
outside area or object by any man-made device located outdoors that
produces light by any means for a period of less than 30 days, with at least
180 days passing before being used again.
TEMPORARY SIGN — Any sign which is not permanently established,
including trailer and portable signs. See § 190-106.
TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any substance or mixture with
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics posing a significant, actual,
or potential hazard to water supplies or other hazards to human health
if such substance or mixture were discharged to land or water. Toxic or
hazardous materials include, without limitation, synthetic organic
chemicals, petroleum products, heavy metals, radioactive or infectious
wastes acids and alkalis, and all substances defined as toxic or hazardous
under applicable state or federal statutes, and also include such products
as solvents and thinners in quantities greater as solvents and thinners in
quantities greater that normal household use.
TOURIST HOME — A private dwelling that is not part of or used in
conjunction with any other establishment and in which there are at least
four rooms for rent to the traveling or vacationing public, whether rented
regularly, seasonally, or occasionally.
TOWNHOUSE — A single dwelling unit whose sidewalls are separated from
other dwelling units by a fire wall or walls. Each unit in the row may be
owned by a separate owner (condominiums).
TOWNHOUSE — For purposes of Article VIII (Impact Fees), a "townhouse"
means at least two dwellings that share a common wall in which each
dwelling has living space on the ground floor and a separate, ground floor
entrance. See § 190-75.
TRAILER SIGN — See "portable sign" and "temporary sign."
§ 190-264 NASHUA CODE § 190-264
164:836
TRANSIT STATION — A facility where taxi, bus or railroad passengers
regularly stop to load or unload passengers, which may provide ancillary
services such as ticket sales and waiting rooms. These stations are
multimodal in nature where users are switching from one mode of
transportation to another, such as automobiles to buses or buses to rail.
TRAVEL TRAILER — See "camper."
TREATED STORMWATER — Stormwater runoff that meets the
requirements set forth in Article XXXI.
TREE — A woody perennial plant having a single usually elongate main
stem, generally with few or no branches on its lower part.
UNENCLOSED — A building, structure, or roofed projection that has no
more than 50% of each outside wall area enclosed by a wall or other solid,
opaque structure, or windows, but not including meshed screens.
USE — The purpose for which a building, lot, sign or other structure is
arranged, intended, designed, occupied or maintained.
USE, ACCESSORY — A use incidental and subordinate to the principal use
of a structure or lot, or a use not the principal use, which is located on the
same lot as the principal structure. Accessory use by area shall not exceed
40% of the area of the total use of the structure and/or lot on which it is
located.
USE, NONCONFORMING — See "nonconforming use."
USE, PRINCIPAL — The main or primary purpose for which a structure or
lot is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it may be used, occupied
or maintained under this article. Any other use within the main structure
or the use of any other structure or land on the same lot and incidental or
supplementary to the principal use and permitted under this article shall be
considered an accessory use.
USE, SUBSTANTIALLY DIFFERENT — A use which by reason of its normal
operation would cause readily observable differences in patronage, service,
appearance, noise, employment or similar characteristics from the use to
which it is being compared.
UTILITY or UTILITIES — Buildings, structures, or land used by a public
utility, corporation, railroad, or governmental agency for uses such as, but
not necessarily limited to, water or sewage treatment plants or pumping
stations, communications, substations, telephone exchanges, and resource
recovery facilities, but not including land, buildings, or structures used
solely for storage and maintenance of equipment and materials.
UTILITY SIGN — These signs are noncommercial in nature and identify
the location of gaslines, waterlines or phone cables, often warning of the
potential hazard of digging or excavation in the immediate area.
VARIANCE — Such departure from the terms of this article as the Zoning
Board of Adjustment, upon appeal in specific cases, is empowered to
authorize under this article.
§ 190-264 FLAG § 190-264
164:837
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s Floodplain Management Regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
§ 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to
be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. See
§ 190-62.[Added 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-66]
WALL SIGN — Any sign attached parallel to the building wall, false wall or
false roof, or other facade surface that does not extend more than 12 inches
from said surface, or does not vary more than 30° from the plane of the
building's parallel wall, and that has only one sign face that is intended to be
read parallel to the wall or other surface to which it is mounted. A wall sign
includes any sign established on a penthouse above the roof of a building,
as long as the wall of the penthouse is on a plane parallel to the wall of the
building. See § 190-108A.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION — The height, in relation to the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified)
of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains. See
§ 190-62.
WETLAND BUFFER — For purposes of Article XI (Wetlands), an area of
land adjacent to a wetland (or stream, river, etc.) that is protected from
development in order to protect a wetland and its functions, such as:
WETLANDS — Soils which are poorly or very poorly drained as defined by
the Soil Conservation Service, the United States Department of Agriculture,
and identified in the county soil handbook. These soils have a water table
at or very close to the surface of the ground throughout a major portion
of the year (a minimum of seven to nine months out of the year). For the
purposes of this Part X, wetlands are those wetlands defined and delineated
in accordance with the Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating
Jurisdictional Wetlands, dated 1989.
WINDOW SIGN — A sign established within 12 inches of window plane
inside a window for purposes of viewing from outside the premises. Such
sign shall not be construed to include merchandise located in a window.
YARD — A portion of a lot upon which the principal building is situated,
unobstructed artificially from the ground to the sky, except as otherwise
provided herein.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending for the full width of the lot between the
front line of the nearest building wall and the front lot line.
YARD, REAR — A yard, unoccupied except by an accessory structure or
accessory use as herein permitted, extending for the full width of the lot
between the rear line of the building wall and the rear lot line.
A. A protective barrier that filters out particles, sediment, and pollutants.
B. Flood storage.
C. Wildlife habitat.
§ 190-264 NASHUA CODE § 190-264
164:838
YARD, SIDE — Yard extending for the full length of a building between the
nearest building wall and the side lot line.
§ 190-265. List of abbreviations.
CIP Capital improvements program
DES New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services
NRO Nashua Revised Ordinances
RSA Revised Statutes Annotated
ZBA Zoning Board of Adjustment
§ 190-264 FLAG § 190-265
164:839

ARTICLE XLIII
Submittal Requirements
§ 190-266. Generally. [Amended 3-28-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-06;
8-14-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-108]
This article establishes the information, materials, and permitting fees
needed to submit a complete application for the various permits or other
land use decisions required by this chapter. An interpretation of this article
as applied to a site plan or subdivision plan may be rendered by the
Planning Board as part of an application for subdivision or site plan
approval (Articles XVI and XVII). An appeal from the interpretation of this
article, as applied to the zoning ordinances (Part 2) of this chapter may be
filed with the Zoning Board of Adjustment pursuant to § 190-136.
§ 190-267. Fees. [Amended 3-28-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-06;
8-14-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-108]
A. Planning Board fees. At the time of application submission the applicant
will submit plans and reports signed and stamped by a New Hampshire
registered design professional as specified along with a plan processing
and review fee of $500. The Planning Department may forward
application plans for a peer review or review by an outside consultant
selected by the Planning Department. In such case the applicant shall
be required to pay the consultant's fee directly to the consultant and the
$500 fee may be waived by the Planning Department. This fee may also
be waived by the Planning Department for lot line relocations where no
buildable lots are created, or for minor site plan amendments or similar
situations. If after review of the plans by the Planning Department or
outside consultant the plans do not meet submission requirements the
plans shall be sent back to the applicant for correction and
resubmission with the requirement for additional plan fee to be paid
again when resubmitted for review. This process will continue until
such time as the plans are determined complete or acceptable by the
Planning Department. Before any subdivision plan or site plan can be
placed on the agenda of the Planning Board for action, the following
Planning Board agenda and meeting fee shall have been paid.
(1) Subdivision plan: $110 per lot plus an application fee of $300. For
any plan submitted to the planning staff for recording at the county
registry of deeds, the county registry of deeds recording fee shall
be collected prior to such recording.
(2) Site plan.
(a) Residential: $110 per dwelling unit, plus an application fee of
$300.
(b) Commercial, industrial, semipublic civic, and recreational
facilities: $110 per 1,000 square feet or fraction thereof, plus
an application fee of $300.
§ 190-266 FLAG § 190-267
164:841
(3) Minimum; additional fees. Including minor site plan amendments,
in no instance is the fee to be collected to be less than $300.
(4) Rezoning fee. All applications for rezoning shall be accompanied by
an application fee of $900.
(5) Inspection fee. A site plan/subdivision inspection fee of $100 shall
be assessed per each inspection. All fees are to be paid prior to the
final certificate of occupancy being issued or at a time agreed to by
the Planning Director or his/her designee.
(6) Abutter notification.
(a) The abutter notification fee shall be any necessary postal fees
plus $3 per abutter.
(b) Any subdivision or site plan placed on the agenda for a meeting
of the Planning Board which is postponed due to errors or
omissions caused by the applicant shall require payment of all
mailing costs and an additional processing fee of $100 for each
time the plan is subsequently placed on the agenda of the
Planning Board.
(7) Research fee. Department research fee for information, files or
archives in excess of 15 minutes shall be $40 for an hour and $20
for a half hour or portion thereof.
(8) On-site notice of public hearing. An applicant shall pay $15 for each
required on-site notification sign. A recovery fee of $100 shall be
paid by the applicant for each sign remaining on site in excess of
seven days of the public hearing.
(9) Special use permit for development of lots with access from paper
streets. An applicant shall pay a minimum application fee of $300
for each special use permit for a development of a lot whose sole
access is by a right-of-way which was dedicated to public use by
being shown on a subdivision plan. See § 190-8.
(10) Conditional use permits. An applicant shall pay a minimum
application fee of $300 for each conditional use permit.
B. Land use permit application fees and other fees.
(1) No permit to begin work for new construction, alteration, removal,
demolition or other building operation shall be issued until the fees
prescribed in this section shall have been paid to the
Administrative Officer nor shall an amendment to a permit
necessitating an additional fee because of an increase in the
estimated cost or scope of work involved be approved until the
additional fee shall have been paid.
(2) The fees for land use permits shall be charged as follows: The total
amount of the fee shall be rounded to the nearest dollar. (Drop the
§ 190-267 NASHUA CODE § 190-267
164:842
total amount due under $0.50 and increase the total amount due
from $0.50 to $0.99 to the next whole dollar.)
(a) Residential minimum land use review fee (sheds, decks, pools,
etc.): $25.
(b) Residential additions/alterations (other than new units): $55.
(c) Residential new unit (less than four units): $240 per unit.
(d) Commercial land use application fee or 25% of building permit
fee, whichever is more: $300.
(e) Change of use: $300.
(f) Demolition: $50.
(g) Minor home occupation: $30.
(h) Other: $25.
(i) Voluntary merger of parcels: $25.
(j) Zoning verification letter: $50.
(k) Floodplain letter: $25.
(l) Copy of Chapter 190: $40.
(m) Map reproduction: $10.
(n) Duplication of public hearing tapes (first tape): $25.
[1] If owner supplies tapes first tape, reduced to: $15.
[2] Each additional tape: $5.
(o) Subdivision plan review of individual sewage disposal systems,
per review: $20.
(p) Test pit, each (includes subdivision test pits) See § 255-48F(1)
of the City Code.
C. Appeals (Zoning Board of Adjustment).
(1) A fee to cover the cost of processing and notification shall be paid
to the Administrative Officer at the time of submittal of the petition
for an appeal (§ 190-136) or by variance (§ 190-137) to such
Administrative Officer. The following fee schedule shall be utilized
in determining processing and notification costs:
(a) Basic fee for use variance: $900.
(b) Basic fee for special exception petitions involving the
following:
§ 190-267 FLAG § 190-267
164:843
[1] Filling of floodplains: $440.
[2] Filling of wetlands: $440.
[3] Planned business developments: $440.
[4] Processing/removal of raw material: $440.
(c) Basic fee for all other petitions except as otherwise noted:
$330.
(d) Applications with more than one request: $200 per request.
(e) Applications based on rehearing requests approved by the
Zoning Board of Adjustment: no fee. [Added 3-8-2011 by
Ord. No. O-11-5882]
(f) The abutter notification fee: any necessary postal fees plus $3
per abutter to be paid by the applicant. [Added 3-8-2011 by
Ord. No. O-11-58]
(2) Additional postal fees do not apply to existing residential structures
on lots containing three residential units or fewer. The time and
date of the hearing shall not be set, nor shall notices be sent out,
unless and until all the supporting documents, including all
permits, plans, approvals and other documents required for the
application have been filed with the Administrative Officer.
Additionally, any postponement caused by the applicant, unless the
direct result of a Zoning Board of Adjustment action, shall
necessitate the payment of a processing fee of $100.
D. Sign permits. Permit fees. The issuance of a sign permit shall be
accompanied by a fee calculated per sign in accordance with the
following fee schedule:
Square Feet Fee
50 or less $55
51 to 150 $105
151 and over $200
E. Historic District Commission. Before any application can be placed on
the agenda of the Historic District Commission for action, a fee of $30
shall have been paid.
F. Conservation Commission. Before any application can be placed on the
agenda of the Conservation Commission for action, the following fee
shall have been paid:
(1) For any project that requires a site plan or subdivision plan to be
filed with the Planning Board: $275.
82.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former Subsection C(1)(e) as Subsection
C(1)(f).
§ 190-267 NASHUA CODE § 190-267
164:844
§ 190-268. Building permits and land use permits.
In addition to plans and drawings required for submission under regulations
of the Building Code, all applications for land use or building permits shall
be accompanied by two copies of a legal plan. One copy of such plan
shall be returned to the applicant if approved by the Administrative Officer.
Such legal plan shall be drawn to scale showing the actual dimensions
of the lot to be built upon, the exact size and location on the lot of the
building and accessory buildings to be erected, location and design of offstreet
parking and loading spaces, signs and such other information as
may be necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement of this
article. The information required on the legal plan may be combined with
the information required for any site plan required by this article. A record
of such applications and legal plans shall be kept in the office of the
Administrative Officer.
§ 190-269. Communication towers and antennae.
Applications for approval of a communications tower or antenna as required
by § 190-38 shall include the following supplemental information:
(2) For all other applications: $110.
A. A report from a qualified and licensed professional engineer which:
(1) Describes the tower height and design including a cross section
and elevation;
(2) Documents the height above grade for all potential mounting
positions for co-located antennas and the minimum separation
distances between antennas;
(3) Describes the tower's capacity, including the number and type of
antennas that it can accommodate;
(4) Includes an engineer's stamp and registration number; and
(5) Includes other information necessary to evaluate the request.
B. A report documenting the results of a trial balloon study with attached
photographic simulations depicting the tower and surrounding area
from all significant vantage points.
C. A letter of intent committing the tower owner and his or her successors
to allow the shared use of the tower if an additional user agrees in
writing to meet reasonable terms and conditions for shared use.
D. Before the issuance of a building permit or certificate of occupancy, the
following supplemental information shall be submitted:
(1) Proof that the proposed tower complies with regulations
administered by Federal Aviation Administration shall be submitted
prior to the issuance of a building permit.
§ 190-267 FLAG § 190-269
164:845
§ 190-270. Concept plans (planned residential developments).
The concept plan shall include the following information at a scale of not
less than 100 feet to the inch, prepared by a land planner certified by
the American Institute of Certified Planners (AICP), registered architect,
surveyor, or professional engineer shall be submitted and shall show (in
addition to any other items required by the Planning Board) at least the
following:
(2) A report from a qualified and licensed professional engineer which
demonstrates the tower's compliance with all applicable structural
and electrical standards shall be submitted prior to the issuance of
a building permit.
(3) Measurements that prove the proposed tower and antennas comply
with radio frequency emission requirements under Federal
Communications Commission rules shall be submitted prior to the
issuance of a final certificate of occupancy.
(4) Periodically, or upon written request of the City, all towers and
antennas shall be inspected to ensure compliance with all
applicable structural and electrical standards and the radio
frequency requirements of the Federal Communications
Commission, above, and copies of all inspection reports shall be
filed with the City.
(5) Proof of adequate liability insurance, as determined by the City,
shall be submitted prior to the issuance of a final certificate of
occupancy.
A. Existing five-foot contours on the tract and within 100 feet thereof;
B. Acreage, density, and general configuration of proposed residential,
commercial, and industrial uses and common land;
C. Existing streets, proposed street system, and large parking areas;
D. Abutting generalized land uses within 200 feet of the project property
boundaries;
E. Proposed location of parks, passive recreational area, active
recreational facilities, schools, and other community uses;
F. Existing and proposed landscaping details; and
G. Existing utility easements.
(1) The concept plan shall be accompanied by an up-to-date aerial
photograph of the development area and a land suitability map
which shall include the following:
(2) Existing soil conditions;
(3) Existing slopes;
§ 190-269 NASHUA CODE § 190-270
164:846
§ 190-271. Conditional use permit.
Conditional use permit application shall include the information required
below. The application shall be drawn and reproduced on two sheets in
a twenty-two-inch-by-thirty-four-inch format, along with two sheets in an
eleven-inch-by-seventeen-inch format. An eleven-by-seventeen plan of
existing and proposed conditions shall be provided at final submittal.
(4) Delineation and total acreage of slopes 20% and greater;
(5) Existing vegetation;
(6) Existing drainage areas;
(7) Wetlands and floodplains;
(8) Total acreage of wetlands;
(9) Total acreage of floodplains;
(10) Power line easements; and
(11) Total acreage of power line easements.
H. The concept plan shall be accompanied by a review and analysis
document which shall address the following:
(1) Adequacy of municipal facilities within the area to accommodate
the proposed development;
(2) General economic impact information as it relates to City services
and facilities;
(3) The impact of the development on public sewer, water and drainage
on existing facilities;
(4) The impact of development on the existing street systems; and
(5) The consistency of the development plan with good planning
principles.
A. Title and signature block with name, address and lot number of the
project; name address, phone number of contact; name, address, phone
number of applicant/owner; signature of the applicant/owner; signature
and seal of New Hampshire engineer, surveyor, architect and wetland
scientist; signature block for Planning Board that states: "APPROVED —
NASHUA PLANNING BOARD," followed by signature lines for the
Chairman and Secretary and date; signature block for the applicant
owner that states "The undersigned does hereby agree to perform all of
the improvements as shown on this plan and as conditioned or
stipulated by the Nashua Planning Board. All required site
improvements must be completed or guaranteed prior to the issuance
of a certificate of occupancy;" and a statement that reads: "It shall be
unlawful to modify, change, or alter any structure shown on this plan in
§ 190-270 FLAG § 190-271
164:847
§ 190-272. Construction plans.
Three copies of the construction plans sealed by a professional engineer
shall be submitted to the Administrative Officer for review. The construction
plans shall be at any scale from one inch equals 10 feet through one inch
equals 100 feet, with the exception that one inch equals 25 feet is permitted
so long as the scale is an increment of 10 feet and is sufficiently clear in
reflecting details of the proposed construction. Construction plans shall be
any way whatsoever, or convert or alter any structure shown on this site
plan, or change the above use indicated on the plan without receiving
approval from the City."
B. Date, scale, North point, legend explaining all symbols used, total area
of site, bearings and distances of all property lines. The scale shall not
be smaller than one inch equals 50 feet unless waived.
C. A list of all the abutting property owners along with their addresses, zip
codes and lot numbers as shown on the plans submitted.
D. A traffic impact analysis along with a written statement from the City
Traffic Engineer confirming review of traffic concerns.
E. A plan delineating the proposed use and the uses on abutting lots or
parcels.
F. Location of all permanent monuments, property lines, bearing and
length of every boundary line, street line and lot line, existing
easements.
G. Abutting property owners, names, addresses, zip codes, City Assessor
plan and lot numbers as well as the registry of deeds book and page
numbers of their recorded deeds, as well as the zones and actual uses of
these lots.
H. Areas required to be landscaped as per Article XXVII.
I. Individual parking and loading spaces and note the total number
required and provided.
J. Any and all Zoning Board of Adjustment approvals or Conservation
Commission recommendations with date granted and conditions.
K. If required by the Administrative Official, a site grading plan showing
existing grades with contours at two-foot vertical intervals, and
proposed grades with contours at vertical intervals of not more than
two feet, and at intervals of one foot in paved areas and areas which are
predominantly flat.
L. If required by the Administrative Official, a stormwater management
report, signed by a state-registered engineer, detailing the stormwater
practices used in the site plan and their compliance with the
requirements set forth in Article XXXI.
§ 190-271 NASHUA CODE § 190-272
164:848
prepared on twenty-four-inch-by-thirty-six-inch sheets. Each copy shall be
Mylar or other media approved by the City Engineer. The title page shall be
used as the cover sheet for the construction plans. The plans shall include
but are not limited to the following information, shown on separate sheets:
A. Street, sidewalk, bikeway and traffic control construction plans,
profiles and detail sheets.
B. Sanitary sewer system construction plans, profiles and detail sheets.
C. Stormwater management plan showing plan and profile of proposed
storm sewer drainage facilities, detail sheets, hydrological and
hydraulic calculations and other information as required by the City
Engineer.
D. Proposed grading cross sections and final contours in critical drainage
areas.
E. Water distribution system construction plans and details.
F. Locations of existing and proposed street lights, electric,
telecommunications and other utility improvements.
G. A general schedule of timing and sequence of construction for all
required improvements.
H. Street construction detail sheets. All construction details pertaining to
street improvements (e.g., pavement details, pavement width, curbing,
sidewalk, unpaved areas, entrances, lighting, etc.) shall be shown on
typical section, in plan and profile as required by the City Engineer.
I. Benchmark information.
J. Grading plan. A grading plan showing the proposed finished grading
within the subdivision shall be provided. All grading details pertaining
to side development shall be shown in plan or on cross section sheets.
Specific details shall include, but shall not be limited to:
(1) Existing and proposed contours at two-foot intervals. Contour
intervals for grading plans greater than two feet will require the
City Engineer's approval.
(2) Site grading shall be compatible with ultimate street elevations.
(3) Where required by the City Engineer, cross sections showing
existing ground and finished grades plotted at a scale of not less
than one inch equals 100 feet horizontal and one inch equals 10
feet vertical.
(4) An erosion control plan, as applicable, showing compliance with
state and local requirements.
K. Detailed site plan of the proposed development's layout, including the
following information:
§ 190-272 FLAG § 190-272
164:849
§ 190-273. Filling of water or drainage areas.
§ 190-274. Landscaping plans.
Landscape plans shall include dimensions and distances and shall clearly
delineate the existing and proposed parking space or other vehicular use,
access, aisles and driveways and the location, type/species, height/caliper,
size/number of trees shrubs, flowers and ground cover. The Planning Board
reserves the right to require landscape plans to a scale of one inch equals
20 feet. A detailed snow-removal plan shall be submitted with the landscape
plan.
(1) The location, size and height of all structures, including signs,
fences and walls.
(2) The location, size and dimensions of all yards and proposed
setbacks.
(3) The location, dimensions and layout of all areas to be used for
driveways, walkways and parking areas.
(4) The location and design of all exterior site lighting within the
proposed development.
(5) The proposed landscaping treatments of the site, in accordance
with Article XXVII of this chapter.
A. The following plans shall be submitted with any application involving
the filling of any pond, lake, swamp or other body of water, waterway or
drainage area:
(1) A location plan at a scale of one inch equals 1,000 feet, showing the
area to be filled in, property lines within which the filling is
proposed, and tie-in to the nearest road intersection.
(2) A site plan shall be submitted to a scale of one inch equals 50 feet
of the premises and surrounding area within 100 feet showing, in
addition to that required in Subsection A(1) above, existing and
proposed contour lines at intervals of not more than 2 1/2 feet
resulting from the proposed filling in, in relation to the topography
of the premises. The plan shall be prepared by a registered
professional engineer or registered land surveyor.
(3) Provision shall be made for temporary and permanent drainage of
the site.
B. Documentation shall be submitted that the plan of the proposed filling
has been referred to the United States Army Corps of Engineers.
Referrals shall be made to the appropriate offices having jurisdiction
over the City.
C. Approval by the State Water Resources Board under RSA 149 and 387,
including any conditions attached thereto, shall be submitted.
§ 190-272 NASHUA CODE § 190-275
164:850
§ 190-275. Lighting plans.
§ 190-276. Rezoning applications.
Every request for rezoning shall include the following documents and maps:
A. This section applies to any application for subdivision plan or site plan
approval.
B. A lighting plan shall be submitted with any application described in
Subsection A above. The lighting plan shall include:
(1) The location of all existing and proposed wall and light poles; and
(2) The location and type of any outdoor lighting luminaires, including
the height of the luminaire; and
(3) The luminaire manufacturer's specification data, including lumen
output and photometric data showing cutoff angles; and
(4) The type of lamp (e.g., metal halide, compact fluorescent or high
pressure sodium); and
(5) A photometric plan showing the intensity of illumination at ground
level, expressed in foot candles; and
(6) Calculations demonstrating compliance with Article IX of this
chapter. This may be demonstrated by manufacturer's data, cross
section drawings, or other means.
A. Legal description of the area for which rezoning is requested.
B. A map illustrating the proposed new zoning boundaries, together with
the existing zoning boundaries relevant to the case, which shall include
property lines. If the lot, parcel or tract is located in Nashua and
another jurisdiction, include a description of the zoning classification,
existing uses, and permitted uses of all abutting property in both
jurisdictions.
C. A map illustrating the existing uses of land within the proposed new
zoning area, together with the existing uses of land (residential,
commercial, industrial, agricultural, undeveloped) adjacent to the
proposed new zoning area and extending sufficiently distant from it to
include at least the land in the immediate vicinity deemed to be affected
by the change. The map shall portray principal topographic features
such as watercourses, hills and unusual conditions, shall portray
principal man-made features such as highways and power lines, shall
indicate property lines and identify major public or private
establishments, and the various land uses shall be represented in a
color code with yellow for residential use, blue for commercial use,
purple for industrial use, brown for agricultural use, green for parks
and institutional use, and no coloring for vacant undeveloped land. This
§ 190-275 FLAG § 190-276
164:851
§ 190-277. Rezoning and site plan application combined.
Reference: § 190-135.
map may be combined with the map required by Subsection B above, if
feasible.
D. On the same map as Subsection C foregoing, or on a separate map, if
required for clarity, shall be depicted the proposed pattern of general
development, including the new uses, and the proposed general pattern
for the subdivision of land, if any.
E. The name of the person, firm or corporation requesting the zoning
change shall be submitted, together with address and telephone
number. The name, address and telephone number of the attorney,
engineer, or other professional person representing the person, firm or
corporation shall be included on the application if any such persons are
employed in the preparation of the application.
F. The person, firm, or corporation requesting the zoning change shall
submit a statement setting forth the reasons for seeking the zoning
change.
G. All maps required by this subsection shall include a North arrow, scale,
legend, the name of the person, firm or corporation requesting the
zoning change and a signature representing the sponsor, and the date
of the submission to the Board of Aldermen.
H. Maps of sparsely settled land or acreage may be prepared at a scale of
no more than 200 feet to one inch. Maps of intensively developed areas
may be prepared at a scale of no more than 100 feet to one inch.
A. The applicant shall pay the rezoning, site plan, and subdivision fees as
provided in § 190-267, plus an additional $500 to cover administrative
costs associated with this procedure. The Planning Board may also
require the payment of such fees to reimburse the City for the cost of
any special studies or engineering analysis of plans and/or documents
provided by the applicants as may be reasonably required.
B. The applicant is required to submit the following information:
(1) All the requirements as specified in § 190-276. Amendment;
petitions for rezoning. If there is a conflict between § 190-276 and
the following, the more stringent requirement will prevail;
(2) A detailed traffic analysis acceptable to the Administrative Officer
and the City's Traffic Engineer;
(3) A listing of all proposed uses;
(4) A written statement on substantial compliance with the City's
Master (Comprehensive) Plan;
§ 190-276 NASHUA CODE § 190-277
164:852
(5) Written statement(s) providing evidence that there are adequate
City or public services such as, but not limited to, sanitary sewer,
water, storm drainage, and other utilities;
(6) A written analysis on the impact on the public school system;
(7) A written statement, maps, photographs, and other evidence
demonstrating compatibility of the proposed rezoning and
proposed uses with adjacent and surrounding zoning districts and
existing uses;
(8) A fiscal impact study showing the effects of the rezoning on the
City; and
(9) Any other study, analysis, report or document or maps as requested
by the Administrative Officer.
C. Site plan submission and review standards. The applicant shall submit
the following:
(1) Evidence showing compliance with all the requirements as
specified in § 190-146, as well as those set forth generally in RSA
674:43 and 674:44. Negative impacts are grounds for Planning
Board disapproval of the site plan.
(2) A written statement to accompany the site plan must contain the
following information:
(a) An explanation of the character of the site plan and the manner
in which it has been planned to ensure a quality and attractive
development;
(b) A statement of proposed financing;
(c) A statement of the present ownership of all land included
within the site plan; and
(d) The development schedule, including the following
information:
[1] The approximate date on which construction of the project
will begin;
[2] The stages in which the project will be built, if applicable;
[3] The approximate date when the construction of each stage
will begin;
[4] The interim uses and treatment of areas awaiting
development at a later stage;
[5] The approximate dates when the development of each of
the stages in the development will be completed; and
§ 190-277 FLAG § 190-277
164:853
§ 190-278. Sign plans.
[6] The area and location of common open space that will be
provided at each stage of development.
(3) Elevations of all four sides of all proposed structures and
improvements, except single-family detached dwellings and their
accessory buildings on lots over 6,000 square feet in area. Typical
elevations may be submitted in lieu of one for each site for singlefamily
and duplex dwellings. The plans shall include type and style
of wall finish, type of shingles, stairs, and architectural
appendages, and other design features of the structure. Plans for
all structures with two or more floors, except single-family and
duplex units, shall show the floor elevations in relation to adjacent
grade.
(4) Agreements, provisions, or covenants which govern the use,
maintenance and continued protection of the site plan and any of
its common areas.
(5) A detailed landscape plan.
(6) A drainage plan to include the location and size of any drainage
structure, the direction of flow, the areas drained by such
structures and any other information which is necessary to
determine the drainage requirements for the site plan.
(7) A detailed off-street parking (for all types of vehicles, including
bicycles) and loading plan.
(8) A circulation plan showing the proposed movements of vehicles,
goods, cyclists and pedestrians within the site plan, and off site to
and from existing private or public streets. This plan shall indicate
any special engineering features and traffic regulation devices
needed to facilitate or ensure the safety of the circulation pattern
proposed.
(9) Any other study, analysis, report or document or maps as requested
by the Administrative Officer.
D. Subdivision application requirements. If a subdivision is required to be
submitted with the rezoning and site plan, the applicant shall conform
to all applicable provisions of Article XVI, Subdivision Procedures, of
this chapter, as well as the requirements of RSA 674:35 and 674:36 et
seq.
A. Generally. An applicant for a sign permit is required to submit to the
Administrative Officer the following:
(1) A completed sign permit application form.
(2) A review fee as set forth in § 190-267.
§ 190-277 NASHUA CODE § 190-278
164:854
§ 190-279. Site plans.
Site plans shall include the information required below. The Engineering
Department may develop standards for the electronic submission of the site
plan, and may require the submission of those portions of the site plan in
such electronic format as shall be deemed necessary to incorporate the
public information in the plan into the City's geographic information system.
The design review shall be drawn and reproduced on two sheets in a twentytwo-
inch-by-thirty-four-inch format, along with two sheets in an eleven-inchby-
seventeen-inch format. An eleven-inch-by-seventeen-inch plan of existing
and proposed conditions shall be provided at final submittal.
(3) A photo of existing signage, if any, including dimensions drawn
onto photos.
(4) A sketch of proposed sign that includes sign area, height, setback
and location, as may apply.
(5) Information such as materials, color, illumination, animation,
function, etc.
B. Signage plans within Historic (H) Overlay Districts. The following
information is required in addition to the standard sign application
form:
(1) Scale drawing of the building or site where the proposed sign will
be located. Drawing should include dimensions and design detail of
building, precise location of the sign in relation to the building, and
location of existing signage.
(2) Enlarged photographs of the building or site indicating the
proposed location of sign.
(3) Samples of color, lettering, materials, illumination, animation and
function of proposed sign.
(4) Total concept signage for entire multitenant building, when
applicable.
(5) Size (dimensions of the sign).
(6) Color(s) to be used.
(7) Placement of the sign on the property.
(8) Materials to be used.
(9) Drawing(s) of the proposed sign.
(10) Lettering (what will be on the sign; type of lettering).
A. Title and signature block with name, address and lot number of the
project; name address, phone number of contact; name, address, phone
number of applicant/owner; signature of the applicant/owner; signature
§ 190-278 FLAG § 190-279
164:855
and seal of New Hampshire engineer, surveyor, architect and wetland
scientist; signature block for Planning Board that states: "APPROVED
— NASHUA PLANNING BOARD," followed by signature lines for the
Chairman and Secretary and date; signature block for the applicant
owner that states: "The undersigned does hereby agree to perform
all of the improvements as shown on this plan and as conditioned
or stipulated by the Nashua Planning Board. All required site
improvements must be completed or guaranteed prior to the issuance
of a certificate of occupancy"; and a statement that reads: "It shall be
unlawful to modify, change, or alter any structure shown on this plan in
any way whatsoever, or convert or alter any structure shown on this site
plan, or change the above use indicated on the plan without receiving
approval from the City."
B. Date, scale, North point, legend explaining all symbols used, total area
of site, bearings and distances of all property lines. The scale shall not
be smaller than one inch equals 50 feet unless waived by the Planning
Board.
C. If new survey, date of survey and name of surveyor. If old survey,
reference plan(s) used, HCRD#, and book and page of deeds.
D. The zoning districts and boundaries.
E. The location of all permanent monuments, property lines, street line
and lot line, existing easements (e.g., sewer, water, drainage,
conservation).
F. Dimension and square footage of all buildings and structures.
G. Minimum lot and yard requirements, existing and proposed; should
include lot area, width depth, setbacks, building height, open space,
building coverage and number of stories.
H. Abutting property owners, names, addresses, zip codes, City Assessor
plan and lot numbers as well as the registry of deeds book and page
numbers of their recorded deeds, as well as the zones and actual uses of
these lots.
I. Delineate proposed and existing sewer systems, water systems, storm
drainage systems and the sewer cleanouts to the site, as well as any
septic systems to be used.
J. The location and size of existing and proposed water mains, sewer lines,
drain lines, gaslines, electric lines, utility poles, streetlights, and
manholes in the street(s) adjacent to the site.
K. Whether served by municipal sewer and Pennichuck Water Works,
including a written statement from Pennichuck Water Works Co.
confirming water service availability and approval if the site is within
the Water Supply Protection District of the stormwater system design of
Pennichuck Water.
§ 190-279 NASHUA CODE § 190-279
164:856
L. Provide a plan and profile of the water, sewer and drain lines to
constructed in the street, including a sewer design approved by the City
Engineer or a septic system design approved by the Board of Health for
the proposed development.
M. The location of any existing or proposed wells to be used.
N. A lighting plan as required by § 190-275.
O. All existing utility poles on the site and show whether they have to be
relocated.
P. A landscaping plan as required by § 190-274.
Q. Individual parking and loading spaces and note the total number
required and provided, including the state required parking, by
breakdown of uses on the site.
R. A notation if there is a basement, more than one floor level and floor
elevations. All existing buildings and structures shall be shown in
dashed lines, or half tones or other method to differentiate from
proposed, while proposed buildings and structures shall be shown in
dark or bold solid lines. Note on plan any building(s) or structure(s) to
be demolished, and pavement and tress removed.
S. Building and structures and driveways on abutting parcels and parcels
located across a nondivided street.
T. Mixed uses and square footage of each use.
U. Location of mechanical equipment pads, HVAC ground units, and
dumpster(s) with enclosure.
V. The one-hundred-year floodplain boundary and any existing and
proposed improvements with the boundary.
W. Wetland boundaries by classification: other, critical and prime.
X. A planned residential, business or industrial development must be
noted on plan with date of aldermanic or Planning Board approval
stipulations.
Y. Any and all Zoning Board of Adjustment approvals with date of granting
and conditions.
Z. The date and approval of any and all agency approvals with copies of
the approved plans including the state water supply and Pollution
Control Commission and State Wetlands Board.
AA. The intended hours of operation including but not limited to hours
during which the site is occupied by employees, hours during which the
site is open for business, hours during which deliveries are made to the
site, hours during which shipments are made from the site, and the
hours during which refuse removal or other services involving truck
§ 190-279 FLAG § 190-279
164:857
traffic on the site are performed for any businesses located within the
site.
BB. A site grading plan showing existing grades with contours at two-foot
vertical intervals, and proposed grades with contours at vertical
intervals of not more than two feet, and at intervals of one foot in paved
areas and areas which are predominantly flat.
CC. A stormwater management report, signed by a state-registered
engineer, detailing the stormwater practices used in the site plan and
their compliance with the requirements set forth in Article XXXI. (For
projects meeting § 190-214B, a statement of intent to apply for an
alteration of terrain permit from the New Hampshire Department of
Environmental Services shall be submitted in lieu of a stormwater
management report.) The stormwater management report shall include
a brief narrative description of the project, including documentation of
any modifications to the approach since the subdivision plan approval,
site specific geotechnical investigation including soil maps, final soil
boring test results, site specific recommendations, and any additional
information necessary for the proposed design, hydrologic
computations including drainage area maps depicting predevelopment
and postdevelopment runoff, flow paths, and land use, hydraulic
computations, structural design computations, sizing criteria volume
computations in accordance with the Design Manual.
DD. Consolidation plan if required.
EE. A plan sheet of existing conditions on site and adjacent parcels as
appropriate including: topography - contour intervals not more than
two feet; structures and buildings; physical features including
vegetation, trees, rock outcroppings, swales, ditches, wetlands, ponds,
streams, drainage, material sites, and other; sidewalks, trails, cart
paths, and driveways; streets, pipe and power lines; utilities including
electric, sewer, gas, waterlines, septic systems, wells, utility sites,
utility poles, and streetlights; all easements; and abutting property
owners including owner name, address, book and page number from
registry of deeds, lot and map number, and use of the lot (i.e.,
commercial, single-family residential, etc.).
FF. A plan and profile of the lines to constructed in the street.
GG. Easement for right-of-way, sidewalks and utilities.
HH. Non-site-specific permit (NHWSPCC) application.
II. A driveway plan approved by the Engineering Department for singlefamily
homes.
JJ. Indication of ownership of the land on the proposed site which indicates
owner or other agent.
KK. A stormwater operation/maintenance plan and easement for recording.
§ 190-279 NASHUA CODE § 190-279
164:858
§ 190-280. Site plan suitability report in D and MU Districts.
An applicant requesting a modification of the dimensional standards in the
Downtown Districts (D-1 or D-3) or site plan approval in the Mixed Use
Overlay District (MU) shall submit a site plan suitability report. A site plan
suitability report shall include appropriate studies, drawings, plans and
illustrations, which shall address the following relevant factors:
LL. A certificate from the Fire Department that fire requirements have been
met.
MM.All easements, deeds, covenants and deed for right-of-way dedication
are to be submitted and executed.
NN. A list of all the abutting property owners along with their addresses, zip
codes and lot numbers as shown on the plans submitted.
OO. A traffic impact analysis along with a written statement from the City
Traffic Engineer confirming review of traffic concerns.
PP. Approval letter from the state water supply and Pollution Control
Commission for RSA 149:8(a) concerning temporary erosion control
measures and water pollution.
QQ. A written statement from a state-registered engineer, surveyor or
architect that states that the submitted application complies with the
above minimum requirements.
RR. An affidavit by the applicant that it is presently in compliance with all
State of New Hampshire and United States of America laws and
regulations regarding land use and environmental issues related to the
property which is the subject of the site plan, or that the site plan
approval sought will bring the applicant into compliance with all such
laws and regulations. Further, the applicant shall acknowledge in the
affidavit that the City may withhold or withdraw approval or a permit
should the applicant fail to maintain compliance with the abovementioned
state and federal laws and regulations.
A. Analysis of the ability of the proposed use and existing uses to coexist
and the potential impacts that proposed and existing adjoining and
surrounding uses and buildings may have upon one another.
B. Analysis of any impacts on significant natural, architectural, visual or
aesthetic qualities of the surrounding environment.
C. Analysis of the health and safety impacts on customers, residents,
employees and the general downtown and inner-city population.
D. Analysis of economic or property value impacts.
E. Analysis of traffic and parking impacts.
F. Analysis of the adequacy of existing municipal facilities and services.
§ 190-279 FLAG § 190-280
164:859
§ 190-281. Subdivision plans, design review.
G. The consistency of the site plan with the Mixed Use District objectives
and guidelines established by the D District (§ 190-20), the Master Plan
and sound planning and development principles. Prior to the
preparation and submission of a site plan and site plan suitability
report, the applicant shall hold preliminary review sessions with the
Administrative Officer and/or Planning Board to solicit their comments
and recommendations.
A. Generally. The applicant shall submit two copies of any layout for which
design review is desired. The design review shall be drawn and
reproduced on two sheets in an twenty-two-inch-by-thirty-four-inch
format, along two sheets in an eleven-inch-by-seventeen-inch format.
B. Initiation. Initiation of the design review shall be submitted to the
Board at least 15 days prior to the meeting at which such layout is to be
considered. Such layout shall meet the requirements set forth in
Subsections C and D below.
C. Scale. The scale of the design review shall be no smaller than 100 feet
to one inch. A master site plan may be smaller without waiver.
D. Required information, accompanying data. The following information
must be shown on the design review:
(1) Title and signature blocks including name, address, map and lot
number of project; name, address, phone number of contract;
name, address, phone number of applicant/owner; name, address,
phone number of designer; signature of applicant owner; signature
and seal of New Hampshire engineer, surveyor, architect, and
wetland scientist, statement certifying accuracy of survey and date;
and signature block for Planning Board that states: "APPROVED —
NASHUA PLANNING BOARD"; signature line for Chairman and
Secretary and date.
(2) Date, scale, North point and legend explaining all symbols used.
(3) Abutting subdivision names and names and addresses of owners of
record of abutting properties, the book and page number from
registry of deeds, and the lot and map number and use of lot (e.g.,
commercial, single-family, etc.).
(4) Bearing and distances of all property lines with existing and
proposed monuments.
(5) If new survey, date of survey and name surveyor.
(6) Map and lot number.
(7) If old survey, reference plan(s) used, HCRD#, and book and page of
deeds.
§ 190-280 NASHUA CODE § 190-281
164:860
(8) Acreage of parcel to be subdivided and of each new lot created.
(9) Acreage of land transferred if a lot line relocation.
(10) A plan sheet of existing conditions on site and adjacent parcels as
appropriate including topography - contour intervals not more than
five feet (City datum plane); structures and buildings including
stonewalls; physical features on site and within 1,000 feet of
subdivision boundaries including vegetation, trees, rock
outcroppings, swales, ditches, wetlands, ponds, streams, drainage,
material sites, and other; sidewalks, trails, cart paths, and
driveways; roads, streets, pipe and power lines; utilities including
electric, sewer, gas, waterlines, septic systems, wells, utility sites,
utility poles, and streetlights; lot lines with bearings and distances
of each line segment and monuments; and all easements.
(11) Note if there is a basement, more than one floor level and floor
elevations.
(12) All existing building and structures shall be shown in dashed lines,
half tones or other method to differentiate from proposed, while
proposed buildings shall be shown in dark or bold solid lines.
(13) Note on plan any building(s) or structure(s) to be demolished,
pavement added or removed, including trees and landscaping.
(14) Show buildings and structures and driveways on abutting parcels
located across a nondivided street.
(15) Note mixed uses (i.e., office, warehouse and manufacturing) and
square footage of each.
(16) Location of mechanical equipment pads, HVAC ground units and
dumpster(s) with enclosure.
(17) Grading plan with two-foot contour intervals maximum.
(18) Show the one-hundred-year floodplain boundary and any existing
and proposed improvements within the boundary.
(19) Show the mapped wetland boundaries by classification: other,
critical and prime.
(20) Location of all existing streets, watercourses, and other features
within and immediately adjacent to the proposed subdivision, and
the location of any natural character features within the
subdivision, and the approximate location of natural character
features occurring within 1,000 feet of the boundaries of the
subdivision that are visible from the proposed subdivision. Maps
produced by the City's geographic information system shall be
deemed sufficient to meet the provisions of this subsection.
§ 190-281 FLAG § 190-281
164:861
(21) Cul-de-sac notes: lots that front on a cul-de-sac shall be responsible
for the maintenance and shall be recorded in deeds.
(22) If the site is within the Water Supply Protection District show the
one-hundred-fifty-foot or three-hundred-foot buffer as applicable
(approval of Pennichuck).
(23) The location and size of any existing or proposed waterline(s) to the
site.
(24) The location of any existing or proposed wells to be used.
(25) A plan and profile drawing of the waterline(s) to be constructed in
the street.
(26) The location, slope and size of proposed sewer line(s), including
cleanouts, to the sites.
(27) The location of any existing/proposed septic systems to be used.
(28) A plan and profile drawing of the sewer line(s) to be constructed in
the street.
(29) Any existing and proposed sewer line easements; that the applicant
has submitted a sewer design approved by the City Engineer or a
septic system design approved by the Board of Health.
(30) The location and size of existing drain lines, including manholes, in
the street(s) adjacent.
(31) The location, slope and size of proposed drain line(s), including
manholes, to the site.
(32) The location of the proposed drainage systems on the site,
including manholes and catch basins.
(33) A plan and profile drawing of the drain line(s) to be constructed in
the street.
(34) Drainage calculations as submitted to the Engineering Department
for review.
(35) The location of any proposed gaslines on the site.
(36) The location of electric conduits and line(s) to the site.
(37) The location of any proposed electric conduits and lines on the site.
(38) The location of all existing utility poles and streetlights in the
street(s) adjacent and whether any have to be relocated; provide a
detail drawing of the light fixtures to be used if other than the
standard mast arm.
(39) Deed for right-of-way or other land dedication.
§ 190-281 NASHUA CODE § 190-281
164:862
(40) Non-site-specific permit (NHWSPCC) required, applied for or
received.
(41) Abutters list.
(42) Location of all proposed streets and open spaces and other
features.
(43) Existing right-of-way widths.
(44) Existing zoning districts and boundaries, and the proposed use of
all land.
(45) Minimum lot and yard requirements, existing and proposed; should
include lot area, frontage, width, depth, setbacks, building height,
open space, building coverage, and number of stories.
(46) Parking, existing and proposed, broken down by state required
use(s) for parking.
(47) All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to public use.
(48) Contours at vertical intervals of not more than five feet. Contours
shall be marked with elevations based on the City datum plane and
shall indicate both the existing and the proposed grading of the
subdivision. Bench marks may be obtained from the City Engineer's
office. Any change to grading which requires removal of substantial
vegetation or the modification or removal of a natural character
feature shall be delineated by specific notation on the map.
(49) Division of Public Works' notes.
(50) Where the layout or plan submitted covers only a part of the
applicant's entire holding, a sketch shall be furnished showing the
potential street system for the unsubmitted part.
(51) Street grades, profiles and typical cross sections.
(52) A location map at a suitable scale (as defined in Subsection C)
showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision to the
surrounding area, with a radius of at least 1,000 feet, or sufficient
to show nearby existing streets, highways, community facilities,
and the approximate location of commercial and residential
structures. Maps produced by the City's geographic information
system shall be deemed sufficient to meet the provisions of this
subsection.
(53) A typical landscape plan for a lot in the subdivision, for residential
subdivisions.
(54) A stormwater management report, signed by a state-registered
engineer, detailing the stormwater practices used in the site plan
and their compliance with the requirements set forth in Article
XXXI. (For projects meeting § 190-214B, a statement of intent to
§ 190-281 FLAG § 190-281
164:863
§ 190-282. Subdivision plans.
apply for an alteration of terrain permit from the New Hampshire
Department of Environmental Services shall be submitted in lieu of
a stormwater management report.) The stormwater management
report shall include a brief narrative description of the project, a
geotechnical investigation including soil maps and preliminary soil
boring test results, hydrologic computations including drainage
area maps depicting predevelopment and postdevelopment runoff,
flow paths, and land use, hydraulic computations, sizing criteria
volume computations in accordance with the Design Manual, detail
of stormwater improvements including plan view and cross section
of detention basins and swales, stormwater operation/maintenance
plan and easement.
(55) Consolidation plan if required.
(56) All zoning variances and special exceptions that apply to the site
(wetlands, flood hazard, use, dimensional), date of approval and
stipulations.
(57) Purpose of plan.
(58) Traffic report.
(59) Dimension and square footage of all buildings and structures.
(60)New lot numbers and street addresses assigned (approval of
addresses and street name by NFD), as well as old lot numbers and
lot lines shown to differentiate from proposed.
(61) Setback for all lot lines by zoning district and dimensions from
existing buildings to closest lot lines.
(62) Legal status of any existing right-of-way (paper street) proposed to
be used, but not built in or accepted within 20 years of layout.
(63) Copies of any legal instruments or formal documents by which land
is to be dedicated to public use.
(64) If blasting will occur as part of any construction activities, that the
applicant has submitted a preblasting and postblasting survey.
A. Drafting standards. The scale of the conditional plan shall not be
smaller than 50 feet to one inch. The conditional plan shall be drawn
and reproduced on sheets no larger than 22 inches by 34 inches. When
more than one sheet is required, an index sheet of the same size shall
be prepared showing the entire subdivision at a lesser scale.
B. Required information; accompanying data. The following information
must be shown on the conditional plan:
§ 190-281 NASHUA CODE § 190-282
164:864
(1) Title and signature block including: name, address, map and lot
number of project; name, address, phone number of contract;
name, address, phone number of applicant/owner; signature of
applicant owner; name, address, phone number of designer;
signature and seal of New Hampshire engineer, surveyor, architect,
and wetland scientist, statement certifying accuracy of survey and
date; and signature block for the Planning Board that states:
"APPROVED — NASHUA PLANNING BOARD"; signature line for
Chairman and Secretary and date.
(2) Date, scale, North point and legend explaining all symbols used.
(3) Bearing and distances of all property lines with existing and
proposed monuments.
(4) If new survey, date of survey and name surveyor.
(5) Map and lot number.
(6) If old survey, reference plan(s) used, HCRD#, and book and page of
deeds.
(7) Acreage of parcel to be subdivided and of each new lot created.
(8) Acreage of land transferred if a lot line relocation.
(9) A plan sheet of existing conditions on site and adjacent parcels as
appropriate including topography - contour intervals not more than
five feet (City datum plane); structures and buildings including
stonewalls; physical features on site and within 1,000 feet of
subdivision boundaries including vegetation, trees, rock
outcroppings, swales, ditches, wetlands, ponds, streams, drainage,
material sites, and other; sidewalks, trails, cart paths, and
driveways; streets, pipe and power lines; utilities including electric,
sewer, gas, waterlines, septic systems, wells, utility sites, utility
poles, and streetlights; lot lines with bearings and distances of each
line segment and monuments; and all easements.
(10) Note if there is a basement, more than one floor level and floor
elevations.
(11) All existing building and structures shall be shown in dashed lines,
half tones or other method to differentiate from proposed, while
proposed buildings shall be shown in dark or bold solid lines.
(12) Note on plan any building(s) or structure(s) to be demolished,
pavement added or removed, including trees and landscaping.
(13) Note mixed uses (i.e., office, warehouse and manufacturing) and
square footage of each.
(14) Location of mechanical equipment pads, HVAC ground units and
dumpster(s) with enclosure.
§ 190-282 FLAG § 190-282
164:865
(15) Grading plan with two feet contour intervals maximum.
(16) Typical landscape plan for residential structures.
(17) The one-hundred-year floodplain boundary and any existing and
proposed improvements within the boundary.
(18) The mapped wetland boundaries by classification: other, critical
and prime.
(19) The street lines, areas to be dedicated to public use, and areas the
title to which is reserved by an applicant.
(20) Sufficient data acceptable to the City Engineer to determine
readily the location, bearing and length of every boundary line,
street line and lot line to reproduce such lines on the ground. All
dimensions shall be shown to tenths of a foot, and all bearings to at
least one minute. All boundaries of the subdivision shall be made by
survey in the field, which shall be balanced and closed, made by a
registered professional engineer or qualified surveyor, and certified
to be correct.
(21) Abutting property owners, names, addresses, City Assessor plan
and lot numbers as well as the registry of deeds book and page
numbers of their recorded deeds.
(22) Buildings and structures and driveways on abutting parcels located
across a nondivided street.
(23) Evidence satisfactory to the Board indicating the ownership of the
land in the proposed subdivision to be the applicant of his principal
or other agent.
(24) Cul-de-sac notes: abut lots that front on a cul-de-sac shall be
responsible for the maintenance and shall be recorded in deeds.
(25) Drainage report or statement of compliance.
(26) Operation/maintenance plan and easement for recording.
(27) If the site is within the Water Supply Protection District show the
one-hundred-fifty-foot or three-hundred-foot buffer as applicable
(approval of Pennichuck).
(28) The location and size of any existing or proposed waterline(s) to the
site.
(29) The location of any existing or proposed wells to be used.
(30) A plan and profile drawing of the waterline(s) to be constructed in
the street.
(31) The location, slope and size of proposed sewer line(s), including
cleanouts, to the sites.
§ 190-282 NASHUA CODE § 190-282
164:866
(32) The location of any existing/proposed septic systems to be used.
(33) A plan and profile drawing of the sewer line(s) to be constructed in
the street.
(34) Any existing and proposed sewer line easements. (See § 190-226.)
(35) The location and size of existing drain lines, including manholes, in
the street(s) adjacent.
(36) The location, slope and size of proposed drain line(s), including
manholes, to the site.
(37) The location of the proposed drainage systems on the site,
including manholes and catch basins.
(38) A plan and profile drawing of the drain line(s) to be constructed in
the street.
(39) Drainage calculations as submitted to the Engineering Department
for review.
(40) The location of any proposed gaslines on the site.
(41) The location of electric line(s) to the site.
(42) The location of any proposed electric lines on the site.
(43) The location of all existing utility poles and streetlights in the
street(s) adjacent and whether any have to be relocated.
(44) The existing right-of-way widths.
(45) Locate any existing and proposed utility poles and streetlights on
the site; provide a detail drawing of the light fixtures to be used if
other than the standard mast arm.
(46) Deed for right-of-way or other land dedication.
(47) Non-site-specific permit (NHWSPCC) required, applied for or
received.
(48) A certificate from the Health Officer, where required, that the
requirements of § 190-223B have been met.
(49) Typical cross-section and profiles of streets showing grades
approved by the City Engineer. Profiles shall be drawn to City
standard scales and elevations and shall be based on the City
datum plane.
(50) Statement signed by owner dedicating streets, rights-of-way, and
other sites to public use.
§ 190-282 FLAG § 190-282
164:867
§ 190-283. Traffic impact analysis (TIA).
See "Guidelines for the Preparation of Traffic Impact Reports and Traffic
Management Plans," City of Nashua, Board of Public Works (May 2000),
which document is hereby incorporated by reference.
(51) Minimum lot and yard requirements, existing and proposed should
include lot area, frontage, width, depth, setbacks, building height,
open space, building coverage, and number of stories;
(52) Parking, existing and proposed, broken down by state required
use(s) for parking.
(53) Statement which complies with the provisions of § 190-142A(2)(a)
of this chapter, pertaining to street and utility improvements.
(54) A list of all the abutting property owners along with their addresses
and lot numbers as shown on the plans submitted, along with the
names and addresses of the owners of the plot.
(55) Division of Public Works' notes.
(56) Consolidation plan if required.
(57) All zoning variances and special exceptions that apply to the site
(wetlands, flood hazard, use, dimensional), date of approval and
stipulations.
(58) Traffic report.
(59) Dimension and square footage of all buildings and structures.
(60)New lot numbers and street addresses assigned (approval of
addresses and street name by NFD), as well as old lot numbers and
lot lines shown to differentiate from proposed.
(61) Setback for all lot lines by zoning district and dimensions from
existing buildings to closest lot lines.
(62) Legal status of any existing right-of-way (paper street) proposed to
be used, but not built in or accepted within 20 years of layout.
C. Electronic submission. The Engineering Department may develop
standards for the electronic submission of the subdivision plan and may
require the submission of those portions of the subdivision plan in such
electronic format as shall be deemed necessary to incorporate the
public information in the plan into the City's geographic information
system.
D. Number of copies. Two copies of the conditional plan in eleven-inch-byseventeen-
inch format shall be submitted with the conditional plan for
use by the Administrative Officer.
§ 190-282 NASHUA CODE § 190-284
164:868
§ 190-284. Wetlands application process.
A wetlands application required by Article XI shall include the following
information:
A. A completed Nashua Conservation Commission Wetlands Application
Review Form shall be submitted to the Administrative Officer.
B. Sufficiently detailed information and locus plan at a scale of no smaller
than one inch equals 100 feet zero inch to clearly show the extent of the
wetland area and it's associated buffers located on or immediately
adjacent to the subject property. Detailed plans of each of the wetlands
impact areas shall be provided at a scale no smaller than one inch
equals 40 feet, zero inch.
C. The use(s) proposed to be located on the subject property.
D. Primary wetlands delineated as shown on the Nashua Prime Wetlands
Maps and critical wetlands as shown on Nashua Critical Wetlands Map.
E. Any and all sources of wetland delineation information used to
determine the wetlands boundary on the subject property.
F. Documentation regarding the present status of any other permits
required under local, state or federal laws.
G. For projects or land use changes requiring Planning Board and/or
Zoning Board of Adjustment approval, and which are located within or
adjacent to primary or critical wetlands, a detailed wetland delineation
and protection plan shall be prepared and submitted for review.
H. A statement assessing the potential impact of the proposed land use
limited to effects on surface water and groundwater quality, wildlife
habitat, water storage capacity and rare or endangered species, and
other wetlands-specific issues.
I. For other wetlands as defined in § 190-112, Table 112-1, the wetlands
boundary and the method used for its location shall be provided. In
determining the wetlands boundary, the applicant shall consult with the
Administrative Officer who shall provide technical assistance to the
applicant. In the event that a wetland is known or suspected to exist
within 100 feet of any proposed use, a field inspection shall be
conducted by the City, with technical assistance which may be provided
by a certified wetland scientist, to verify its existence and location. The
Administrative Officer shall then consult with the applicant regarding
the applicable regulations, based upon their findings.
J. Any other information required by the NH DES. (Reference: N.H. Code
Admin. R. Department of Environmental Services Chapter Wt 500)
K. Before any application can be placed on the Conservation Commission's
agenda for action, the fees required by § 190-267 shall be paid to the
City of Nashua.
§ 190-284 FLAG § 190-284
164:869
L. Upon submission of a completed wetlands application and appropriate
fees, the applicant will present the proposed project to the
Conservation Commission and answer questions from the members.
M. The applicant may be asked to provide any additional technical
information related to wetlands function and impact at a cost borne by
the applicant.
N. At a public hearing, the Conservation Commission will make final
recommendations on the proposed project.
§ 190-284 NASHUA CODE § 190-284
164:870
Chapter 195
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction site maintenance — See Ch.
128, Art. II.
Housing standards — See Ch. 182.
§ 190-284 LITTERING § 190-284
195:871

ARTICLE I
Posting of Handbills
[Adopted 5-9-1989 by Ord. No. O-89-117; amended 8-13-1996 by
Ord. No. O-96-39 (Sec. 19-2 of the 1987 Code)]
§ 195-1. Posting prohibited.
No person shall leave or post upon utility poles, traffic sign posts, City light
stanchion posts, City signs, wires or other structures, or within any public
right-of-way, or upon automobile windshields or other parts of automobiles
or other motor vehicles on public property; any handbills, posters, fliers,
writing or markings of any type, or similar or other articles which may tend
to contribute to or cause litter or obstruct any street, lane, alley, common or
other public place.
§ 195-2. Exceptions.
This article shall not prohibit the posting of official notice by the City. This
article shall not prohibit the posting of items on the vehicle by the owner or
with the permission of the owner of the vehicle.
§ 195-3. Political items.
Political items including but not limited to handbills, posters, fliers, and/or
similar items are controlled by RSA 664:17 and also § 195-1 of this article.
§ 195-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating this article shall be subject to a fine of $100 a day for
each day of noncompliance.
§ 195-1 LITTERING § 195-4
195:873
Chapter 201
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction noise — See Ch. 128, Art. I.
§ 201-1. Noises created by or emanating from motor vehicles.
A. A person operating in or in control of a parked or moving motor vehicle
shall not operate or permit the operation of an electrically amplified
sound system in or on the motor vehicle so as to produce sound that is
clearly audible more than 50 feet (15 meters) from the motor vehicle
except as otherwise authorized.
B. A person shall not operate a motor vehicle so as to make any loud,
unusual, or unnecessary noise occasioned by any one or more of the
following actions by the operator:
(1) Misuse of power, exceeding tire traction limits in acceleration
sometimes known as "laying down rubber" or "peeling rubber" or
excessive acceleration where there is no emergency.
(2) Misuse of braking power, exceeding tire traction limits in
deceleration where there is no emergency.
(3) Rapid acceleration by means of quick up-shifting of transmission
gears with either a clutch or manual transmission or automatic
transmission.
(4) Rapid deceleration by means of quick down-shifting of transmission
gears with either a clutch or manual transmission or automatic
transmission.
(5) Racing of engines by manipulation of the accelerator, gas pedal,
carburetor, or gear selection whether the vehicle is either in motion
or standing still.
(6) Use of a straight pipe exhaust system, meaning any straightthrough
exhaust system that does not contain baffles or otherwise
does not meet the definition of muffler in New Hampshire Revised
Statutes Annotated 259:66.
(7) Sounding of any horn or signaling device on any street or public
place, except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any
such signaling device of any unreasonable loud or harsh sound; and
the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and
unreasonable period of time.
§ 195-4 NASHUA CODE § 201-2
201:874
§ 201-2. Prohibited acts and conduct.
The following acts and conduct are prohibited:
§ 201-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-9-2005 by Ord. No.
O-05-96]
A. The using, operating, or permitting to be played, used or operated any
radio, receiving set, television, phonograph, stereo, record player, tape
player, cassette player, compact disc player, loud speaker, sound
amplifier, or any other electronic device for the producing, reproducing,
or amplifying of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet
and comfort of the inhabitants of neighboring premises. The operation
of any such set, instrument, machine or device in such a manner as to
be clearly audible at a distance of 50 feet (15 meters) from the building,
premises or structure in which it is located shall be prima facie
evidence of a violation of this section.
B. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any
radio, receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loud speaker,
television, stereo, record player, tape player, cassette player, compact
disk player, sound amplifier, or any other machine or device for the
producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets
for the purpose of commercial advertising, or attracting the attention of
the public to any building or structure.
C. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on the public streets,
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so
as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in
neighboring premises.
D. The creation of any unreasonable or excessive noise on streets adjacent
to any school, institution of learning, church or court while the same are
in use or adjacent to any hospital so as to annoy or disturb the quiet,
comfort, or repose of patients in the hospital, provided that conspicuous
signs are displayed on such streets indicating that a school, hospital or
court is located thereon.
E. The provisions of this section shall apply to City produced or sponsored
events except that Subsection A shall not apply to sporting events at
Holman Stadium or Stellos' Stadium.
A. Any person who violates any portion of this chapter shall be, upon
conviction, guilty of a violation and fined not less than $100.
B. Any person who violates any portion of this chapter shall receive a
written order to cease or abate the noise immediately or within such
reasonable time period as the enforcing official shall order.
C. If the order to cease or abate construction is not complied with, or is
complied with and then violated again within 24 hours, the person
found in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
§ 201-2 NOISE § 201-3
201:875
Chapter 208
OZONE-DEPLETING COMPOUNDS
§ 208-1. Legislative findings.
of a violation of these sections. Each day such violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable under § 1-12 of the City Code.
A. Available scientific evidence indicates that CFCs (chlorofluorocarbons),
halons, and certain other compounds, when discharged into the
environment, deplete the earth's protective ozone layer, allowing
increased amounts of ultraviolet radiation to penetrate the earth's
atmosphere, thereby posing a long-term danger to human health, life
and the environment by increasing such harms as skin cancers,
cataracts, suppression of the immune system, damage to crops and to
aquatic life, and related harms.
B. The release of halons in testing fire-extinguishing systems is a primary
source of the release of halons into the earth's atmosphere.
C. Chlorofluorocarbons are widely used in refrigeration and airconditioning
systems in a form commonly known as "Freon."
D. There is currently no economically feasible technology available as a
substitute for the Freon used in refrigeration and air-conditioning
systems and the halon used in certain fire-extinguishing systems.
E. The recapturing and recycling of chlorofluorocarbons from auto airconditioning
units alone could eliminate approximately 20% of all
chlorofluorocarbons used in the United States.
F. The Montreal Protocol on the Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer
(an international pact) which was ratified by the United States on April
21, 1988, and which becomes effective January 1, 1989, calls for
reductions in the production, importation and exportation of
chlorofluorocarbons to 50% of the worldwide 1986 levels by 1995, and
for a freeze on the production of halon at 1986 levels beginning January
1, 1992; and was amended June 29, 1990, calling for a complete
production phase-out of CFCs and halons by January 1, 2000.
G. In light of the current and future limitations on the production of
chlorofluorocarbons both nationally and internationally, the
development and utilization of environmentally safe alternatives to
chlorofluorocarbons at this time will create such alternatives prior to
the effective date of any comprehensive international, federal or state
regulations banning the use of chlorofluorocarbons and halons.
H. The release of CFCs and halons into the atmosphere is a global danger
to the environment, thus any reduction in the release of such materials
§ 201-3 NASHUA CODE § 208-1
208:876
§ 208-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires.
APPROVED REFRIGERANT RECYCLING EQUIPMENT — Refrigerant
recovery and recycling equipment models which meet the standards of the
Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) or a similar institution. Additional
models must be approved by the Director of the Environmental Department
of Community Health.
AUTHORIZED AIR CONDITIONING SERVICE CENTER — Any
establishment authorized by the Director of the Environmental Department
of Community Health to extract ozone-depleting compounds from motor
vehicle air conditioners or refrigerators, that will be disposed of at the
Nashua landfill, by using approved refrigerant recycling equipment.
CHLOROFLUOROCARBONS or CFCs — The family of substances
containing carbon fluorine and chlorine, and having no hydrogen atoms
and no double bonds, and which includes, without limitation, CFC-11
(trichlorofluoromethane, CCl3F), CFC-12 (dichlorodifluoromethane,
CF2Cl2), CFC-113 (trichlorotrifluoroethane, CFCl2CF2Cl), CFC-114
(dichlorotetrafluorothane, CClF2CCIF2), CFC-115
[(mono)chloropentafluoroethane, CF3CF2Cl]. Examples of products
containing or utilizing CFCs are Freon used in air-conditioning and
refrigeration units, degreasers and solvents used in the cleaning of metals
and electronic components, rigid and flexible foam used as building
within the City will reduce this global danger and will result in a benefit
to the overall health and safety of the public inside and outside of the
City.
I. Recent discoveries have shown that the reduction in CFCs and halon
levels set forth in the Montreal Protocol are insufficient to remedy the
global health and safety risk created from the release of CFCs and
halons.
J. The City encourages the research and development of environmentally
safe alternative technologies and products to replace the use of CFCs
and halons.
K. The City supports the adoption of international, national and state bans
on uses of chlorofluorocarbons; however, until such bans have been
adopted by the appropriate agencies responsible action on the part of
the City is necessary to reduce chlorofluorocarbon and halon use in
order to promote the long-term health, safety and welfare of the
general public, and the environment.
L. To protect the environment, and thereby the health, safety and welfare
of its citizens, the City herein, by this chapter, intends to prohibit the
manufacture, sale and distribution of certain products made of or with
an ozone-depleting compound and to significantly reduce the release of
such compounds into the earth's atmosphere.
§ 208-1 OZONE-DEPLETING COMPOUNDS § 208-2
208:877
insulating material and propellants or source of energy for aerosol
containers.
CITY — All territory within the corporate limits of the City of Nashua,
County of Hillsborough, State of New Hampshire.
ESTABLISHMENT — Any individual domestic or foreign corporation,
government agency, charitable organization, firm, association, syndicate,
joint-stock company, partnership of any kind, corporation, joint venture,
club, common law trust, school, society or individual engaged in any
business or providing a service in the City.
HALON — Any full halogenated carbon compound containing bromine and
chlorine and/or fluorine, including halon-1211
(bromochlorodiflurormethane, CF2BrC1), halon 1301
(bromotrifluoromethane, CF3Br), halon-2402 (dibromotetrafluoroethane,
C2F4Br2). Examples of products containing or utilizing halons are portable
fire extinguishers.
OZONE-DEPLETING COMPOUND — Any chlorofluorocarbon, halon, the
chemical compounds of HC-140 a (methylchloroform, 1,1,
1-trichloroethane, CH3CCI3) and FC-14 (tetrachloroethane, carbon
tetrachloride, CCI4) or any other chemical compound hereafter designated
by the City Aldermen by amendment to the article as being an ozonedepleting
compound.
RIGID OR FLEXIBLE FOAM CONTAINING OR UTILIZING AN OZONEDEPLETING
COMPOUND — Any building insulation (such as urethane), or
other rigid or flexible foam that contains within any closed cell any ozonedepleting
compound or that was produced by using an ozone-depleting
compound in any manner during the manufacturing process.
§ 208-3. Use in manufacturing or cleaning processes prohibited;
exemptions.
A. Within the City, no establishment shall use any ozone-depleting
compound in any process or activity involving the manufacture,
production cleansing, degreasing or sterilization of any substance or
product, except as otherwise provided in this section.
B. Exemptions:
(1) This section shall not apply to the study and/or research of the
effects of the release of ozone-depleting compounds into the
environment and/or the development of alternative technologies,
where such compounds are necessary for conducting such study
and research.
(2) This section shall not apply to any ozone-depleting compound used
as a refrigerant in any refrigeration or air-conditioning unit or
system.
(3) Subsection A of this section shall not apply to any licensed health
care facility where medical applications for which no safe non-
§ 208-2 NASHUA CODE § 208-3
208:878
§ 208-4. Implementation of recovery and recycling program.
All establishments that manufacture, install, repair, service, maintain,
remove or destroy any refrigeration or air-conditioning unit or system
using ozone-depleting compounds shall adopt and implement a program to
prevent the intentional venting or avoidable release of refrigerants from
such systems by implementing a recovery and recycling program whereby
the ozone-depleting compound used as a refrigerant is recaptured and
recycled by using approved refrigerant recycling equipment.
§ 208-5. Responsibility of recycling establishments and scrap yards.
No establishment or scrap yard which recycles or disposes of any motor
vehicle refrigeration or air-conditioning system containing an ozonedepleting
compound, either in conjunction with disposal of another product,
or in any other manner, shall do so without first recapturing and recycling
any ozone-depleting compound used as a refrigerant in such unit. Any
such unit, being accepted for permanent disposal at the City landfill, must
have refrigerant removed by an authorized air-conditioning service center
prior to acceptance and before crushing, selling, shredding or otherwise
destroying such unit.
§ 208-6. Container restrictions.
No establishment shall sell, offer for sale, trade or transfer any ozonedepleting
compound for use as a refrigerant in a motor vehicle refrigeration
or air-conditioning unit or system in a container designed to hold less than
20 pounds.
§ 208-7. Sale of aerosol containers with propellants.
No establishment shall manufacture or sell any aerosol container that uses
an ozone-depleting compound as a propellant or source of energy including
plastic party streamers and novelties, propelled noise horns, cleaning
solutions, drain plungers, consumer electronics or photographic equipment.
The sale of medical products may be exempted from this section, as
stipulated by the Director of the Environmental Health Department.
ozone-depleting alternatives are available until such time that safe
alternatives become available as stipulated by the Director of the
Community Services Division or his or her designee.
(4) This section shall not apply to any establishment manufacturing a
product or component product under contract with any branch of
the United States Armed Forces where applicable military
specifications require the use of an ozone-depleting compound.
Such manufacturer shall make a good faith effort to adopt and
implement a recycling system whereby an ozone-depleting
compound shall be recaptured and recycled.
§ 208-3 OZONE-DEPLETING COMPOUNDS § 208-8
208:879
§ 208-8. Building insulation materials; certification requirements.
Effective January 1, 1995, in the new construction or renovation of any
building or structure (commercial, industrial, residential, or other), no
establishment shall install any building insulation which contains an ozonedepleting
compound. Simultaneous with the filing of a building permit
application, the applicant shall submit a written verification to the Director
of the Code Enforcement Department or his or her designee, certifying that
the building insulation to be installed does not contain an ozone-depleting
compound.
§ 208-9. Release of halon prohibited in training fire personnel or
testing equipment.
Except as required by statute, rule or regulation mandating the release
of halon, no establishment shall release halon from a fire-extinguishing
system in the training of personnel or in the testing of any fire-extinguishing
system.
§ 208-10. Fire extinguishers using halons; permit for certain uses
available.
No establishment shall sell, offer for sale, install, distribute, trade or
transfer any fire extinguisher which contain halons or other ozone-depleting
compounds without being presented by the customer with a permit from
the Chief of the Fire Department or his or her designee. Permits will
be available for aviation uses, for protection of electrical equipment, or
when the applicant can demonstrate to the Chief of the Fire Department
that no technically feasible, economically sound, or environmentally safe
alternative exists.
§ 208-11. Reclamation of halons from fire-extinguishing systems or
units.
All establishments that repair, service or perform maintenance on any
fire-extinguishing system containing halons shall adopt and implement a
reclamation system whereby any halons used as the extinguishing agent
shall not be released into the environment, but shall be recaptured and
recycled or properly disposed of in accordance with a reclamation system
approved by the Chief of the Fire Department or his or her designee.
§ 208-12. Administration and enforcement.
A. The Director of the Environmental Health Department, or his or her
designee, shall administer §§ 208-3 through 208-7 and is authorized to
adopt implementing and administrative regulations and to take any and
all actions reasonable and necessary to enforce this chapter, including,
but not limited to, inspection of any establishment's premises to verify
compliance with this chapter.
§ 208-8 NASHUA CODE § 208-12
208:880
§ 208-13. Violations and penalties.
Any establishment or person found guilty of violating any provision of this
chapter shall be punishable as provided in § 1-12 of the City Code or as
otherwise authorized by law or in equity.
Chapter 215
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conservation Commission — See Ch. 12, Art.
I.
Open burning — See Ch. 110.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 225.
Off-highway vehicles — See Ch. 325.
B. The Director of the Code Enforcement Department, or his or her
designee, shall be responsible for the administration of § 208-8,
including compiling a list of acceptable alternative building insulation
materials to rigid foam insulation containing ozone-depleting
compounds.
C. The Chief of the Fire Department, or his or her designee, shall be
responsible for the administration of §§ 208-9 through 208-11, and shall
establish such rules and regulations as are reasonable and necessary to
enforce and administer these sections, including rules required to
implement the permit program authorized in § 208-10.
D. Upon a showing by any establishment to the responsible official that no
technically feasible alternative for such use of an ozone-depleting
compound is currently available, the Director of such Department or his
or her designee, upon finding that there is no technically feasible
alternative for such use, may grant an exemption from any section or
subsection of this chapter. No exemptions shall be granted from the
prohibition on the manufacture of ozone-depleting compounds.
§ 208-12 OZONE-DEPLETING COMPOUNDS § 208-13
208:881

ARTICLE I
Park and Playground Rules
[Adopted NRO 1975, T. 14, § 8 (Sec. 15-16 of the 1987 Code);
amended 10-31-1977 by Ord. No. O-77-244; 11-13-1980 by Ord. No.
O-80-81; 9-28-1981 by Ord. No. O-81-138; 12-15-1982 by Ord. No.
O-82-71; 3-12-1985 by Ord. No. O-84-79; 3-23-1993 by Ord. No.
O-92-19; 9-24-1996 by Ord. No. O-96-79; 8-10-1999 by Ord. No.
O-99-151; 8-13-2002 by Ord. No. O-02-67; 10-14-2003 by Ord. No.
O-03-198; 11-25-2003 by Ord. No. O-03-216; 12-9-2003 by Ord. No.
O-03-222]
§ 215-1. Prohibited acts.
In all parks, playgrounds, pools and other City recreational facilities, no
person shall:
A. Make or kindle an open fire except in picnic stoves provided for that
purpose;
B. Discharge firearms which is hereby prohibited under authority of RSA
644:13 II(b) or throw stones or other harmful missiles;
C. Sell, or offer to solicit for sale, any goods or merchandise without a
special permit;
D. Use, consume, carry or bring any alcoholic beverage, except that in
connection with the leasing of Holman Stadium for purposes of the
Holman Stadium Concert Series and instances of use of the stadium by
a professional or semiprofessional sports team, allowance by written
license revocable at the City's option may be made for the lessee to sell
beer and/or wine to be consumed on the premises in accordance with
polices established for the use of Holman Stadium from time to time,
the laws of the state, the terms of said license, and in a controlled
setting that has been approved in advance by the Nashua Police
Department. There shall be a fee for said license to be comprised of a
minimum flat amount, plus a percentage of the gross receipts from the
sale of said alcoholic beverages, both as may be established in said
license;
E. Play baseball except at diamonds expressly set aside for this activity;
F. Hold, conduct or address any public assemblage, meeting or gathering,
or take part in any public debate or discussion, without first having
obtained a written permit;
G. Give any entertainment or exhibition except under the direction, or by
permission, of the Superintendent;
H. Operate any motorized vehicle, including but not limited to, cars,
trucks, snowmobiles, minibikes or other powered bikes except in those
areas so designated and only during the times so designated by the
Superintendent;
§ 215-1 OZONE-DEPLETING COMPOUNDS § 215-1
208:883
§ 215-2. Closing hours. [Amended 6-13-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-21;
1-9-2007 by Ord. No. O-06-72; 6-26-2007 by Ord. No. O-07-105]
Except under the direction of or by permission of the Park Superintendent,
no person may enter, remain, stay or loiter in or on the Deschenes Oval,
Sandy Pond Park, Bicentennial Park or Monument Park between the hours
of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.; no person may enter, remain, stay or loiter in
Sunset Heights Park, Salem Street Park, Salem Street Tot Lot, Field’s Grove
Park, Shattuck Street Park or Belvedere Park between the hours of dusk and
6 a.m.; and no person may enter, remain, stay or loiter in any other city park
between the hours of 10 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
§ 215-2.1. Greeley Park Bandshell. [Added 3-23-2010 by Ord. No.
O-10-12; amended 9-15-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-27]
All existing external amplification devices to be used are not expected
to change in status, condition, or place as affixed to the bandshell in its
current configuration and allows for effects and audio monitor. No portable
amplification devices and speakers are permitted until such time as the
unfinished bandshell is completed.
§ 215-2.2. Parks and recreation fees. [Added 5-22-2018 by Ord. No.
O-18-014]
I. Throw, leave or discard any trash, rubbish or garbage except in
containers provided therefor;
J. Bring or allow any dog or horse to be in any park or playground except
in areas designated and marked by the Superintendent for dogs and/or
horses;
K. Play golf in any park or playground except in areas designated and
marked by the Superintendent for the playing of golf;
L. Remove or deface any tree, shrub or flower located in any park or
playground;
M. Possess or use any metal detection device in any park or playground
without the written authority of the Superintendent.
A. The following parks and recreation fees shall apply:
(1) Greeley Park, gazebo: $25.
(2) Greeley Park, public garden plot: $30 per year.
(3) Greeley Park, bandstand (non-Summerfun events): $375.
(4) Holman Stadium, day game: $300.
(5) Holman Stadium, night game: $400.
(6) Rectangular, baseball or softball field:
§ 215-1 NASHUA CODE § 215-2.2
208:884
§ 215-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be subject to
punishment as provided in § 1-12 of the City Code. Any snowmobile,
minibike or other powered bike operated in lands and other recreational
facilities under the jurisdiction of the City without permission may be
impounded for a period of 30 days. All expenses, i.e., towing or
transportation and storage, shall be paid by the owner of the vehicle prior to
redemption, charges to be arrived at by the Chief of Police or his authorized
agent.
(a) No lights, non-Parks and Recreation-affiliated youth league:
$40 for two hours.
(b) Lights, non-Parks and Recreation-affiliated youth league: $75
for two hours.
(c) No lights, nonresident: $50 for two hours.
(d) Lights, nonresident: $100 for two hours.
(e) No lights, adult league: $300 per team season.
(f) Lights, adult league: $500 per team season.
B. For purposes of this section, a "resident" is defined as one or more of
the following:
(1) A voter registered in the City;
(2) A person who is domiciled in the City;
(3) A person who pays real estate taxes to the City; or
(4) A spouse or dependent of any of the above.
C. Fees shall not be charged for Parks and Recreation Departmentaffiliated
uses, or use by the Nashua School District or other elementary
and secondary schools located in Nashua.
D. The Board of Public Works may waive a parks and recreation fee upon a
showing of hardship.
§ 215-2.2 OZONE-DEPLETING COMPOUNDS § 215-3
208:885

ARTICLE II
Stellos Stadium
[Adopted 11-26-2002 by Ord. No. O-02-94 (Sec. 15-17 of the 1987
Code)]
§ 215-4. Applicability of usage restriction.
The following restrictions shall apply to the usage of Stellos Stadium under
the control of the Parks and Recreation Department.
§ 215-5. Restrictions on use.
The use of Stellos Stadium shall be restricted to events of a nonprofessional
nature serving directly the youth of the City of Nashua.
§ 215-6. Operation of public address system.
No person shall operate a public address system at Stellos Stadium before
noon on Sunday and 9:00 a.m. on Saturday. Use of a public address system
at Stellos Stadium shall be in conformance with rules and regulations
established by the Division of Public Works.
§ 215-7. Use of noisemaking devices.
Except for the use of a public address system as provided in § 215-6, no
person shall operate any cannon, air horn, or other noisemaking device at
Stellos Stadium if such device can be heard in the surrounding homes.83
83.Editor's Note: See Ch. 201, Noise.
§ 215-4 OZONE-DEPLETING COMPOUNDS § 215-7
208:887

ARTICLE III
Conservation Lands
[Adopted 4-22-2003 by Ord. No. O-03-152 (Secs. 15-37 to 15-41 of
the 1987 Code)]
§ 215-8. Purpose.
It is the purpose and intent of this article to provide for the implementation
of the following goals and objectives adopted in the Nashua Master Plan
2000:
§ 215-9. Conservation lands designated.
§ 215-10. Authority of Conservation Commission to adopt
stewardship plans.
A. Protect the ecosystems, wildlife habitat, and wetlands of Nashua from
degradation, and link these areas, whenever possible, by wildlife
corridors. This can be done through regulation or acquisition.
(1) Preserve views along scenic roadways and into identified scenic
areas.
(2) Strive to preserve the remaining active agriculture and forest lands
in the City.
(3) Provide more areas for passive recreation and enjoyment of the
outdoors.
(4) Preservation areas to provide relief from the build environment. As
the City nears build-out, conservation land will help retain
Nashua's scenic character that was so evident 20 years ago, but is
now becoming more and more scarce.
(5) Preserve the quality and quantity of the City's drinking water
supply.
A. The following lands are hereby designated conservation lands of the
City of Nashua:
(1) The Northwest Sanctuary.
B. Any appropriate mappings or descriptions of such lands are
incorporated by reference.
C. Additional conservation areas shall be designated by amendment to this
section.
A. The Nashua Conservation Commission shall have the authority to adopt
stewardship plans for conservation lands of the City in a manner
consistent with the provisions, purpose, and intent of this article.
B. Such stewardship plans may:
§ 215-8 OZONE-DEPLETING COMPOUNDS § 215-10
208:889
§ 215-11. Establishment of stewardship plans.
§ 215-12. Prohibited acts on conservation land.
It shall be unlawful for any person in any conservation land to:
(1) Fix times. Fix the times when the conservation lands shall be open
to public use, whenever such restrictions are necessary to protect
the public or the lands.
(2) Restrict use. Restrict the use of open space lands, or parts thereof,
for any use which may be determined by the Conservation
Commission to be detrimental to forest or conservation land
management.
(3) Layout of uses. Layout proper open space land uses in accordance
with the open space plan and other management studies dealing
with these designated conservation lands.
C. The Conservation Commission shall establish through stewardship
plans guidelines for any necessary permits for uses allowed by this
article. Permits shall be issued through the Community Development
Division. Any permit issued shall be followed with strict accordance
with the written terms and conditions thereon. Any violation of any law
or ordinance, rule or regulation shall constitute grounds for revocation
of the permit. In the case of revocation, monies paid shall be forfeited
and the violator shall be liable for all damages including prosecution
under the applicable legal jurisdiction.
A. The Conservation Commission shall adopt a base stewardship plan for
the care of conservation lands which shall be consistent with the
provisions and the purpose and intent of this article. This plan shall
include written findings relating the allowed and prohibited uses and
other regulations to the protection of the resources. [Amended
2-26-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-07]
B. Upon designation of an area as a conservation area, the base
stewardship plan shall become effective with regard to the new
conservation area.
C. The Conservation Commission may adopt specific stewardship plans for
specific conservation land areas, consistent with the provisions,
purpose, and intent of this article.
A. Solicit money, subscription, alms, or contributions for any purpose.
B. Advertise in any manner whatsoever for any reason whatsoever.
C. Exhibit, sell, offer, or solicit for sale, hire, lease, or rent any object,
service, goods, or merchandise without a special permit under such
terms as the Commission may allow.
§ 215-10 NASHUA CODE § 215-12
208:890
D. Hold, conduct or address any public assemblage, meeting or gathering
or take part in any public debate or discussion without first having
obtained a written permit from the Commission.
E. Give any entertainment or exhibition except under the direction, or by
permission, of the Commission.
F. Remain, stay or loiter on conservation land between 10:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m., except under the direction, or by permission, of the
Commission.
G. Throw, leave or discard any trash, rubbish or garbage.
H. Use, consume, carry or bring any alcoholic beverage.
I. Make or kindle an open fire except with written permission from the
Commission.
J. Deface, destroy or remove any sign, bench, fence, or other structure, or
any living plant material existing on conservation open space lands
except for forest management practices specifically authorized by the
Commission.
K. Remove or have in his possession any animal's nest or remove the
young or eggs of an animal or injure, kill, disturb or destroy any animal
except during a hunting or trapping season and while legally hunting or
trapping in a manner allowed and prescribed by the Commission.
L. Deposit, drop or leave any debris, refuse or other litter of any kind
except in such receptacles as may be provided for this purpose.
M. Ride a horse on, or bring into or possess a horse on any conservation
land that is posted prohibiting such use.
N. Operate or bring onto any conservation, except in areas designated by
the Commission, any motorized vehicle including but not limited to
automobile, truck, motorized trail bike, snowmobile, or other offhighway
recreational vehicle, with the exception that any "electric
personal assistive mobility device" or "EPAMD" as defined in RSA 269:1
shall be exempt from this prohibition when operated on a paved
pedestrian walkway in accordance with applicable law. Vehicles
authorized by the City shall be exempt from this provision.
O. Remain upon any conservation open space lands for the purpose of
overnight camping.
§ 215-12 OZONE-DEPLETING COMPOUNDS § 215-12
208:891
Chapter 220
PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vendors, flea markets and street fairs — See
Ch. 231, Art. II.
§ 220-1. Purpose.
This chapter is adopted by the Board of Aldermen for the purpose of
regulating transactions in items which have been historically shown to
be subject to theft and illicit transfer. The function of the regulations
contained in this chapter is to discourage such theft and illicit transfer
from occurring within the City and to mandate the keeping of certain
records which will assist victims of theft in recovering their stolen property
and which will assist law enforcement authorities in the apprehension
of perpetrators of theft and detection of regulated parties intentionally
transacting business in stolen property. This chapter has been enacted
pursuant to the authority granted to the City of Nashua by New Hampshire
Revised Statutes Annotated Chapters 322 and 398.
§ 220-2. Definitions. [Amended 8-12-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-26]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMODITY METALS — Any metal traded on the commodity market that
sells for $0.50 per pound or greater, including, but not limited to, gold,
silver, platinum, brass, copper, copper alloy, aluminum, stainless steel,
rhodium, palladium, titanium and magnesium.[Added 2-14-2012 by Ord.
No. O-12-001]
PAWNBROKER — Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation whose
business includes any transaction wherein there is the lending of money
secured by taking possession of property, with interest charged thereon,
with the right to sell the property if it is not redeemed. A person, firm,
partnership or corporation shall be deemed to be a pawnbroker whether
the transaction takes the form of a loan by the pawnbroker secured by the
property or a sale to the pawnbroker with the right to repurchase within
a specified period of time. Pawnbrokers are regulated according to New
Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated Chapter 398.[Amended 2-14-2012
by Ord. No. O-12-001]
PROPERTY — Anything of value, including but not limited to jewelry,
watches, clocks, diamonds or other precious stones or gems, gold, silver,
platinum, other precious metals or commodity metals, musical instruments
and equipment, cameras, furs, fur coats or other kinds of wearing apparel,
televisions, DVD players, videocassette recorders and other electronic
§ 215-12 NASHUA CODE § 220-2
208:892
equipment, tools, computers and computer equipment, firearms, auto
accessories and office and store fixtures and related equipment. Property
shall not include secondhand furniture or books.[Added 2-14-2012 by
Ord. No. O-12-001]
SECONDHAND DEALER — [Amended 9-22-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-73]
§ 220-3. Licensing authority.
The Board of Aldermen may license such persons as they deem suitable
to be pawnbrokers or secondhand dealers within the City. All licenses so
granted shall contain a clause that the person so licensed agrees to abide
by and be subject to all provisions of this chapter as it may be from time to
time amended.
§ 220-4. License required; application requirements. [Amended
8-12-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-26]
No person, firm, partnership or corporation shall operate, conduct or
engage in business as a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer unless such
person, firm, partnership or corporation obtains a license from the City of
Nashua through the Board of Aldermen in accordance with NH RSA 398:5
and RSA 322:1, respectively. Applications for licenses for pawnbrokers or
secondhand dealers shall be made in writing to the City of Nashua on forms
provided by the City of Nashua.
Any person, firm, partnership or corporation whose business is the
retail buying, selling, buy-back, exchanging, dealing in or dealing with
secondhand articles and property. Secondhand dealers are regulated
according to New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated Chapter 322.
[Amended 2-14-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-001]
A.
However, the definition of "secondhand dealer" shall not apply to any
person, firm, partnership, or corporation who does not purchase
secondhand articles directly from the general public.
B.
A. Investigation of applicant. All applications shall be submitted by the
City Clerk to the Chief of Police, who shall cause an investigation to be
made of the fitness of the applicant and the applicant's employees to
carry on the business of pawnbroker or secondhand dealer. The Chief of
Police shall then report his or her findings to the Board of Aldermen.
[Amended 2-14-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-001]
B. Location. The license shall be issued for a specific location within the
City of Nashua and is not transferable to any other person, firm,
partnership or corporation. [Amended 2-14-2012 by Ord. No.
O-12-001]
C. Fee. Upon approval by the Board of Aldermen, a fee of $50 shall be paid
by the applicant to the City Clerk prior to the issuance of the license.
§ 220-2 OZONE-DEPLETING COMPOUNDS § 220-4
208:893
§ 220-5. Transaction records. [Amended 8-12-2008 by Ord. No.
O-08-26; 2-14-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-001]
Every pawnbroker and secondhand dealer shall keep and maintain a
complete written record of each such purchase. This record, which must be
kept on file for seven years, shall be in the English language and include
a full and accurate detailed description, including serial numbers, of the
item or items purchased, pawned or pledged; the date and time of such
transaction; the amount of money loaned and the rate of interest to be paid
on said loans; and, the full name and address of the seller or pledger.
§ 220-6. Identification of sellers required; age restriction.
[Amended 2-14-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-001]
§ 220-7. Holding period for purchases and pawns. [Amended
8-12-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-26; 2-14-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-001]
D. Display of license. Licensees shall display their current license in a
conspicuous place within the business where it may be readily viewed
by the general public.
E. Expiration; revocation. A numbered license shall be issued and continue
in full force until April 1 of each year unless revoked prior to this date
by the Board of Aldermen at any time after notice to the licensee and
hearing on the charges preferred.
A. Every pawnbroker and secondhand dealer shall require every seller or
pledger of items to produce, in person, a valid positive photographic
identification issued by a United States federal or state government
agency. The identification used must include the seller's or pledger's
full name, date of birth, and current street address. The identification
must have been issued in the past five years. The type of identification
used shall be noted on the transaction records. At no time shall a
pawnbroker or secondhand dealer accept another person's
photographic identification for any transaction. The pawnbroker or
secondhand dealer shall attach a photocopy of the identification shown
to the transaction record.
B. No pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall transact business with
anyone under 16 years of age, except when said minor is accompanied
by a parent or legal guardian who shall sign the transaction record.
A. Every pawnbroker and secondhand dealer shall retain possession of all
property purchased for a thirty-day period subsequent to the purchase
thereof; provided, however, that any such item may be disposed of by
the purchaser within such thirty-day period with the written permission
of the Chief of Police.
B. Property, including jewelry, shall be maintained in the condition in
which it was received, and shall not be altered, damaged, or destroyed
§ 220-4 NASHUA CODE § 220-7
208:894
§ 220-8. Reports of transactions. [Amended 2-14-2012 by Ord. No.
O-12-001]
§ 220-9. Inspection of records and premises. [Amended 2-14-2012
by Ord. No. O-12-001]
Pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers shall retain each original transaction
record in his or her possession for a period of seven years. The records,
along with the respective property, shall be kept or stored in or upon the
licensed premises. The licensed premises may be inspected at any time
by a duly authorized police officer. New Hampshire RSA 398:13 and 322:7
provide for this inspection process and RSA 398:14 and 322:8 make any
willful obstruction of the police a misdemeanor.
§ 220-10. Violations and penalties.
during the holding period for any purpose. Property must be
maintained at the dealer's licensed location during the holding period.
C. Pawnbrokers shall retain nonperishable items for at least four months
and perishable items for at least one month after the date of deposit for
said article(s).
A. Pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers shall electronically file
documentation of all transaction records to the Chief of Police, within
24 hours of the end of said dealer's business day in which the
transaction occurred. If during any week a pawnbroker or secondhand
dealer has not purchased any items, he or she shall make a report of
such fact to the Chief of Police on or before 10:00 a.m. of the first
business day of the following week.
B. All property purchased shall be photographed with a digital camera or
digital image scanner. A color digital image shall be saved in a manner
to allow it to be electronically sent to the Nashua Police Department as
part of the transaction record. The complete transaction record shall be
submitted on one standard-size page. The transaction record shall
include a color image of the identification used by the seller,
information documented by the dealer, and a clear color image of the
item(s) purchased. Miscellaneous amounts of jewelry will be separated
and not photographed in one aggregate pile. The image shall be sent
electronically in a PDF or JPG format.
C. Every pawnbroker and secondhand dealer shall use the transaction
record form prescribed by the City of Nashua.
A. Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding
$100 per day.
B. The Board of Aldermen may, independently or upon recommendation
from the Chief of Police, suspend or revoke said license for any violation
of this chapter or reasons it deems to be in the best interest of the City,
§ 220-7 OZONE-DEPLETING COMPOUNDS § 220-10
208:895
Chapter 225
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 134.
Drug-free zones — See Ch. 140.
Noise — See Ch. 201.
after a hearing. Offenses which may result in the suspension or
revocation of said license include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Violation of any provision of this chapter; or
(2) Violation of any statute of the State of New Hampshire or any other
state or territory of the United States relating to the licensed
business.
C. Notice of the suspension or revocation will be made, in writing, to the
owner(s) of the business within five business days of said hearing.
D. The provisions of this chapter shall be severable, and if any phrase,
clause, sentence or provision of these regulations shall, for any reason,
be held invalid or unconstitutional, the validity of the remainder of
these regulations shall not be affected thereby.
§ 220-10 NASHUA CODE § 220-10
225:896
ARTICLE I
Shoeshining
[Adopted NRO 1975, T. 15, § 403 (Sec. 14-17 of the 1987 Code)]
§ 225-1. Age restriction.
No child under 10 years of age shall shine shoes or solicit the shining of
shoes in any street or public place in the City.
§ 225-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 225-1
225:897

ARTICLE II
Vandalism
[Adopted NRO, T. 16, § 201 (Sec. 14-61 of the 1987 Code)]
§ 225-2. Vandalism defined. [Amended 7-12-1978 by Ord. No.
O-78-45]
A person commits vandalism when he engages in the willful or malicious
destruction, injury, disfigurement or defacement of any public or private
property, real or personal, without the consent of the owner or person
having custody of the property. Such an offense shall include but is not
limited to actions by cutting, tearing, breaking, marking, painting or
drawing when such actions are intended to or have the effect of causing
damage to property.
§ 225-3. Restitution.
In the case of an unemancipated minor residing with a parent or legal
guardian the minor, upon order of the court, may be required to submit full
restitution to the victim or victims of such vandalism by monetary payment
or property repairs. If the unemancipated minor residing with such parent
or legal guardian fails to submit to or make full restitution to the victim or
victims of vandalism that parent or legal guardian may upon order of the
court be ordered to pay restitution in the amount of not more than $10,000
as provided for under RSA 169-B:45.
§ 225-2 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 225-3
225:899

ARTICLE III
Urinating and Defecating in Public
[Adopted 10-14-2003 by Ord. No. O-03-192 (Sec. 14-1 of the 1987
Code)]
§ 225-4. Findings.
It is hereby determined that urinating and defecating in public places other
than in public facilities intended for those purposes are detrimental to the
public health, welfare and safety, erode the integrity of the environment,
annoy or disturb reasonable people of normal sensibilities, disrupt the
quality of life, and are contrary to the public interest of the citizens of
Nashua.
§ 225-5. Prohibition.
No person shall urinate or defecate in a public place other than in public
facilities intended for those purposes.
§ 225-4 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 225-5
225:901
Chapter 231
PEDDLING, SOLICITING AND VENDING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conservation Commission — See Ch. 12, Art.
I.
Soliciting in parks and recreation areas — See
Ch. 215.
Pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers — See
Ch. 220.
§ 225-5 NASHUA CODE § 225-5
225:902
ARTICLE I
Dissemination of Literature and Solicitation of Funds
[Adopted 4-12-1988 by Ord. No. O-88-21 (Sec. 19-1 of the 1987
Code)]
§ 231-1. Dissemination of materials regulated.
In recognition of essential fundamental constitutional rights of free speech,
religious exercise and unfettered participation in the political process, all
requiring the exchange of ideas, the dissemination of political, charitable,
religious or similar materials of a printed or other nature are permitted
on all sidewalks of the City, and are permitted on all public lands of the
City during such times as said lands are open to use by the general public.
Dissemination of materials as aforesaid is prohibited within the portions of
all streets of the City travelled by automotive traffic for safety reasons, and
within all publicly owned buildings, in order to minimize the disruption upon
governmental functions and to enhance the neutrality and nonpartisan or
nonsectarian character of governmental offices and agencies, although said
dissemination is not prohibited upon the lands on which said publicly owned
buildings have been erected, in accordance with this article.
§ 231-2. Additional requirements to remain applicable.
Nothing contained in this article shall modify any requirements for
registration or licensure, or other requirements pertinent to the manner
in which a permitted activity is carried out, whether germane to elections,
polling places, charitable solicitation as regulated by § 231-9, or state law,
or encumbrances of streets and sidewalks as set forth in this chapter, or
otherwise pertinent to the activities generally described or referred to in
this article.
§ 231-3. Solicitation of funds.
The solicitation of funds for use by any organization of a political, charitable
or similar nature in connection with the dissemination of materials as set
forth in this article is permitted so long as said solicitation is otherwise
lawful under federal and state law, and all applicable local ordinances
and necessary registrations, permits or approvals have been obtained in
advance, if required in advance. It shall be the responsibility of any person
or organization soliciting funds as set forth in this section to comply with all
of said pertinent laws and to reasonably demonstrate, with any necessary
documentation, compliance therewith, upon request by any police officer or
other authorized official of the City, within 24 hours of said request. This
section shall not be construed to require the production of any information
or documents which may not be lawfully required by the City in order
to effectuate the purposes of this section, which are to ensure that all
pertinent laws and ordinances have been complied with.
§ 231-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 231-4
225:903
§ 231-4. Intent.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to be a regulation by the City
in any way of the content of protected speech, or a regulation to restrain
the same in advance, or to prohibit the dissemination of constitutionally
protected political, charitable, religious or similar materials. It is the
purpose of this article to reasonably regulate the manner of dissemination
of the materials covered hereby so that the rights of all other citizens using
public streets, sidewalks and lands, or conducting business with the City or
its agencies, will be reasonably protected from undue influence, harassment
or annoyance in the exercise of their rights without depriving them of
opportunities to expose themselves to the views of others or to receive
materials or to make contributions that they may freely wish to make. This
article shall not be construed to expand upon, affect or permit any greater
right of any person or organization to distribute commercial information
or materials than is otherwise permitted under federal, state and local law
exclusive of this article.
§ 231-5. Distribution on sidewalks.
Any person or organization may distribute political, charitable religious
or similar materials on any public sidewalk within the City, provided that
access to any entranceway to any building is not restricted and free passage
of pedestrians upon said sidewalk is not infringed. Access to an
entranceway shall be deemed not to be restricted if the dissemination of
materials is not conducted within five feet of either side of said entranceway
at its widest points. Free passage of pedestrians upon a sidewalk shall be
deemed not to be infringed if a passageway having a width of five feet
remains clear at all times, said passageway being within the inner and
outer paved edges of said sidewalk. For sidewalks narrower than five feet,
a passageway of two feet shall be deemed reasonable. No table, chair,
sign, stool, booth, kiosk, display, billboard or other similar article or device
shall be placed upon any sidewalk in connection with the dissemination
of materials as set forth in this article, unless the person or organization
disseminating the same shall have first obtained a permit therefor from the
Department of Public Works in accordance with the procedures of § 285-9 of
the City Code. Any person or organization aggrieved by a decision pertinent
to said permit by the Department of Public Works may appeal to the Board
of Public Works, and thence to the Board of Aldermen, if said person or
organization remains aggrieved.
§ 231-6. Distribution on public lands.
Any person or organization may distribute political, charitable, religious or
similar materials on any public land within the City. The same regulations
shall pertain thereto as shall pertain to the dissemination of said materials
upon public sidewalks as set forth in § 231-5 above. In addition, said
dissemination shall be prohibited in or upon public lands in areas where the
general public is not permitted, and at times when the general public is not
§ 231-4 NASHUA CODE § 231-6
225:904
permitted in said areas or upon said lands. Said dissemination is prohibited
within all public buildings of the City, its departments or agencies.
§ 231-7. Distribution in vicinity of City Hall.
A. Due to the unique layout of the City Hall and its use by all of the citizens
of Nashua to conduct their public business with the City, so that it is
more greatly used than many buildings in that it houses many City
departments frequently consulted by many citizens, the special rules
set forth in this section have been established for the dissemination of
materials in the vicinity of the City Hall. No such dissemination shall be
permitted inside of the City Hall buildings.
B. Any person or organization may distribute political, charitable,
religious or similar materials at the City Hall and upon the land upon
which it is constructed, including the parks to the immediate south and
north of the City Hall, in accordance with the requirements of this
section, except that said dissemination of materials shall be effected
around the two entrances to the City Hall as follows:
(1) East (Main Street) entrance. No dissemination of materials shall be
permitted on the front steps of the City Hall. An unobstructed
pathway at least 10 feet in width shall be maintained from the foot
of the stairway leading to this entrance and running to the east side
of the Kennedy Memorial in front of the building.
(2) West (Elm Street) entrance. No dissemination of materials shall be
permitted under the overhang at the west end of the building or
along the two brick sidewalks running east-west to the two parking
lots to the west of the City Hall building. Dissemination of materials
shall be permitted along the other sidewalks to the west of the City
Hall building, so long as it is not conducted within five feet of the
westernmost terminus of the center handrails along the
aforementioned sidewalks and does not restrict passage along said
sidewalks as set forth in § 231-5 above.
(3) North (alley) entrances. The three entrances along the alley to the
north of City Hall are not public entrances, and the alley is narrow
and used for parking and operation of delivery vehicles. No
dissemination of materials shall be permitted at any of these three
entrances or within the alley, from the start of the sidewalk in the
east to the northernmost corner of the City Hall building along the
alley in the west.
(4) Tables, booths, etc. Tables, chairs, signs, stools, booths, kiosks,
displays, billboards, and other similar articles or devices are
prohibited in connection with the dissemination of materials,
unless a permit shall first be obtained therefor in accordance with
§ 231-5 above and § 285-9.
§ 231-6 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 231-8
225:905
§ 231-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be punished as
provided in § 1-12 of the City Code and/or as may be authorized by state
law, including the Criminal Code, equitable relief or otherwise.
§ 231-8 NASHUA CODE § 231-8
225:906
ARTICLE II
Vendors, Flea Markets and Street Fairs
[Adopted 4-27-2004 by Ord. No. O-04-07 (Secs. 12-56 to 12-69 of
the 1987 Code)]
§ 231-9. Solicitation for charities; permit; raffles; violations and
penalties.
§ 231-10. Definitions.
As used in this article:
FLEA MARKETS AND SHOWS EXHIBITING WARES FOR SALE — A group
of at least five vendors operating in one structure in accordance with
the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance84 and other pertinent City
requirements.
HAWKER or PEDDLER — Any person, either principal, agent or employee,
who goes from town to town or from place to place in the same town, or
from a temporary place of business, selling or bartering, or carrying for sale
or barter or exposing therefore any goods, wares, merchandise, or services.
ITINERANT MAGAZINE SALESMAN — Any person, either principal, agent
or employee, who engages in a temporary or transient business in this
City of traveling from house to house soliciting orders for magazine
subscriptions or renewals.
A. No person shall solicit financial aid or assistance from the public
offering in return therefore any emblem tag, flower or like symbol;
solicit funds for charitable purposes; or sell tags, flowers or other
objects for charitable purposes unless a charitable solicitation permit
for such activity is obtained from the City Clerk. Charitable solicitation
permits shall be issued for a two-day period only. Payment of a fee for a
charitable solicitation permit is not required. The holder of such a
permit is not authorized, by receipt of a permit, to enter upon private
property for charitable solicitation without the consent of the owner of
that property.
B. The authority for the issuance of raffle permits granted under RSA
287-A to the Mayor and Aldermen is hereby granted to the City Clerk.
All such permits shall be issued by the City Clerk in accordance with the
provisions of RSA 287-A, as it is now written or may hereafter be
amended. The fee for each raffle permit shall be $10. All raffle tickets
will show the raffle license number.
C. If any person shall violate the provisions of this section, he or she shall
be punished as provided in § 1-12 of the City Code for each offense and
in addition thereto shall forfeit all sums taken in violation of this section
to the use of the City.
84.Editor's Note: See Ch. 190, Land Use, Part 2.
§ 231-9 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 231-10
225:907
ITINERANT PHOTOGRAPHER — Any person, either principal, agent or
employee, who engages in a temporary or transient business in this City,
whether such person conducts their business by traveling from house to
house taking pictures in a house, or operating from a hotel room, store or
other place of business, or otherwise, and who performs any of the following
acts of the photography business: solicits orders, takes pictures, assists in
the taking of pictures, shows proofs, delivers pictures, or makes collections
for pictures sold.
ITINERANT VENDOR — Any person, either principal, agent or employee,
who engages in a temporary or transient business in this state, either
in one locality or traveling from place to place, selling goods, wares and
merchandise from stock or by sample for future delivery, and who, for the
purpose of carrying on such business, hires or occupies any building or
structure for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise
or samples.
STREET FAIR — A special event conducted within a limited, defined
geographic area for a period of time not to exceed four days.
VENDOR — Flea market and shows exhibiting wares for sale, hawker,
peddler, itinerant magazine salesman, itinerant photographer, itinerant
vendor or street fair.
§ 231-11. Vendor's license.
A. No person shall act as a vendor within the City of Nashua unless
licensed to do so.
B. Each applicant for a vendor's license shall apply in writing to the City
Clerk upon a form to be determined by the City Clerk. The application
shall include:
(1) The name, home and business address of the applicant, and the
name and the address of the owner, if other than the applicant, of
the business and of any stand or motor vehicle to be used in the
vending;
(2) A description of the source and type of food, beverage,
merchandise, or service to be sold and in the case of products of
farm or orchard, whether produced or grown by the applicant;
(a) A separate food service license (in addition to the vendor's
license) must be obtained from the Environmental Health
Department for the sale of various food items.
(3) A description or photograph of any stand or motor vehicle to be
used for the vending, including the license and registration number
of any motor vehicle used for the vending; and
(4) A certificate of insurance that the applicant has been issued an
insurance policy by an insurance company licensed to do business
in the state, protecting the licensee and the City from all claims for
§ 231-10 NASHUA CODE § 231-11
225:908
damages to property and bodily injury, including death which may
arise from operations under or in connection with the license.
Such policy shall include coverage that the Insurance Department
deems necessary. Exceptions to certificates of insurance may be
considered on a case-by-case basis by the Insurance Department
to modify guidelines to meet the exposures presented in a specific
activity. Factors to consider in determining the required insurance
coverage include but are not limited to the use of vehicles, the
potential audience, and the history of the applicant. The required
insurance coverage may include:
(a) The City is named as additional insured for all liability arising
out of the operation by or on behalf of the named insured, and
this policy protects the additional insured, its officers, agents
and employees against liability for bodily injuries, deaths, or
property damage or destruction arising in any respect, directly
or indirectly, in the performance of the license;
(b) Inclusion of more than one insured shall not operate to impair
the rights of one insured against another insured, and the
coverages afforded shall apply as though separate policies had
been issued to each insured;
(c) The insurance provided herein is primary, and no insurance
held or owned by the City shall be called upon to contribute to
a loss;
(d) The coverage provided by this policy shall not be reduced or
cancelled without 30 days written notice given to the City; and
(e) The licensee shall submit certificates of insurance
countersigned by a state licensed agent prior to the effective
date of the license.
C. All vendors and licensees required by law to have City health licenses,
state licenses or licenses of any other type, are responsible for
obtaining said licenses and shall be considered in violation of this
article in the event that they are found to be without said licenses. All
health licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous place.
D. As a condition of licensure, and at any time during the license period,
an applicant or licensee may be subject to additional restrictions or
conditions ordered by the Building, Health, Police or Fire Departments
as may be warranted by any circumstances pertaining to a specific
vendor or vending site or to prevent any nuisance related to or caused
by the licensed activity. A "nuisance," in addition to its common law
meaning, is anything that endangers life, health or safety, gives offense
to senses, violates common standards of decency or obstructs the
reasonable use, enjoyment, or habitation of any property.
E. The license may limit the amount of space to be occupied by the vendor.
§ 231-11 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 231-11
225:909
§ 231-12. Additional regulations.
§ 231-13. Prohibited acts.
No vendor shall:
F. Any person who employs others to sell, solicit or take orders under a
permit issued under this article, as well as the employer of a group of
persons selling, soliciting or taking orders without a permit, shall be
held responsible and liable for the acts of his or her employees and shall
be deemed in violation of this article in the same manner as though he
or she were the actual employee in question.
G. The vendor's license fee shall be $10 for each day less than one week,
or $25 for one week, or $100 for the year.
H. All annual licenses issued under this section shall expire December 31
of each year.
A. All licenses shall be displayed in a conspicuous place at all times during
the operation of the vending business.
B. Ice cream and/or canteen truck vendors shall be permitted in the
residential zones of the City in accordance with any ordinances of the
City of Nashua.
C. Vendors at special events licensed under Chapter 88, Article III
(Theaters and Shows) or at street fairs, shall comply with all applicable
provisions of this article and rules and regulations issued pursuant to it
and pay all fees as required by the person coordinating the special
event.
D. Support equipment and accessories shall be self-contained within the
retail stand when the vendor is not present. Support equipment and
accessories shall not be placed so as to impede pedestrian or vehicular
traffic. In no instance shall the stand, support equipment and
accessories extend beyond an area of nine feet by 20 feet or beyond the
space defined by the license, assigned by a street fair licensee, or as
established within the Downtown District.
A. Directly or indirectly, cause or permit the public streets, sidewalks or
places to be littered with papers, wrappings or other debris or refuse
where the littering results from the conduct of his or her business;
B. Use or operate any loudspeaker, public address system, radio, sound
amplifier or similar device to attract the attention of the public;
C. Operate in any metered parking area or no-parking zone, unless
otherwise provided;
D. Operate in any area where his or her operation will be deemed by the
Police Chief or Fire Chief, or his or her designee, to endanger or
§ 231-11 NASHUA CODE § 231-13
225:910
§ 231-14. Downtown District.
inconvenience the general public, including but not limited to sidewalk
and roadside areas;
E. Operate within 40 feet of driveways, intersections, bus stops or
crosswalks;
F. Set up a parking lot selling operation without the written permission of
the owner of the property on which the operation is located, and such
written permission shall be available for display upon request at all
times;
G. Operate in a manner that obstructs or prevents the free and convenient
use of any street or sidewalk by pedestrian or vehicular traffic;
H. Sell, or offer to solicit for sale, any goods or merchandise in any park,
playground, pool area, or other City recreational facility, without a
special permit, nor give any entertainment or exhibition except under
the direction, or by permission, of the Superintendent, as provided for
under Article I of Chapter 215, Parks and Recreation Areas;
I. Sell, or offer to solicit for sale, any goods or merchandise, nor give any
entertainment or exhibition in any land or water areas under the
jurisdiction of the Conservation Commission of the City, as provided for
under Article I of Chapter 12;
J. Place or expose for sale or advertisement, merchandise of any
description or other article on any sidewalk of the City except in
conjunction with a properly licensed street fair or when such activity
occurs as an incidental part of the retail sales activity of a merchant
regularly conducting business from a permanent building where such
sales are conducted on the premises of the building and in close
proximity to said building, and the person engaged in such sidewalk
displays or sales has obtained a license for a sidewalk obstruction as
required under § 285-9;
K. Enter any house, building or premises where there is posted on the
front of the house, building or premises a written notice stating that
vendors are not desired, unless the vendor has received the prior
consent of the occupant; or
L. Display any flashing or changing (electronic) sign.
A. This section shall apply to the Downtown District shown on the
Downtown Outdoor Vending District Map filed with the City Clerk by
the Economic Development Department and adopted as a part of this
article by reference. Said map may be revised periodically by the
Economic Development Department. The area described as the
Downtown District shall include all street area, sidewalks and areas in
front of all properties, buildings and vacant lands fronting on said
boundaries.
§ 231-13 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 231-14
225:911
§ 231-15. Special rules for flea markets and shows exhibiting wares
for sale.
(1) The map shall include a master list of all sites within the Downtown
District that shall be available to street vendors, which may
generally include all, or a portion of the following areas:
(a) Railroad Square;
(b) Main Street Bridge;
(c) City Hall Plaza;
(d) Public portion of Indian Head Plaza; and
(e) Superior Court Plaza.
(2) In addition, the map shall set forth the following information for
each area:
(a) The number of vendors to be allowed;
(b) Restrictions as to the type of product to be allowed (e.g., food
only, nonfood only, or both food and nonfood);
(c) Any restrictions as to days or times allowed;
(d) Whether the site is seasonal or yearlong; and
(e) Any other special conditions that may apply.
A. The fee for additional vendors over 10 shall be $5 per vendor per month
for a minimum of one month, for flea markets and shows licensed for
four or more days per month, payable in advance.
B. Licenses for qualifying flea markets and shows exhibiting wares for sale
may be issued by the City Clerk. All fees therefor shall be paid to the
Clerk in advance of any month to which the license pertains, or the
same shall be void. Licenses issued shall be issued to one named
individual or organization who shall be the promoter of the flea market
or show exhibiting wares for sale and who shall be responsible therefor,
and shall be responsible for compliance with all terms, conditions and
requirements of the license and pertinent law.
C. Said person shall additionally:
(1) Keep a register of all vendors participating in the flea market or
show exhibiting wares for sale including such information as the
City Clerk may require from time to time.
(2) File said register with said Clerk on a monthly basis, on or before a
date to be specified by the Clerk.
(3) Assure that vendors sell only goods permitted by law.
§ 231-14 NASHUA CODE § 231-15
225:912
§ 231-16. Special rules for transient or itinerant magazine
salesmen.
§ 231-17. Special rules for street fairs.
(4) Assure that vendors conduct themselves in a lawful and
commercially reasonable manner.
(5) Take such actions as shall be necessary in order to carry out his or
her responsibilities hereunder.
A. No person shall engage in the business of an itinerant magazine
salesman except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
B. Each application for an itinerant magazine salesman's license shall also
include the name and address of all organizations by which he or she is
employed or receives commissions or compensation of any kind;
whether he or she has ever before applied for a license under this
section; and verification of identity. The license shall not be transferable
and must be presented to any party being solicited for magazine orders
or to any police officer upon request.
C. Any person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this
section shall have his or her license revoked and no license shall be
issued to such person for a period of three years.
A. A street fair vendor license shall limit the use of such geographic area
by any hawker, peddler, or any other such vendor during the period of
the street fair license except such owners or tenants of buildings, rooms
or structures within the geographic area, and except in such persons as
the holder of the street fair vendor license authorizes to be in the
geographic area; provided, however, that a business occupant of a
storefront on the ground floor of a building, located within said
geographic area, may apply for an exemption to the street fair vendor
license restrictions by: first, obtaining a license to obstruct the sidewalk
as provided under § 285-9, for the sale of items or promotion of services
which are related to the regular and recurrent business activity of the
business in operation at that location; and second, applying for a street
fair license exemption by delivering to the City Clerk a copy of the
license obtained under § 285-9, along with a letter describing the
products to be sold or the services to be promoted, no less than 72
hours prior to the event. If the City Clerk determines that the sale of
items or promotion of services is related to the regular and recurrent
business activity of the ground floor business in operation at that
location, he or she shall issue a street fair license exemption upon
payment of a $10 fee and shall notify the street fair vendor license
applicant within 24 hours or granting said exemption. The person
obtaining the exemption must comply with all applicable state and local
restrictions, rules, regulations, ordinances and statutes.
§ 231-15 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 231-17
225:913
§ 231-18. Sunday activities.
It shall be lawful on Sunday to engage in any play, game or sport to the
maximum extent permitted by state law.
B. The licensee shall have the authority to issue sublicenses upon payment
of a fee not to exceed $150 for the period of the street fair vendor
license, and shall have the authority to designate areas of use by the
sublicensee.
C. The licensee shall have full discretion in issuing sublicenses, such
discretion to be exercised taking into consideration the purpose, nature
and general atmosphere of the proposed street fair for which the
exclusive license was issued, provided that the licensee and
sublicensees shall, at all times, comply with the ordinances, rules,
regulations, and conditions under which the license was issued.
D. A written notice of intent to apply for a street fair license must be
submitted at least 14 days prior to the date(s) for which the license will
be requested.
E. All applications for street fair licenses shall include a petition signed by
50% of the ground-floor occupants of any and all buildings, structures
or rooms to be included in the geographic area which is the subject of
the proposed exclusive license, or by an organization or professional
association whose members include 50% of the ground-floor occupants
of any and all buildings, structures or rooms to be included in the
geographic area, or a combination of the two.
F. All applications shall include a copy of the applicant's state license(s)
and/or license from the Environmental Health Department, if such
licenses are required by statute or ordinance.
G. The street fair vendor licensee shall make suitable provisions to allow
for solicitation and dissemination of materials by charitable and
nonprofit groups.
H. The City shall be paid a fee of $5 per sublicensee, and the licensee shall
provide a list of all sublicensees and a map detailing the assigned
locations of all sublicensees to the City Clerk no less than 72 hours prior
to the event.
I. The map detailing the assigned locations of all sublicensees is subject
to the review of the Mayor or his or her designee and may be subject to
additional restrictions or conditions ordered by the Mayor or his or her
designee, the City Clerk, or the Building, Health, Police or Fire
Departments as may be warranted by any circumstances pertaining to a
specific vendor or vending site or to prevent any nuisance related to or
caused by the licensed activity.
§ 231-17 NASHUA CODE § 231-19
225:914
§ 231-19. Sunday sales.
It shall be lawful on Sunday to keep any shop, warehouse, cellar, restaurant
or workshop open for the reception of company, and to expose for sale any
merchandise whatever.
§ 231-20. Exemptions. [Amended 2-26-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-07]
The following are exempt from the provisions of this article:
§ 231-21. Violations and penalties.
A. Persons enrolled in elementary and secondary schools conducting such
solicitations under the direction and guidance of the school or other
charitable organization.
B. Individuals under the age of 16 years who vend Girl Scout cookies,
candy, lemonade, or similar items.
C. Any person issued a charitable solicitation permit under § 231-9.
D. A vendor activity or event, sponsored or cosponsored by the City of
Nashua, shall be subject to licensure. However, payment of a fee is not
required.
E. A vendor covered under this chapter, who sells only Christmas trees,
wreaths, and/or boughs. [Added 11-25-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-45]
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be
subject to punishment as provided in § 1-12 of the City Code.
B. Notwithstanding other provisions of this article, licenses issued under
this article may be suspended or revoked by the City Clerk after notice
for any of the following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the
application for license;
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the course of
carrying on the vending;
(3) Any violation of this article;
(4) Any violation of applicable municipal building, zoning, health,
police and fire rules, regulations, and ordinances and applicable
statutes, rules and regulations of the state;
(5) Any violation of a restriction or condition placed on the license; or
(6) Vending or activity that endangers the public health, welfare or
safety.
C. Upon receipt of notification of denial or pending suspension or
revocation of a vendor's license, or for the issuance of new or revised
§ 231-19 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 231-21
225:915
§ 231-22. License remains property of City.
Licenses granted under this article shall remain the property of the City
and are to be returned to the office of the City Clerk during a period
of suspension, after revocation, or if the person, firm, corporation, or
association holding the vendor license ceases to operate.
conditions or restrictions on the licensee from the office of the City
Clerk, the applicant or licensee may request, in writing, a hearing
before the personnel and Administrative Affairs Committee of the Board
of Aldermen. The request must be made within 10 days of the date of
notice. The Personnel and Administrative Affairs Committee shall set a
hearing date, notifying the applicant or licensee of said hearing date.
The hearing will be held at the earliest possible date and the matter
shall be decided within a reasonable time. The applicant or licensee will
be notified of the decision of the Committee, and the decision by the
Committee to deny, restrict, suspend, or revoke a vendor license shall
be final.
§ 231-21 NASHUA CODE § 231-22
225:916
Chapter 248
REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED
§ 248-1. Removal of doors and locks required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building or
dwelling, in a place accessible to the public, any abandoned, unattended or
discarded refrigerator or other container of any kind which has an airtight
door or lock which cannot be opened from the inside, without first removing
such door or lock from said refrigerator or container.
Chapter 255
SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 270.
§ 231-22 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 248-1
248:917

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 255-1. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
used in this chapter shall be as follows:
ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean
Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
APPLICANT — Any person requesting approval to discharge industrial
wastes or domestic wastewater into the publicly owned treatment works
(POTW).
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The Environmental Protection Agency Region I
Administrator.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD5) — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of the wastewater under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C., expressed in milligrams per liter.
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Board of Health as established in Sections 78
through 81 of the City Charter, or its authorized agents or representatives.
BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS — The Board of Public Works as established
in Sections 59 through 63 of the City Charter, or its authorized agents or
representatives.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives discharge from soil, waste or other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer
termination.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to public sewer
or other place of disposal.
BYPASS — The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of
an industrial user's wastewater treatment facility.
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any regulations containing
pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the Environmental Protection
Agency in accordance with 33 U.S.C. § 1317 of the Clean Water Act which
apply to a specific category of industrial users and which are found in the
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40 - Protection of Environment, Chapter
1 - Environmental Protection Agency, Subchapter N - Effluent Guidelines
and Standards.
CITY — The City of Nashua, or its authorized agents or representatives.
CITY ENGINEER — The Engineer of the City or an authorized agent or
representative.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer receiving both wastewater and surface
runoff.
§ 255-1 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 255-1
248:919
COMMERCIAL USER — Any retail store, restaurant, office building, laundry
or other private business or service establishment.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — The sample resulting from the combination of
individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an
increment of either flow or time.
CONTROL AUTHORITY — The City of Nashua, or its authorized agents or
representatives.
CORPORATION COUNSEL — The City Solicitor/Corporation Counsel for the
City or an authorized agent or representative.
DILUTION — The watering down of a discharge.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Public Works Division of the City or an
authorized agent or representative.
DOMESTIC WASTEWATER — Water-carried household or toilet wastes
discharged from any improved property, excluding groundwater, surface
water and stormwater.
EPA — The Environmental Protection Agency of the United States.
EXCESSIVE — Amounts or concentrations of any constituent of wastewater
which in the judgment of the City:
EXISTING SOURCE — Any source of discharge, the construction or
operation of which commenced prior to the publication of proposed
categorical pretreatment standards which will be applicable to such source
if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with 33 U.S.C.
§ 1317 of the Act.
FRONTAGE — The side of a property which is common to the side line of a
street.
Will adversely affect any part or function of the publicly owned
treatment works;
A.
Will be present in abnormally high quantities in the sludge produced at
the wastewater treatment facility;
B.
Will be harmful to a wastewater treatment process or interfere with the
effective operation of the wastewater treatment facility;
C.
Which cannot be removed in the wastewater treatment facility of the
City to the degree required to meet the limited stream classification
standard of the receiving water, or otherwise affects the ability of the
wastewater treatment facility to meet any required effluent or influent
parameters;
D.
Which can endanger life, health, the environment, or public property;
or
E.
F. Which constitutes a nuisance.
§ 255-1 NASHUA CODE § 255-1
248:920
GARBAGE — Animal or vegetable wastes resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking or serving of food.
GOVERNMENTAL USER — Any legislative, judicial, administrative or
regulatory activity of federal, state or local government.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a onetime
basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream and without
consideration of time.
HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer of the Environmental Health
Department of the City or an authorized agent or representative.
HUMAN EXCRETA — Human fecal or urinary discharge and includes any
waste containing such material.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property located within the City upon which
there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation,
occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which structure
domestic wastewater or industrial wastes shall be or may be discharged.
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — Any pollutant, other than biochemical
oxygen demand, suspended solids, coliform bacteria or additional pollutants
identified in the wastewater treatment facility's National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System permit, which the wastewater treatment
facility was not designed to treat or which it does not remove to a
substantial degree.
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A sewer disposal system with
the source of wastes limited to sewage originating from or on an individual
property, dwelling or premise, designed and constructed to receive, treat
and dispose of liquidborne wastes in such a manner as to retain settleable
solids in a liquid type tank and to discharge the liquid portion in an
approved manner to an adequate disposal area. Examples include, but are
not limited to, septic tanks with soil absorption systems, incinerator type
toilets and holding tank systems.
INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGE — The introduction of nondomestic pollutants
into the publicly owned treatment works from any nondomestic source
regulated under 33 U.S.C. § 1317 of the Act.
INDUSTRIAL USER — Any room, group of rooms, building or other
enclosure used or intended for use in the operation of one or more business
enterprise for manufacturing, processing, cleaning, laundering, assembling
or preparing any produce, commodity or article from which any process
waste, as distinct from domestic wastewater, may be discharged. Industrial
user shall include any government nonresidential user of the wastewater
system as identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972,
Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented, under
the following divisions: Division A, Agricultural, Forestry and Fishing;
Division B, Mining; Division D, Manufacturing; Division E, Transportation,
Communications, Electric, Gas and Sanitary; and Division I, Services.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any and all waste and pollutants discharged from
any industrial establishment, other than domestic wastewater.
§ 255-1 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 255-1
248:921
INSTITUTIONAL USER — Any social, charitable, religious or educational
activity such as schools, churches, hospitals, nursing homes, and similar
institutions.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the publicly
owned treatment works, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge
processes, use or disposal; or is a cause of a violation of the publicly
owned treatment works' National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
permit or a cause of the prevention of sewage sludge disposal in compliance
with any of the following statutory or regulatory provisions: 33 U.S.C.
§ 1345 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.;
any state statutes or regulations including but not limited to state sludge
management plans; the Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C. § 7401 et seq.; the Toxic
Substances Control Act, 15 U.S.C. § 2601 et seq.; the Marine Protection,
Research, and Sanctuaries Act, 16 U.S.C. § 1431 et seq., § 1447 et seq.,
33 U.S.C. § 1401 et seq., and § 2801 et seq.; Code of Federal Regulations,
Title 40 - Protection of Environment, Chapter 1 - Environmental Protection
Agency, Subchapter O - Sewage Sludge, Part 503 Standards for the Use or
Disposal of Sewage Sludge; or any other state or federal requirements for
sludge use and disposal.
MEDICAL WASTE — Isolation waste, infectious agents, human blood or
blood products, pathological waste, sharps, needles, body parts,
contaminated bedding, garments or gloves, surgical waste, potentially
contaminated laboratory waste, dialysis waste, or other similar
waste.[Amended 2-26-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-07]
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
PERMIT — The document issued by the Environmental Protection Agency
designed to control all discharges of pollutants from point sources within
United States waterways.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet, including but not limited to, storm sewers
and combined sewer overflows, which flow into watercourses, ponds,
drainage areas, ditches, lakes or other bodies of surface water or
groundwater.
NEW SOURCE —
Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is or
may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced
after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under 33
U.S.C. § 1317 of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section,
providing that:
The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a
site which no other source is located;
(1)
The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the
process or production equipment that causes the discharges of
pollutants at an existing source; or
(2)
A.
§ 255-1 NASHUA CODE § 255-1
248:922
NEW SUBDIVISION — A subdivision whose plat or plot plan has been
approved by the Nashua Planning Board after the effective date of this
chapter.
NHDES — The New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used for cooling which does not
come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product, or finished product.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, or possession of any improved property.
PASS-THROUGH — The discharge of pollutants through the publicly owned
treatment works into surface waters in quantities or concentrations, which
alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, is a cause
of a violation of any requirement of the wastewater treatment facility's
The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining
whether these processes are substantially independent, factors
such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the
existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged
in the same general type of activity as the existing source, will be
considered.
(3)
Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results
in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does
not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the
criteria of Subsection A(2) or (3) above but otherwise alters, replaces,
or adds to existing process or production equipment.
B.
Construction of a new source has commenced if the owner or operator
has:
Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site
construction program:
Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
(a)
Significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or
facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or
installation of facilities or equipment; or
(b)
(1)
Entered into a contractual building obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its
operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase, contracts
which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and
contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not
constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph.
(2)
C.
§ 255-1 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 255-1
248:923
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit or of any other
legally required standard to which the City is subject.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, firm, company, corporation,
association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any
other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. This
definition includes all federal, state or local government entities.
pH — The reciprocal of the logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration in
grams per liter of solution.[Amended 2-26-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-07]
PHOTOPROCESSOR — Any industry with discharges resulting from the
development or printing of paper prints, slides, negatives, enlargements,
movie film, or other sensitized materials. A nonphotoprocessor is any
industry which does not meet any of the above criteria.
POLLUTANTS —
POLLUTION — Contamination or other alteration of the physical, chemical
or biological properties of any water which will or may create a public
health nuisance or render water or land harmful, detrimental or injurious
to public health, safety or welfare, or to domestic, commercial, industrial,
agricultural, recreational or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock,
animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life.
PRETREATMENT — The treatment of wastewater at its source before
discharge with the intention to remove or neutralize substances injurious
to the wastewater treatment facilities of the City or to effect a partial
reduction in the load on the wastewater treatment process.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment imposed on an industrial user, other
than a pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS — Prohibitive discharge standards,
categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits.
Dredged soil, soiled waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash,
medical waste, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical waste,
biological material, radioactive material, heat wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt or industrial and agricultural waste
discharged into any natural outlet;
A.
Toxic pollutants which are those pollutants or combination of pollutants
which are disease causing agents, or, upon assimilation into any
organism either directly from the environment, or indirectly by
ingestion through food chains, will, as determined by the
Environmental Protection Agency, cause death, disease, behavioral
abnormalities, cancer, genetic mutations, physiological malfunctions
(including malfunctions in reproduction) or physical deformities in such
organisms or their offspring; or
B.
Any substance which is subject to an effluent limitation, or
pretreatment standard, as established by federal, state or local
authorities, and is discharged in violation of said standards.
C.
§ 255-1 NASHUA CODE § 255-1
248:924
PRIVATE SEWER — Any sewer which has not been dedicated and accepted
for public use and maintenance.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — Garbage that has been shredded
to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater
than 0.5 inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer which is controlled by public authority and is
maintained by the City.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — A wastewater
treatment facility which is owned by a state or municipality, plus any
devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling,
or reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial waste of a liquid nature.
It also includes sewers, pipes and other conveyances if they convey
wastewater to a wastewater treatment facility.
RCRA — The Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
REACTIVE POLLUTANTS — Substances which, when mixed with certain
substances have the potential for chemical transformation which may
generate heat, fumes, gases or other by-products which may be hazardous
to life, health or property.
RECEIVING WATERS — Any waters receiving discharge of wastewater.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid and semisolid wastes,
including garbage, rubbish, trash, ashes, manure, street cleanings, or dead
animals, but not human excreta.
RESIDENTIAL USER — Any contributor to the City's wastewater system
whose lot, parcel, real estate or building is connected to the wastewater
system and is used for domestic dwelling purposes only.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes
from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions
together with minor quantities of groundwater, stormwater and surface
water that are not admitted intentionally.
SCREENING LEVEL — The level of concentration of a pollutant which
under baseline conditions would cause a threat to personnel exposed to
the pollutant or would cause a threat to structures of the publicly owned
treatment works. To apply limits to a particular discharge, the screening
levels must be adjusted to account for conditions at the point of discharge
which differ from baseline conditions.
SEPTAGE — Liquid and solid wastes removed from residential septic tanks.
SEPTIC TANK — A liquidtight receptacle which receives raw sewage for
storage and digestion, and which has been designed and constructed so
as to retain the solids and to allow the liquids to discharge through a
secondary system of piping into an approved form of subsurface disposal
area.
§ 255-1 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 255-1
248:925
SEWAGE — Wastes from toilets, baths, sinks, lavatories, washing machines,
or other plumbing fixtures in residences, institutions, public or business
buildings, mobile homes, water craft or other places of human habitation,
employment or recreation.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying wastewater or stormwater.
SEWERAGE SYSTEM — The pipes or conduits, pumping stations, force
mains and all other devices, appurtenances and facilities used for
collecting, treating or conducting wastewater to point of final disposal.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (SIU) — An industrial user who is:
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE (SNC) — An industrial user whose
violation or violations meet one or more of the following criteria:
A. Subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
Any other industrial user that:
Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of
wastewater (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler
blowdown wastewater);
(1)
Contributes a waste stream which makes up 5% or more of the
average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the publicly
owned pretreatment works; or
(2)
Is designated by the City as having:
A reasonable potential for adversely affecting the publicly
owned treatment works; or
(a)
(b) Violated any pretreatment standard or requirement.
(3)
B.
Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as those in
which 66% or more of all measurements taken during a six-month
period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit or the
average limit for the same pollutant parameter;
A.
Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as those violations in
which 33% or more of all measurements for each pollutant parameter
taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the
daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable
technical review criteria (TRC = 1.4 for biochemical oxygen demand,
total suspended solids, fats, oil, and grease, and 1.2 for all other
pollutants except pH);
B.
Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum
or longer term average) that the control authority determines has
caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference,
pass-through, or an endangerment of the health of publicly owned
treatment works personnel or the general public;
C.
§ 255-1 NASHUA CODE § 255-1
248:926
SLUG — Any discharge of water or wastewater:
SPILL — The release, accidental or otherwise, of any material not normally
released to the publicly owned treatment works or which by virtue of its
volume, concentration or physical or chemical characteristics, creates a
hazard to the publicly owned treatment works, any aspect of its operation
or its personnel. Such characteristics shall include, but are not limited to,
volatile, explosive, toxic, or otherwise unacceptable materials.
STANDARDS — Prohibitive discharge standards, categorical pretreatment
standards, and local limits.
STORM DRAIN or STORM SEWER — A pipe or conduit for conveying
rainwater, groundwater, subsurface water, condensate, cooling water or
other similar unpolluted water from any source.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation, and resulting therefrom, including snow melt.
SUBDIVISION — Any lot, tract or parcel of land which is hereafter divided
into two or more parcels.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Superintendent of the wastewater treatment
facility of the City or any authorized agent or representative.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS) — The total suspended matter that
floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other
liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering, and are referred to as
Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment
to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the
publicly owned treatment works' exercise of its emergency authority to
halt or prevent such discharge;
D.
Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction,
or attaining final compliance;
E.
Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required reports
such as the baseline monitoring report, ninety-day compliance report,
periodic report, or reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
F.
G. Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
Any other violation or group of violations which the control authority
determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the
local pretreatment program.
H.
In which the concentration of any given constituent or quantity of
flow exceeds more than five times the average twenty-four-hour
concentration or flows during the normal operation for a period of
duration longer than 15 minutes; or
A.
B. Which shall adversely affect the publicly owned treatment works.
§ 255-1 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 255-1
248:927
nonfilterable residue in the laboratory test prescribed in Standard Methods
for the Examination of Water and Wastewater.
UNPOLLUTED WATER — Water not containing any pollutants limited or
prohibited by the effluent standards in effect, or water whose discharge will
not cause any violation of receiving water quality standards.
USER — Any person who discharges wastewater to the publicly owned
treatment works.
WASTE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — Any system for the disposal of sewage and
other waste, including but not limited to, public or franchised sewerage
systems, individual sewage disposal systems, chemical toilets, privies,
wastewater treatment facilities, sanitary landfill operations, dumps,
incinerators or composting operations.
WASTEWATER — The spent water of a community, and may be a
combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants or institutions, together with any
groundwater, surface water or stormwater that may be present.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITY — Any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating wastewater.
WATERS — All rivers, streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses,
waterways, wells, aquifers, springs, irrigation systems, drainage systems,
groundwater and any other bodies of accumulated water, surface or
underground, natural or artificial, public or private.
WHOLESALE USER — Municipalities and other municipal corporations
which discharge wastewater from a municipal collection system into the
City wastewater system.
§ 255-2. Purpose, scope and public participation.
A. In accordance with NH RSA 149:I and other applicable federal and
state laws, this chapter regulates the use of public and private sewers;
the installation and connection of private sewers; and the discharge of
water and waste into the public sewer system.
B. It is the intent of this chapter that the City, in issuing a permit to
discharge certain waste, reserves the right to impose more stringent
requirements on any person who discharges waste or wastewater based
on the conditions actually encountered either at the point of discharge
or at the wastewater treatment facilities. Therefore, the City's issuance
of a industrial user wastewater permit, or approval of a discharge, a
system of pretreatment, or no pretreatment shall not be construed to
mean that changes cannot be required by the City in the future, even
though there maybe no change in the nature of the discharge.
C. The City will establish a public participation program and shall annually
provide public notification in the largest daily newspaper published in
the City of industrial users during the previous 12 months who were in
significant noncompliance of the applicable pretreatment requirements
§ 255-1 NASHUA CODE § 255-2
248:928
§ 255-3. Conflicting provisions.
If a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with any provision of
any zoning, building, safety, health or other ordinance or code of the City,
the ordinance or provision which in the judgment of the Director or the
Board of Health establishes the higher standard of safety and protection of
health shall prevail; and the ordinance or provision which sets the lower
standard is hereby declared to be invalid to the extent that it is found to be
in conflict with the ordinance or provision which sets the higher standard.
§ 255-4. Special agreements.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any special
agreement or arrangement between the City and any industrial concern,
provided that such agreements do not violate any requirements of existing
federal, state or local laws, regulations, or pretreatment standards or
requirements. Such agreements must be ratified by both the Board of Public
Works and the Board of Aldermen.
§ 255-5. Violations and penalties.
§ 255-6. Liability for damage.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the City for any expense, loss or damage occasioned to the City by
reason of such violation.
§ 255-7. Storage and transport of sewage, refuse, excreta and
waste.
at least once. The notification will also contain enforcement actions
taken by the City during the same 12 months. Information and data
submitted to the City under the provisions of this chapter will be
available to the public in accordance with federal and state law.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
a civil penalty not to exceed $10,000 per day of such violation, as
provided in NH RSA 149-I:6.
B. All charges and penalties shall be collected as provided in NH RSA
149-I.
C. Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the violator.
D. The Board of Public Works may adopt a schedule of fines as appropriate
from time to time.
A. All sewage, refuse, human excreta or industrial waste shall be kept,
transported, treated, disposed of, or reclaimed by a method or methods
which are in compliance with City ordinances and regulations, state
§ 255-2 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 255-7
248:929
§ 255-8. Disposal of wastewater.
§ 255-9. Authority of Board of Public Works.
The Board of Public Works shall have full authority over the construction,
installation and repair of all public sewers, and shall have full authority over
private sewer design specifications and method of construction.
statutes, and any federal regulations pertinent to disposal of wastes and
control of pollution.
B. No sewage, refuse, human excreta, or industrial waste shall be
permitted in, placed, or deposited into any water, or upon or under the
lands of the City, in any manner determined by the Board of Health to
be detrimental to the quality of the receiving body of water, or to the
use of the receiving lands, or prejudicial to the health, safety or welfare
of persons who may be affected by the resulting environmental
conditions.
C. The design of any system of waste storage, collection, transportation,
treatment, composting or disposal shall take into consideration
proximity to wells, waters, topography, water table, soil characteristics,
available area, residential concentration and present and future
property use, and shall provide for adequate handling, treatment and
disposal facilities for the amount and nature of the waste materials
anticipated, so as to prevent nuisance, pollution or hazard to the public
health, safety or welfare.
D. The Health Officer shall be permitted to make such inspections of any
place, premises, container, process equipment or vehicle used for the
collection, storage, transportation, disposal or reclamation of sewage,
refuse, human excreta or industrial waste as are necessary to insure
compliance with statutes, ordinances and regulations.
A. No person shall discharge to any natural outlet or waters within the
City any wastewater or other polluted water, except where suitable
wastewater treatment has been provided in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and Chapter 170 of the City Code.
B. The disposal of wastewater from all improved property shall be done
only in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and Chapters
105, 123, 170, and 280 of the City Code. The Building and Housing
Inspectors of the City shall report to the Environmental Health
Department all situations in which the wastewater from existing
improved property is not discharged into the public sewer or an
individual sewage disposal system approved by the Environmental
Health Department. No building permit for new construction shall be
issued unless the wastewater from the proposed improvements is
discharged into the public sewer or an individual sewage disposal
system approved by the Environmental Health Department.
§ 255-7 NASHUA CODE § 255-9
248:930
ARTICLE II
General Regulations
§ 255-10. Discretion of the Board of Public Works.
The City shall construct all sewers, sewage pumping stations and force
mains, except those constructed within the limits of the development of land
or structures, subject to the availability of funds and subject to the opinion
of the Board of Public Works that such construction is in the best interests
of the City.
§ 255-11. Construction and design specifications.
The size, slope, alignment, construction materials, and the methods to be
used in excavating, placing of pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the
trench for all public and private sewers (including building sewers) shall
conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Codes and the
specifications of the Board of Public Works.
§ 255-12. Lifting of wastewater for gravity flow.
In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow
to the public sewer, wastewater carried by such drain shall be lifted by an
approved means and discharged to the building sewer.
§ 255-13. Interceptors and traps.
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be required when, in the opinion
of the City Engineer, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
waste containing grease, oil, sand or other materials which will damage or
interfere with the operation of sewers or drains or give rise to hazardous
conditions therein. All interceptors shall be of the type and capacity
approved by the City Engineer and shall be located to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection. All interceptors shall be vented and
equipped with easily removable covers. Grease and oil interceptors shall
be constructed of impervious material capable of withstanding abrupt and
extreme changes in temperature. All interceptors shall be continuously and
efficiently maintained and operated by the owner, at the owner's expense.
In maintaining and operating these interceptors, the owner is responsible
for the proper removal and disposal of the collected material by appropriate
means, subject to review by the Superintendent. The owner shall maintain
records of dates and means of disposal of the collected material subject
to review by the Superintendent. Removal and disposal of the collected
material not performed by the owner's personnel must be performed by
currently licensed waste disposal firms.
§ 255-14. Damaging or tampering with publicly owned treatment
works.
No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment
§ 255-10 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 255-14
248:931
witch is part of the publicly owned treatment works. Any person violating
this section shall be subject to immediate arrest and charged accordingly.
§ 255-14 NASHUA CODE § 255-14
248:932
ARTICLE III
Service Permits
§ 255-15. When required.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written wastewater service permit from the City
Engineer.
§ 255-16. Types; application.
§ 255-17. Revocation.
Permits to connect with a sewer issued under §§ 255-16 and 255-30 of this
chapter may be revoked and annulled by the Board of Public Works, at
any time, for such cause as they determine sufficient, and all parties in
interest shall be held to have waived the right to claim damages on account
of such revocation, provided that such revocation shall be annulled upon
compliance with the provisions in this chapter and the rules and regulations
of the Board of Public Works.
A. There shall be two classes of wastewater service permits:
(1) Residential wastewater service permit. Issued only to users
discharging domestic wastewater; excludes all industrial users.
(2) Industrial user wastewater permit. Issued to industrial users.
B. For either type of permit, the owner or an authorized agent or
representative shall submit an application at least 90 days prior to the
proposed commencement of service. The industrial user wastewater
permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or
other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the City
Engineer or the Superintendent.
C. Proposed new discharges from residential, commercial or industrial
sources exceeding 50 population equivalents, or an increase in flow,
pollutant characteristics or concentration, must be approved by the
New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services. New systems,
extensions or replacement sanitary sewers should be designed so that
rainwater from roofs, streets and other areas, and groundwater from
foundation drains are excluded.
D. After the applicant has complied with the requirements in this chapter,
the requirements of other applicable ordinances, and any rules and
regulations as may be established by the Board of Public Works, the
permit shall be issued to the applicant by the City Engineer.
§ 255-15 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 255-17
248:933

ARTICLE IV
Construction of Sewers
§ 255-18. Construction by licensee.
No public or private sewer or connection shall be laid or constructed except
by the City or its authorized representative or a drainlayer duly licensed by
the Board of Public Works.
§ 255-19. Issuance of drainlayer's license.
§ 255-20. Inspection and approval of work.
The entire work of laying a private sewer to connect with a public sewer is
subject to the inspection of, and shall be done in a manner satisfactory to,
the Board of Public Works and the City Engineer. The drainlayer shall not
perform any of the work making the connection unless the City's Sewer or
Plumbing Inspector or authorized representative is present. The drainlayer
A. By vote of the Board of Public Works, drainlayer's licenses may be
issued to parties who apply for the privilege of laying public or private
sewers. Such applicants shall execute a bond to the City in the sum of
$1,000. The bond shall provide that it will not be changed or cancelled
except upon 30 days written notice to the Board of Public Works. To be
licensed by the Board of Public Works, the drainlayer will:
(1) Comply with the City ordinances and rules and regulations passed
by the Board of Public Works under which the work is performed;
(2) Cause the excavation to be properly guarded at all times for the
protection of the public;
(3) Properly make all connections and joints in every sewer and leave
no obstruction of any kind in any sewer; and
(4) Indemnify and hold harmless the City from any damage or cost for
which it may be liable by reason of injuries resulting from neglect,
carelessness or incompetence in constructing, repairing or
connecting any sewer, or properly fencing or lighting any
excavation or obstruction or in performing any other work
connected therewith.
B. Such licenses shall be good during the calendar year unless sooner
revoked.
C. Such licenses may be revoked and annulled by the Board of Public
Works, at any time, for such cause as they determine sufficient, and all
parties in interest shall be held to have waived the right to claim
damages on account of such revocation, provided that such revocation
shall be annulled upon compliance with City ordinances and the rules
and regulations of the Board of Public Works.
§ 255-18 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 255-20
248:935
shall be held responsible for any expenses to the City on account of any
imperfect work.
§ 255-20 NASHUA CODE § 255-20
248:936
ARTICLE V
Building Sewers
§ 255-21. Owner's responsibility.
§ 255-22. Separate sewer for every building.
§ 255-23. Reuse of old building sewers.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and testing by the City Engineer,
to meet all current requirements or if they can be upgraded to meet the
current requirements of this chapter.
A. All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of a
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify
the City for any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of a building sewer. In addition to the
initial construction of a building sewer, the owner is also obligated to
pay all costs and expenses of operation, repair, maintenance and
reconstruction of both the building sewer and the building drain.
B. The City retains the right to levy sewer rentals to provide for the
construction, operation, maintenance, management and replacement of
the publicly owned treatment works.
A. A separate and independent private building sewer shall be provided
for every building on an individual lot. Any lot legally containing more
than one building may have a private sewer servicing the buildings
upon that lot.
B. The Board of Public Works may authorize a private sewer servicing
more than one lot when in the opinion of the Board, such an
arrangement is in the best interest of the City and to require separate
sewers would result in significant impracticality. Such authorization
may be conditioned upon such other reasonable requirements as the
Board of Public Works or corporation counsel may impose.
§ 255-21 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 255-23
248:937

ARTICLE VI
Waste Discharge
§ 255-24. Unpolluted waters discharge to sewer prohibited.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, unpolluted
cooling water or unpolluted water to any sanitary sewer.
§ 255-25. Unpolluted waters proper disposal.
§ 255-26. Prohibited discharges.
A. Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage, and unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to storm sewers
or to a natural outlet which has been approved by the Superintendent.
B. Unpolluted cooling water or process water may be discharged to a
storm sewer if available, or to a natural outlet, on approval of the City
Engineer, the Superintendent, and the NHDES. A NPDES permit issued
by the EPA is required prior to discharge.
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following pollutants, substances or wastewater to any public sewer or
direct connection to a public sewer:
(1) Any wastewater or waste containing toxic or poisonous solids,
liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction
with other waste, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans, animals or the
environment, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard to the
publicly owned treatment works, including but not limited to the
following substances in excess of the stated concentrations:
Substance
Concentration
(mg/l)
Arsenic 0.16
Boron 17.48
Cadmium 0.33
Carbon Disulfide 1.17
Chloroform 1.07
Chromium, hexavalent 1.85
Chromium, total 1.85
Copper 7.53
Cyanides, total 0.19
Hydrogen sulfide 0.550
§ 255-24 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 255-26
248:939
Substance
Concentration
(mg/l)
Lead 1.20
Mercury 0.006
Nickel 25.57
Phenols 0.83
Selenium 0.11
Silver:
Nonphotoprocessors 0.05
Photoprocessors 1.89
Sulfates 810
Toxic organics, total 5.0
Zinc 6.57
All concentrations for metallic substances are for total metal
unless otherwise indicated.
(2) Any wastewater or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F.
(65.5° C.) or any wastewater sufficiently hot to cause the influent at
the wastewater treatment facility to exceed 104° F. (40° C.) or heat
in lesser amounts which would inhibit biological activity.
(3) Any wastewater containing an increase in caustic alkalinity
calculated as CaCO (calcium carbonate) in excess of 75 mg/l or in
volumes which may be excessive.
(4) Any wastewater having a pH lower than six or higher than 10.5 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to the publicly owned treatment works, the treatment
process or personnel at the publicly owned treatment works.
(5) Any wastewater containing fats, wax, grease or oil, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l, or containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°
F. (0° C.) and 150° F. (65.5° C.).
(6) Any wastewater containing gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or
other volatile, flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas with
closed-cup flashpoints below 140° F. (60° C.) or boiling points
below 150° F. (65.5° C.), using the test method specified in the
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40 - Protection of Environment,
Chapter 1 - Environmental Protection Agency, Part 261 -
Identification and Listing of Hazardous Waste, Subpart C -
Characteristics of Hazardous Waste, .21 - Characteristics of
Ignitibility.
§ 255-26 NASHUA CODE § 255-26
248:940
(7) Any wastewater containing hazardous, toxic or reactive pollutants,
including but not limited to halogenated hydrocarbons, organic
solvents and organochlorine insecticides, pesticides, herbicides
and fungicides.
(8) Any solid or viscous substance in such quantity or size to be
capable of causing obstruction to the flow in the publicly owned
treatment works or other interference with the proper operation of
the wastewater treatment facility, including, but not limited to
ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood,
manure, hair, fleshings, entrails, paper dishes, cups and milk
containers, either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
(9) Any garbage or solids that have not been properly shredded. The
installation and operation of any grinder equipped with a motor of
0.75 horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the City Engineer.
(10) Any wastewater containing strong acid iron pickling wastes or
concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not.
(11) Any wastewater containing heavy metals, solvents or similar
objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any such
material discharged to the public sewer exceeds the limits
established by the Superintendent, the NHDES or the EPA for such
materials.
(12) Any wastewater containing taste or odor producing substances in
such quantity that it inhibits wastewater treatment, causes harm to
the publicly owned treatment works, creates a public nuisance, or
causes the wastewater facility to fail any state or federal
requirements.
(13) Any radioactive waste or isotopes in amounts in excess of such halflife
or concentration limits established in applicable state or federal
regulations or by the Superintendent.
(14) Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other materials
which, either singly or by interaction with other materials are
sufficient to create a public nuisance, a hazard to life or health or a
bar to entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair.
(15) Any wastewater containing an average concentration of suspended
solids in excess of 300 mg/l.
(16) Any wastewater which imparts color that cannot be easily removed
by the treatment process, including, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions. Color (in combination with
turbidity) shall not cause the treatment plant effluent to reduce the
depth of the compensation point for photosynthetic activity by
§ 255-26 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 255-26
248:941
more than 10% from the seasonably established norm for aquatic
life.
(17) Any wastewater containing an average concentration BOD in
excess of 250 mg/l or material which cause unusual oxygen
demand, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements.
(18) Any wastewater in which the concentration of any given
constituent or quantity of flow constitutes a slug, or is excessive.
(19) Any wastewater containing materials which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only by such a limited
degree that the publicly owned treatment works effluent cannot
meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over
the discharge to the receiving waters.
(20) Any wastewater containing pollutants which would pass through
the wastewater treatment facility or cause interference with the
operation or performance of the wastewater treatment facility. This
shall apply to any source introducing wastewater containing
pollutants, whether or not the source is subject to the categorical
pretreatment standards or any other federal, state or local
pretreatment requirements.
(21) Any wastewater which, by interaction with other water or waste in
the publicly owned treatment works, releases obnoxious gases,
forms suspended solids which interfere with the collection system,
or creates a condition detrimental to structures and treatment
processes.
(22) Any wastewater which has a concentration of any pollutant above
screening levels. Such screening levels, generated on the basis of
standard conditions, shall be adjusted for the particular conditions
applicable to the specific discharge as needed. Fume toxicity
screening levels shall be adjusted when administered as limits to
account for the pH, temperature, dilution, other toxic fumes and
ventilation present at the site of the particular discharge.
(23) Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the City.
(24) Stormwater, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate,
deionized water, noncontact cooling water, or unpolluted industrial
wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the Superintendent.
(25) Any sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment
of industrial waste.
(26) Any medical waste, except as specifically authorized by the
Superintendent in an industrial user wastewater permit.
§ 255-26 NASHUA CODE § 255-26
248:942
§ 255-27. Standard tests, measurements, analyses.
(27) Any wastewater causing the publicly owned treatment works
effluent to fail a toxicity test.
(28) Any wastewater containing detergents, surface active agents, or
other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the
publicly owned treatment works.
(29) Any petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of
mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or passthrough.
(30) Any pollutants that will result in the presence of toxic gases,
vapors, or fumes within the publicly owned treatment works in a
quantity that may cause worker health or safety problems.
(31) Any household hazardous waste including but not limited to paints,
stains, thinners, pesticides, herbicides, antifreeze, transmission
fluid, brake fluid, motor oil and battery acid.
(32) Any substance the Superintendent may deem harmful to the
treatment process, the publicly owned treatment works, or its
personnel.
B. All industrial wastewater shall be pretreated in accordance with federal
and state regulations and this chapter, or standards established by the
Superintendent, whichever is more stringent.
C. If pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or required for
any wastewater, they shall be continuously maintained in satisfactory
and effective operation by the owner at the owner's expense.
D. The Superintendent may, with discretion, reallocate industrial loadings,
establish mass-based discharge limits, adjust present discharge limits,
and establish new limits to meet the needs of the publicly owned
treatment works.
A. All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of
wastewater shall be determined in accordance with EPA methods, and
shall be performed at the control manhole, on suitable samples taken at
the control manhole or at a site designated by the Superintendent.
B. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the publicly owned treatment
works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, health,
property or the environment. The Superintendent will determine
whether a 24 hours composite of all outfalls is appropriate or whether a
grab sample shall be taken. Results may be used for assessments of
penalties and payments as provided for under §§ 255-5, 255-29 and
255-40.
§ 255-26 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 255-28
248:943
§ 255-28. Dilution.
It is illegal to meet the requirements of this chapter by using dilution.
§ 255-29. Control of discharge.
If any wastewater is discharged or proposed to be discharged to the public
sewers, the City may choose any or all of the following actions:
§ 255-30. Industrial user wastewater permit.
A. Reject the wastewater or waste;
B. Require the pretreatment of wastewater to an acceptable condition for
discharge to the public sewers;
C. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge of the
wastewater;
D. Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating the
wastewater; and
E. Require adequate bond or other surety in amount deemed appropriate
by the Superintendent.
A. Requirement of a permit. All industrial users must obtain an industrial
user wastewater permit.
B. Application. Any industrial user proposing a new discharge into the
publicly owned treatment works or an existing discharger proposing a
change in the volume or character of its existing discharge, a change in
location of discharge, or a significant change in production shall submit
an application for an industrial user wastewater permit. The industrial
user shall submit an application to the Superintendent no later than 90
days prior to the proposed change or connection. Said application, at a
minimum, shall include:
(1) The name and address of the facility, including the name of the
operators and owners;
(2) A list of all environmental permits held by or for the facility;
(3) A description of the nature, average rate of production, quantities
of products manufactured and Standard Industrial Classification
Code of the operations carried out at the facility;
(4) An identification of the categorical pretreatment standards
applicable to each regulated process;
(5) An analysis identifying the nature and concentration of pollutants
in the discharge or data illustrating the expected levels of
pollutants in a proposed wastewater discharge;
§ 255-28 NASHUA CODE § 255-30
248:944
(6) Information showing the measured average daily flow in gallons
per day, the maximum daily flow in gallons per day, and the
expected peak rate in gallons per minute to the public sewer from
regulated process streams and other streams and the time and
duration of discharges;
(7) A plan showing the essential characteristics of all wastewater
outlets and analysis of existing and expected average and
maximum wastewater flows;
(8) A list of raw materials, process chemicals, chemical products and
treatment substances;
(9) A schedule of actions to be taken to comply with discharge
limitations;
(10) Requirements and plans for the design and installation of
pretreatment technology, pollution control, and construction of
appropriate containment devices designed to reduce, eliminate, or
prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned
treatment works;
(11) Notification of any proposed or existing discharge of listed or
characteristic hazardous waste, as well as any proposed or ongoing
shipments of hazardous waste to outside disposal facilities. If there
has been a discharge of hazardous waste, the industrial user shall
provide the following certification: "I certify that [Industrial User
Name] has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of
hazardous wastes generated";
(12) Any other information required to meet the baseline monitoring
requirements applicable to industrial users subject to National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards;
(13) An agreement stating that the applicant agrees to abide by all
ordinances and rules of the City, that a bond sufficient to cover the
costs to the City of any violation of this chapter will be supplied
upon demand of the Director or Superintendent, that the applicant
will provide works for the pretreatment of the wastewater as may
be required by the Superintendent, and the applicant will permit
duly authorized representatives of the City to enter the premises to
the applicant to sample wastewater; and
(14) Any other information requested by the Superintendent or
Director.
C. Specifications and conditions of the permit. The industrial user
wastewater permit will outline the general and specific conditions
under which industrial wastewater will be accepted from that industrial
user for treatment at the publicly owned treatment works. Specifically
included in the permit are the following:
§ 255-30 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 255-30
248:945
(1) Whether pretreatment and self-monitoring facilities are required;
(2) Type, frequency, and location of samples required;
(3) Effluent limitations on the industrial wastewater;
(4) Parameters to be monitored and type, frequency, and location of
monitoring samples;
(5) Provision for notification of any noncompliance with any of the
permit conditions or any provision of this chapter including but not
limited to a slug discharge, as well of notification of any prior
noncompliance, bypass or excessive situation by the industrial
user;
(6) Penalties for noncompliance, including but not limited to denial of
access to the publicly owned treatment works;
(7) Compliance schedules; and
(8) Reporting requirements:
(a) Periodic reports. Industrial users shall submit periodic reports
to the Superintendent indicating the nature and concentration
of pollutants in the discharge from the regulated processes
governed by pretreatment standards and the average and
maximum daily flow for these process units. The reports shall
state whether the applicable pretreatment standards and
effluent limitations are being met on a consistent basis and, if
not, what additional operation and maintenance practices and
pretreatment are necessary. The report shall be reviewed by an
authorized representative of the industrial user and analysis
shall be certified by a qualified laboratory professional. Due
dates for reports are as specified in the permit. Additional
requirements for such reports may be imposed at the
discretion of the Superintendent.
(b) Categorical pretreatment standards. Any industrial facility
which is subject to EPA categorical pretreatment standards
shall, within 180 days after the effective date of the standard or
180 days after the final EPA administration decision upon a
category determination submission, submit a schedule
containing dates for the start of and completion of major
events in construction and operation of additional
pretreatment required for the industrial facility to meet the
categorical pretreatment standards. Increments between
dates in the schedule shall not exceed nine months. Within 14
days following each due date in the schedule, including the
final date for compliance, the industrial facility shall submit a
progress report indicating whether or not it complied with the
schedule; and if not, the date on which it expects to comply, the
§ 255-30 NASHUA CODE § 255-30
248:946
reason for the delay and the steps being taken by the facility to
return to the established schedule.
(c) Certification. All reports shall be signed and shall include the
following certification:
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all
attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision
in accordance with a system designed to ensure that qualified
personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons
who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible
for gathering the information, the information submitted is,
to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and
complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitting false information, including the possibility of fines
and imprisonment for knowing violations. I further certify that
any changes to the process or in the materials used or in the
wastewater discharge of this facility will be brought to the
attention of the Superintendent immediately."
(d) Certification signature. The certification will be signed by:
[1] A responsible corporate officer, if the industrial user
submitting the reports is a corporation. For the purpose of
this paragraph, a responsible corporate officer means (1) a
president, vice president, secretary, or treasurer of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or
any other person who performs similar policy or
decisionmaking functions of the corporation, or (2) the
manager or one or more manufacturing, production, or
operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or
having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding
$25,000,000, if authority to sign documents has been
assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with
corporate procedures;
[2] A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user
submitting the reports is a partnership or sole
proprietorship respectively; or
[3] A duly authorized representative of the individual
designated in Subsection C(8)(d)[1] or [2] of this
subsection if:
[a] An authorization is made in writing by an individual
described in Subsection C(8)(d)[1] or [2];
[b] The authorization specifies either an individual or a
position having responsibility for the overall operation
of the facility from which the industrial discharge
originates, such as the position of plant manager,
§ 255-30 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 255-30
248:947
operator of a well or well field, superintendent, or a
position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall
responsibility for environmental matters for the
company; and
[c] The written authorization is submitted to the
Superintendent.
(e) If an authorization under this subsection is no longer accurate
because a different individual or position has responsibility for
the overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company, a new authorization
satisfying the requirements of this subsection must be
submitted to the Superintendent prior to or together with the
required reports and certification.
(f) Monitoring records.
[1] Industrial users subject to reporting requirements shall
maintain records of information resulting from monitoring
activities. Such records shall include for each sample:
[a] The date, time, exact location, and method of sampling
and the names of person or persons taking the sample;
[b] The dates analyses were performed;
[c] The laboratory performing the analyses;
[d] The analytical techniques and methods used;
[e] The results of such analyses;
[f] The chain of custody of the records;
[g] Flows during the monitoring period; and
[h] Production figures for the monitoring period.
[2] Such records shall be maintained for a minimum of three
years, or longer in the case of unresolved litigation or
when requested by the Superintendent. Such records shall
be made available for inspection and copying by the
Superintendent at any time.
[3] If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirements
of this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than
required by the Superintendent, using procedures
approved by the EPA, the results of this monitoring shall
be included in the monitoring records and reports.
[4] If monitoring performed by an industrial user indicates a
violation, the user shall notify the Superintendent within
24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall
§ 255-30 NASHUA CODE § 255-30
248:948
§ 255-31. Annual reports.
Each industrial user shall submit an annual report at a time designated by
the Superintendent, containing all relevant monitoring records and reports
as well as any additional information which the Superintendent may
request. Each significant industrial user shall submit self-monitoring
reports at least twice per year.
§ 255-32. National Categorical pretreatment standards.
also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the
results of the repeat analysis to the Superintendent on
a schedule determined by the Superintendent but in no
event longer than 30 days after becoming aware of the
violation.
(g) Additional conditions:
[1] The granting of a permit shall not create any expectations
of vested rights to any future permit. An industrial user
who has committed any violation of this chapter shall not
be granted a new permit until such conditions and
mechanisms as the Superintendent deems necessary are
included to ensure that no future violation shall occur.
[2] A permit is nontransferable and may be revoked for
noncompliance with this chapter or modified so as to
conform to discharge limitation requirements that are
enacted by federal or state rules or regulations at any
time.
[3] Industrial users may be assessed fees by the City to defray
the costs of the industrial pretreatment program.
A. Notification. The City shall provide timely notification to appropriate
industries of applicable categorical pretreatment standards. Industries
shall also independently maintain current knowledge of applicable
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
B. Compliance date. All industries subject to categorical pretreatment
standards shall comply with the standards immediately and at all times;
and all industries that become subject to any future standards that are
promulgated by the EPA at some future time shall comply with those
standards within the EPA designated time period, unless a shorter
compliance time is specified by the Superintendent.
C. Application for industrial user wastewater permit amendment. Within
60 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard,
an industry subject to such standard shall submit an application for an
industrial user wastewater permit amendment. The application shall
contain the information noted in § 255-30.
§ 255-30 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 255-32
248:949
§ 255-33. Monitoring and surveillance.
§ 255-34. Bypass, spills, slugs, and excessive discharges.
D. Categorical pretreatment standards. The National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards, found in the Code of Federal Regulations, Title
40-Protection of Environment, Chapter 1 - Environmental Protection
Agency, Subchapter N - Effluent Guidelines and Standards, are hereby
incorporated into this chapter.
A. All industrial users shall regularly monitor their discharges in
accordance with the terms of their permit, and submit reports to the
Superintendent as indicated in the permit. Submission of said reports
does not relieve the industrial user of any other report required by
federal, state, or local statute, regulation, or ordinance, including but
not limited to the annual report.
B. The City shall sample and analyze the wastewater discharges of
contributing industries and conduct surveillance and inspection
activities to identify, independently of information supplied by such
industries, occasional or continuing noncompliance with industrial
pretreatment standards. The City, NHDES, and EPA personnel shall
have unrestricted access to all industries discharging to the publicly
owned treatment works for the purposes of investigating and sampling
discharges from the industries. Each industry will be billed directly for
costs incurred for analysis of its wastewater.
A. Each industrial user shall provide protection from accidental discharge
of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this chapter.
Facilities to prevent accidental discharges shall be provided and
maintained at the industrial users' expense.
B. Any bypass, spill, slug, or excessive discharge shall be reported
immediately to the Superintendent. In addition, a complete written
report shall be sent by the user to the Superintendent within five days
of the incident describing the reason for the bypass, spill, slug, or
excessive discharge, the remedial action taken, and the steps taken to
prevent its recurrence.
C. Any damages experienced by the City as the result of a bypass, spill,
slug or excessive discharge are considered a violation of this chapter,
and costs for repair, replacement, other associated costs, or any costs
incurred by the City due to imposition of fines or penalties pursuant to
an administrative order or judicial decree are recoverable from the
user.
D. Bypass, spill, slug, and excessive discharge control plan. At least once a
year the Superintendent shall evaluate whether each significant
industrial user needs a bypass, spill, slug, and excessive discharge
control plan. The Superintendent may require any user to develop,
submit for approval, and implement such a plan. At a minimum, a
§ 255-32 NASHUA CODE § 255-34
248:950
§ 255-35. Control manhole and monitoring.
§ 255-36. Notification of discharge of hazardous waste.
bypass, spill, slug, and excessive discharge control plan shall address
the following:
(1) Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;
(2) Description of the process;
(3) Procedures for immediately notifying the Superintendent of any
bypass, spill, slug, or excessive discharge, as required by this
chapter; and
(4) Procedures to prevent any adverse impact from any bypass, spill,
slug, or excessive discharge. Such procedures include, but are not
limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling
and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations,
control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of
containment structures or equipment, measures for containing
toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and measures and
equipment for emergency response.
E. Refusal or failure to provide a suitable plan approved by the
Superintendent within the time designated by the Superintendent shall
result in the immediate loss of access to the publicly owned treatment
works.
A. When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property
discharging industrial waste to a public sewer shall install a suitable
control manhole or sampling site together with such necessary meters
and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation,
sampling, measurement and flow control of the waste. Said control
manhole or sampling site shall be installed by the owner at the owner's
expense and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and
accessible at all times. The control manhole or site approved by the
Superintendent shall convey all of the industrial wastewater generated
at an industrial facility unless other agreements are made with the
Superintendent.
B. All industries discharging into the publicly owned treatment works shall
perform such monitoring of their discharges as the Superintendent and
other duly authorized employees of the City may reasonably require.
A. Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify
the Superintendent, the EPA Regional Waste Management Director, and
the state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into
the publicly owned treatment works of a substance which if otherwise
disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under the Code of Federal
Regulations, Title 40 - Protection of Environment, Chapter 1 -
§ 255-34 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 255-36
248:951
Environmental Protection Agency, Part 261 - Identification and Listing
of Hazardous Waste. Such notification must include the name of the
hazardous waste as set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations, Title
40 - Protection of Environment, Chapter 1 - Environmental Protection
Agency, Part 261 - Identification and Listing of Hazardous Waste, the
EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous,
batch, or other). If the user discharges more than the one 100
kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the publicly owned
treatment works, the notification shall also contain the following
information: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained
in the waste, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such
constituents in the wastewater discharged during the calendar month,
and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastewater
expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. Any
notification under this paragraph need be submitted only once for
each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed
conditions must be submitted 60 days prior to the change. The
notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants
already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards under the self-monitoring requirements of their permit.
B. Dischargers are exempt from the above requirements during a calendar
month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous
waste, unless the waste is acute hazardous waste as specified in the
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40 - Protection of Environment, Part
261 - Identification and Listing of Hazardous Waste, Subpart D - Lists of
Hazardous Waste, 30 - General and .33 - Discarded Commercial
Chemical Products, Off-Specification Species, Container Residues, and
Spill Residues Thereof. Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of
nonacute hazardous waste in a calendar month, or of any quantity of
acute hazardous waste as specified in the Code of Federal Regulations,
Title 40 - Protection of Environment, Part 261 - Identification and
Listing of Hazardous Waste, Subpart D - Lists of Hazardous Waste, .30 -
General and .33 - Discarded Commercial Chemical Products, Off-
Specification Species, Container Residues, and Spill Residues Thereof,
requires notification as provided in Subsection A.
C. In the case of any new regulations under 42 U.S.C. § 6921 identifying
additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional
substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the
Superintendent, the EPA Regional Waste Management Director, and the
state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of the discharge of such
substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations, and
include the same information as required in Subsection A.
D. For any discharge under this section, the user shall certify that it has a
program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous waste
generated.
§ 255-36 NASHUA CODE § 255-36
248:952
§ 255-37. Discharge prevention.
§ 255-38. Investigations of noncompliance.
The City shall investigate instances of noncompliance with any provision of
this chapter or any permit requirements. Any violation of a pretreatment
standard may be referred to NHDES or EPA irrespective of any action taken
under this chapter.
§ 255-39. Public and confidential information.
E. This section does not create a right to discharge any substance not
otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit issued
thereunder, and any applicable federal, state, or local law.
A. Whenever it reasonably appears to the Director or Superintendent that
the discharge of pollutants by any user: imminently endangers the
health or welfare of persons; interferes with the operation of the
publicly owned treatment works; endangers the environment; violates
the water quality limits for the receiving waters; violates any effluent
limit of any federal, state or local authority, or any provisions of their
industrial user wastewater permit; constitutes an interference, passthrough,
slug, spill, or excessive discharge; bypasses the user's
treatment system; causes an action prohibited under § 255-26; or
violates any City ordinance; the Director or Superintendent shall have
the authority, after taking reasonable action to inform the user, to
immediately halt or prevent such discharge and discontinue treatment
services. A facsimile transmission during business hours or a phone call
to an emergency number during nonbusiness hours shall be deemed to
be reasonable notice pursuant to this section.
B. Whenever the Director or Superintendent acts to prevent discharge and
discontinue treatment services such action shall be reviewed by the
Board of Public Works as soon as possible. The Director or
Superintendent shall notify the user of the time and place of the
meeting. The Director or Superintendent shall, and the user may,
submit a report to the Board setting forth the actions and reasons for
the response. Upon review the Board may reinstitute treatment
services in full, in part, or upon condition. The Board may withhold
treatment services for a definite period of time or until the occurrence
of any event or condition, or they may revoke the industrial user
wastewater permit. The user shall not have a right to any damages on
account of termination of service under this section.
C. The Director or Superintendent shall have the authority to take such
action necessary to halt or prevent such discharges, including but not
limited to criminal prosecution, suspension of sewer permits, referral to
state or federal authorities, termination of sewer services, and
imposition of penalties as provided for in NH RSA 149-1:6.
§ 255-36 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 255-39
248:953
§ 255-40. Administrative action.
A. Information and data submitted to the City under this chapter relating
to wastewater discharge characteristics shall be available to the public
without restriction. Other such information shall be available to the
public at least to the extent provided by the Code of Federal
Regulations, Title 40 - Protection of Environment, Chapter 1 -
Environmental Protection Agency, Part 2 - Public Information, Subpart
B - Confidentiality of Business Information, .302 - Special Rules
Governing Certain Information Obtained Under the Clean Water Act.
B. Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys,
industrial user wastewater permits and applications, monitoring
programs, and information gathered from the Superintendent's
inspection and sampling activities, shall be made available to the public
without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Superintendent, that the release
of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods
of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable
state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission
of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the
user furnishing a report that such information should be held
confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets
or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the
public, but shall be made available upon request to governmental
agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment
program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person
furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and
effluent data as defined by the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40 -
Protection of Environment, Chapter 1 - Environmental Protection
Agency, Part 2 - Public Information, Subpart B - Confidentiality of
Business Information, .302 - Special Rules Governing Certain
Information Obtained Under the Clean Water Act will not be recognized
as confidential information and will be available to the public without
restriction.
A. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the City, Director or
Superintendent to take any action. The actions listed below are not
exclusive. Any enforcement action undertaken by the Director or
Superintendent may be in addition to the suspension or revocation of
any permit.
B. The following actions may be taken:
(1) Notification of violation. When the Superintendent finds that an
industrial user has violated any provision of this chapter, an
industrial user wastewater permit, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, the Superintendent may serve upon that
user a written notice of violation. Within such time as specified in
the notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for
§ 255-39 NASHUA CODE § 255-40
248:954
§ 255-41. Powers and authority of inspectors.
satisfactory correction and prevention, including specific remedial
and preventative actions, shall be submitted to the Superintendent.
(2) Consent orders. The Superintendent may enter into consent orders,
assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents
establishing an agreement with any noncompliant user. Such
documents will include specific actions to be taken by the user to
correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the
document.
(3) Show cause hearings. The Superintendent may order a user who
has violated any provision of this chapter, an industrial user
wastewater permit, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, to appear before the Director and show cause why
the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice will
be served on the user specifying the time and place for the
meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such
action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting
shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail at least
seven days prior to the meeting. Such a notice may be served on
any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing
shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the user.
(4) Compliance orders. When the Superintendent finds that a user has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, an
industrial user wastewater permit, any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, or any other order or agreement between
the City and the user, the Superintendent may issue an order to the
user directing compliance within a specified time. If the user does
not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service
may be discontinued. Compliance orders may also contain other
requirements to address noncompliance, including, but not limited
to additional self-monitoring and management practices designed
to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A
compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance
established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a
compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation,
including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order
shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the user.
A. The Director, Superintendent, or other duly authorized City employee
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter upon all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.
§ 255-40 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 255-41
248:955
§ 255-42. Safety.
While performing inspections and obtaining samples on private property,
the Director, Superintendent or duly authorized City employee shall observe
all safety rules applicable to the premises as established by the industrial
user. The industrial user shall be held harmless for injury or death to the
City employees, and the City shall indemnify the industrial user against loss
or damage to its property by the City employee and against liability claims
and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the
industrial user growing out of the gauging and sampling operations, except
if caused by negligence or failure of the industrial user to maintain safe and
appropriate conditions.
§ 255-43. Emergency bypass.
§ 255-44. Resampling of discharge requirement.
If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the user
shall notify the Superintendent immediately on becoming aware of the
violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit
the results of the repeat analysis to the Superintendent within 30 days
after becoming aware of the violation. The industrial user is not required to
resample if:
B. The Director, Superintendent, or other duly authorized City employee is
empowered to obtain information concerning industrial processes or
any other data which has a bearing on the kind and source of discharge
to the public sewer.
C. Denying access to any facility to a properly identified inspector is a
violation of this chapter.
A. Bypass of an industrial pretreatment system is prohibited except where
the bypass is unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury or
severe property damage. The user shall notify the Superintendent
immediately and, if possible, prior to the event of any bypass.
B. A notice shall be permanently posted, plainly visible to all user's
personnel responsible for managing wastewater discharges, informing
them of the required notification to the Superintendent of a potential
bypass.
C. Bypasses shall not exempt the user from any fines, administrative
actions or prohibitions of this chapter. All bypasses will be considered a
violation of the industrial user wastewater permit.
A. The City performs sampling of the industrial user at a frequency of at
least once per month;
B. The City performs sampling of the industrial user between the time
when the user performs its initial sampling and the time when the user
receives the results of the sampling; or
§ 255-41 NASHUA CODE § 255-44
248:956
C. The City performs sampling within 30 days of the user becoming aware
of the violation.
§ 255-44 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 255-44
248:957

ARTICLE VII
Individual Sewage Disposal Systems
§ 255-45. General requirements.
§ 255-46. Earth pit privy.
No earth pit privy shall be constructed, operated or maintained within the
City.
§ 255-47. Septic tanks.
Septage will be accepted at a designated receiving structure within the
publicly owned treatment works at such times established by the
Superintendent, provided the septage does not contain toxic pollutants or
A. Every building or place where humans reside, assemble or are
employed shall be provided with a sanitary method of human excreta
disposal. It shall be the duty of the owner of any such place or building
to provide a sanitary method of excreta disposal approved by the
Environmental Health Department and consistent with the provisions of
all City codes and building permits.
B. The use of an individual sewage disposal system by more than one
property dwelling or other premises is prohibited.
C. All buildings within 100 feet of a public sewer must connect to the
public sewer per NH RSA 147:8.
D. No building permit shall be issued until a sewage disposal approval has
been issued by the New Hampshire Department of Environmental
Services, and a sewage disposal system construction permit has been
granted by the Environmental Health Department, if any work
contemplated requires such approval or permit.
E. No certificate of occupancy approving any change in configuration or
use of land or buildings shall be issued without a valid certificate of
compliance issued by the Environmental Health Department indicating
that a satisfactory disposal system has been located, constructed,
altered or repaired.
F. No existing individual sewage disposal system shall be repaired or
altered unless a sewage disposal system construction permit has been
applied for and granted by the Environmental Health Department. No
permit to repair or alter such system shall be granted if a public sewer
abuts the property for which the permit is requested, except upon a
showing to the Health Officer, confirmed by the City Engineer, that it
would be impossible or highly unreasonable to require connection of
the units served by the existing system to the public sewer. This
restriction does not prohibit pumping of septic tanks, repairs of
plumbing lines preceding the septic tank, or other necessary, normal or
routine maintenance.
§ 255-45 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 255-47
248:959
materials and does not violate any other special requirements established
by the City, including but not limited to biotoxicity. Permits to use the
septage receiving structure shall be under the jurisdiction of the Board
of Public Works. The discharge of industrial waste as industrial septage
requires prior approval of the NHDES. Fees for dumping septage will
established as part of the sewer use fees. The Superintendent shall have
authority to limit the disposal of septage if disposal would interfere with
the operation of the publicly owned treatment works. Procedures for the
disposal of septage shall be in conformance with the operating policy of
the City's wastewater treatment facility and disposal shall be accomplished
under the Superintendent's supervision unless specifically permitted
otherwise.
§ 255-48. Sewerage disposal system construction permit and
specifications.
A. No construction shall be commenced until a sewage disposal system
construction permit has been obtained from the Environmental Health
Department. Applications for a sewage disposal construction permit
shall be made on forms provided by the Environmental Health
Department and shall be accompanied by all required information.
B. No sewage disposal system construction permit shall be issued when, in
the opinion of the Health Officer, engineering data, soils information
and similar pertinent data show that normal use of the contemplated
system could reasonably be expected to violate this chapter or where
requiring connection to the public sewer is feasible and reasonable.
C. In determining a suitable form and appropriate location for a sewage
disposal system, consideration shall be given to the size, shape and
slope of the lot, natural and adjusted drainage, existing and known
future water supplies, depth to groundwater and impervious material,
and room for future expansion of the disposal system.
D. Approval of individual sewage disposal systems for new subdivisions is
subject to the provisions of Article XXXII of Chapter 190, Land Use.
E. Permits issued pursuant to approved applications shall be valid for not
more than 180 days from the date issued. Failure to achieve a
certificate of compliance prior to expiration of the construction permit
shall require reapplication in the same manner as an original
application.
F. Charges for a sewage disposal construction permit shall be as follows:
[Amended 3-28-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-06]
(1) Test pit, each (includes subdivision test pits): $40.
(2) Plan reviews: $35.
(3) Final inspections: $25.
§ 255-47 NASHUA CODE § 255-48
248:960
G. Sewage disposal systems utilizing a septic tank and subsurface
drainage system shall be constructed according to the current
provisions and recommendations of the Water Division of the New
Hampshire Department of Environmental Services.
H. Disposal trenches.
(1) The size and spacing requirements of disposal trenches shall
conform to the following table:
Time for
One Inch
Fall
(minutes)
Minimum
Width of
Trench at
Bottom
(inches)
Minimum
Depth of
Filter
Stone
Under
Piping
(inches)
Minimum
Distance
Between
Pipes
(feet)
Depth of
Trench
(inches)
Less than 5 18 6 6 20 - 30
5 to 20 24 8 6 22 - 32
21 to 40 30 10 7.5 24 - 34
(2) All disposal trenches shall also meet the following requirements:
(a) Maximum width of trench at bottom: 36 inches.
(b) Minimum diameter of distribution piping: four inches.
(c) Minimum filter material over pipes: two inches.
(d) Slope of distribution piping: two to six inches in 100 feet.
(e) Slope of trench floor: two to six inches in 100 feet.
(f) Maximum slope of piping where siphon required: four inches in
100 feet.
(g) Minimum lines per field: two.
(h) Maximum length per line: 100 feet.
(i) Minimum length per line: 25 feet.
(j) Maximum depth of pipe: 36 inches.
(k) Minimum depth of top of pipe: 18 inches.
I. Disposal beds. Disposal beds shall be construed in accordance with the
following table:
(1) Minimum diameter of distribution piping: four inches.
(2) Minimum filter material over pipes: two inches.
§ 255-48 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 255-48
248:961
§ 255-49. Cesspools.
The use of cesspools is prohibited except that in emergency situations a
cesspool may be temporarily permitted, subject to any conditions of the
Environmental Health Department.
§ 255-50. Exemptions.
In special cases where a system or part thereof as prescribed in this chapter
cannot be expected to function satisfactorily, an alternate design which
meets the conditions of the ordinances of the City in principle may be
approved. Written permission from the Health Officer must be obtained
prior to the installation of any nonconforming part of an individual sewage
disposal system or installation in a manner otherwise than in compliance
with the provisions of this chapter.
(3) Minimum filter material under pipes: 12 inches.
(4) Slope of distribution piping: two to six inches in 100 feet.
(5) Slope of disposal bed slope: two to six inches in 100 feet.
(6) Maximum slope of piping where siphon required: four inches in 100
feet.
(7) Minimum lines per field: two.
(8) Maximum length per line: 100 feet.
(9) Minimum distance between lines: four feet.
(10) Minimum distance from edge of bed to nearest distribution line:
three feet.
(11) Maximum depth of piping: 36 inches.
(12) Minimum depth of top of piping: 18 inches.
§ 255-48 NASHUA CODE § 255-50
248:962
ARTICLE VIII
Payment for Extensions and Connections
§ 255-51. General policies.
§ 255-52. Betterment charge.
A. Any property owner whose property can be served by gravity by a
sewer constructed in any street by the City or with City funds after May
21, 1969, may be liable for an assessment, and any property owner who
actually connects his property by any means to any public sewer after
the effective date of this article, shall be assessed as provided in this
article.
B. This article applies to all connections and extensions applied for after
the effective date of this article and to connections to all public sewers
existing on the effective date of this article, except that the betterment
and entrance charges do not apply to users connected to sewers
constructed within subdivisions in which the subdivider has paid all
costs of the sewer construction and all applicable betterment and
entrance charges.
C. No owner of a lot served by a sewer connection shall be obliged to pay
any further betterment or entrance fees for the use of such connection
after a building on that lot is replaced, provided that the new building is
in the same or lesser peak sewage flow classification as the original
structure. If the new building is in a higher peak sewage flow
classification than the original structure, no use shall be made of the
connection until the currently applicable entrance fees have been paid
minus the fee which would currently be applicable to the original
structure. If the City is requested to install a new connection,
connection fees shall be charged at the rate in effect at the time the
connection is installed.
A. The betterment charge is a one-time assessment against each property
which can be served by gravity by a sewer constructed by the City or
with City funds after May 21, 1969, or is connected to any public sewer
constructed after May 21, 1969, either in a street, an easement, or a
right-of-way.
B. The betterment charge is $8.10 per foot of a property's street frontage,
as computed by § 255-57, regardless of the location or direction of the
sewer.
C. One-half of the betterment charge shall be assessed against the owners
of vacant property who are liable for assessment, and the amount paid
shall be credited to the owners when the vacant property is developed
and connected to the sewer.
D. Owners of properties whose frontage can be served only partially by
gravity by new sewers shall pay betterment charges based on the
§ 255-51 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 255-52
248:963
§ 255-53. Entrance charge.
number of front feet which can be served, in multiples of the thenexisting
minimum lot frontages required by the zoning ordinances,
provided the portion not served is not in common use with the portion
served.
A. The entrance charge is a one-time assessment against each property to
provide service to the City's sewerage system, and the amount of the
entrance charge is as follows:
(1) For residential or apartment developments or properties: $295 for
each dwelling unit.
(2) For other types of developments (commercial, industrial, etc.),
according to the following schedule based on anticipated gallons
per minute (gpm) of peak sewerage flow from the property:
Gallons Per Minute Fee
0 - 20 $295
20 - 40 $590
40 - 60 $885
60 - 80 $1,180
80 - 100 $1,475
100 - 120 $1,620
120 - 140 $1,765
140 - 160 $1,910
160 - 180 $2,055
180 - 200 $2,200
200 - 220 $2,270
220 - 240 $2,340
240 - 260 $2,410
260 - 280 $2,480
Each additional 20 Add $70
B. Upon application for sewerage service for developments other than
residential or apartments, the applicant shall submit to the City
Engineer an estimate of peak sewage flow from the development,
together with any information requested by the City Engineer for
verification of the estimate.
C. Additional entrance charges will be made, as provided herein,
whenever the use of any service connection is increased over the use
existing on December 29, 1975, or over the use contemplated in the
original or subsequent application for service.
§ 255-52 NASHUA CODE § 255-54
248:964
§ 255-54. Connection, replacement, and repair charges.
§ 255-55. Land subdivisions.
Land subdividers who construct sewers and service connections as a part
of the subdivision construction shall pay a betterment charge based on the
amount of subdivision frontage on existing sewered streets, and shall pay
the entrance charges. Subdividers constructing interceptor sewers, sewage
pumping stations and force mains within the subdivision shall do so at no
A. Any property owner of an existing one- or two-family residence who
desires initial service from the municipal sewerage system when there
is not an existing service connection shall be charged a connection
charge of $600 for the City's performance and cost of installing a
service connection from the main sewer to the property owner's
property line. The $600 charge may be waived if the property owner
performs the work at his or her expense after obtaining permission
from the Board of Public Works. All work not performed by the City or
its authorized representative shall be performed by a licensed
drainlayer.
B. Any other property owner who desires initial service from the municipal
sewerage system when there is not an existing service connection is
responsible for performance of all work and all costs to bring service
from the main sewer to the property owner's property line. All work
shall be performed by a licensed drainlayer.
C. Any property owner who desires initial service from the municipal
sewerage system by connecting to a previously constructed but unused
service connection shall be charged a connection charge of $600.
D. Replacement or repair charges.
(1) One- or two-family residence. A property owner of a one or twofamily
residence who requires repair or replacement of an existing
service connection to the municipal sewerage system shall be
charged $600 for the City's performance and cost of replacing or
repairing the existing service connection from the main sewer to
the property owner's property line. The $600 charge may be
waived if the property owner performs the work at his or her
expense after obtaining permission from the Board of Public Works.
All work not performed by the City or its authorized representative
shall be performed by a licensed drainlayer.
(2) Any other property. A property owner of any other property who
requires repair or replacement of an existing service connection to
the municipal sewerage system is responsible for performance of
all work and all costs to replace or repair the existing service
connection from the municipal sewer to the property owner's
property line. All work shall be performed by a licensed drainlayer.
§ 255-54 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 255-55
248:965
cost to the City. Such facilities and the land on which they are constructed
or installed shall be deeded to the City for operation and maintenance.
§ 255-56. Administrative procedure for sewer extensions.
§ 255-57. Computation of frontage.
The length of street frontage for properties against which betterment
charges are made shall be computed according to one of the following:
A. Any property owner in the City whose property is not served by a public
sewer may make an application to the City Engineer for extension of the
sewerage system to serve the property. Information required for the
application is shown on the application form provided by the City
Engineer.
B. The City Engineer shall prepare a map showing the route of the
necessary sewer extension to serve the applicant, together with the
properties which would be subject to betterment charges, including the
property owners' names and amount of assessable frontage.
C. The City Engineer shall attempt to ascertain in writing from each
property owner whose property would be subject to betterment charges
whether the owner is in favor of or opposed to the extension and the
betterment charges.
D. The City Engineer shall submit the application and his findings to the
Board of Public Works for disposition.
E. If all abutters subject to betterment charges are in favor of the
requested extension, the Board may order that the extension be
constructed after all abutters have paid their betterment charges. If all
abutters subject to betterment charges are not in favor of the requested
extension or have not paid their betterment charges within a
reasonable time, the application shall go to the Board of Aldermen as a
resolution, with supporting documents and recommendations for
disposition. The Board of Aldermen shall take such action as is
permitted by the City Code and the state statutes.
F. Upon a negative decision by the City under Subsecton E, any applicant
may have the proposed extension constructed at the applicant's
expense. The applicant shall be liable for all assessments and charges,
as determined under this chapter, and the amount of the assessments
and charges shall be reduced by the actual cost of the extension to the
applicant.
G. Prior to the making of any assessment by the Board of Aldermen against
the abutters for any sewer extension which has not been requested or
assented to by them, the appropriate aldermanic committee shall hold a
public hearing on the extension and assessment. All abutters shall be
given seven days notice of the hearing in writing by the City Clerk.
§ 255-55 NASHUA CODE § 255-57
248:966
§ 255-58. Methods of payment of assessments and charges.
A. Frontage on one street. The actual frontage on the street, except if
computed under Subsection C(3).
B. Frontage on two or more streets. The average of the frontages
including 1/2 the length of any curves between intersecting streets;
provided, however, that such frontage shall in no event be less than the
minimum frontage for the subject premises required under Chapter
190, Land Use, Part 2.
C. Cul-de-sac properties. Where a sewer serves properties on a cul-de-sac,
the frontage shall be taken as the largest of the following:
(1) The width of the lot at the front of the house, whenever the
frontage at the street line is less than that required by Chapter 190,
Land Use, Part 2;
(2) The actual street frontage; or
(3) The minimum frontage required by the zoning ordinance.
A. All assessments and charges arising from the extension of or
connection to the City's sewerage system shall become liens against the
properties to which they apply, either by the voluntary action of the
applicants or by resolution of the Board of Aldermen.
B. All assessments and charges against a property shall be paid in one
lump sum payment prior to construction of extensions or connection,
except as provided in Subsection C.
C. Deferred payments are available for owner-occupied residential
properties, but do not include the betterment charge if the assessment
is made to defray the cost of the sewer construction project. All
assessments and charges against a property may be paid in five annual
installments, and the amount of each installment shall not be less than
1/5 of the original amount due. Installments shall be due and payable on
December 1 of each year, and interest will be charged at the rate
allowed by NH RSA Chapter 149-I on the unpaid balance of each
installment not paid when due. Any property owner qualified for
deferred payments who makes a lump sum payment of all of their
outstanding assessments and charges in full a minimum of 180 days
prior to the due date of the final installment shall be entitled to a credit
in the amount of 10% of the total remaining amount due. The 10%
credit will be applied against the final payment at the time of such
payment.
D. The owners of all properties who desire service to a public sewer will be
required to pay the betterment charge existing at the time of issuance
of permit (if the full betterment charge has not already been paid), the
entrance fee existing at the time of issuance of the permit (if the
entrance fee has not already been paid), and the connection charge.
§ 255-57 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 255-58
248:967
§ 255-59. Abatements.
Any person desiring an abatement of all or part of the assessments and
charges made pursuant to this chapter shall apply in writing for an
abatement to the Board of Public Works. The Board of Public Works shall
place said application on the agenda for its next regular meeting, and shall
notify the applicant in writing by certified mail of the date said application
shall be considered. After the hearing, the Board shall forward its
recommendation and the application to the Mayor and Board of Aldermen.
The request for abatement shall be considered in the same fashion as a
resolution, and the Mayor and Board of Aldermen may, for good cause
shown, grant or deny all or part of the abatement requested pursuant to NH
RSA 149-I:18.
E. In the event of a transfer of a property against which an assessment or
charge has been permitted to be paid over time pursuant Subsection C,
the amount remaining due for the assessments and charges, including
any interest or other charges, shall become immediately due and
payable on the date of such transfer.
§ 255-58 NASHUA CODE § 255-59
248:968
ARTICLE IX
Sewer Use Fees
§ 255-60. Purpose. [Amended 4-11-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-031]
This article provides for a system of sewer use fees to be paid by all users
of the City wastewater system, the classification of users, and the creation
of a wastewater system fund as a municipal enterprise and a legal and
accounting entity. This wastewater system fund is the "sewer fund" required
by NH RSA 149-I:10.
§ 255-61. Wastewater system fund. [Amended 12-23-2003 by Ord.
No. O-03-217]
A. The wastewater system fund shall be a legal and accounting entity of
the City. Pursuant to state law, the fund shall be kept as a separate and
distinct fund, shall not be commingled with City tax revenues, and shall
not be deemed part of the municipality's general fund accumulated
surplus. All revenues from sewer use fees, connection charges and any
other revenues related to the collection and treatment of wastewater
will be credited to this fund, and all expenditures for the operation and
maintenance of the system, including contract summary and change
orders as well as a scope of work for each contract or change order
related to the EPA consent decree associated with the separation of
wastewater and stormwater and/or storage facilities as well as other
designs presented for approval shall contain only items related to the
storage treatment and separation of wastewater or stormwater and
conveyance systems. Submission of plans and/or change orders shall
contain only what is necessary to complete and restore disturbed areas
as deemed appropriate by the Board of Public Works and the Board of
Aldermen. Appropriate uses also include capital replacement, and
improvements will be charged to this fund. A detailed summary of these
plans shall be updated yearly and submitted to the Board of Aldermen
for review. The earnings and other reserves of the system will be
retained in this fund. Pursuant to state law, the fund may be expended
only for the cost of design, construction, expansion, replacement,
management, maintenance, operation, and repair of sewer lines and
systems and sewerage treatment and disposal works and facilities, as
well as payment of the interest on any related debt incurred.
[Amended 4-11-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-031]
B. The administration of the provisions of this article shall be the
responsibility of the Director of Public Works.
C. The Nashua wastewater system shall be responsible for the preparation
of monthly and quarterly bills, the receipt and custody of all funds, and
the maintenance of general and operating account records required to
show the results of operations and the financial condition of the fund.
§ 255-60 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 255-62
248:969
§ 255-62. Classes of users.
There shall be six classes of users: residential, commercial, industrial,
institutional, governmental, and wholesale, which are defined in § 255-1.
§ 255-63. Rates and charges. [Amended 10-14-2003 by Ord. No.
O-03-173]
A. Basis for payment for services. Each user shall pay for the services
provided by the City wastewater system based on the size of the water
meter that serves the user, and which represents the demand the user
may make on the system, and the actual use of the system measured by
water meter readings or wastewater meters installed at the user's
expense.
B. Demand charges. Each user shall pay a quarterly or monthly demand
charge based on the size of the water meter serving the property.
Quarterly and monthly charges will be as follows: [Amended
5-24-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-7085; 12-10-2013 by Ord. No.
O-13-3986; 12-13-2016 by Ord. No. O-16-01987]
Meter Size
(inches) Quarterly Charge Monthly Charge
0.625 $31.94 $10.65
0.75 $63.88 $21.30
1 $253.99 $84.66
1.5 $506.45 $168.82
2 $1,426.59 $475.53
3 $3,164.94 $1,054.98
4 $6,331.41 $2,110.47
6+ $15,829.27 $5,276.42
C. Flow charge. In addition to the monthly or quarterly demand charge,
each user shall pay a flow charge for each 100 cubic feet of use
measured by water meter readings or wastewater flow meter readings.
The flow charge per 100 cubic feet will be $2.05 through December 31,
2016. Effective January 1, 2017, the flow charge per 100 cubic feet will
be $2.36. [Amended 2-26-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-07; 4-14-2009 by
Ord. No. O-09-61; 5-24-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-70; 12-10-2013 by
Ord. No. O-13-039; 12-23-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-068;
12-13-2016 by Ord. No. O-16-01988]
85.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided an effective date of 7-1-2011.
86.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided an effective date of 7-1-2013.
87.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided an effective date of 1-1-2017.
88.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided an effective date of 1-1-2017.
§ 255-62 NASHUA CODE § 255-63
248:970
§ 255-64. Exemptions and adjustments.
D. Discount for use of water outside the dwelling unit. Residential users
shall pay demand and flow charges, as outlined, for billing quarters
during the period of October 1 to March 31. To accommodate the
variable use of water outside the dwelling unit during the warm
weather months, residential users, including multifamily residential
users, shall pay the same amount for each billing quarter as they pay for
the first full billing quarter falling between the dates of October 1 and
March 31. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any residential user may opt,
by filing a notice in January of each year, to have the user fee
determined by actual usage as metered by the water meter and any
deduct meter.
E. Use of water from nonmetered source. The Director of Public Works
may require any property served by the wastewater system which uses
water from nonmetered sources to install, at the user's expense, meters
to measure the amount of water used or wastewater discharged to the
sewer system, or the City may bill each user the average quarterly
charge (demand and flow) by billing type (residential or commercial).
This charge shall be reviewed annually. [Amended 4-14-2009 by Ord.
No. O-09-61]
F. Use of water not discharged to sewer system. Any user who uses
metered water that is not discharged to the sewer system may install, at
the user's expense, appropriate meters to measure the amount of water
not discharged to the sewer system. If the City is satisfied that the
meters have been properly installed, the user will not owe flow charges
for this water not discharged to the sewer system.
G. Billing. All residential users and other users whose total quarterly
charge is less than $500 will be billed quarterly. All users whose total
quarterly charge is $500 or more will be billed monthly.
H. Due date; late payment. Bills are due when rendered. Bills paid 30 days
or more after the due date will be charged a late payment penalty of one
and 1.5% for each 30 days or portion thereof of delinquency. When any
bill is more than 90 days past due, sewer service to such property may
be discontinued until such bill is paid.
I. Lien. The City shall have a lien on property served by its sewerage
system for any and all sewer use fees charged pursuant to this article
and may enforce said lien as provided in NH RSA 149-I:11 and NH RSA
38:22. The Tax Collector shall file notices of liens in the county registry
of deeds at least once annually.
J. Septage charges. The charge for disposing of residential septage at the
wastewater treatment plant shall be $79 per 1,000 gallons. Septage
charges will be billed monthly.
§ 255-63 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 255-64
248:971
§ 255-65. Annual review of fees and rates.
§ 255-66. Obstruction or interference with meter.
Any user who shall do any act or commit any deed to obstruct or interfere
with the proper measuring of water consumption or sewerage flow by meter
shall be subject to assessment for all back user charges as estimated by the
Director of Public Works and such other criminal or civil penalties as may
be provided by law, including such civil penalties as may be authorized by
NH RSA 149-I:6.
A. All properties not connected to the City wastewater system will be
exempt from sewer use charges, but will be subject to the fee for any
septage discharged at the wastewater treatment plant.
B. Any user who feels the sewer use fees are unjust or inequitable may
make written application to the Director of Public Works requesting a
review of the sewer use fees. The written request shall, where relevant,
show the actual or estimated flow and the strength of the wastewater
discharged in comparison with the values upon which the charges were
based, including how the measurements or estimates were made.
C. Review of the request for adjustment shall be made by the Director of
Public Works and, if substantiated, sewer use fees for the user shall be
recalculated based on the revised flow and the adjustment included in
the next billing cycle or period.
A. The Director of Public Works will review the sewer use fees and rates at
least once annually and recommend revisions in the rates as necessary
to the Board of Public Works and to the Board of Aldermen to ensure
that adequate revenues are generated to pay the costs of operation and
maintenance, including capital replacements and improvements, and
meet any other financial obligations of the wastewater system, and that
sewer use fees continue to provide for the proportional distribution of
costs among users and user classes.
B. The demand charge, flow rate, and total flow charge applicable to each
user will be printed in a conspicuous place on each bill. Whenever
demand charges or flow rates are subject to a general increase, each
user will be sent a statement setting forth the new charge or rate.
§ 255-64 NASHUA CODE § 255-66
248:972
Chapter 270
SOLID WASTE
§ 255-66 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 255-66
248:973

ARTICLE I
Definitions
[NRO 1975, T. 7, § 401 (Sec. 10-1 of the 1987 Code)]
§ 270-1. Definitions. [Amended 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. O-99-141;
8-13-2002 by Ord. No. O-02-69]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
APPROVED — Approved by the Board of Health, the Board of Public Works
or their authorized representatives, as applicable.
ASHES — Any residue, other than salvage, from the burning of combustible
materials.
COMPOSTING — The biochemical degradation of organic materials to a
stable, sanitary, nuisance free, humus-like material.
DUMP — A place where refuse is disposed of on or in the ground in
a manner other than the normal accepted practices for sanitary landfill
operations.
GARBAGE — Swill and every accumulation of animal, vegetable and other
matter that attends the preparation, handling, consumption, storage or
decay of plant and animal matter, including meats, fowl, birds, fruit,
vegetable or dairy products and the waste wrappers or containers thereof.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — A solid, semisolid, liquid, or contained gaseous
waste, or any combination of these wastes which because of either quantity,
concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may cause
or contribute to an increase of irreversible or incapacitating reversible
illness, or pose a present or potential threat to human health or the
environment when improperly treated, stored, disposed of, or otherwise
mismanaged; or which has been identified as a hazardous waste by the
New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services, office of waste
management using the criteria established under RSA 147:50 I(a), and/or
as listed under RSA 147:50 I(e). Such wastes include, but are not limited
to, those which are toxic, corrosive, ignitable, reactive, irritants, strong
sensitizers, or which generate pressure through decomposition, heat, or
other means. Such wastes do not include radioactive substances that are
regulated or controlled by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended.
INCINERATOR — An apparatus, device, container or equipment in which
combustible wastes are ignited and burned.
MULTIPLE CHAMBER INCINERATOR — Any apparatus or equipment used
to dispose of combustible wastes by burning, consisting of three or more
refractory lined combustion furnaces in series, physically separated by
refractory walls, interconnected by gas passage ports or ducts and designed
for maximum combustion of the material to be burned.
§ 270-1 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 270-1
248:975
OTHER WASTES — Any substance harmful to the health, safety or welfare
of persons including but not limited to garbage, refuse, decayed wood,
sawdust, shavings, bark, lime, ashes, offal, oil tar, chemicals and other
substances other than sewage or industrial wastes.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid and semisolid wastes,
including garbage, rubbish, ashes, manure, street cleanings, dead animals,
and industrial wastes, but not human excreta.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes, excluding ashes, consisting of
both combustible and noncombustible wastes.
SHARP HOUSEHOLD INFECTIOUS WASTE — Any waste with any sharp
edge or point, which, because of its infectious nature may cause or
significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious
irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness, or pose a substantial
present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when
improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
This includes, but is not limited to, needles, syringes, and lancets.
§ 270-1 NASHUA CODE § 270-1
248:976
ARTICLE II
Refuse and Incinerator Emissions
[NRO 1975, T. 7, § 402 (Sec. 10-3 of the 1987 Code); amended
8-13-2002 by Ord. No. O-02-69]
§ 270-2. Compliance required.
All refuse and incinerator emissions shall be kept, transported, treated,
disposed of or reclaimed by a method or methods which are in compliance
with the ordinances and regulations of the City and the statutes of the state,
pertinent to disposal of wastes and control of pollution.
§ 270-3. Deposit of waste restricted.
No refuse or other wastes shall be permitted in or placed or deposited upon
or under the lands, or into the public outdoor atmosphere of the City, in any
manner determined by the Board of Health, or the Board of Public Works, as
applicable, or their authorized representatives and agents to be detrimental
to the use of the receiving lands or the public outdoor atmosphere, or
prejudicial to the health, safety, or welfare of persons who may be affected
by the resulting environmental conditions.
§ 270-4. Considerations in design of waste systems.
The design of any system of wastes storage, collection, transportation,
treatment, composting, or disposal shall take into consideration proximity
to wells, streams, ponds, rivers, or other sources of water supply,
topography, water table, soil characteristics, available area, residential
concentration, present and future property use, and shall provide for
adequate handling, treatment, and disposal facilities for the amount and
nature of waste material anticipated, so as to prevent nuisance, pollution
and hazard to public health, safety and welfare.
§ 270-5. Inspections.
The Health Officer shall be permitted to make and he shall make such
inspections of any place, premises, container, process equipment or vehicle
used for the collection, storage, transportation, disposal or reclamation
of refuse as are necessary to insure compliance with these statutes,
ordinances and regulations.
§ 270-2 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 270-5
248:977

ARTICLE III
Sanitary Landfill
[NRO 1975, T. 6, §§ 401 to 411 (Secs. 10-21 to 10-33 of the 1987
Code)]
§ 270-6. Definitions. [Amended 4-14-1987 by Ord. No. O-86-105;
8-13-2002 by Ord. No. O-02-69]
As used in this article:
APPROVED — Approved by the Board of Health, the Board of Public Works
or their authorized representatives, as applicable.
ASHES — Any residue, other than salvage, from the burning of combustible
materials.
COMPOSTING — The biochemical degradation of organic materials to a
stable, sanitary, nuisance-free, humus-like material.
COMMERCIAL — Relates to or is connected with trade and traffic or
commerce in general; is occupied with business and commerce.
CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS AND DEMOLITION WASTE — Nonputrescible
waste, building material and rubble.
DUMP — A place where refuse is disposed of, on, or in the ground in
a manner other than the normal accepted practices for sanitary landfill
operations.
GARBAGE — Swill and every accumulation of animal, vegetable, and other
matter that attends the preparation, handling, consumption, storage or
decay of plant and animal matter, including meats, fowl, birds, fruit,
vegetable or dairy products and waste wrappers and containers thereof.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — A solid, semisolid, liquid, or contained gaseous
waste, or any combination of these wastes which because of either quantity,
concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may cause
or contribute to an increase of irreversible or incapacitating reversible
illness, or pose a present or potential threat to human health or the
environment when improperly treated, stored, disposed of, or otherwise
mismanaged; or which has been identified as a hazardous waste by the
New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services, office of waste
management using the criteria established under RSA 147:50 I(a), and/or
as listed under RSA 147:50 I(e). Such wastes include, but are not limited
to, those which are toxic, corrosive, ignitable, reactive, irritants, strong
sensitizers, or which generate pressure through decomposition, heat, or
other means. Such wastes do not include radioactive substances that are
regulated or controlled by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended.
HOSPITAL WASTE — Material contaminated as a result of contact with
wastes or infected matter, during, or as a result of, care or treatment of
patients in hospitals or nursing homes.
HUMAN EXCRETA — Fecal and urinary discharges and includes any waste
containing such material.
§ 270-6 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 270-6
248:979
INCINERATOR — An apparatus, device, container, or equipment in which
combustible wastes are ignited and burned.
INCOMPATIBLE WASTE — A hazardous waste that is not suited for
placement in a particular device because it may cause corrosion or other
hazards, or is not suited for commingling with any other waste because it
may produce heat, pressure, or a hazardous reaction.
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A disposal system whose
original source of wastes is limited to sewage originating from/on an
individual property, dwelling or premises designed and constructed to
receive, treat and dispose of liquidborne wastes in such manner as to retain
settleable solids in a liquid-type tank and to discharge the liquid portion in
an approved manner to an adequate disposal area. Examples include, but
are not limited to, septic tanks with soil absorption systems, incineratortype
toilets, and holding tank systems.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any liquid, gaseous or solid waste substance
resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade or business or
from development of any natural resources.
INFECTIOUS WASTE — Any waste which because of its infectious nature
may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in morality or an
increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or pose a
substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment
when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise
managed.
MANURE — Animal feces and urine with or without natural organic bedding
materials such as hay, sawdust, straw or wood chips, but exclusive of human
waste.
NEW SUBDIVISION — A subdivision whose plat or plot plan has been
approved after the effective date of this article.
NUISANCE — Any activity which arises from unreasonable, unwarranted or
unlawful use by a person of his own property, working obstruction or injury
to another, or to the public.
OTHER WASTES — Any substance harmful to the health, safety or welfare
of persons including, but not limited to, garbage, refuse, decayed wood,
sawdust, shavings, bark, lime, ashes, offal, oil, tar, chemicals and other
substances other than industrial wastes.
PATHOLOGIC WASTES — Human tissues, fluids and other metabolic byproducts
together with such materials and equipment as may be
contaminated by same to include sharps, laboratory cultures, dialysis unit
wastes and blood and blood products.
PERSON — Any individual, trust, firm, joint stock company, corporation,
partnership or association engaged in the business of commercial solid
waste storage, collection and handling.
POLLUTION — Contamination, or other alteration of the physical, chemical,
or biological properties of any waters or public outdoor atmosphere, which
§ 270-6 NASHUA CODE § 270-6
248:980
will or may create a public nuisance or render such water, land or public
outdoor atmosphere harmful, detrimental, or injurious to public health,
safety, welfare, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural,
recreational or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, animals,
birds, fish or other aquatic life.
PRIVATE NUISANCE — An invasion of a person's interest in the private
use and enjoyment of land, including any wrongful act which destroys or
deteriorates the property of an individual or of a few persons or interferes
with their lawful use or enjoyment thereof, or any act which unlawfully
hinders them in the enjoyment of a common or public right and causes them
a special injury different from that sustained by the general public.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — One which affects an indefinite number of persons
or all the residents of a particular locality or all people coming within the
extent of its range or operation.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer located in a road, street, alley, easement or
right-of-way, used to convey sewage to community treatment and disposal
facilities.
PUTRESCIBLE MATERIAL — Any organic material that can decompose and
give rise to foul smells and noxious by-products.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid and semisolid wastes,
including garbage, rubbish, ashes, manure, street cleanings, dead animals,
and industrial wastes, but not human excreta.
REFUSE COLLECTION — The process whereby solid waste and/or solid
waste containers containing solid waste are taken from designated location
on any premises and loaded into vehicles intended for transport from the
premises to the disposal site.
REFUSE CONTAINER — An approved portable device designed,
constructed or purchased to hold or store solid waste, pending collection
and transport to the disposal area.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes, excluding ashes, consisting of
both combustible and noncombustible wastes.
SEPTIC TANK — A liquid-tight receptacle which receives raw sewage for
storage and digestion, and which has been designed and constructed so
as to retain the solids and to allow the liquids to discharge through a
secondary system of piping to an approved form of subsurface disposal
area.
SEWAGE — The wastes from toilets, baths, sinks, lavatories, washing
machines, and other plumbing fixtures in residences, institutions, public
and business buildings, mobile homes, watercraft, and other places of
human habitation, employment or recreation.
SEWERAGE SYSTEM — Includes the pipes or conduits, pumping stations,
force mains, and all other devices, appurtenances, and facilities used for
collecting, treating or conducting sewage to point of final disposition.
§ 270-6 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 270-6
248:981
SLUDGE — Any solid, semisolid, or liquid waste generated from a
municipal, commercial, or industrial wastewater plant, water supply
treatment plant, or air pollution control facility, exclusive of the treated
effluent from a wastewater treatment plant.
SOLID WASTE — Waste material generated within the City of Nashua and
approved for disposal at the Nashua landfill. It does not include hazardous,
toxic or nuclear waste as defined by the New Hampshire solid or hazardous
waste rules or the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 as amended.
SUBDIVISION — Any lot, tract or parcel of land which is hereafter divided
into two or more parcels.
SUITABLE PERSON — The individual, trust, firm, joint-stock company,
corporation, partnership or association, or employee thereof properly
licensed and equipped to collect and transport solid waste generated and
collected within the City limits of Nashua for disposal at the City landfill in
conformity with this article.
WASTE — Any matter consisting of garbage, refuse, sludge from a waste
treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control
facility, and other spent, discarded or abandoned material, including solid,
liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial,
commercial, mining, and agricultural operations, and from community
activities, but does not include solid or dissolved material in domestic
sewage, or solid or dissolved materials in irrigation, return flows or
industrial discharges which are point sources subject to permits under
Section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended.
WASTE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — Any system for the disposal of sewage and
other wastes, including but not limited to public or franchised sewerage
systems, individual sewage disposal systems, chemical toilets, privies,
waste treatment works, sanitary landfill operations, dumps, incinerators,
and composting operations.
WASTE HANDLING — Includes the complete process required of collection
and transport of bulk or contained solid waste from point of generation to
the disposal site.
WASTE TRANSPORT — Includes that portion of the solid waste disposal
operation which provides for the hauling of solid waste in bulk or refuse
containers to the disposal site.
WASTE TREATMENT WORKS — Any plant, disposal field, lagoon or other
works used for the purpose of treating or stabilizing sewage or industrial
wastes.
WATERS — All rivers, streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses,
waterways, wells, springs, irrigation systems, drainage systems, and all
other bodies of accumulated water, surface and underground, natural or
artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or
border upon the City of Nashua or any portion thereof.
§ 270-7. Procedure for establishing; hearing; notice.
§ 270-6 NASHUA CODE § 270-7
248:982
§ 270-8. Issuance, display of permits. [Amended 6-25-1985 by Ord.
No. O-85-139; 12-10-1985 by Ord. No. O-85-182; 4-13-1999 by Ord.
No. O-99-109; 8-13-2002 by Ord. No. O-02-69]
A. The Board of Public Works may, after notice and public hearing,
establish sanitary landfills within the boundaries of the City and
establish rules and regulations for the collection of all forms of trash
and waste.
B. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing on the establishment
of a landfill. Notice shall be given to the owners of all of the real
property situated within 200 feet of any of the boundaries of the landfill,
or their representatives in interest if of record in the office of the Board
of Assessors, either in hand or by notice sent by certified mail, and
notice also shall be given by publication in a newspaper published in
the City. The notice shall be sent or delivered in hand at least 14 days
before the date and time of the hearing and shall be published at least
14 days before the date and time of the hearing and published again at
least 72 hours before the hearing. Notices sent by mail shall be mailed
to the last known address of the owners or their representatives in
interest.
C. The Board of Public Works shall give notice of any hearing on the
establishment of rules and regulations for the collection of all forms of
trash and waste by publishing such notice in a newspaper published in
the City at least 14 days before the date and time of the hearing.
A. A disposal permit will be required for all non-City-owned vehicles
before any such vehicle shall be allowed to dispose of waste material in
any City landfill. A disposal permit shall be issued only to individuals or
firms resident in the City and shall be valid only for the calendar year in
which it is issued. Each permit shall be nontransferable and shall be
affixed to the lower left-hand corner of the windshield of each vehicle of
the permittee. Transfer of a permit or failure to display a permit, or to
comply with the rules and regulations as established by the Board of
Public Works, by the permittee will result in immediate revocation of
dumping privileges without notice. The City may accept waste material
from any New Hampshire municipality provided that any contract with
any New Hampshire municipality be approved by the Board of Public
Works and the Board of Aldermen. [Amended 9-12-2006 by Ord. No.
O-06-26]
B. Permits will be issued after payment of the fee to be established by the
Board of Public Works.
C. Passenger vehicles and noncommercial vehicle permits shall not exceed
a fee of $5. Commercial vehicle permits shall not exceed a fee of $50.
D. Unless otherwise provided, any person violating any provision of this
article may be punished by a fine of not more than $20, or the loss of
privileges to use the facility, or both.
§ 270-7 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 270-9
248:983
§ 270-9. Fees for deposit of waste. [Amended 12-12-1984 by Ord.
No. O-84-113; 6-25-1986 by Ord. No. O-85-140; 10-11-1988 by Ord.
No. O-88-86; 6-27-1989 by Ord. No. O-89-123; 7-10-1990 by Ord.
No. O-90-35; 11-24-1992 by Ord. No. O-92-13; 8-9-1994 by Ord. No.
O-94-35; 4-13-1999 by Ord. No. O-99-109; 5-23-2000 by Ord. No.
O-00-25; 8-13-2002 by Ord. No. O-02-69; 9-12-2006 by Ord. No.
O-06-25; 9-12-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-26]
All permittees holding permits under § 270-8 shall pay the following fees in
connection with waste material deposited by them at any landfill:
A. For the commercial disposal of mattresses, a fee not to exceed $10 as
established by the Board of Public Works. This fee is in addition to the
applicable tipping fee. This fee does not apply to the residential disposal
of waste by residential customers. [Added 9-12-2006 by Ord. No.
O-06-26]
B. For the deposit of all waste material requiring segregation from the
usual waste stream:
(1) Asbestos or asbestos containing materials from Nashua properties,
packaged and documented in accordance with federal EPA
regulations: $0.10 per pound or fraction thereof, with a minimum
charge of $25.
(2) Asbestos mixed with otherwise clean fill, asbestos siding shingles:
$200 per ton.
(3) All other materials requiring special handling: $80 to $100 per ton.
C. For all acceptable municipal solid waste other than that defined in other
subsections of this section, a sum charged on a per-ton basis not less
than $60 per ton and not more than $90 per ton to be established from
time to time by the aldermanic Finance Committee in consultation with
the Director of Public Works and Board of Public Works. There will be a
minimum charge not to exceed 1/2 of a ton as established by the Board
of Public Works for commercial disposal of municipal solid waste,
construction and demolition debris and sweepings. Waste from mobile
home parks and multifamily residences, including apartment,
condominium, rowhouse and townhouse complexes, shall be exempt
from such fee in accordance with written procedures established by the
Division of Public Works. [Amended 9-12-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-26]
D. For recyclables from commercial customers, a charge sufficient to
cover the cost of handling as determined by the Board of Public Works.
E. If the landfill scale is inoperative, the following schedule of fees will
apply:
(1) Noncompaction vehicles: $1.75 per cubic yard.
(2) Compaction vehicles: $10.50 per cubic yard.
§ 270-9 NASHUA CODE § 270-9
248:984
§ 270-10. Use regulations. [Amended 8-13-2002 by Ord. No.
O-02-69]
§ 270-11. Hours of operation.
No person shall place or leave or cause to be placed or left in any municipal
sanitary landfill in the City any substance whatsoever between the hours of
5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays and at no time whatsoever on Sundays
and legal holidays.
§ 270-12. Industrial waste.
Liquid industrial waste shall be banned entirely from municipal sanitary
landfill areas. Other industrial waste may be deposited in the area so long as
it does not create an obnoxious odor, but shall be deposited in accordance
with the State Board of Health regulations.
§ 270-13. Rodent control.
The Board of Public Works shall maintain an effective program of rodent
control at municipal sanitary landfills, and shall provide rodent control
service at least once a month and more often if necessary.
F. A fee of $10 will be charged for certified weighing for other than landfill
use.
G. Interest at the rate of 1.5% per month will be charged on all unpaid
invoices more than 30 days past due beginning with invoices rendered
after the effective date of this ordinance from which this subsection
derives.
A. In order to provide for recycling of classes of trash and waste which
have an established market value or cannot be used in the sanitary
landfill, no person shall place or leave, or cause to be placed, trash or
waste material of any kind in any place or on any property for collection
except in accordance with rules and regulations promulgated by the
Board of Public Works.
B. No person shall use any municipal sanitary landfill in the City except for
the purpose of dumping, and no person shall pick over or carry away
any substance which has been placed at curbside for collection or
deposited in any municipal sanitary landfill.
C. No person shall place or leave or cause to be placed or left in or near
any dwelling house, barn, shed, store, shop or cellar any substance that
is or is liable to become putrid or offensive or injurious to the public
health.
D. The collection and disposal of materials such as bulky waste and metal
items shall be handled according to the policies as outlined by the
Board of Public Works.
§ 270-9 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 270-14
248:985
§ 270-14. Daily covering of deposits.
Each day's deposit of trash in a municipal sanitary landfill shall be covered
with a minimum of six inches of fill according to the directions outlined in
the Camp, Dresser & McKee report.
§ 270-15. Screening.
There shall be a screen of trees or shrubs for a distance of 125 feet from
any City or property line to the area of operations of the sanitary landfill.
§ 270-16. Access roads.
Access roads to the sanitary landfill operation shall be cleared of refuse
daily.
§ 270-17. Security. [Amended 8-13-2002 by Ord. No. O-02-69]
Adequate security shall be provided at the Four Hills Landfill.
§ 270-18. Violations; penalties. [Amended 3-12-1985 by Ord. No.
O-84-79; 8-13-2002 by Ord. No. O-02-69]
Any person who shall violate or cause to be violated, by agent or otherwise,
any provision of this article, or any order, rule or regulation made by the
Board of Public Works or the Director or Superintendent or the Health
Officer or the Board of Health under the authority of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished as provided in § 1-12 of the City Code and
the costs of prosecution for each offense.
§ 270-14 NASHUA CODE § 270-18
248:986
ARTICLE IV
Commercial Collection and Storage
[Added 4-14-1987 by Ord. No. O-86-104 (Secs. 10-41 to 10-50 of the
1987 Code)]
§ 270-19. Permit requirements. [Amended 8-13-2002 by Ord. No.
O-02-69]
No person shall engage in the activity of commercial collection and handling
of solid waste within the City without first obtaining a permit from the
Environmental Health Department of the City.
§ 270-20. Permit application procedure. [Amended 8-13-2002 by
Ord. No. O-02-69]
The Environmental Health Department of the City may grant to any suitable
person who applies for a permit to collect and transport nonhazardous and
nontoxic solid waste within the City.
§ 270-21. Permitted hours for waste collection and transport.
§ 270-22. Permit termination; appeal process; reapplication.
[Amended 10-13-1987 by Ord. No. O-87-159; 8-13-2002 by Ord. No.
O-02-69]
A. Permits will be issued each year to approved applicants for a period of
one year. Permits will be effective for the current fiscal year or portion
remaining after review and application approval. Said permit may be
terminated earlier for failure to comply with any statute, ordinance or
rule promulgated by any competent authority including the Board of
Public Works, State of New Hampshire, or any federal agency.
[Amended 2-26-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-07]
B. An annual permit fee of $300 is established. [Amended 3-28-2006 by
Ord. No. O-06-06]
A. No person shall collect or convey any solid waste through any street or
public place or way in the City of Nashua, except between the hours of
6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
B. An exception to this time period may be granted by the Health Officer
for good cause shown which shall be applied for in writing by the
collector, for the customer. Approval, if granted, shall be temporary
pending concurrence of the Board of Health and shall only be done on a
case-by-case basis.
C. Direct shipment or transport of solid waste through the City of Nashua
for disposal at other public or private waste disposal sites is not subject
to the permitted hours cited in Subsection A above.
§ 270-19 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 270-22
248:987
§ 270-23. Other wastes not permitted at landfill.
§ 270-24. Limited self-operated collection.
An industrial, commercial or business establishment operating its own
collection service entirely for the benefit of such establishment under one
ownership and for no other establishment and disposing of such permitted
solid waste at the City of Nashua Landfill need not have an operating permit
but shall register the service with the Environmental Health Department
and shall comply with all requirements for collection and transport of solid
waste.
A. The Health Officer or Director or Superintendent may, by written
notice, terminate permits for failure to comply with the requirements of
this article or any rules and regulations on waste collection, transport
and disposal promulgated by competent authority.
B. Persons who have received written notice of termination for any illegal
action or violation of applicable ordinance or law may, upon receipt of
written notice to terminate their operating permit, file a written appeal
for a hearing before the Board of Health and the Board of Public Works.
Said request must be filed with the Health Officer and Director or
Superintendent within 72 hours. The Boards will conduct the hearing
within 10 days of receipt of request for same. Permit termination will be
deferred pending completion of the appeal process. The Board of
Health and Board of Public Works may:
(1) Act to confirm the termination;
(2) Defer action pending correction of the conditions or actions which
led to the termination; or
(3) Cancel the notice of termination.
C. In the event termination is approved, the collector may reapply for a
new permit upon correction of the conditions or actions which
precipitated the termination. If the new application is approved by the
Board of Health, a new permit for the remainder of the current fiscal
year will be granted at the specified annual fee.
A. The following materials shall not be deposited at the Nashua landfill.
(1) Hazardous, toxic, radiological, or incompatible waste; and
(2) Pathological waste or potentially infectious wastes from hospitals,
dental clinics, nursing homes, outpatient clinics or sheltered care
facilities unless separated from general solid wastes and handled in
accordance with NH Licensure Rules and Regulations, He-P801.07,
Infectious Wastes, and HMH Solid Waste Rules, He-P1901-08.
B. Any violation of this rule will result in permit suspension.
§ 270-22 NASHUA CODE § 270-25
248:988
§ 270-25. Site maintenance standard.
§ 270-26. Solid waste containers. [Amended 8-13-2002 by Ord. No.
O-02-69]
§ 270-27. Service frequency.
A. Every person, occupant, owner or permit holder shall have the
responsibility of maintaining premises and equipment under his
supervision to include all waste containers in compliance with this
chapter.
B. The collector shall clean up all garbage, rubbish or waste matter spilled
during collection and shall completely empty containers.
C. No person, owner, agent or occupant of a lot or premises whereon a
building of any kind may exist shall allow any collection of garbage,
rubbish, or waste matter to remain on such lot or premises longer than
three days or any shorter period of time specified by the Health Officer
after the date of a written notice issued by the Health Officer or his
agent to remove the offensive material.
A. Limited-volume standards.
(1) Solid waste containers to be lifted and emptied manually shall not
exceed 32 gallons' capacity, shall be in good repair, leakproof,
rodentproof, free from holes and fitted with tight-fitting covers
which shall be removed only at times of filling and emptying.
(2) Commercial solid waste containers, typically ranging from 60 to
120 gallons or more capacity and designed to be raised and
lowered by power equipment and the collection vehicle may be
used if desired. Said containers must be in good repair, leakproof,
rodent proof, free from holes and fitted with tight-fitting covers
which shall be removed only at times of filling and emptying.
B. Bulk standards. Bulk solid waste containers used for or containing
putrescible matter shall be capable of tight closure, free of leaks,
fissures or cracks, and equipped with operational drain plugs.
C. Container identification. Bulk solid waste containers at all collection
points must be clearly marked with the owner's identity, maintained in
good repair, and regularly cleaned and treated as necessary to prevent
insect infestation and odors.
D. Placement and maintenance of area. Containers shall be placed on an
impervious, well-drained base. The area where containers are stored
pending collection shall be kept clean, free of spilled waste or foulsmelling
liquid or residue.
A. Solid waste material shall be collected and containers emptied at a
frequency which precludes the possibility of an unsightly or unhealthy
§ 270-25 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 270-27
248:989
§ 270-28. Violations and penalties.
premises or the occurrence of a nuisance and in no case be less than
every two weeks.
B. Collection and transfer of waste from food service establishments,
apartments, condominiums, or other commercial or business
establishments which generate or produce putrescible waste will be
required at a rate necessary to preclude the creation of a public
nuisance such as the generation of odor, insects, or rodent harborage.
Said rate of collection and removal being required at least twice weekly
during any season or period of time when the average temperature
exceeds 60° F. Mandatory collection and removal of putrescible waste
may be increased as necessary to preclude a nuisance.
A. Any person violating any provision of this article shall be punished by a
fine not exceeding the provisions of § 1-12 of the City Code or the loss of
dumping privileges, or both.
B. All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed.
§ 270-27 NASHUA CODE § 270-28
248:990
ARTICLE V
Recycling
[Added 4-23-1991 by Ord. No. O-90-68 (Sec. 10-55 of the 1987
Code)]
§ 270-29. Recycling in City-owned buildings.
Mandatory recycling programs shall be in effect in all City-owned buildings,
including those of the Nashua School District, as of July 1, 1991. Additional
recycling programs, which have minimal budgetary impact (as determined
by the Committee on Collection) shall commence as soon after passage of
this article as deemed reasonable by the Committee, but not later than
January 1, 1991.
§ 270-30. Duties of Recycling Coordinator.
The Recycling Coordinator shall determine which materials are to be
recycled and shall oversee the programs as a whole. Each department
shall be responsible for day-to-day implementation of recycling in its own
buildings (including internal collection, quality control and storage), and
each department's program shall be funded out of that department's
budget.
§ 270-29 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 270-30
248:991

ARTICLE VI
Residential Collection
[Added 11-22-1994 by Ord. No. O-94-23 (Sec. 10-5 of the 1987
Code); amended 8-12-1997 by Ord. No. O-97-148; 7-14-1998 by Ord.
No. O-98-17; 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. O-99-141, 8-13-2002 by Ord.
No. O-02-69]
§ 270-31. Placement.
No person shall put or place, or cause, suffer or permit to be put or placed,
any residential waste, refuse, rubbish or garbage upon or near any sidewalk
or public way for the purpose of public or private collection thereof except
in accordance with the following standards:
A. Until the residence has been transferred to the automated collection
program, the waste, refuse, rubbish or garbage is contained within
plastic bags, or other secure, disposable container approved by the
Board of Public Works by regulation from time to time, and which shall
be collected along with the waste refuse, rubbish, or garbage. Such
disposable containers shall, in turn, be placed in a rigid metal, plastic,
or other container for the storage of such waste as approved by the
Board of Public Works by regulation from time to time. This container
shall be in good repair and shall securely enclose the contents with the
exception that it need not be covered on top. The only exceptions to this
subsection are recycling bins containing proper materials to be
recycled and approved bags or other containers containing soft yard
wastes.
B. The waste, refuse, rubbish, garbage, soft yard wastes or recycling shall
only be placed curbside or as otherwise directed by rule or regulation of
the Board of Public Works, upon any street or sidewalk for the purpose
of collection so long as neither pedestrian nor motor vehicle traffic is
obstructed or impeded or thereby endangered. Garbage, trash, refuse,
waste or containers therefor cannot be stored between collections in
front yards or forward of the building lines, when there is other
available outdoor space on the property.
C. All trash carts, recycling carts, recycle bins, soft yard waste containers,
as well as any bulky items requested to be removed by the City of
Nashua Solid Waste Department, must be placed within the confines of
the lot line frontage of the property address of all properties in
residential zones, unless otherwise specified by the Solid Waste
Department. [Added 10-12-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-2889]
D. No waste, refuse, rubbish, garbage or recycling shall be placed on any
sidewalk, or at curbside in the absence of a sidewalk for public
collection earlier than 7:00 a.m. on the day prior to the scheduled day of
collection, and no later than 6:45 a.m. on the day of collection.
89.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former Subsections C
and D as Subsections D and E, respectively.
§ 270-31 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 270-31
248:993
§ 270-32. Additional rules and regulations.
The Board of Public Works may make such additional rules and regulations
pertaining to residential waste, refuse, rubbish or garbage storage and
collection as it may deem advisable in accordance with § 270-7 of this
chapter.
§ 270-33. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-12-2010 by Ord.
No. O-10-28]
Any person who violates any provisions of this article may receive a warning
or have his or her service suspended until such time as compliance is
achieved as determined by the Solid Waste Department. In addition, any
person who violates any provisions of this article may be fined and/or issued
a citation pursuant to § 1-12 of the City Code. For purposes of this section,
person includes the owner of the property or any other person or persons
with authority to effect compliance with this chapter.
E. Waste, refuse, rubbish or garbage containing sharp household
infectious waste will not be collected curbside or accepted at the City
landfill. To dispose of sharp household infectious waste, residents can
utilize disposal programs run by local hospitals pursuant to each
hospital's guidelines. Enforcement of this section may be by either the
Police Department, the Environmental Health Department, or the Code
Enforcement Department, after initial notification to the violator by the
Division of Public Works, Solid Waste Department.
§ 270-31 NASHUA CODE § 270-33
248:994
ARTICLE VII
Automatic Collection
[Added 8-13-2002 by Ord. No. O-02-69 (Sec. 10-4 of the 1987 Code)]
§ 270-34. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish minimum standards for the
storage, collection, transportation and disposal of refuse by automated
collection, and thus promote the health, safety, and welfare of the City's
residents, employees and environment.
§ 270-35. Administrative officer.
The Superintendent of the Solid Waste Department (hereinafter the
"Superintendent") shall have the direct responsibility for the administration
of this article subject to the direction and control of the Director of Public
Works, the Mayor and the Board of Public Works.
§ 270-36. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
AUTOMATED COLLECTION — A method of collecting refuse through the
use of mechanical collection equipment and special containers issued for
the storage and collection of rubbish.
AUTOMATED COLLECTION CONTAINER OR CART — A specially designed
container with wheels, approved by the Division of Public Works, Solid
Waste Department, to be used for the storage of acceptable refuse in the
automated collection operation.
BULKY WASTE — Discarded nonmetal items that may not be placed in the
automated collection container, such as small furniture, mattresses, box
springs, etc.
CITY — The City of Nashua, New Hampshire.
CURBLINE — The area directly behind or adjacent to the curb; in the
absence of a curb, the area adjacent to the edge of pavement or road.
CUSTOMER — Any person or entity receiving service from the City.
DESIGNATED COLLECTION POINT — The place where the automated cart
shall be placed for service, as determined by the Division of Public Works,
Solid Waste Department.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Division of Public Works or his or her dulyauthorized
representative.
DWELLING UNIT — Any building or portion thereof that contains living
facilities (which provide for sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation) for not
more than one household.
§ 270-34 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 270-36
248:995
EXTRA REFUSE — Any refuse placed on, around or in a five-foot radius
of the automated collection container in excess capacity of the automated
container.
INFECTIOUS WASTE — Waste that has the potential to cause an infectious
disease via exposure to a pathogenic organism of sufficient virulence and
dosage, through a portal of entry in a susceptible host.
NONRESIDENTIAL UNIT — Any establishment except those defined under
residential property.
OVERLOADED — The automated container or cart is so full of refuse that its
lid is not completely closed, thereby exceeding the automated cart's rated
capacity.
RECYCLABLE — Any material that is collected and handled by the City for
remanufacture into new products.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — A single or multiple-family housing unit up to
and including apartment buildings of six or fewer dwelling units.
SOFT YARD WASTE — Organic material, including leaves, grass clippings
and pine needles, which are banned by the NH Department of
Environmental Services, its successor agency, or the appropriate regulatory
authority from disposal in landfills.
§ 270-37. General requirements.
A. The Division of Public Works, Solid Waste Department, will provide an
automated collection container and instructions for use to residents
who receive collection services from the Department, prior to the onset
of the new collection program.
B. It shall be the customer's responsibility to assure that automated
collection containers are placed in the appropriate location designated
by the City, by 6:45 am on collection day.
C. The City shall not be responsible for the refuse collection if there is a
violation of any part of this article, or circumstances that are beyond
the control of the City. Circumstances or violations include, but are not
limited to, automated container overload, improperly loaded automated
container, blocked access, automated container inaccessibility, or
dangerous situations.
D. Automated containers shall be placed at the City-designated collection
point on the scheduled collection day by 6:45 a.m. Such location shall
be easily accessible to the container with the lids completely closed,
and unobstructed to the collection vehicle, and with the handle of the
container facing the house. It shall be the duty of each customer to
remove the automated container from the curbline on the same day as
collection. It is prohibited to overload automated containers in a
manner that is likely to cause damage to the collection vehicle,
automated container or create a litter condition or impede collection.
§ 270-36 NASHUA CODE § 270-37
248:996
§ 270-38. Containers.
E. Automated collection within the City is mandatory in those areas
designated by the Superintendent of the Solid Waste Department or
Director of Public Works.
F. Any manure, offal or other noxious material that, in the discretion of the
Superintendent, has not been securely wrapped and placed in an
automated container, shall not be collected. All refuse shall be drained
of any free liquids prior to placement in any automated container. It
shall be the responsibility of the resident to keep automated containers
clean.
G. It shall be a violation hereof to place or deposit any refuse whatsoever
in or around an automated container owned or provided for the use of
another customer without that customer's approval.
H. The City shall reserve the right to inspect any or all refuse, collected
and disposed, prior to and or during collection and disposal for
compliance with local, state, or federal laws or regulations, and to
reject if noncompliant.
A. The automated containers are provided exclusively by the City. No
other type of automated container is allowed. The City shall initially
provide one automated container at no charge to each occupied
residential unit currently serviced by the City. All automated containers
will be assigned to a street address and have an imprinted number for
identification purposes. The automated container shall remain at the
assigned address regardless of whether the property owner or resident
sells or moves.
B. The automated container provided by the City shall not be filled to
exceed the manufacturer's recommended limit (200 pounds total
weight for a container 90 to 95 gallons and 150 pounds for a sixty-fivegallon
container), and all rubbish must fit inside the automated
collection container. The cover of any automated container must be
kept closed at all times except when the automated container is being
filled, emptied or cleaned. Animal wastes and ashes shall be wrapped
separately from other refuse in a manner to prevent spillage prior to
placement in an automated container.
C. Bulky items, such as mattresses, furniture, and brush; tires; and metal
items will be picked up in special collections by appointment only, for
residential properties receiving City municipal solid waste collection
service by the Solid Waste Department, as outlined in the Board of
Public Works policy.
D. Currently served housing units are limited to a maximum number of
automated collection containers, as determined by the Division of
Public Works, Solid Waste Department. If customers require more than
the determined number of automated collection containers, or do not
§ 270-37 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 270-38
248:997
§ 270-39. Rubbish collection service.
have the room to properly place automated containers at curbside for
collection, the Director or Superintendent may order them to purchase
and maintain additional containers or to obtain private collection
service.
E. Any customer in possession of a City-owned automated collection
container shall pay the cost of repair or replacement of any damaged
container, if it is the determination of the Director or Superintendent
that such damage is the result of negligence of, or abuse by, the
customer. The charge shall be the actual cost of repair or replacement
as determined by the City. If a container is rendered unusable through
normal wear and tear, or through the fault of the City, then a
replacement container will be provided at no cost to the residence.
F. The initial automated containers issued by the City are the property of
the City and shall remain with the premises they are assigned to.
Automated container shall only be used for storage and placement for
collection of refuse by the City.
G. In order to maintain an orderly and aesthetic appearance within the
City and to prevent unauthorized encroachment on any street, public
property or private property the Superintendent or Director shall have
the authority to approve the storage location of automated containers
for residential customers. Automated containers shall be stored on
private property except on collection days. Failure by the customer to
comply with City notification citing improper storage for automated
containers shall be a violation of this section.
H. Automated collection containers shall be returned to a secure location
after the pickup, with the exception of automated containers being
stored in a garage or shed, the automated container shall not be stored
anywhere closer to the street than the extension of any existing
building line that faces any street, unless the automated container is
screened from public view by shrubbery, foliage, a fence or wall.
Automated containers are not to be left curbside, street side or roadside
overnight after the day of collection.
A. To be eligible to receive collection service, the customer shall currently
be receiving service as of the effective date of this article, in accordance
with the approved Board of Public Works multifamily collection policy.
B. Standard refuse collection service shall consist of once a week
collection of acceptable refuse, which may include bulky waste, metals
goods, and seasonal soft yard wastes, in accordance with policies as
outlined by the Board of Public Works.
C. Residential curbside collection of acceptable recyclables shall consist of
biweekly pickup service, in accordance with policies as outlined by the
Board of Public Works.
§ 270-38 NASHUA CODE § 270-40
248:998
§ 270-40. Points of collection.
Automated containers shall be placed:
§ 270-41. Prohibited material. [Amended 2-26-2008 by Ord. No.
O-08-07]
All materials prohibited under other ordinances are also prohibited under
this article. In addition, the following materials are prohibited:
A. Within two feet of the curbline or where directed by the City.
B. At least three feet away from all objects such as fences, mailboxes, and
utility poles, and clear of overhanging vegetation, utility wires, etc., to
allow for the unimpeded operation of collection vehicles.
C. So that the automated container handle is facing the dwelling unit.
D. At least three feet from recycling and yard waste containers.
E. At least 10 feet away from parked vehicles.
F. Residents are responsible for ensuring the accessibility of all
containers.
A. No toxic, extremely hazardous, dangerous/hazardous or liquid waste as
defined now or hereafter, shall be deposited curbside or in any
automated collection container intended for disposal.
B. Household hazardous waste and small quantity generator waste shall
not be deposited curbside or in any automated collection container.
C. No infectious waste or sharps shall be placed curbside or in any
automated container for collection.
D. No rocks, concrete, asphalt, dirt, or other similar material shall be
placed in automated containers.
E. Yard waste and recyclables shall be separated from refuse and placed in
separate containers for separate collection, as outlined in the Board of
Public Works policy.
F. No hot ashes or any other material capable of causing ignition or
spontaneous combustion shall be placed in any automated collection
container.
G. No motor oil or other automotive fluids shall be deposited in any
automated container.
H. The City reserves the right to prohibit, or to place disposal restrictions
upon any waste that may adversely affect the disposal site. This shall
also extend to any item that may pose a risk to the health or safety of
City employees. Disposal restrictions that may be implemented shall
include, but are not limited to, item size restrictions, quantity
§ 270-40 REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED § 270-41
248:999
§ 270-42. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by either the Police Department, the
Environmental Health Department or the Code Enforcement Department or
their duly authorized agents, after initial notification to the violator by the
Division of Public Works, Solid Waste Department.
§ 270-43. Violations and penalties.
Any customer found willfully violating any of the provisions of this article
may have their service terminated by the Superintendent or Director.
restrictions, recycling regulations, special preparation requirements,
and rubbish source documentation requirements.
I. Failure of a customer to comply with disposal restrictions will be
deemed a violation and may, at the discretion of the Superintendent or
Director, result in revocation of collection services.
§ 270-41 NASHUA CODE § 270-43
248:1000
Chapter 280
STREET AND BUILDING IDENTIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and site plan procedures — See
Ch. 190.
§ 280-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards for street and building
identification in public and private developments and complexes in order
to ensure their expeditious location by police and fire officials in times of
emergency.
§ 280-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
STREET — Includes either existing or dedicated public streets, private
streets or private driveways leading to a cluster or group of buildings.
§ 280-3. Conflict with existing names.
At the time of preliminary subdivision or site plan approval by the City
Planning Board, all proposed street names or designations shall be checked
for approval with the street names currently on file in the City Engineer's
office. Submitted names which are similar to existing street names or
designations will not be approved.
§ 280-4. Temporary street signs.
A. Issuance of a building permit by the Code Official shall be contingent
upon the owner agreeing to install, within five working days of the
initiation of construction, temporary street signs in conformance with
the following specifications:
(1) Color: White letters on a green background.
(2) Size: Sign letters shall be at least four inches in height and the sign
a minimum of six inches in height with a maximum sign height of 10
inches.
(3) Height from ground: Signs shall be at the top of a post no lower
than seven feet and no higher than eight feet from the ground.
(4) Visibility: Signs shall have the street name on both sides and shall
be located within 10 feet of an intersection and parallel to the
street they identify. Signs shall be located to ensure that they are
§ 270-43 STREET AND BUILDING IDENTIFICATION § 280-4
280:1001
§ 280-5. Permanent street signs.
Permanent street signs are subject to the following procedures and
standards:
not obstructed from view by any natural or man-made object or
feature, natural elements or weather excepted.
(5) Material: Signs and posts shall be constructed of wood or metal and
fixed to the ground in a vertical position. Paper and cardboard
signs are excluded.
(6) Maintenance: The owner of the development or his agent shall be
responsible for the maintenance of all signs required under this
section.
B. Exception. The provisions of this section shall not apply to shopping
malls, shopping centers or recreational buildings which have or share a
common area for vehicular movement if the name of the facility is
clearly identifiable from a public street.
A. Dedicated public streets. When the Code Official issues a certificate of
occupancy for the first building or buildings on a dedicated public
street, he shall immediately notify the Board of Public Works of such
action. The Board of Public Works shall, as soon feasible, install a
permanent street sign to current City standards.
B. Private streets and driveways. Before the Code Official issues a
certificate of occupancy for the first building or buildings on a common
private street or driveway, the owner shall have installed permanent
street identification signs to the following standards:
(1) Sign color: Signs should be of white luminous block-style letters on
a green background.
(2) Size: Sign letters shall be at least four inches in height and the sign
a minimum of six inches in height with a maximum sign height of 10
inches.
(3) Height from ground: The sign shall be at the top of a post of no less
than seven feet nor more than eight feet from the ground.
(4) Visibility: Signs shall have the street name on both sides and shall
be located within 10 feet of an intersection and parallel to the
street they identify. Signs shall be located to ensure that they are
not obstructed from view by any natural or man-made object or
feature, natural elements or weather excepted.
(5) Material: Signs and posts shall be constructed of wood or metal and
fixed to the ground in a vertical position. This is meant to exclude
paper and cardboard signs.
§ 280-4 NASHUA CODE § 280-5
280:1002
§ 280-6. Multifamily, commercial, residential and industrial
building identification.
All multifamily, commercial, residential and industrial buildings shall be
clearly marked for identification as prescribed in the following sections:
(6) Maintenance: The owner of the development and/or his agent shall
be responsible for the maintenance of all signs required under this
section.
C. Exception. The provisions of this section shall not apply to shopping
malls, centers or recreational buildings which share or have common
area for vehicular movement if the name of such center is clearly
identifiable from a public street.
A. Multifamily buildings within complexes.
(1) All buildings must be clearly designated by street numbers or
letters.
(2) All numbers or letters used to designate buildings must be a
minimum of three inches in height and shall be Arabic numbers or
block-style letters.
(3) All such numbers or letters must appear at both the front and rear
doors of all such buildings.
(4) All identifying characters must be placed on the door or near the
door so as to be clearly visible from the public or private street or
driveway.
(5) The owner of the development or his agent shall be responsible for
the maintenance of all building identification required under this
section.
B. Commercial or industrial buildings within complexes or with more than
one principal tenant per building.
(1) All buildings must be clearly designated by street numbers or
letters.
(2) All numbers or letters used to designate buildings must be a
minimum of three inches in height and shall be Arabic numbers or
block-style letters.
(3) All rear exterior doors of such buildings shall be clearly labeled
with the above numbers or letters or may be identified with the
name of the commercial or industrial enterprise.
(4) All identifying characters must be placed on the door or near the
door so as to be clearly visible from the public or private street or
driveway.
§ 280-5 STREET AND BUILDING IDENTIFICATION § 280-6
280:1003
§ 280-7. Modifications to chapter.
Modifications of the requirements of this chapter may be granted for the
good cause upon written request to and written by the Fire Chief of the City.
§ 280-8. Enforcement.
The overall responsibility for the enforcement of this chapter shall be that of
the Fire Department, utilizing such other agencies of the City government
as the Fire Commissioners, in their discretion, deem appropriate.
Chapter 285
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
(5) The owner of the development and/or his agent shall be responsible
for the maintenance of all building identification required under
this section.
C. All other multifamily, commercial, residential or industrial buildings.
(1) All buildings must be clearly designated by street numbers or
letters.
(2) All numbers or letters used to designate buildings must be a
minimum of three inches in height and shall be Arabic numbers or
block style letters.
(3) All such numbers or letters shall appear at the front door of all such
buildings.
(4) All identifying characters must be placed on the door or near the
door so as to be clearly visible from the public or private street or
driveway.
(5) The owner of the building or development, or his agent, shall be
responsible for the maintenance of all building identification
required under this section.
§ 280-6 NASHUA CODE § 280-8
280:1004
ARTICLE I
Use of Roads for Recreational Purposes
[NRO 1975, T. 12, §§ 1801 and 1802 (Secs. 13-401 to 13-402 of the
1987 Code)]
§ 285-1. Running or jogging at night. [Amended 12-21-1982 by Ord.
No. O-82-19]
All persons who use the public roads for the purpose of running or jogging
during the evening hours between sunset and sunrise shall wear while
doing so at least one item of reflective material with a cumulative total of at
least 24 square inches in area. Such material shall be worn in a manner so
as to be readily visible to any automotive vehicle approaching the runner or
jogger from either the front or the rear.
§ 285-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-21-1982 by Ord. No.
O-82-19]
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be liable to a fine not
in excess of $10.
§ 285-1 STREET AND BUILDING IDENTIFICATION § 285-2
280:1005

ARTICLE II
Construction and Repair
[NRO 1975, T. 6, §§ 901, 904a to 918 (Secs. 19-16 to 19-33 of the
1987 Code)]
§ 285-3. Street width.
No street or highway shall be accepted or laid out by the City of less width
than 50 feet.
§ 285-4. Construction of sidewalk ramps at points of vehicular
access. [Amended 11-14-1977 by Ord. No. O-77-267]
No sidewalk shall be constructed or reconstructed unless provision is made
for the installation of ramps suitable for wheelchair travel at or near each
street intersection, driveway or other point where the sidewalk intersects
with any location of vehicular access.
§ 285-5. Edgestones.
Whenever any owner or owners of land upon any street shall make
application to the Board of Public Works for edgestone to be set in front of
such land, the Board may furnish and set the edgestone if in its judgment
the public good will be promoted thereby.
§ 285-6. Agreement for sidewalk.
In all requests for edgestones granted by the Board of Public Works, the
landowners shall agree with the Board, in writing, to lay, within 30 days
from the setting of the edgestone, a sidewalk of hard-burned brick, concrete
or other material satisfactory to the Board in front of the land to the
satisfaction of the Board. If the sidewalk is not built within the time
specified, the landowners shall pay the City the cost of such edgestone
and setting. If the Board so elects, the edgestone may be removed for
use elsewhere, the expense of setting and removing to be charged to the
landowners. All of such expenses shall be collected from the owner or
owners as other bills due the City.
§ 285-7. Grade of fences, walls, lawns and buildings.
No person shall proceed to erect or make any alteration in the location or
grade of any fence, wall, lawn or building, a part of which is to abut a public
street or square, without first applying to the City Engineer for the lines
and grades of the street or square at the point where the structure is to be
built or the grading done. Such application shall be made at least 15 days
before the work is to be begun, and the City Engineer shall, within that time,
furnish the required lines and grades without charge, if it is in his power
to do so. In default of such application, the City shall not be liable for any
damages resulting from such default or from change of grades of streets or
squares.
§ 285-3 STREET AND BUILDING IDENTIFICATION § 285-8
280:1007
§ 285-8. License required to disturb surface.
No individual shall make an excavation or otherwise disturb the surface of
any public street of the City, except as set forth in this article, without a
license granted by the Board of Public Works.
§ 285-9. License required for obstructing. [Amended 10-12-1982 by
Ord. No. O-82-63]
§ 285-10. Newspaper and magazine vending machines. [Amended
11-10-1983 by Ord. No. O-83-143]
A. The Board of Public Works may grant a license in writing to any person
for the purpose of building or for other lawful purposes, to obstruct or
encumber so much and such part of any street, lane, alley, sidewalk, or
other public place in the City, and on such terms and conditions as they
may deem safe and proper.
B. A base fee of $300 will be charged for the issuance of license to
encumber a highway involving the movement of a house, garage or
other structure through City streets. If costs to the City incident to such
movement exceed the base fee, the licensee will be charged the total
amount in excess thereof.
A. Notwithstanding any other provisions of the City Code, in recognition of
important considerations of freedom of speech and the press, the
Director of Public Works or his designee shall issue a license allowing
the erection of a newspaper or magazine vending machine upon the
public sidewalk, upon application to him demonstrating the following:
(1) The machine shall not be erected at a distance less than three feet
from the paved edge of any street, driveway or entranceway
commonly traveled by automobiles.
(2) The machine shall not infringe upon a clear corridor for pedestrian
traffic of five feet in width on the Main Street sidewalk between
Amherst Street and Hollis Street and of four feet in width on all
other sidewalks.
(3) The machine shall, through the use of bolts, chains, cables or
weight, be made stable and unmovable by other than authorized
persons using appropriate equipment.
(4) The machine shall not be attached, supported by or impede access
to any parking meter, traffic-control sign or signal, City-owned light
pole, refuse receptacle, tree or tree guard.
(5) The applicant has liability insurance, as attested by insurance
certificates naming the City as an additional insured, providing
protection in the sum of $300,000 for injury to persons and
$100,000 for property damage.
§ 285-8 NASHUA CODE § 285-10
280:1008
§ 285-11. Obstruction of street or sidewalk.
No person shall break or dig up the ground or stones in any street, lane,
alley or any sidewalk in the City, or erect any staging for building or place
or deposit any stones, brick, timber or other building materials thereon,
without first obtaining a written license from the Board of Public Works or
some person authorized by them to grant such a license, and complying in
all respects with the conditions of such license.
§ 285-12. Removal of snow. [Amended 4-19-1977 by Ord. No.
O-77-140]
The Board of Public Works shall, on a priority basis, within 48 hours after
the conclusion of any snow storm, take all steps necessary to remove snow
and ice from all streets and sidewalks extending a distance of 1,000 feet
from the entrance of all City schools.
§ 285-13. License to excavate. [Amended by Ord. No. O-97-181;
11-12-2003 by Ord. No. O-03-219]
B. Any applicant whose license request has been rejected by the Director
of Public Works may appeal to the Board of Public Works at their next
meeting. The Board of Public Works may upon a hearing overrule the
director and grant the license if it shall determine that justice so
requires.
C. Any person erecting a newspaper or magazine vending machine
without first obtaining a license as provided in this section shall be
subject to the general penalty provisions as provided in § 1-12 of the
City Code.
D. Any newspaper or magazine vending machine erected on a public
sidewalk without a license or not in accordance with the
representations of the license application may be removed by the City
and the owners charged for the expense upon 24 hours' notice.
A. The Board of Public Works may grant licenses to individuals or
corporations who apply in writing for the privilege of excavating
trenches or otherwise disturbing the surface of streets of the City.
B. Such persons shall execute a bond to the City, in the amount deemed
necessary by the Board, conditional:
(1) That all excavations shall be properly guarded at all times for the
protection of the public;
(2) That all points where the street, sidewalk, alley, lane or other
surface improvement is disturbed shall be properly resurfaced and
left in as good condition as when found, and to the satisfaction of
the Board;
(3) That all resurfacing work shall be divided into two separate phases:
§ 285-10 STREET AND BUILDING IDENTIFICATION § 285-13
280:1009
(a) Phase I. A temporary resurfacing patch shall be made no later
than three working days after completion of work for which
such surface improvement was disturbed.
(b) Phase II. The final resurfacing work shall be completed no
sooner than 30 working days and no later than 45 working days
after laying of temporary resurfacing to allow for settling of fill.
The Board may authorize the department of public works to
extend the completion for final resurfacing for up to one year if
required by existing conditions.
(4) That the City shall be indemnified and held harmless from any
damages or costs for which the City may be liable by reason of
injuries resulting from neglect, carelessness or incompetency in
the progress of the work, or in properly fencing or lighting any
excavation or obstruction, or in performing any other work
connected therewith.
C. Such licenses shall be valid for one year from the date of issue, unless
sooner revoked.
D. The bond will be released upon approval of such resurfacing by the City.
E. The Board may exempt licensed drainlayers from any of the provisions
of this section.
F. Any construction activity that requires cutting into, connecting to,
disturbing, or otherwise damaging an existing public street shall
require the licensee to reconstruct the street by removing the existing
asphalt, aggregate base, and subgrade material a minimum of three
feet in each direction beyond the damaged area (or up to the edge of
pavement if closer than three feet), and placing a minimum of 18 inches
of aggregate base, and two inches more than the existing asphalt
concrete thickness, but never less than five inches total asphalt
concrete on residential streets, and seven inches total asphalt concrete
on all other streets. This obligation shall apply to all excavations,
including work under Articles V and VI of this chapter.
G. Construction shall not be permitted on any street paved within the past
five years, except for emergency or hardship purposes only, and only if,
at the licensee's expense, the street is reconstructed by removing the
existing asphalt, aggregate base, and subgrade material a minimum of
three feet in each direction beyond the damaged area (or up to the edge
of pavement if closer than three feet, and placing a minimum of 18
inches of aggregate base, and a minimum of three inches total asphalt
concrete on residential streets, and five inches total asphalt concrete on
all other streets. In addition, the licensee shall resurface the entire
street from curb to curb, and for a minimum of 20 feet beyond either
end of the disturbed area as measured along the center line of the
roadway, and a minimum asphalt concrete thickness of two inches. Full
depth edge grinding shall be performed to maintain curb profile, and
§ 285-13 NASHUA CODE § 285-13
280:1010
§ 285-14. Barricades, lights.
Whenever any street, lane, alley, sidewalk or other public place in the
City shall, under any license granted under this article, be obstructed or
encumbered and thereby rendered unsafe or inconvenient for travelers, the
person so obstructing or encumbering shall put, and at all times keep up,
a suitable railing or fence around the section or parts of the street, alley,
lane or side-walk or other public place obstructed or encumbered so long as
the same shall remain unsafe or inconvenient, and shall keep one or more
lighted lanterns fixed to the fence or in some other proper manner, every
night from twilight and through the whole night, so long as such railing or
fence shall be kept standing. He shall also, within such reasonable time as
the Board of Public Works shall direct, amend and repair the street, lane,
alley, sidewalk or public place to the acceptance of the Board.
§ 285-15. Cellar entrances.
No person shall make, erect or maintain any doorstep, portico, porch,
entrance or passageway to any cellar or basement, or any other structure,
in or upon any street, lane, alley or sidewalk in the City without permission
in writing from the Board of Public Works. No person shall suffer the
platform or grate of the entrance or passageway to his cellar or basement
in any street, lane, alley or sidewalk to rise above the even surface of the
street, lane, alley, or sidewalk. Every entrance or passageway shall be kept
covered by a suitable and substantial platform or grate. If kept open it shall
be guarded and protected by a sufficient railing on both sides, at least 2 1/
2 feet high and shall be well lighted at night.
§ 285-16. Poles and wires.
All permits or licenses granted by the Board of Public Works to public utility
companies or others under the provisions of Section 63 of the City Charter,
for placing and maintaining poles or wires, in, over or under the streets,
highways or sidewalks of the City, shall stipulate as a condition thereof that
the poles or wires so placed and maintained shall conform to the National
Electric Safety Code. No public utility company or others shall place and
maintain the same as aforesaid without such permit or license.
§ 285-17. Underground utility services.
No person, firm, contractor, company or corporation shall install
underground utility services such as water lines, sewer lines, gas mains,
telephone cables, television cables or power lines until a plan locating such
preclude feathering of pavement. This obligation shall apply to all
excavations, including work under Articles V and VI of this chapter.
H. The board may permit and authorize the Division of Public Works to
conduct pilot programs for the excavation and resurfacing of streets to
evaluate new technologies, methods, and/or materials. [Added
10-14-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-34]
§ 285-13 STREET AND BUILDING IDENTIFICATION § 285-17
280:1011
services has been filed with the City Engineer. The plan shall include the
location of the proposed underground service in relation to the nearest
street and lot lines, which shall be properly identified, and the relationship
of the proposed underground service to the nearest service of the same kind
of which it is or is intended to be an extension, now or in the future, and the
depth of the utility installation.
§ 285-18. Easements.
No underground utility service shall be installed in publicly or privately
owned land until an easement therefor has been secured from the owner
of the land. The lines of any easement secured for the purpose of installing
underground utilities shall be identified on any plan submitted to the City
Engineer, and the relationship of the proposed underground service to such
easement lines set forth.
§ 285-19. Exemptions.
This article shall not apply to streets or ways which have become public
ways by the laws of the state.
§ 285-20. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-12-1985 by Ord. No.
O-84-79]
Any violation of this article shall, upon complaint of the Board of Public
Works, be punishable as provided in § 1-12 of the City Code. In addition,
anyone making an excavation or otherwise disturbing the surface of any
public street or easement of the City shall upon request of the Board
return the public street or easement to the condition it was in before the
excavation or disturbance started.
§ 285-17 NASHUA CODE § 285-20
280:1012
ARTICLE III
Acceptance and Discontinuance
[NRO 1975 T. 6, §§ 919 to 923 (Secs. 19-34 to 19-38 of the 1987
Code)]
§ 285-21. Petitioner's procedure for acceptance of streets.
[Amended 11-29-1978 by Ord. No. O-78-145; 12-26-2000 by Ord.
No. O-00-103]
Pursuant to RSA 47:17 XV, upon petition, the Board of Aldermen may accept
streets for public use, provided that the following requirements have been
complied with:
A. The petitioner shall cause to be prepared, in accordance with such rules
as the City Engineer may prescribe, an accurate plan and profile,
showing the length of frontage of each lot and the lot numbers, the
proposed lines and grades, and any other information which the City
Engineer shall require in order to define the work to be built.
B. The plan and profile shall be submitted to the City Engineer for his
approval, and he may require such alterations in them as he deems
necessary.
C. When the City Engineer has approved the plan and profile, the
petitioner shall submit such plans signed "approved" by the City
Engineer, together with his subdivision plat for approval to the Planning
Board in accordance with Article XVI of Chapter 190 of the City Code.
D. Upon approval by the Planning Board, the street shall then be
constructed by the petitioner, under City inspection, in conformance
with the approved plans and the requirements of Article XVI of Chapter
190 of the City Code.
E. The petitioner shall submit his petition for street acceptance to the City
Engineer on a form provided by him. The petition shall describe the
limits of the street to be accepted in metes and bounds, and shall be
accompanied by a mylar copy of the approved street plan which shows
the limits of the street to be accepted.
F. The City Engineer shall certify that the street has been constructed in
accordance with the approved plan.
G. The petitioner shall provide the written opinion of an attorney, licensed
in New Hampshire, in a form acceptable to corporation counsel, to
establish that the petitioner has sufficient property rights in the rightof-
way of the proposed street to dedicate it for acceptance as a Class V
highway. The opinion shall be addressed to the fee simple title of the
right-of-way and all liens and encumbrances of record. City Solicitor/
Corporation Counsel shall review said opinion and submit written
comments to the appropriate aldermanic committee.
§ 285-21 STREET AND BUILDING IDENTIFICATION § 285-22
280:1013
§ 285-22. Aldermanic procedure for acceptance of streets.
[Amended 11-15-1979 by Ord. No. O-79-234; 12-26-1995 by Ord.
No. O-95-148]
§ 285-23. Petitioner's procedure for discontinuance of streets.
[Amended 11-29-1978 by Ord. No. O-78-145]
Upon petition, the Board of Aldermen may discontinue from public
dedication or use any street or highway or portion thereof, provided that
the following requirements have been complied with:
§ 285-24. Aldermanic procedure for discontinuance of streets.
[Amended 11-29-1978 by Ord. No. O-78-145; 12-26-1995 by Ord.
No. O-95-148; 2-26-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-07]
When the requirements of § 285-23A and B have been met, the Board of
Aldermen shall proceed as follows (pursuant to RSA Chapter 238):
A. When the requirements of § 285-21 have been met, the City Engineer
shall submit the petition to the Board of Aldermen.
B. The Board of Aldermen, through the appropriate aldermanic
committee, shall hold a public hearing on the petition. The City
Engineer's office shall give notice to the abutters and petitioner by
certified mail, by publication in a newspaper printed in the City, and by
posting a notice in City hall at least 15 days before the public hearing.
C. The Board of Aldermen and the Mayor shall then act upon the petition,
in accordance with the regular procedures of the Board on resolutions.
D. If the petition is approved, the street or highway specified thereon shall
thereafter by subject to public use and maintenance.
A. The petitioner shall cause to be prepared a plan of the street proposed
for discontinuance showing the abutting owners, the location of the
proposed new property lines, any existing utilities, and the new bounds
to be set. The Planning Board staff may waive the rules when the plans
and petitions involve one-owner tracts.
B. The petitioner shall submit a petition for street discontinuance to the
City Clerk on a form provided by him. The petition shall describe the
limits of the street to be discontinued in metes and bounds and shall be
accompanied by a copy of the plan required in Subsection A of this
section.
C. If the petition is granted by the Board of Aldermen in accordance with
§ 285-24, then the petitioner shall record the plan in the county
Registry of Deeds.
A. The Board of Aldermen, through the appropriate aldermanic
committee, shall hold a public hearing on the petition, giving notice to
the abutters by certified mail, by publication in a newsletter printed in
§ 285-22 NASHUA CODE § 285-24
280:1014
§ 285-25. Conveyance of title of discontinued streets. [Amended
11-29-1978 by Ord. No. O-78-145]
the City, and by posting a notice in City hall at least 15 days before such
public hearing.
B. The Board of Aldermen shall refer the matter to the Planning Board for
report thereon, but if the Planning Board does not make its report
within 30 days of such reference, it shall be deemed thereby to have
forfeited the right further to suspend action. If the Planning Board
disapproves the proposed discontinuance, the Board of Aldermen shall
not have the right to overrule such decision, unless by vote of not less
than 2/3 of its entire membership. (See RSA 36:18.)
C. Before reaching its decision the Planning Board shall refer the matter
to the City Engineer for his recommendations.
D. The Board of Aldermen and the Mayor shall act upon the petition in
accordance with the regular procedures of the Board in resolutions.
E. Granting of the petition by the Board of Aldermen shall be conditional
on the petitioner's recording the plan in the county Registry of Deeds,
as stipulated in § 285-23C.
F. If the petition is granted by the Board of Aldermen and the plan is
recorded in the Registry of Deeds, the street or highway specified
thereon shall thereafter be discontinued and no longer subject to public
use, other than as may be specified in the discontinuance petition as
granted or as shown on the plan approved.
A. If a street or highway, or portion thereof, is discontinued, the fee
interest of the City in the land under the street, if any, shall be sold by
the City pursuant to a resolution of the Board of Aldermen on such
terms and conditions and to such abutters as they shall determine.
B. Based on the recorded plan, the City Solicitor/Corporation Counsel
shall prepare a resolution for the sale of land underlying such
discontinued street to those abutters stipulated by the Board of
Aldermen, subject to any reservations shown on the plan or included in
the petition.
C. Following passage of the resolution by the Mayor and Board of
Aldermen, the City corporation counsel shall prepare deeds and have
them properly executed and recorded.
D. The fees for recording and all other expenses incurred are to be
included in the consideration for the deeds.
§ 285-24 STREET AND BUILDING IDENTIFICATION § 285-25
280:1015

ARTICLE IV
General Street and Sidewalk Regulations
[NRO 1975, T. 6, §§ 951 to 957, 959 (Secs. 19-50 to 19-56 and 19-58
to 19-59 of the 1987 Code)]
§ 285-26. Rubbish.
§ 285-27. Firewood, coal and other fuel; when barricade required.
No person shall suffer any firewood, coal or other fuel, in any quantity, to
remain unnecessarily on any sidewalk, or in any street, lane or alley. If such
fuel must of necessity remain after twilight or through the night, the owner
thereof shall place and keep a sufficient light over or near the same in order
to give notice thereof to travelers and passengers, and thereby prevent
injury to them.
§ 285-28. Placing snow or yard debris in street. [Amended
3-12-1985 by Ord. No. O-84-79; 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-007]
§ 285-29. Moving buildings.
No person shall move, or assist in moving, any house, shop or other building
through any street, lane, alley of over any bridge without first obtaining a
written license therefor, as provided in § 285-9.
A. No person shall put or place, or cause to be put or placed, in or on any
street, lane, alley, sidewalk or other public place any house dirt, ashes,
garbage, shreds, shavings, filth, suds, offal, oyster shells or other
rubbish, except in such place and in such manner as the Board of Public
Works may prescribe.
B. No person shall tip over, handle or remove any rubbish or waste placed
in barrels, rubbish cans or boxes upon any street, lane or alley except as
under the direction of the Board of Public Works.
A. No person shall by himself or by his agent or agents throw, push, blow
or put any snow, ice, or yard debris, including but not limited to leaves,
branches, and grass clippings, into the right-of-way of any way, street,
lane, alley, or sidewalk. This section shall not apply to the following
situations:
(1) Placement has been directed or requested by the Division of Public
Works; or
(2) Cleanup or collection of material is simultaneously occurring.
B. Any person who shall violate this section shall upon conviction be
subject to punishment as provided in § 1-12.
§ 285-26 STREET AND BUILDING IDENTIFICATION § 285-30
280:1017
§ 285-30. Doors, gates opening onto public ways.
No person shall place, establish or maintain any gate or door, driving gates
excepted, in his or her fence, store or dwelling house, or place of business,
in such manner that it will swing into, upon, across or onto any sidewalk in
or on any public street, avenue, lane or alley, unless the gates or doors shall
be made in such a manner as to be self closing.
§ 285-31. Disturbing edgestones.
No person shall make any excavation or otherwise disturb any edgestone
which has been set under the direction of the City, in any public street,
without a permit signed by the Board of Public Works.
§ 285-32. Cisterns, wells, drains; barricade required.
§ 285-33. Repair of motor vehicles. [Added 9-12-1984 by Ord. No.
O-84-73]
Except to take emergency measures necessitated by an unforeseen
breakdown and necessary to render a vehicle operable, no person shall
perform repair or maintenance work upon any motor vehicle while such
vehicle is parked upon any street, lane, alley, sidewalk or other public place.
§ 285-34. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-12-1984 by Ord. No.
O-84-73; 3-12-1985 by Ord. No. O-84-79]
Any person who shall violate any provision of §§ 285-26, 285-27, or 285-29
through 285-32 of this article shall be subject to punishment as provided in
§ 1-12.
A. No person shall permit or suffer a well, cistern or drain in any street,
lane, alley or sidewalk in the City to be or remain open or uncovered
unless enclosed by a strong safe curb, guard or fence.
B. If any person shall dig or sink or cause to be dug or sunk, or leave
uncovered, or cause to be left uncovered, any well, cellar, cistern, drain
or other cavity in the ground, near to or adjoining any street, lane, alley
or sidewalk in the City, he shall put up and at all times keep up, so long
as it may be necessary for the purpose, a railing or fence on or near the
line of such street, lane, alley or sidewalk, sufficient to guard and
protect travelers and passengers from falling into such well, cellar,
cistern, drain or other cavity in the ground, or being injured thereby.
§ 285-30 NASHUA CODE § 285-34
280:1018
ARTICLE V
Transportation of Waste Material
[NRO, T. 6, § 958 (Sec. 19-57 of the 1987 Code); amended 3-12-1985
by Ord. No. O-84-79]
§ 285-35. Transportation of sand, loam, gravel waste material on
City streets.
No person shall transport any sand, loam, gravel or waste material in a
truck, trailer, automobile, carriage or vehicle of any description, motorized
or otherwise, on the City streets, whether going to or returning from a
sanitary landfill or in transit through or to any other point in the City, unless
the sand, gravel, loam or waste material being transported is adequately
covered and tied down with a canvas covering or other similar covering so
as to prevent any sand, gravel, loam or waste material being transported
from falling out if the vehicle is of the covered type, unless the doors of the
vehicle shall be kept closed or that part of the vehicle which remains open
shall be blocked with a canvas covering or similar covering so as to prevent
any sand, loam, gravel or waste material being transported from falling out
of the vehicle or being blown out into the streets.
§ 285-36. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate or cause to be violated any provision of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in § 1-12 of
the City Code.
§ 285-35 STREET AND BUILDING IDENTIFICATION § 285-36
280:1019

ARTICLE VI
Work Performed by Government Agencies
[NRO 1975, T. 6, §§ 1101-1117 (Secs. 19-76 to 19-92 of the 1987
Code)]
§ 285-37. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words shall, unless inconsistent with
the context, be construed as follows:
AGENCY — The agency of government, public utility or company for whom
the work is being done.
CONTRACTOR — The person, firm, corporation or combination thereof,
private or municipal, actually performing the work.
ENGINEER — The City Engineer, including his duly authorized agents.
GOVERNING AUTHORITY — The City or the state.
LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY — The City Police Department.
§ 285-38. Compliance with laws.
All work done in public streets and public easements shall be in accordance
with this article, and the agency or contractor shall perform the work in
compliance with applicable laws and regulations of the federal government,
the state and the City which limit or control the work in any manner.
§ 285-39. Exceptions.
Any exception to the requirements of this article must be requested of the
Board of Public Works in writing and permission granted in writing.
§ 285-40. Notification of project starting date.
Other than in the event of bona fide emergency, the City Engineer, the Fire
Department and the Police Department must be notified of the starting date
and time of each and every project within the public streets or easements. If
notification is not given before commencement of the project, a fine of $500
shall be levied for each day or fraction thereof during which the project has
been underway and the contractor shall immediately stop work and return
the public street or easement to the condition it was in before excavation
started.
§ 285-41. Accident prevention and safety measures.
A. Precaution shall be exercised at all times for the protection of persons
and property. The safety provisions of applicable laws and building and
construction codes shall be observed.
B. Evidence of adequate liability insurance coverage must be provided to
the public works inspector upon request.
§ 285-37 STREET AND BUILDING IDENTIFICATION § 285-41
280:1021
§ 285-42. Maximum length of trenching operation.
C. The contractor shall take all necessary measures to protect the work
and prevent accidents during construction. The contractor shall provide
and maintain sufficient night lights, signs, barricades, flagmen,
temporary sidewalks and surfacing, appropriate temporary bridges,
danger signals, watchmen and other appliances and safeguards
necessary to properly safeguard life and property. "No Parking" signs
shall not be placed without proper authority.
D. No traffic regulating, warning, directional or street name signs shall be
removed from the area of the work, or relocated therein, unless so
indicated on the plans or unless so ordered by the Engineer. Signs shall
be removed and replaced as directed by the Engineer.
E. The contractor shall provide suitable access to adjoining property when
necessary.
F. Fire hydrants shall be left clear for hose connections at all times.
G. Immediately after an excavation has been made, the contractor shall
remove surplus materials which are in excess of requirements for, or
will not be used in, the backfill.
H. All trenches across intersections shall be provided with temporary
bridges to allow not less than one lane of traffic to flow in each
direction. The length of trench to be bridged shall be as specified in the
specifications or as directed by the Engineer with the cooperation of the
Police Department.
I. For business areas, and in other areas where traffic is heavy, in order to
provide a maximum amount of street area for use of vehicles and
pedestrians, compliance with any or all of the following conditions may
be required:
(1) Remove all excavated materials from the site immediately;
(2) Store excavated materials in approved boxes or bins placed so as
not to obstruct traffic or create a hazard;
(3) Construction materials shall be stored off the site and shall not be
brought into the street prior to the time needed on the job;
(4) Construction equipment shall be placed in the street in a manner to
least obstruct traffic, and shall not be stored in the street when not
in use;
(5) Work only during off-peak traffic hours.
A. Maximum work area.
(1) Where a trench is cut along and under traffic lanes in streets or
alleys, and where the width of the trench exceeds 28 inches and the
§ 285-41 NASHUA CODE § 285-42
280:1022
§ 285-43. Preservation of monuments.
The contractor shall not disturb any monuments or tie points found on
the line of the improvements without permission from the Engineer. The
contractor shall bear the expense of resetting any monuments or tie points
which are disturbed without permission.
§ 285-44. Water use.
The contactor shall be required to arrange for water service and shall
be required to pay for any and all water consumed by the contractor or
subcontractors during the course of construction.
depth exceeds four feet, at no time shall more than 1,000 feet of
trench be under construction in any one work area, and all work
operation in one work area shall be confined to not more than the
1,000 feet.
(2) Where width and depth of the excavation do not exceed 28 inches
and four feet, respectively, or where the work area is outside the
traffic lanes, 2,000 feet of trench may be under construction in any
work area.
(3) A trenching operation includes all work between the point of
excavation and the point where the trench has been resurfaced and
opened for traffic.
B. Vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
(1) In the area of trenching operation defined in Subsection A(1) of this
section, there shall not be more than 500 feet of trench opened and
incompletely backfilled. The remainder of the area of trenching
operation shall be available for safe vehicular and pedestrian traffic
at all times. Not more than 50 feet of trench incompletely backfilled
shall be left overnight when width of unencumbered pavement will
not allow two-way traffic.
(2) In the area of trenching operation defined in Subsection A(2) of this
section, there shall not be more than 700 feet of trench opened and
incompletely backfilled. The remainder of the area of trenching
operation shall be available for safe vehicular and pedestrian traffic
at all times. Not more than 50 feet of trench incompletely backfilled
shall be left overnight when width of unencumbered pavement will
not allow two-way traffic.
C. Only when the contractor has entirely separate and complete crews,
each of which is capable of doing the entire job in their area, will two or
more operations be considered separate work areas.
D. Trench covered with temporary surfacing will be considered as open to
traffic. Temporary surfacing shall conform to the provisions of § 285-51.
§ 285-42 STREET AND BUILDING IDENTIFICATION § 285-45
280:1023
§ 285-45. Cleanup.
§ 285-46. Care and custody of work.
§ 285-47. Removal and replacement of existing improvements.
A. Cleanup shall progress as rapidly as the work itself, and upon
completion of the job the contractor shall remove all debris and waste
material caused by construction operations and leave the job site in a
clean and neat condition.
B. Where vehicular and pedestrian traffic conditions are heavy and where
weather conditions result in unsightliness, discomfort, or hazards, the
contractor shall take special cleanup precautions.
A. The contractor shall have full care and custody of the work until
completion and acceptance, and he shall be responsible for all damage
to existing improvements, persons, property and utility structures while
the work is in his charge.
B. Damage done to existing street improvements or utility structures shall
be repaired at the expense of the contractor.
C. Haul routes along and across any public traveled way shall be kept free
and clean of all rubbish and debris, including spillage, resulting from
construction operations. When necessary for the alleviation or
prevention of a dust nuisance, water or dust palliative, or both, shall be
applied.
A. Where it is necessary to cut and remove pavement, curb, sidewalk or
other surface improvement, the material shall be cut and removed by
means of equipment suitable to the type of material to be removed, and
in a manner which results in a minimum amount of damage to adjacent
improvements. Unless otherwise specified, improvements shall be
replaced or reconstructed as nearly in the original location and
condition as is reasonably possible.
B. Whenever a part of a block, square or section of curb, sidewalk or
driveway is broken or damaged by the contractor, the entire block,
square or section shall be removed to the score, groove or saw cut line
and replaced or reconstructed. Where the line of cut would be less than
two feet from an existing expansion or weakened plane joint, the
concrete shall be removed to such joint.
C. Unless otherwise specified, the outlined of all trenches cut in streets,
alleys, sidewalks and driveways having portland cement concrete
wearing surface shall be cut with an abrasive-type cutting wheel. Cuts
shall be made to a depth of one-fourth the thickness of the improvement
but need not be more than two inches in depth. Where the line of cut
would be less than two feet from an existing expansion or weakened
plane joint, concrete shall be removed to such joint.
§ 285-45 NASHUA CODE § 285-47
280:1024
§ 285-48. Excavation of trenches.
Excavation for trenches shall include the removal of all material of whatever
nature necessary for the installation of the pipe or facility and shall include
the construction of trench shoring and timbering and all necessary
installations for dewatering whenever required.
§ 285-49. Trench subgrade.
The bottom of the trench shall be prepared to provide a firm foundation
for the pipe or facility in accordance with the bedding conditions specified
for the type of pipe or facility to be installed. The subgrade of the trench
shall be kept free of standing water. Where the trench subgrade material is
found to be unsuitable and does not afford a solid foundation, the contractor
shall excavate to such depth as necessary to construct a stable foundation.
A stable foundation shall be constructed by placing crushed rock or other
approved material.
§ 285-50. Trench backfill.
(1) Unless otherwise specified, in asphalt-surfaced streets and alleys
the trench cut lines shall be scored by the use of an impact-type
chisel. The edges of the trench cut lines shall be sufficiently
straight to allow for proper compaction within the entire trench
area.
(2) The use of an abrasive-type cutting wheel is not mandatory on
emergency cuts.
D. When, during the progress of the work, any excavation is to be made in
public easements through private property, the contractor shall notify
the property owners at least 48 hours in advance of beginning work.
E. It shall be the responsibility of the contractor to apprise himself of all
specific conditions contained in private easements. He shall perform all
of his work in accordance with the stipulations contained therein.
F. The contractor shall take precautions to limit the removal of or damage
to existing pavements, sidewalks, curbs, lawns, shrubbery, trees,
hedges, walls, fences, buildings or other existing improvements to the
least practicable amount and shall replace or restore such
improvements to as near their original location and condition as is
reasonably possible. Plantings shall be given proper care and attention
and shall be replaced in as nearly their original location and condition
as is reasonably possible after the excavation has been backfilled and
compacted. These same requirements shall apply where the excavation
is in the area behind the curb.
A. Backfilling shall be so placed that the pipe will not be displaced or
damaged. Backfilling to a depth of one-foot over the crown of the pipe
shall be made with granular soil or sand as required by the City
§ 285-47 STREET AND BUILDING IDENTIFICATION § 285-50
280:1025
§ 285-51. Trench cover requirements.
Engineer. The remainder of the backfill may include material
originating on the job, provided that such material is not larger than six
inches in any dimension.
B. The first lift shall be placed and compacted to a height of one-foot above
the top of the pipe by any approved method. The remainder of the
backfill material shall be compacted in lifts or stages to the minimum
depth hereinafter specified by means of tamping or water settlement or
both. Jetting will not be allowed unless specifically authorized by the
City Engineer.
C. When hand or hand-operated pneumatic tamping methods are used, the
moistened fill material shall be tamped in uniform layers not to exceed
six inches in thickness, loose measurement.
D. When the flooding method is allowed, the trench shall be diked at
suitable intervals, depending on the grade of the ditch. The depth of
water must be such that when earth or sand is drifted into the trench it
will become completely saturated. Sufficient water must be kept in the
trench so that the backfill material will at all times be dropping into
water.
E. When heavy-duty tamping or compaction equipment is allowed there
shall be sufficient backfill material over pipe to prevent damage
thereto.
F. Unless otherwise specified, the backfill material shall be compacted to
a relative compaction of not less than 90%.
A. All trenches across traffic lanes, where it becomes necessary to remove
any existing surfacing or pavement, shall be provided with temporary
trench cover.
B. Minimum requirements for temporary trench cover shall be wellcompacted
bituminous surfacing material and shall be a minimum of
two inches thick. The mineral aggregate shall, with a tolerance of 5%,
conform to the grading specified for three-eighths-inch maximum
aggregate (Item 260-22, State Department of Public Works and
Highways specifications). Bituminous binder to be mixed with the
mineral aggregate shall be liquid asphalt, grade MC-3, with or without
a cutback, or SC-2, 3 or 4, or liquid tar T-6 and shall be between 5 1/2%
and 6% by weight of the dry mineral aggregate.
C. Temporary trench cover surfacing material shall be stockpiled on the
job site and shall be placed within six hours after completion of trench
backfill and compaction. Temporary trench cover shall be properly
maintained until permanent trench cover is placed.
D. After the backfill has been made and compacted as specified, it shall be
cut and trimmed to allow 12 inches for gravel and the permanent trench
§ 285-50 NASHUA CODE § 285-51
280:1026
§ 285-52. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-12-1985 by Ord. No.
O-84-79]
Any agency or contractor who shall violate any of the provisions of this
article or fail to comply herewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply
with any order or regulations made under this article, or who shall carry
out construction in violation of any detailed statement or specifications or
plans submitted and approved under this article, or any certificate or permit
issued under this article, shall, severally for each and every such violation
and noncompliance respectively, be subject to punishment as provided in
§ 1-12. The imposition of one penalty for any violation of this article shall
not excuse the violation, or permit it to continue; and all violators shall
be required to correct or remedy violations or defects within a reasonable
time. When not otherwise specified, each day that prohibited conditions are
maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
cover as specified below, for the full width of the excavated trench. The
gravel shall be free of all rock over 2 1/2 inches in size and shall have
a relative compaction of 95% or more at the time of constructing curb,
gutter, sidewalk, pavement or permanent trench cover.
E. Unless otherwise specified, the replacement of pavement shall be as
follows:
(1) In areas where the wearing surface is asphalt concrete, the
contractor shall replace the pavement with a portland cement
concrete base and a one-and-one-half-inch asphalt concrete surface
course conforming to the requirements of the governing authority
for payment. The concrete base shall be finished to 1 1/2 inches
below adjacent pavement and shall be of the same depth as the
original pavement but not less than 4 1/2 inches thick on alleys or
residential streets, nor less than six inches thick on major or
secondary streets and highways.
(2) In areas where the wearing surface is portland cement concrete,
the contractor shall replace the pavement with concrete pavement
conforming to the requirements of the governing authority. The
concrete pavement replacement shall be of the same depth as the
original pavement, but not less than six inches thick on alleys or
residential streets, nor less than eight inches thick on major or
secondary streets and highways.
(3) In areas where the wearing surface is other than asphalt concrete
or portland cement concrete, the contractor shall replace the
pavement and base in kind. The pavement replacement shall be of
materials and thickness conforming to the requirements of the
governing authority.
§ 285-51 STREET AND BUILDING IDENTIFICATION § 285-53
280:1027
§ 285-53. Liabilities.
Any agency or contractor who shall violate any of the provisions of this
article, in addition to the penalty imposed by § 285-52 shall become liable to
the City for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the City if the City
has to expend labor and materials in repairing or restoring public streets
and public easements to their conditions before any work was done by the
agency or contractor; provided, however, that as a condition precedent to
such liability the City shall provide written notice of the required repair
or restoration and that the agency or contractor has been provided a
reasonable time after notice, not less than 30 days, to accomplish such
repair or restoration.
§ 285-53 NASHUA CODE § 285-53
280:1028
ARTICLE VII
New England Telephone Company Facilities
[Adopted NRO 1975, T. 6, §§ 1301-1309 (Secs. 19-101 to 19-109 of
the 1987 Code)]
§ 285-54. Underground conduits; rights of company.
The New England Telephone and Telegraph Company, for itself, its
successors and assigns, may construct and maintain underground conduits,
cables and wires for the conduct of its business in such of the streets of the
City as the Board of Public Works may deem advisable. The company may
construct therein and maintain the necessary manholes and house and pole
connections. It may also erect and maintain distributing poles at the termini
of conduits and at suitable distributing points. All of the above shall be done
in accordance with the regulations provided in this article and subject to
such ordinances in addition to or in amendment hereof, as may hereafter be
passed.
§ 285-55. Approval of work and material.
The conduits and appurtenances shall be of a suitable kind and
construction, such as the Board of Public Works shall approve, and the work
shall be done in a thorough manner and to the approval of the Board of
Public Works or of any person whom the Board may select. The distributing
and other poles shall be of suitable height and other dimensions and of such
form and material and so located as to be satisfactory to the Board and shall
be subject to the approval of the Board or the approval of any person or
persons whom the Board may elect.
§ 285-56. Permit for opening or disturbing street.
The surface of the street shall not be disturbed for the purpose of laying,
removing or repairing wires or conduits or of erecting, removing or
repairing distributing poles without a permit from the Board of Public
Works authorizing the work to be done. Such permit shall indicate the time,
manner and place of opening the street and the time within which work
shall be completed.
§ 285-57. Agreement in favor of City.
A. No permits shall be granted, or, if granted, shall be valid, to disturb the
surface of the street for any of the purposes in § 285-56, until the
company has executed an agreement in a form satisfactory to the City
Solicitor/Corporation Counsel, provided that:
(1) In every underground conduit constructed by the company one
duct not less than three inches in diameter shall be reserved and
maintained, free of expense, for the use of the fire, police and
telegraph signal and telephone wires belonging to the City and
used exclusively for municipal purposes; and that the
§ 285-54 STREET AND BUILDING IDENTIFICATION § 285-57
280:1029
§ 285-58. Restoration of street.
When an opening is made in the street for any purpose allowed by this
article, the portion of the street opened shall be restored to a condition
satisfactory to the Board of Public Works and shall be kept in such condition
for one year thereafter. If the street is not so restored and maintained by
the company, the Board may cause the same to be done at the expense of
the company.
§ 285-59. Manholes.
No permit shall be required for the opening of manholes for the purpose of
drawing in, removing or repairing wires and cables. When the company has
obtained the permit of the Board of Public Works for conduit locations in any
street or streets, and has constructed its main line of conduit under such
permit in any street, it may from time to time thereafter lay and connect
with such main conduits, ducts, cables and wires for house and distributing
pole connections with the permit and under the supervision of the Board.
§ 285-60. Interference with other pipes.
The company, in laying, repairing or removing its wires or conduits, shall
not disturb or in any way interfere with gas and water pipes or sewers or
pipes therewith connected.
§ 285-61. Changing of conduits.
In case the City finds it necessary to construct or enlarge sewers or other
public works in the streets where conduits are laid, which shall require
changing the location of the conduits, the changing shall be at the expense
of the company, which shall forthwith carry out the same.
superintendent of the fire alarm or any person duly authorized by
the City shall be allowed access to said conduits at all times; and
that the City shall be allowed facilities and privileges in putting in
or taking out wires equal in all respects to those of the company.
(2) The company will indemnify and save the City harmless against all
damages, costs and expense whatsoever to which the City may be
subject in consequence of the acts or neglect of the company, its
agents or servants, or in any manner arising from the rights and
privileges granted it by the City.
B. The company shall, before a street is disturbed for the laying of its
wires or conduits, execute its bond in a penal sum of not less than
$5,000 conditioned to fulfill its agreement with the City and terms of
this article.
§ 285-57 NASHUA CODE § 285-62
280:1030
§ 285-62. Removal of conduits.
The company shall not remove its conduits, unless permitted to do so by the
Board of Public Works.
§ 285-62 STREET AND BUILDING IDENTIFICATION § 285-62
280:1031
Chapter 290
SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS
§ 290-1. Applicability.
This chapter shall regulate the construction and operation of all swimming
pools, spas and hot tubs except those facilities located appurtenant to
single-family or duplex family residences. All such bathing facilities
regulated by this chapter shall be referred to herein as "public pools" or
"public spas."
§ 290-2. License required; fees; expiration; posting. [Amended
3-28-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-06]
No person, corporation or other entity shall operate, maintain or allow to
be used any public swimming pool, spa or hot tub except in possession of
a valid license issued by the City Environmental Health Department. Said
licenses shall be issued for an annual fee of $325 for each indoor pool or
$275 for each outdoor pool. Spa and hot tub permits will be issued at $250
per tub or spa. Licenses will be issued annually and expire April 30. This
license shall be posted in a conspicuous place about the pool or spa.
§ 290-3. License revocation.
Whenever the Health Officer or a sanitarian of the Environmental Health
Department of the City shall find that any public pool or spa is not in
compliance with the terms and conditions of this chapter, the Health Officer
may cause the operating license to be revoked or suspended by any or all of
the following methods:
§ 290-4. Inspections and sample collection.
All owners and operators of public pools and spas shall allow any authorized
representative of the Environmental Health Department of the City onto the
pool premises at all reasonable times for the purposes of inspection and
sample collection.
§ 290-5. Maintenance; operation; water quality.
A. He may physically remove the license from its posting.
B. He may notify the owner or operator of the pool in writing that the
operating license is revoked or suspended.
C. He may post a sign or signs conspicuously about the pool to the effect
that the operating license has been revoked.
A. Public swimming pools. Public swimming pools shall be maintained and
operated at all times in accordance with the following standards:
§ 285-62 NASHUA CODE § 290-5
290:1032
§ 290-6. Lifeguards; warning signs.
(1) All public pools must be equipped with a water recirculation device
designed and operated so as to provide three complete turnovers of
pool water in 24 hours.
(2) All water recirculation devices shall be kept in constant operation
24 hours a day.
(3) All public pools shall be equipped with a positive displacement
chlorinator which shall be maintained in operating condition at all
times. Other systems of disinfection such as bromine, ozonization,
hydrogen peroxide and ultraviolet light will be considered on an
individual basis.
(4) Disinfectant shall not be manually fed into public pools.
(5) Public pools using cyanuric acid as a stabilizer shall be maintained
with a cyanuric acid level not less than 30 parts per million nor
more than 80 parts per million.
(6) Public pools utilizing cyanuric acid as a stabilizer shall be
maintained with a free chlorine residual of 1.5 to three parts per
million in diameter and 1 1/2 times the width of the pool in length.
(7) One backboard device for the transportation of persons with spinal
injuries.
(8) One break-point safety line.
(9) One standard American Red Cross twenty-four-unit first-aid kit or
its equivalent.
A. In public pools supervision of bathers shall be provided in accordance
with the following standards:
(1) Where lifeguard service is provided, the lifeguard shall have
satisfactorily completed a senior course of instruction in lifesaving
and water safety equivalent to that offered by the American Red
Cross or the YMCA.
(2) Where no lifeguard service is provided, a warning sign shall be
placed in plain view which shall state "WARNING — NO
LIFEGUARD ON DUTY" with clearly legible letters at least four
inches in height.
B. Signs must be posted to inform patrons of hot tubs or spas of the
inherent health risks associated with their use. As an absolute minimum
this notification must cite the dangers of use while under the influence
of alcohol, anticoagulants, antihistamines, vasoconstrictors,
vasodialator, stimulants, hypnotics, narcotics or tranquilizers. The
elderly or those suffering from heart disease, diabetes or high or low
blood pressure must be informed of the inherent risks associated with
§ 290-5 SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS § 290-6
290:1033
§ 290-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who operates, maintains or allows to be used any public pool
or spa except when in possession of a valid license as required by this
chapter shall be guilty of a separate violation for each day of such operation,
maintenance or use. Each such violation shall result in a fine of not less
than $100 or a greater sum not to exceed the provisions of § 1-12 of the City
Code.
Chapter 295
TAXATION
spas or hot tubs. All users must be made aware of the safe and proper
use of the facility.
§ 290-6 NASHUA CODE § 290-7
290:1034
ARTICLE I
Exemption for the Blind
[Adopted 3-11-1986 by Ord. No. O-86-18 (Sec. 2-735 of the 1987
Code)]
§ 295-1. Tax exemption granted. [Amended 9-12-2006 by Ord. No.
O-06-19; 11-27-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-029]
The provisions of RSA 72:37 are adopted, and every inhabitant of the City
who is legally blind, as determined by the Blind Services Department of the
Vocational Rehabilitation Division of the Education Department of the state,
shall be exempt each year from taxation upon his or her residential real
estate to the value of $85,000 in the tax year beginning April 1, 2018, and
$94,000 in the tax year beginning April 1, 2019.
§ 295-1 SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS § 295-1
290:1035

ARTICLE II
Exemption for Dormitories, Dining Rooms and Kitchens of
Qualifying Educational Institutions
[Adopted 6-13-1995 by Ord. No. O-95-126 (Sec. 2-739 of the 1987
Code)]
§ 295-2. Expanded exemption granted.
The dormitories, dining rooms, and kitchens of educational institutions
qualifying for tax exemptions pursuant to RSA 72:23(IV), shall for their
value in excess of $150,000, be taxed thereon only for the municipal and
county portions of the then applicable tax rate, and not for the school
portion, to the full value of said dormitories, dining rooms and kitchens.
§ 295-2 SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS § 295-2
290:1037

ARTICLE III
Exemption for Elderly Persons
[Adopted 8-12-1997 by Ord. No. O-97-121 (Sec. 2-740 of the 1987
Code)]
§ 295-3. Elderly exemption granted. [Amended 4-28-1998 by Ord.
No. O-98-16; 4-28-1998 by Ord. No. O-98-16; 10-24-2000 by Ord.
No. O-00-77; 5-27-2003 by Ord. No. O-02-96; 9-28-2004 by Ord. No.
O-04-44; 10-11-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-118; 9-12-2006 by Ord. No.
O-06-19; 11-27-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-029]
The City of Nashua hereby adopts the provisions of New Hampshire Revised
Statutes Annotated 72:39-a and 72:39-b, as they may be amended from time
to time, relative to elderly tax exemptions. The optional exemption, based
on assessed value, for qualified taxpayers, shall be as follows:
§ 295-4. Qualifications. [Amended 3-22-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-74;
2-26-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-07; 9-22-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-67;
5-24-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-69; 3-13-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-00490;
11-24-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-073]
To qualify, the person must have been a New Hampshire resident for at
least three consecutive years, own the real estate individually, jointly, or if
the real estate is owned by a spouse, he/she must have been married for
at least five years. In addition, the taxpayer must have a net income of not
more than $50,000 or, if married, a combined net income of not more than
$50,000 and own net assets not in excess of $150,000, excluding the value
of the person's residence.
§ 295-5. Review of applications.
The Assessing Department shall review all applications on an annual basis.
A. For a person 65 years of age up to 74 years of age: $175,000 in the tax
year beginning April 1, 2018, and $192,000 in the tax year beginning
April 1, 2019;
B. For a person 75 years of age up to 79 years of age: $203,000 in the tax
year beginning April 1, 2018, and $224,000 in the tax year beginning
April 1, 2019; and
C. For a person 80 years of age or older: $254,000 in the tax year
beginning April 1, 2018, and $280,000 in the tax year beginning April 1,
2019.
90.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it would take effect for the tax year
commencing 4-1-2012.
§ 295-3 SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS § 295-6
290:1039
§ 295-6. Effective date.
The revised exemption set forth herein shall become effective January 1,
1998.
§ 295-7. Annual deadline for filing. [Amended 2-26-2008 by Ord.
No. O-08-07]
The annual deadline for filing for an elderly exemption is April 15 prior to
setting the tax rate.
§ 295-6 NASHUA CODE § 295-7
290:1040
ARTICLE IV
Tax Credit for Disabled
[Adopted 6-8-1999 by Ord. No. O-98-15 (Sec. 2-742 of the 1987
Code); amended 10-24-2000 by Ord. No. O-00-91; 9-28-2004 by Ord.
No. O-04-44; 3-22-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-74; 10-11-2005 by Ord.
No. O-05-118]
§ 295-8. Tax exemption for the disabled. [Amended 1-23-2007 by
Ord. No. O-06-69; 11-27-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-029]
A taxpayer who provides proof of eligibility under Title II or Title XVI of the
Federal Social Security Act for benefits to the disabled is entitled to a tax
exemption. The exemption, based on assessed value, for qualified taxpayers
shall be $175,000 for the tax year beginning April 1, 2018, and $194,000
for the tax year beginning April 1, 2019. The deadline for filing for the
exemption shall be the April 15 prior to the setting of the tax rate.
§ 295-9. Qualifications. [Amended 11-24-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-78]
To qualify, a person must have been a New Hampshire resident for at least
five years and own and occupy the real estate individually or jointly, or if
the real estate is owned by a spouse, they must have been married for at
least five years. In addition, the taxpayer must have a net income of not
more than $36,000 or, if married, a combined net income of not more than
$40,000 and own net assets not in excess of $125,000 excluding the value
of the person's residence.
§ 295-10. Deadline for filing.
The deadline for filing for the credit shall be the April 15 prior to the setting
of the tax rate.
§ 295-8 SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS § 295-10
290:1041

ARTICLE V
Development and Revitalization Districts
[Adopted 11-24-1998 by Ord. No. O-98-74 (Sec. 2-741 of the 1987
Code); amended 9-16-2003 by Ord. No. O-03-171]
§ 295-11. Authority to establish districts. [Amended 2-26-2008 by
Ord. No. O-08-07]
The City hereby adopts the provisions of RSA 162-K, Municipal Economic
Development and Revitalization Districts, which authorize the City to
establish development districts, development programs, and to finance
improvements through tax increment financing plans, all consistent with
the provisions of that statute as amended from time to time.
§ 295-12. District identified. [Amended 3-27-2018 by Ord. No.
O-18-006]
A. The following properties shall constitute a tax increment financing
development district:
The property identified as Tax Map 43, Lot 66
The property identified as Tax Map 69, Lot 1
The property identified as Tax Map 77, Lot 6
The property identified as Tax Map 77, Lot 18
The property identified as Tax Map 77, Lot 20
The property identified as Tax Map 77, Lot 23
The property identified as Tax Map 77, Lot 26
The property identified as Tax Map 77, Lot 42
The property identified as Tax Map 78, Lot 20
The property identified as Tax Map 78, Lot 21
The property identified as Tax Map 78, Lot 22
The property identified as Tax Map 78, Lot 36
The property identified as Tax Map 78, Lot 68
The property identified as Tax Map 78, Lot 73
The property identified as Tax Map 78, Lot 86
The property identified as Tax Map 78, Lot 87
The property identified as Tax Map 78, Lot 88
The property identified as Tax Map 78, Lot 89
§ 295-11 SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS § 295-12
290:1043
The property identified as Tax Map 78, Lot 90
The property identified as Tax Map 78, Lot 93
The property identified as Tax Map 78, Lot 96
B. Such district shall also include any lots created out of or established
from the foregoing lots.
§ 295-12 NASHUA CODE § 295-12
290:1044
ARTICLE VI
Veterans' Tax Credits
[Adopted 5-25-2004 by Ord. No. O-04-02 (Sec. 2-743 of the 1987
Code); amended in its entirety 6-13-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-03591]
§ 295-13. Optional veterans' tax credit established.
The City of Nashua hereby adopts the provisions of New Hampshire Revised
Statutes Annotated 72:28, as it may be amended from time to time, relative
to an optional veterans' tax credit. Effective April 1, 2007, the optional
veterans' tax credit shall be $500. This stated optional veterans' tax credit
shall replace the standard veterans' tax credit in its entirety and shall not
be in addition thereto.
§ 295-13.1. All veterans' tax credit established.
The City of Nashua hereby adopts the provisions of New Hampshire Revised
Statutes Annotated 72:28-b, as it may be amended from time to time,
relative to an all veterans' tax credit. Effective April 1, 2017, the all
veterans' tax credit shall be $165. Effective April 1, 2018, the all veterans'
tax credit shall be $330. Effective April 1, 2019, the all veterans' tax credit
shall be $500. The all veterans tax credit is only available to persons who
are not eligible for and are not receiving a tax credit under New Hampshire
Revised Statutes Annotated 72:28 (the optional veterans' tax credit, see
NRO § 295-13) or New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated 72:35 (the
optional tax credit for service-connected total disability, see NRO § 295-15).
§ 295-14. Requirements.
The requirements for the optional veterans' tax credit and the all veterans'
tax credit shall be as stated in New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated
72:28 and 72:28-b, as may be amended from time to time. Proof of eligibility
shall be submitted to the Assessing Department.
91.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided an effective date of 4-1-2017.
§ 295-13 SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS § 295-14
290:1045

ARTICLE VII
Service-Connected Total Disability Tax Credit
[Adopted 4-27-2004 by Ord. No. O-04-10 (Sec. 2-744 of the 1987
Code)]
§ 295-15. Tax credit granted.
The City of Nashua hereby adopts the provisions of New Hampshire Revised
Statutes Annotated 72:35, as it may be amended from time to time, relative
to a service-connected total disability tax credit. The service-connected total
disability tax credit shall be $2,000 credit, which shall replace the standard
service-connected total disability tax credit in its entirety and shall not be
in addition thereto.
§ 295-16. Requirements; proof of eligibility.
The requirements for the service-connected total disability tax credit shall
be as stated in New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated 72:35, as it may
be amended from time to time. Proof of eligibility shall be submitted to the
Assessing Department.92
92.Editor's Note: Original provisions concerning the effective date of the tax credit, which
immediately followed, were deleted 2-26-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-07.
§ 295-15 SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS § 295-16
290:1047

ARTICLE VIII
Surviving Spouse Tax Credit
[Adopted 7-12-2005 by Ord. No. O-05-101]
§ 295-17. Tax credit granted.
The City of Nashua hereby adopts the provisions of New Hampshire Revised
Statutes Annotated 72-29-a, as it may be amended from time to time,
relative to the surviving spouse of any person who was killed or died while
on active duty in the armed forces of the United States or any of the armed
forces of any of the governments associated with the United States in the
wars, conflicts or armed conflicts, or combat zones set forth in RSA 72:28.
The surviving spouse's tax credit shall be $2,000 for the taxes due upon the
surviving spouse's real and personal property, whether residential or not, in
the same municipality where the surviving spouse is a resident.
§ 295-18. Proof of eligibility.
Proof of eligibility shall be submitted to the Assessing Department.93
93.Editor's Note: Original provisions concerning the effective date if tge tax credit, which
immediately followed, were deleted 2-26-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-07.
§ 295-17 SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS § 295-18
290:1049

ARTICLE IX
Exemption for Solar Energy Systems
[Adopted 2-10-2016 by Ord. No. O-16-002]
§ 295-19. Exemption granted.
The City of Nashua hereby adopts the provisions of RSA 72:62, as they
may be amended from time to time, relative to exemptions for solar energy
systems. The value of a solar energy system, as defined in RSA 72:61, shall
be exempt from the assessed value of the property. The deadline for filing
for the exemption shall be April 15, prior to the setting of the tax rate.
§ 295-19 SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS § 295-19
290:1051
Chapter 300
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Towing — See Ch. 306. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 320.
§ 300-1. Definitions. [Amended 9-13-2000 by Ord. No. O-00-45]
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
DISQUALIFYING CRIMINAL CONVICTION — Within the past seven years,
any felony convictions, including but not limited to, convictions involving a
controlled substance, violence, or crimes against persons, or any criminal
misdemeanor convictions involving a controlled substance, violence, or
threats of violence, or crimes against persons.
DISQUALIFYING MOTOR VEHICLE CONVICTION — Within the past seven
years, conviction as a habitual offender, or for reckless driving, operating
under the influence, or any motor vehicle convictions which may affect the
safety of persons or property.
HYBRID ELECTRIC VEHICLE — A vehicle powered by two or more energy
sources, one of which is electricity. Hybrid electric vehicles may combine
the engine and fuel of a conventional vehicle with the batteries and electric
motor of an electric vehicle in a single drivetrain.[Added 2-23-2010 by
Ord. No. O-10-05; and 2-23-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-06]
REVOCATION — The permanent loss of a taxicab vehicle license or taxicab
driver's license.
SUSPENSION — The temporary loss of a taxicab vehicle license or taxicab
driver's license.
TAXICAB — Any motor vehicle; having a manufacturers rated capacity
of not more than seven passengers, used in the call and demand
transportation of passengers from within the limits of the City to a
destination inside or outside of the City, for compensation to or from points
chosen or designated by the passengers and not operated on a fixed
schedule, between fixed termini, or any such vehicle leased or rented,
or held for leasing or renting, with or without driver or operator. This
definition shall not include a motor vehicle subject to regulation by the
Public Utilities Commission of the state; sightseeing buses or limousines
designed to carry eight persons or more from a fixed place to places
of interest about the City; motor vehicles collecting fares by tickets or
coupons sold for interstate transportation; or motor vehicles owned by
any person, firm, corporation, or association engaged in the business of
providing transportation services to another person, firm, corporation, or
association solely under the terms of written and signed contracts and
§ 295-19 NASHUA CODE § 300-1
290:1052
which are not otherwise engaged in the solicitation of occasional
passengers.
TAXICAB BUSINESS or TAXICAB COMPANY — Any person, firm,
corporation or association engaged in the business of transporting
passengers in a taxicab from one destination to another for a fee. A taxicab
company may provide its own dispatching service or lease such service.
TAXICAB DISPATCH COMPANY — Any person, firm, corporation, or
association engaged in the business of providing dispatch service for
taxicabs for the purpose of transporting passengers from one destination to
another for a fee.
TAXICAB DRIVER — Any individual who has a valid taxicab driver's license.
TAXICAB OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE — The Mayor, the Chief of Police,
City Solicitor/Corporation Counsel, and the City Clerk, or a designated
representative of any of these named persons.
§ 300-2. Vehicle licensing. [Amended 9-13-2000 by Ord. No.
O-00-45]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to engage in the
business of operating a taxicab company in the City without first having
secured a taxicab vehicle license for each taxicab from the City.
B. Applications for a taxicab vehicle license shall be made to the City Clerk
upon a form to be determined by the City Clerk. The application shall
include:
(1) The name, date of birth, social security number, home address,
home phone number, business name, business address and
business phone number of the applicant, and name, address, and
phone number of intended dispatch service.
(2) If the applicant is any type of business entity, such as a corporation,
partnership, etc., a list of the names, dates of birth, social security
numbers, home addresses, and home phone numbers of any other
person or persons having an interest in the business.
(3) A description, including the manufacturing year, make, model,
motor vehicle license plate state and number and vehicle
registration number, of the proposed taxicab.
(4) A copy of the vehicle's registration.
(5) A certificate of insurance, signed by an insurance company licensed
to do business in the state, indicating that the applicant has been
issued an insurance policy by that insurance company,
indemnifying the applicant in an amount not less than $100,000 for
injury to one person or $300,000 for injury to more than one
person, and $25,000 property damage in any one accident, arising
out of the operation of each taxicab of the applicant. Such
certificate shall also provide that the insurance company shall not
§ 300-1 SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS § 300-2
290:1053
§ 300-3. Minimum applicant requirements.
change, terminate or cancel the policy prior to the expiration date
except upon 30 days advance written notice to the City Clerk.
The certificate of insurance shall indicate the maximum number
of taxicabs which may be in use for passenger service under the
provisions of the insurance policy, including the year, make, model,
motor vehicle license plate state and number and vehicle
registration number of each.
(6) Completed and notarized New Hampshire Department of Safety
Division of State Police Criminal Record Release Authorization
Form and Motor Vehicle Record Release Authorization Form,
authorizing the City Clerk and/or the Police Department to obtain
the criminal and motor vehicle records of anyone named on the
taxicab vehicle license application.
C. The City Clerk shall issue an original or renewed taxicab vehicle license
after receipt of the application and a full review by appropriate
personnel. The City Clerk shall have the Nashua Police Department
check the criminal and motor vehicle records on anyone named on the
taxicab vehicle license application for the seven years preceding the
application. The City may choose to limit the total number of taxicabs
that may operate in the City, but will not do so without first holding a
public hearing before the Taxicab Oversight Committee.
A. An applicant for a taxicab vehicle license must meet the following
minimum requirements:
(1) Taxicabs shall be equipped with two-way communication
equipment and have an arrangement for calling for prompt
assistance in the event of a breakdown en route.
(2) The taxicab company shall publish hours of dispatch service in all
display advertising.
(3) The taxicab company shall have a published business telephone
number.
B. In addition to those standards set forth in this chapter, a taxicab vehicle
license shall be denied to the following persons:
(1) To a corporation which is not licensed to do business in the state.
(2) To an applicant other than the registered owner or lessee of the
vehicles.
(3) To a corporation if any principal officer thereof or any person
having actual ownership interest therein has a disqualifying
criminal conviction.
§ 300-2 NASHUA CODE § 300-3
290:1054
§ 300-4. Taxicab driver's license. [Amended 9-13-2000 by Ord. No.
O-00-45]
(4) To an applicant, other than a corporation, if such applicant or any
person having an actual ownership interest or management
authority therein has a disqualifying criminal conviction.
C. In addition to those standards set forth in this chapter, a taxicab vehicle
license may be denied to any applicant who has had a taxicab vehicle
license previously revoked.
A. No person shall drive a taxicab unless they have secured a license
therefor as herein provided.
B. Applications for a taxicab driver's license shall be made to the City
Clerk upon a form to be determined by the City Clerk. The application
shall include:
(1) The name, date of birth, home address, social security number, and
telephone number of the applicant, as well as the applicant's home
addresses and dates of residence for the past one year.
(2) The name, address and nature of the applicant's previous
employment.
(3) The name, address, telephone number and relationship of someone
to contact in case of emergency.
(4) Whether the applicant is currently employed or expects to be
employed by a taxicab company, and the name, address, and phone
number of the company. Whether the applicant intends to lease a
vehicle or utilize the services of a taxicab company or taxicab
dispatch company, and the name, address, and phone number of
the company.
(5) Proof of possession of a valid driver's license.
(6) A statement signed by the applicant that he or she is not aware of
any physical or mental impairment that might prevent the safe
operation of a motor vehicle.
(7) Completed and notarized New Hampshire Department of Safety
Division of State Police Criminal Record Release Authorization
Form and Motor Vehicle Record Release Authorization Form,
authorizing the City Clerk and/or the Police Department to obtain
the applicant's criminal and motor vehicle records in the State of
New Hampshire.
(8) A statement signed by the applicant that he or she has not been
convicted of a felony or misdemeanor in any state, or if the
applicant has been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor, a date
and description of the felony or misdemeanor.
§ 300-3 SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS § 300-4
290:1055
(9) A statement signed by the applicant that he or she agrees to submit
to random drug tests and that such information may be shared with
governmental entities, agencies, or departments that participate in
that random test pool as provided for in § 300-18. The Police
Department and the City Clerk may order an applicant to report to
a local site for a drug test at any time. The applicant will sign a
release for the results of the drug test to be sent directly to the City
Clerk.
(10) Any other information reasonably required by the Police
Department or City Clerk.
C. The following shall be part of the application process:
(1) The City Clerk shall have the Nashua Police Department check the
applicant's criminal and motor vehicle records for the seven years
preceding the application.
(2) The City Clerk shall take two photographs of the applicant, for a fee
of $2. One of these photos, along with a copy of the applicant's
driver's license, shall be forwarded to the Nashua Police
Department.
D. In addition to the application requirements set forth in this section, a
license to drive a taxicab shall be denied to the following persons:
(1) An applicant who has not attained the age of 18 years.
(2) An applicant who has received a disqualifying criminal conviction,
or who has been imprisoned at any time during the preceding
seven-year period for a disqualifying criminal conviction, provided
that the conviction was for an offense rationally related to the
purpose of licensing taxicab drivers.
(3) An applicant who has received a disqualifying motor vehicle
conviction, or whose privilege to operate a motor vehicle in any
jurisdiction has been revoked or suspended at any time during the
one year preceding the application for any reason.
E. An applicant who is denied a taxicab driver's license under the
standards of this section, or who has reason to believe that they may be
denied a taxicab driver's license under these standards, may file a
written request for a review of the application by the Taxicab Oversight
Committee. The Committee will approve or disapprove the fitness of the
applicant for a taxicab driver's license. The Committee may require the
submission of qualifying evidence to make an assessment, including
character references, alcohol or drug treatment records, and/or
evaluation by a qualified professional, and may set such conditions,
review procedures, or monitoring activities as it deems appropriate as a
condition of licensure.
§ 300-4 NASHUA CODE § 300-4
290:1056
§ 300-5. License fees.
§ 300-6. Suspension or revocation of license. [Amended 9-13-2000
by Ord. No. O-00-45]
F. The City Clerk shall make and keep a written record of every decision to
deny an application for a taxicab driver's license for a period of one
year.
G. The City Clerk shall issue an original or renewed license after receipt of
application or renewal documentation and upon full review by
appropriate personnel.
A. The annual fee for a taxicab vehicle license is $75 per vehicle, except
that the annual fee for a taxicab vehicle license for a hybrid electric
vehicle is $1 per vehicle. Licenses shall expire annually on April 30. The
taxicab business shall conspicuously and permanently affix the vehicle
license, a single metal plate issued by the City Clerk, bearing the
vehicle license number, to the lower left-hand corner of the trunk deck
or tailgate, in such a fashion that it shall be clearly visible to the public
from the rear of the vehicle. This plate shall be firmly fastened to the
body of the vehicle in such a manner that it will not easily become
detached, and under no conditions will the plate be attached to the
state registration plate or the bumper of the taxicab. The number of
plates issued to a taxicab company shall not exceed the maximum
number of vehicles that may be in passenger service under their
insurance certificate. Vehicle license renewals shall occur annually
between April 1 and April 30 of each year. [Amended 2-23-2010 by
Ord. No. O-10-06]
B. The annual fee for a taxicab driver's license is $50. Each license to drive
a taxicab shall expire annually on April 30. Renewal of each license
must be requested at least 30 days prior to license expiration. The City
Clerk shall deliver to the licensee an identification card, approximate
size of four inches by six inches, setting forth the number and terms of
the license, a photograph, the name and personal description of the
licensee, including age, height, weight, complexion, color of hair, and
color of eyes. The licensee's address shall be placed on the back of the
license. The licensee shall, when driving or in charge of a taxicab,
display the identification card conspicuously in a holder in his taxicab.
The licensee shall show the card whenever so requested by a
representative of the City Clerk's office, any passenger, or any law
enforcement officer.
A. No taxicab driver's license shall be effective for the purposes of this
chapter during any period in which the driver's motor vehicle license is
suspended or revoked, or following a positive drug test as provided for
under this chapter until such license is reinstated by the Committee;
and no taxicab vehicle license shall be effective for the purposes of this
chapter during any period in which the owner's insurance coverage, as
§ 300-4 SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS § 300-6
290:1057
required under this chapter, is no longer in effect or does not meet the
coverage requirements of this chapter. Until the circumstances that led
to the suspension have been corrected, the City Clerk may not restore
the suspended taxicab vehicle license.
B. The City Clerk may suspend or revoke any license granted under the
provisions of this chapter after a violation of this chapter or for cause.
The City Clerk shall make reasonable attempts to notify the licensee in
writing of the Clerk's decision using the licensing information available.
If desired, the licensee may make a written request for a hearing before
the Taxicab Oversight Committee within 45 days of the suspension or
revocation. The City Clerk shall schedule a hearing within 20 days of
the licensee's date of request, notifying the licensee of the date. The
Taxicab Oversight Committee may restore the license, sustain the
suspension or revocation, or otherwise set such conditions on the
license as it deems appropriate. The licensee will be notified of the
decision of the Committee, which shall be final.
C. A license may be suspended or revoked upon a finding that the licensee
has:
(1) Had a positive drug test or failed to report to a drug test when
notified, or failed to sign a release for the results of the drug test to
be sent directly to the City Clerk.
(2) Falsified any record, document, or information required to be kept
or submitted by this chapter or failure to supply information asked
or required of the applicant.
(3) Driven or authorized any person to drive a taxicab which was not
properly equipped and in safe condition as required by the laws of
the state or the provisions of this chapter.
(4) Used, or authorized to be used, a trade name, color scheme, or
other identification upon a taxicab or in any advertising or public
listing, which was likely to be confused with the registered trade
name, scheme, or identification of another licensee or which
tended to deceive or mislead the public as to the type of service
offered.
(5) Carried any passenger to his destination by a route that was not the
most direct, unless the most direct route was not safe, or the
customer specifically authorized or requested the deviation or
alternate route.
(6) Refused to accept as a passenger any person who requested
transportation when the taxicab was not already carrying a
passenger, unless the taxicab is traveling to pick up a fare, the
potential passenger creates a hazard to the driver's safety or
utilizes the taxicab for an illegal purpose, or the taxicab has its
"out-of-service" sign displayed.
§ 300-6 NASHUA CODE § 300-6
290:1058
§ 300-7. Nontransferability.
§ 300-8. Pick-up and drop-off restrictions for certain licensed
vehicles and operators.
§ 300-9. Rates for fares.
(7) Drove or authorized a driver to drive a taxicab without a valid
taxicab driver's license.
(8) Declined to provide service to a neighborhood of the City, or
refused to respond to a call from a dispatcher because of the
location of the pickup.
(9) Violated any provision of this chapter.
(10) Received a disqualifying criminal conviction, provided that the
conviction was for an offense rationally related to the purpose of
the licensing of taxicab drivers.
(11) Received a disqualifying motor vehicle conviction or had their
motor vehicle drivers license suspended or revoked in any
jurisdiction.
A. Licenses granted under this chapter shall remain the property of the
City and are to be returned to the City Clerk's office during a period of
suspension, after revocation, or if the taxicab company ceases to
operate.
B. No taxicab vehicle license held by a corporation, association,
partnership, individual, or other entity shall be transferred to another.
C. No taxicab driver's license shall be transferred to another individual.
A. Only taxicabs with a current taxicab vehicle license from the City of
Nashua may pick up passengers within Nashua if they are also being
dropped off within Nashua. Taxicabs licensed in other cities or towns
may pick up or drop off fares in Nashua if such fares are dropped off or
picked up in another City or town.
B. Only taxicab operators with a current taxicab driver's license from the
City may pick up passengers within Nashua if they are also being
dropped off within Nashua. Taxicab drivers licensed in other cities or
towns may pick up or drop off fares in Nashua if such fares are dropped
off or picked up in another City or town.
A. The dispatcher, if called by the passenger, and the taxicab operator,
when the passenger enters the taxicab, must both clearly state the total
amount of the fare. If the passenger requests additional service, the
taxicab operator will clearly state the new total fare.
§ 300-6 SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS § 300-9
290:1059
§ 300-10. Receipt to be provided upon request.
Taxicab drivers shall provide customers with a receipt, when requested. The
receipt shall include the following information in legible form:
§ 300-11. Recordkeeping requirements. [Amended 9-13-2000 by
Ord. No. O-00-45]
B. For waiting time after the cab has arrived at a requested place and time
of call or while standing at the direction of the passenger, the taxicab
may charge no more than $0.25 for each minute or fraction thereof.
C. No charge shall be made for waiting in advance of the time at which the
cab is wanted as given in the call nor for delay due to inefficiency of the
taxicab or its operation.
D. The taxicab driver shall carry hand luggage free.
E. There shall be no additional charges added on for cab sharing.
A. Name of the vehicle driver;
B. The taxicab driver's license number;
C. The date, time, and place of origin and departure;
D. Time and place of destination;
E. The total fare paid or charged; and
F. The amount of tip.
A. Each taxicab company with at least one licensed taxicab, and taxicab
dispatch company shall be required to keep a log detailing all requests
for services as received and shall contain no less than following
information: date and time call received, address of caller, destination,
cab to which call was assigned, name of driver and fare charged. The
log shall be maintained in order by date at the principal place of
business of each taxicab company or taxicab dispatch company for the
current calendar year and for the calendar year immediately preceding
the current calendar year and shall be made available upon request, for
review by any law enforcement agency or by the office of the City Clerk.
B. Every taxicab vehicle owner shall provide for each of his licensed
taxicabs a suitable logbook in which shall be kept the name of the
driver, the date, time, origin of trip, and destination, and amount of
each fare. If a trip is made pursuant to a contract as may be allowed by
this chapter, the log shall show the fare charged and the identification
of the contract under which the transportation was provided. The
logbook shall be kept available for inspection by members of the Police
Department and the office the City Clerk, and shall be preserved for at
least one year from the date of the last entry at the address for which
the vehicle license is issued.
§ 300-9 NASHUA CODE § 300-11
290:1060
§ 300-12. Condition and appearance of vehicles. [Amended
9-13-2000 by Ord. No. O-00-45]
C. A taxicab company or taxicab dispatch company shall notify the City
Clerk within three days of receipt of any knowledge that a taxicab
driver has had his motor vehicle operator's license suspended or
revoked by the state. Similarly, if the City Clerk shall be made aware
that a taxicab driver has had their motor vehicle operator's license
suspended or revoked, the City Clerk shall notify the taxicab business
with which the driver is associated with, as may reasonably be
determined by the licensing documentation, of the suspension of the
licensee's taxicab driver's license by the City.
D. Any person with a taxicab vehicle license or a taxicab driver's license
shall notify the City Clerk in writing within 10 days of any change of
address.
E. Any taxicab vehicle owner or taxicab driver shall notify the City Clerk
within three days of receiving a felony or misdemeanor criminal
conviction or motor vehicle conviction or notification that their motor
vehicle license has been suspended or revoked by any jurisdiction.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of each taxicab to keep the
taxicab in safe and operable condition according to the state motor
vehicle inspection laws. In addition to the annual inspection required by
the state, a second midyear inspection of taxicabs is to be made in the
sixth month following the required state inspection. All inspections
shall be done at a New Hampshire registered inspection station. Within
10 days after the end of the midyear inspection month, the City Clerk
must receive proof that the taxicab passed the additional midyear New
Hampshire state inspection. The taxicab owner is responsible for all
costs related to these inspections.
B. In addition to the inspections required by Subsection A, once a year,
during the same month as the state-required annual inspection, all
taxicabs must report to the Nashua Police Department for a brief
inspection by the police, focusing on the general condition and
appearance of the car and adherence to the requirements of this
section. The Police Department and the City Clerk shall communicate
with each other to ensure that all police inspections occur in a timely
manner.
C. The City Clerk shall be notified in writing of any physical damage to a
taxicab within 48 hours of such damage. Such notification shall include
a copy of any written report submitted to the insurance company, if one
exists. The City Clerk or Police Department may order a special
inspection of the damaged vehicle at a New Hampshire registered
inspection station. All taxicabs must be repaired as expeditiously as
possible, and at most within 30 days, unless an extension is granted by
the City Clerk.
§ 300-11 SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS § 300-12
290:1061
D. Every vehicle used as a taxicab shall be a sedan or station wagon with a
passenger and cargo volume of 110 cubic feet or more, van, minivan,
sport utility vehicle, or special purpose vehicle as listed in the United
States Department of Energy’s Fuel Economy Guide. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, all four door hybrid electric vehicles qualify to be used as
taxicabs. [Amended 2-23-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-05]
E. Every vehicle used as a taxicab shall not be more than nine years old by
model year.
F. Every vehicle used as a taxicab shall be maintained consistent with the
vehicle's original intended appearance, taking into account normal
wear and tear. Every taxicab shall be washed on a regular basis.
G. The interior of all taxicabs shall be clean and sanitary at all times, and
shall be suitable for the occupancy and safety of passengers. At a
minimum, the taxicab shall be thoroughly cleaned at least once a week.
H. Every vehicle used as a taxicab shall be of the closed type, having at
least two operational doors for direct and unimpeded access to the
passenger area behind the driver's seat. The doors shall be so
constructed so that they will remain securely fastened during normal
operation, while the taxicab is in motion, but may be readily opened by
a passenger in case of emergency. The taxicab shall have operational
windows that roll down at least halfway.
I. Every vehicle used as a taxicab shall have seats that are intact, and not
torn or ripped.
J. The taxicab vehicle license number shall be displayed on the rear side
posts of the taxicab, in clearly visible numbers of a minimum three
inches in height.
K. Every owner of a taxicab which is temporarily removed from passenger
service shall clearly identify such vehicle as being "out of service" via an
exterior light, if so equipped, or by placing a placard in the vehicle's
rear window identifying the vehicle as being out of service. The placard
shall be placed in such a way so as to be visible from the rear but not so
it is in conflict with state motor vehicle regulations.
L. All drivers shall be courteous to the public, clean and neat in
appearance, shall not drink intoxicating liquors during their hours of
employment, shall operate their vehicles at a reasonable rate of speed
and shall obey the laws of the road and all traffic regulations. Each
taxicab driver may decide if their passengers will be allowed to smoke
inside the taxicab. Upon the request of a passenger, the taxicab driver
will refrain from smoking inside the taxicab.
M. Every taxicab owner shall post a notice in each taxicab that shall state
that any passenger who wishes to complain or comment about any
aspect of the taxicab or driver may call or write to the City Clerk, and
shall provide the correct address and telephone number.
§ 300-12 NASHUA CODE § 300-12
290:1062
§ 300-13. Care of passengers.
§ 300-14. Lost articles.
Taxicab drivers must check vehicles at the end of each shift for any articles
of value left behind by passengers. When possible, the taxicab company or
taxicab dispatch company shall notify the passenger within 24 hours with
notice of the found articles. The Police Department shall also be provided
with a description of any such articles within 24 hours unless reclaimed by
passengers prior to that time, and the taxicab company or taxicab dispatch
company shall retain all lost articles for a period of 60 days from the date of
notice to the Police Department before disposing of the articles.
§ 300-15. Prohibited conduct by vehicle licensee and driver.
The holder of a taxicab vehicle license and the holder of a taxicab driver's
license shall not:
N. Every vehicle used as a taxicab will be subject to random inspections.
Owners will be given no more than 10 working days to correct
deficiencies and may be ordered to take vehicles out of service until
such deficiencies are corrected.
O. Every taxicab licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall have
displayed near the outside of each forward door or of each rear door,
the name or the trade name of the taxicab company or taxicab dispatch
company holding the vehicle license, in clearly visible letters of at least
three inches in height.
A. No taxicab drivers shall directly solicit customers.
B. No taxicab driver shall carry any person other than the passenger first
employing his cab without the consent of the first passenger.
C. Any taxicab agent at any bus, railroad, airport, or other terminal or
station, before directing a second passenger to a taxicab employed,
shall ask the person first employing the taxicab if be consents to
another passenger or passengers.
D. No taxicab shall stop to take on or discharge passengers at any place or
on any street or square except at the curb or as near thereto as
possible. Passengers shall be permitted to enter or leave the vehicle
only from the side nearest the curb, unless there are extraordinary
circumstances.
E. No person may sit or ride upon any fender, dash, step, top or door of any
taxicab.
A. Operate or allow the operation of a taxicab in violation of any of the
provisions of the highway laws of the state or of the ordinances of the
City regulating traffic.
§ 300-12 SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS § 300-15
290:1063
§ 300-16. Drug and alcohol policy. [Amended 9-13-2000 by Ord. No.
O-00-45]
§ 300-17. Drug- and alcohol-related prohibited conduct. [Amended
9-13-2000 by Ord. No. O-00-45]
A licensee is expected to report for duty in appropriate mental and physical
condition for work. Accordingly, a licensee shall not:
B. Demand a fare in excess of the amount previously quoted.
C. Use a scanning device, radio, or any instrument to intercept calls of
other cab companies.
D. Fail to maintain a log detailing all requests for services as required in
such a manner that the activities of a particular company and/or leased
vehicle cannot be properly identified and reviewed by the office of the
City Clerk or a law enforcement officer.
E. Refuse to cooperate with state or local police.
F. Violate any other provisions of this chapter.
A. It is the policy of the City that licensed drivers of taxicabs (hereinafter
the "licensees") shall not be substance abusers. The abuse of alcohol or
the use of illegal drugs reduces awareness and increases the potential
for accidents. Substance abuse thereby increases both the risk of injury
to fares and citizens of the City and the risk of damage to public and
private property.
B. It is the policy of the City that the use or possession of alcohol
beverages or illegal drugs by taxicab licensees while on duty is
prohibited. Licensees shall not report for duty under the influence of
alcoholic beverages or with sufficient amounts of illegal drugs in their
system so as to give rise to a positive drug test or impair their job
performance. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "illegal drugs"
means any intoxicant, any narcotic, marijuana, or any controlled drug,
save medication prescribed for a licensee by a licensed physician,
presuming the use of such is consistent with the prescription and with
the operation of a motor vehicle. Violations of this policy shall result in
disciplinary action, including immediate suspension of the vehicle
license.
A. Work or report to work under the influence of alcohol or illegal drugs. A
licensee shall be deemed under the influence of alcohol if he or she has
an alcohol concentration of 0.02 or more or is impaired to any degree as
a result of the consumption or use of alcohol. A licensee shall be
deemed under the influence of illegal drugs if he or she has sufficient
quantities of controlled drugs in his or her system to give rise to a
positive finding on a drug test or is impaired to any degree as a result of
the consumption, inhalation, or injection of alcohol, drug, or any other
intoxicating substance, or any combination thereof;
§ 300-15 NASHUA CODE § 300-17
290:1064
§ 300-18. Types of testing. [Amended 9-13-2000 by Ord. No.
O-00-45]
§ 300-19. Substances for which tests are administered. [Amended
9-13-2000 by Ord. No. O-00-45]
B. Consume alcohol or possess an open container while on duty;
C. Engage in any drug-related conduct prohibited under state or federal
law; or
D. Engage in any other manner of conduct involving alcohol, drugs, or any
other intoxicating substance which adversely affects his or her job
performance or is detrimental to the safety of his or her welfare or the
public.
A. Prelicensing. All applicants for licensure must submit to a urine drug
test as evidence he or she does not use illegal drugs. The test shall be
conducted by a local physician, lab or hospital in accordance with
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
(hereinafter SAMSHA) standards. The applicant shall complete the test
at a time and place specified by the office of the City Clerk. A temporary
license shall be issued pending receipt of the results of the prelicensing
test.
B. Random testing. The City will conduct random drug and alcohol testing.
All licensees will be included in a random selection system. This system
shall provide an equal chance for each licensee to be selected for each
random test. Accordingly, a particular licensee may be selected for
successive tests or may not be selected at all throughout the year.
Random tests shall be reasonably spread throughout the year. The City
shall annually test a minimum of 50% of its licensees for drugs and a
minimum of 25% of its licensees for alcohol. Upon notification of
selection, a licensee shall complete the test at a time and place
specified by the office of the City Clerk. The test shall be conducted by a
local physician, lab or hospital in accordance with SAMSHA standards.
All random drug and alcohol tests shall be paid for by the City; however,
any other costs associated with a second analysis of the licensee's
specimen, counseling, treatment, rehabilitation or other medical followup
shall be paid for by the licensee.
A. Any applicant who tests positive for the presence of any of the drugs set
forth herein shall be deemed unsuitable for licensure. Any licensee who
tests positive for any of the substances set forth herein shall be deemed
unsuitable for continued licensure and shall be subject to the provisions
of § 300-6. The substances for which the City may test are:
(1) Alcohol.
(2) Amphetamines.
(3) Cocaine.
§ 300-17 SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS § 300-19
290:1065
§ 300-20. Refusal to test. [Amended 9-13-2000 by Ord. No. O-00-45]
Any person licensed to drive a taxicab by the City shall be deemed to have
given consent to the drug and alcohol tests employed by the City under
this chapter. Refusal to submit to any drug and alcohol test established
herein shall be grounds to suspend a license. Any conduct intended to
obstruct or unreasonably delay the proper administration of a test shall
be deemed a refusal to submit to the test. In the event that a licensee
cannot provide a sufficient urine or breath specimen, the City may direct the
individual to a physician for purposes of evaluation. If the physician cannot
find a legitimate medical explanation for the licensee's inability to provide
a sufficient urine or breath specimen, the licensee shall be deemed to have
refused to submit to the test.
§ 300-21. Substance abuse evaluation; return to duty; follow-up
testing. [Amended 9-13-2000 by Ord. No. O-00-45]
§ 300-22. Laboratory procedures; retest. [Amended 9-13-2000 by
Ord. No. O-00-45]
(4) Marijuana.
(5) Opiates.
(6) Phencyclidine (PCP).
B. The City reserves the right to expand the scope of substances for which
it will test at any time.
A. Any licensee who engages in prohibited conduct shall be provided with
the names, addresses and telephone numbers of a qualified substance
abuse professionals (SAP). In order to requalify for a license, the
licensee shall be evaluated by the SAP, submit to any treatment the SAP
prescribes, and successfully complete a return-to-duty and/or alcohol
test. The licensee shall also be subject to follow-up testing. Follow-up
testing is separate from and in addition to any prelicensing or random
testing procedures. The schedule for follow-up testing shall be
unannounced and in accordance with instructions of the SAP. Follow-up
testing may continue for a period of up to 12 months following the
licensee's return to duty. Follow-up testing shall consist of no fewer
than six tests. The cost of any SAP evaluation, prescribed treatment,
return to duty and follow-up testing shall be paid by the licensee.
B. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit or, in any way, affect
the authority of the Taxicab Oversight Committee to prescribe the
period of suspension or revocation it deems appropriate under § 300-6.
A. All specimens collected under this chapter will be submitted to a
laboratory certified by SAMSHA. All specimens initially testing positive
will be confirmed by a subsequent confirmation test before the
laboratory reports a result as positive. The laboratory shall report all
§ 300-19 NASHUA CODE § 300-22
290:1066
§ 300-23. Disciplinary action. [Amended 9-13-2000 by Ord. No.
O-00-45]
§ 300-24. Confidentiality. [Amended 9-13-2000 by Ord. No. O-00-45]
Individual test results and rehabilitation records, if any, for applicants and
licensees shall only be used to determine adherence to this chapter and
in defense of any administrative or judicial action initiated by the licensee
against the City. Unless release is required under NH RSA Chapter 91-A
or by a valid subpoena, the test results and rehabilitation records shall
be kept strictly confidential and released only upon the written consent
of the person who submitted to the test. However, any individual who has
submitted to drug testing in compliance with this chapter is entitled to
access to his or her records related to such testing upon written request as
long as such is available.
positive laboratory test results to the medical review officer. The
licensee or applicant shall also be notified of any positive laboratory
test results and have an opportunity to explain to the medical review
officer such result. In the event the medical review officer determines
there is no legitimate basis for the licensee's objection, the test will
stand as reported. In the event the medical review officer determines
there is an explanation for the positive test result other than the use or
abuse of illegal drugs or alcohol, the test result shall be reported back
as negative.
B. A licensee or applicant whose test results are positive may, at his or her
own expense, request a retest of the original sample. Such a request
shall be made within 72 hours of the licensee or applicant being notified
of the original test results; otherwise, any right to retest shall be
deemed waived. The retest shall be performed by a SAMSHA certified
lab. In the event the retest demonstrates a negative result, the licensee
will be reimbursed for the cost of the retest.
A. In addition to any other penalty permitted under this chapter, a licensee
shall be subject to immediate suspension in accordance with the
procedures established in § 300-6 if he or she:
(1) Engages in prohibited conduct as set forth in § 300-17;
(2) Refuses to submit to any drug and alcohol test which the City may
administer under this chapter; or
(3) Fails to comply with the provisions of § 300-21.
B. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, any licensee
having an alcohol concentration between 0.02 to 0.039 shall
immediately be suspended for a period of 10 days. If the licensee has
any subsequent violation of any alcohol prohibition, he/she shall be
required to comply with the provisions of § 300-21 in order to requalify
for licensing.
§ 300-22 SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS § 300-25
290:1067
§ 300-25. Substance abuse testing account. [Amended 9-13-2000 by
Ord. No. O-00-45]
There is established a special account to be known as the Substance Abuse
Testing Account. Such account shall consist of any money appropriated or
received for the purposes of this chapter and from revenues derived from
a portion of the licenses fees assessed under § 300-5B, as follows: $50 of
each application fee for a new license and $35 of each application fee for a
renewal license. Such monies shall be used by the City Clerk to cover costs
associated with testing conducted under § 300-18. The account shall be
nonlapsing and continually appropriated to the City Clerk for the purposes
of this chapter.
§ 300-26. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-13-2000 by Ord. No.
O-00-45]
A. The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine
not to exceed $100 per day, or the revocation of the taxicab vehicle
license, taxicab driver's license, or a combination of any of the three,
except that a violation of §§ 300-2A and 300-4A shall be punishable by a
fine of not less than $500. [Amended 3-22-2005 by Ord. No.
O-05-81]
B. Each act of violation and every day upon which any such violation shall
occur shall constitute a separate offense. The City may enjoin or abate
any violation of this chapter by appropriate action. In addition to the
penalty set forth in this chapter, if the court finds for the City, the City
shall recover its costs of suit including reasonable experts fees,
attorneys fees, and necessary investigative costs.
C. The Police Department is hereby authorized to seize or immobilize any
taxicab located within the City operating without a valid taxicab vehicle
license. Upon such seizure or immobilization, the Police Department
shall notify the owner of the vehicle of such seizure, the reason
therefore, and of the place to which such vehicle has been removed or
immobilized. The Police Department shall order the holding of any such
vehicle for a period of not less than 10 days from the date of the
required notification to the owner. During this period, the owner may
redeem any such vehicle by correcting the violation of this chapter
which led to such seizure or by providing satisfactory evidence of his
ability or intent to correct the violation. Any taxicab which is
impounded or immobilized and which is not redeemed within 30 days of
the date of notification as described in this section shall become the
property of the City. Cost for towing and storage charges will be billed
to the owner of the taxicab seized and must be paid before the release
of the vehicle to the owner who shall be responsible for removing the
vehicle from storage. The City will be held harmless for any damage
occurring during the act of confiscation, transportation, storage, and/or
immobilization of each vehicle.
§ 300-25 NASHUA CODE § 300-26
290:1068
Chapter 306
TOWING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 315. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 320.
§ 306-1. Maximum rates for towing without consent of owner.
Any lawful towing of a motor vehicle that is performed without the prior
consent or authorization of the owner or operator of the motor vehicle,
and is not performed under a contract with the City of Nashua, shall have
as a maximum rate the current City requested rate plus other reasonable
charges and fees as set forth in the price schedule for the current
contractual City towing charges on file at the City Clerk's office.
§ 306-2. Conspicuous notice to public required.
In addition to the requirements found in NH RSA 262:40-a, notice to the
public must include posting a sign(s) in a conspicuous location(s) in the
parking garage or parking lot, and the sign(s) must have the following
minimum standards. Each sign shall be at least 18 inches by 24 inches in
size and constructed of a durable material with the following information in
bold print:
"Customer/tenant parking only.
Violators may be towed at vehicle owner's risk and expense.
For towing information call Nashua Police Department at 594-3500."
§ 306-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be subject to
punishment as provided in § 1-12 of the City Code.
Chapter 315
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Towing — See Ch. 306. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 320.
§ 300-26 TOWING § 315-1
306:1069
§ 315-1. Abandonment prohibited.
It shall be a violation of this chapter to abandon any motor vehicle anywhere
in the City
§ 315-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle which remains
standing in one place for more than 48 hours under circumstances which
would lead a reasonable person to conclude that the vehicle has been
abandoned.
§ 315-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-13-2015 by Ord. No.
O-15-069]
Any person violating this section shall be subject to a fine of at least $200
and shall be responsible for the cost of towing.
Chapter 320
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Drinking alcoholic beverages while operating
vehicles — See Ch. 83, Art. III.
Bicycles, skateboards and roller blades — See
Ch. 98.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 285.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 300.
Towing — See Ch. 306.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 315.
Off-highway recreational vehicles — See Ch.
325.
§ 315-1 NASHUA CODE § 315-3
306:1070
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 320-1. Definitions.
The following terms, whenever used in this chapter, shall have the following
meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE —
HORSE — All domestic animals.
MOTOR TRUCK — Any motor vehicle of greater than 18,000 pounds'
manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating or any motor vehicle equipped
with other than pneumatic tires.
MOTOR VEHICLE —
A motor vehicle designed or used to transport passengers or property
if:
The vehicle has a gross vehicle weight rating or gross combination
weight rating of 26,001 or more pounds;
(1)
The vehicle is designed to transport 16 or more passengers,
including the driver; or
(2)
The vehicle is of any size and is used in the transportation of
materials found to be hazardous for the purposes of 49 CFR Part
172, Subpart F.
(3)
A.
The term "commercial motor vehicle" shall not include:
Emergency vehicles assigned or registered to a Fire Department or
fire service organization when driven by fire service personnel in
pursuit of fire service purposes.
(1)
(2) Recreational vehicles.
Military vehicles when driven by non-civilian military personnel in
pursuit of military purposes.
(3)
(4) Vehicles used exclusively for agriculture and farming.
B.
Except where otherwise specified in this chapter, any self-propelled
vehicle not operated exclusively on stationary tracks, including ski area
vehicles.
A.
As used in RSA 261:148 relative to municipal permits for registration,
includes all trailers and semi-trailers, as defined therein, and travel
trailers, as determined by the Commissioner of Revenue
Administration; however, snow-traveling vehicles, as defined by State
law, mobile homes, house trailers and mopeds shall not be so included.
B.
§ 320-1 TOWING § 320-1
306:1071
OPERATOR — Any person who operates a motor vehicle.
SAFETY ZONE — Any part of a highway, established and marked by the
Police Department as such, on which travel by vehicles may be restricted or
excluded.
SCHOOL ZONE — Any highway or part of a highway located between signs
so designated in the vicinity of a school.
U-TURN — Any diagonal crossing over the center of a highway, except to
enter or come out of a street, lane, avenue, yard or driveway.
VEHICLE —
For purposes of the financial responsibility statutes, any self-propelled
vehicle not operated exclusively upon stationary tracks, except farm
tractors, crawler-type tractors, and mopeds.
C.
For purposes of the road toll statutes, all vehicles, engines, machines or
mechanical contrivances which are propelled on the public highways by
internal-combustion engines, electric motors, steam engines, or other
alternate sources of energy, except human or animal power.
D.
Except as provided in Subsection B of this definition, every mechanical
device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a way, excepting devices used exclusively
upon stationary rails or tracks.
A.
When used in the provisions of RSA 264, the same as Subsection A of
this definition, but not including bicycles and mopeds.94
B.
94.Editor's Note: Original §§ 13-16 through 13-20, pertaining to the Traffic Commission,
which immediately followed this section, were repealed 12-28-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-44.
§ 320-1 NASHUA CODE § 320-1
306:1072
ARTICLE II
Traffic Signals
§ 320-2. Traffic signal indications.
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting different
colored lights, or colored lighted arrows, successively, one at a time or in
combination, only the colors green, red, and yellow shall be used, except
for special pedestrian signals carrying a word legend, and such lights shall
indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows:
A. Green indication.
(1) Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal may proceed
straight through or turn right or left, unless a sign at such place
prohibits either such turn. But vehicular traffic, including vehicles
turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles
and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent
crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited.
(2) Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown alone or in
combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow,
or such other movement as is permitted by other indications shown
at the same time. Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way
to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other
traffic lawfully using the intersection.
(3) Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal, as
provided in RSA 265:11, pedestrians facing any green signal,
except when the sole green signal is a turn arrow, may proceed
across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
B. Steady yellow indication.
(1) Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow
signal is thereby warned that the related green movement is being
terminated or that a red indication will be exhibited immediately
thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter the intersection.
(2) Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow signal,
unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal as
provided in RSA 265:11, are thereby advised that there is
insufficient time to cross the roadway before a red indication is
shown, and no pedestrian shall then start to cross the roadway.
C. Steady red indication.
(1) Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal alone shall stop
at a clearly marked stop line or before entering the crosswalk on
the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before entering
the intersection and shall remain standing until an indication to
§ 320-2 TOWING § 320-2
306:1073
§ 320-3. Traffic signals. [Amended 2-8-2011 by Ord. No. O-10-47]
Traffic signals are hereby authorized and shall be installed and maintained
at the following intersections, in accordance with the standards established
proceed is shown, except as provided in Subsections C(2) and C(6)
of this section.
(2) When a sign is in place permitting a turn, traffic, except
pedestrians, facing a steady circular red signal may cautiously
enter the intersection to make the turn indicated by the sign after
stopping as required in Subsection C(1) of this section. Such
vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully
within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the
intersection.
(3) Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal as
provided in RSA 265:11, pedestrians facing a steady circular red
signal alone shall not enter the roadway.
(4) Traffic, except pedestrians, facing a steady red arrow indication
may not enter the intersection to make the movement indicated by
such arrow, unless entering the intersection to make such other
movement as is permitted by other indications shown at the same
time, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if
none, then before entering the intersection, and shall remain
standing until an indication to make the movement indicated by
such arrow is shown, except as provided in Subsection C(6) of this
section.
(5) Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal, pedestrians
facing a steady red arrow signal indication shall not enter the
roadway.
(6) Except when the authority having jurisdiction over the intersection
prohibits such a turn and a sign located at the intersection so
indicates, vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal alone
or a steady red arrow indication shall stop as required in this
section and may, after making such stop, make a right turn if such
right turn is lawful at that intersection. Such vehicular traffic shall
yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent
crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
D. Signal not at an intersection. In the event that an official traffic-control
signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection,
the provisions of this section shall be applicable except as to those
provisions which, by their nature, can have no application. Any stop
required shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating
where the stop shall be made; but in the absence of any such sign or
marking, the stop shall be made at the signal.
§ 320-2 NASHUA CODE § 320-3
306:1074
by the United States Department of Transportation's Federal Highway
Administration's Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, 2009 Edition,
or as may be amended or revised:
Intersection Traffic Department Location No.
Allds Street at Harbor
Avenue and Burke Street
4
Amherst Street at Airport
Road
11
Amherst Street at Baldwin
Street
6
Amherst Street at Blackstone
Drive
17
Amherst Street at Broad
Street
7
Amherst Street at Building
19 1/15
14
Amherst Street at Celina
Avenue
19
Amherst Street at Cellu
Drive
18
Amherst Street at Charlotte
Street school crossing
8
Amherst Street at Charron
Avenue and Turnpike Plaza
10
Amherst Street at Cotton
Road
12
Amherst Street at
Merrimack Street
5
Amherst Street at Northwest
Boulevard
20
Amherst Street at Somerset
Parkway
13
Amherst Street at Thornton
Road
16
Amherst Street at Townsend
West
15
Broad Street at Blue Hill
Avenue
25
Broad Street at Broad Street
Parkway [Added
11-13-2012 by Ord. No.
O-12-025]
25A
§ 320-3 TOWING § 320-3
306:1075
Intersection Traffic Department Location No.
Broad Street at Coliseum
Avenue
29
Broad Street at Dublin
Avenue
30
Broad Street at Nashua Mall
entrance
28
Broad Street at the Red Barn
[Repealed 12-23-2014 by
Ord. No. O-14-034]
Broad Street Parkway at
Technology Way [Added
11-13-2012 by Ord. No.
O-12-025]
92
Canal Street at Amory Street 33
Canal Street at Lowell Street 31
Canal Street at Nashua Drive
and Chandler Street and
Jackson Street
32
Coliseum Avenue at Home
Depot and Gusabel Avenue
35
Coliseum Avenue at Senior
Housing and Nashua Mall
34
Dan Chan Street at Mall
Ring Road
48
Daniel Webster Highway at
Autumn Leaf Drive
41
Daniel Webster Highway at
Dan Chan Street
46
Daniel Webster Highway at
Danforth Road
45
Daniel Webster Highway at
Graham Drive
36
Daniel Webster Highway at
Pheasant Lane Mall and
Costco
47
Daniel Webster Highway at
Poisson Avenue
42
Daniel Webster Highway at
Silver Drive
44
Daniel Webster Highway at
Spit Brook Road
43
§ 320-3 NASHUA CODE § 320-3
306:1076
Intersection Traffic Department Location No.
Daniel Webster Highway at
Veterans Drive
37
East Dunstable Road at
Harris Road
49
East Dunstable Road at Lund
Road
52
East Hollis Street at Allds
Street
54A
East Hollis Street at
Arlington Street
54
East Hollis Street at the fire
station
54B
East Hollis Street at Harbor
Avenue and Spruce Street
55
East Hollis Street at Hudson
Bridge and Bridge Street
53
East Hollis Street at Spring
Street and Medical Center
Drive
56
Harris Road at Northeastern
Boulevard
57
Kinsley Street at Elm Street 60
Kinsley Street at Markar
Street and St. Joe's
58
Kinsley Street at Palm Street
[Added 11-13-2012 by
Ord. No. O-12-025]
59A
Kinsley Street at Pine Street 59
Lake Street at Pine Street 61
Lund Road at Almont Street 62
Main Dunstable Road at
Conant Road
74
Main Street at Allds Street 72
Main Street at Amherst
Street and Lowell Street and
Concord Street
63
Main Street at Canal Street
and Franklin Street
64
Main Street at East
Dunstable Road
73
§ 320-3 TOWING § 320-3
306:1077
Intersection Traffic Department Location No.
Main Street at East Hollis
Street and West Hollis Street
68
Main Street at East Pearl
Street and West Pearl Street
67
Main Street at Factory
Street and Temple Street
66
Main Street at Kinsley Street 69
Main Street at Lake Street 71
Main Street at Otterson
Street
70A
Main Street at Park Street
and Water Street
65
Main Street at Prospect
Street
70
Palm Street at Central Street
[Added 11-13-2012 by
Ord. No. O-12-025]
90
Pine Street at Central Street
[Added 11-13-2012 by
Ord. No. O-12-025]
91
Route 111A at Main
Dunstable Road
2
Route 111A at Northeastern
Boulevard
3
Route 111A at Route 3
southbound on-ramp (state
shed)
1
Somerset Parkway at Kessler
Drive
75
Spit Brook Road at BAE
Systems and Newcastle
Drive
77
Spit Brook Road at Oracle
Drive
81
Spit Brook Road at Royal
Ridge Mall
76
Spit Brook Road at Tara
Boulevard
80
Tara Boulevard at Innovative
Way
82
§ 320-3 NASHUA CODE § 320-3
306:1078
Intersection Traffic Department Location No.
West Hollis Street at 12th
Street and Markar Street
85
West Hollis Street at Elm
Street
83
West Hollis Street at
Ledgewood Drive and
Wellesley Road
89
West Hollis Street at Liberty
Street and Simon Street
86
West Hollis Street at Palm
Street [Added 11-13-2012
by Ord. No. O-12-025]
84A
West Hollis Street at Pine
Street
84
West Hollis Street at
Riverside Drive
88
§ 320-3 TOWING § 320-3
306:1079

ARTICLE III
Stop and Yield Intersections
§ 320-4. Stop intersections.
A. Preferential right-of-way at an intersection may be indicated by stop
signs.
B. Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control
signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection
indicated by a stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the
near side of the intersection or, in the event that there is no crosswalk,
shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at a point
nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the
intersection.
C. All stop signs which have been erected at the time of the passage of this
chapter are hereby approved.
D. The following intersections are hereby designated as stop or through
streets, and authority is hereby granted for the erection of a stop sign at
the corner so designated in accordance with the tenor of this chapter:
[Amended 2-26-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-07; 3-11-2008 by Ord. No.
O-08-08; 8-12-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-28; 10-14-2008 by Ord. No.
O-08-33; 10-28-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-40; 9-8-2009 by Ord. No.
O-09-69; 11-10-2009 by Ord. No. O-09-74; 12-22-2009 by Ord.
No. O-09-86; 4-13-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-10; 2-8-2011 by Ord.
No. O-10-47]
Stop Sign on
Sign
Location At Intersection of
Abbott Street Corner Merrimack Street
Abbott Street Northwest
corner
Amherst Street
Aberdeen Lane Southwest
corner
Searles Road
Academy Drive Northeast
corner
Concord Street
Alder Drive Southern
corner
Lund Road
Alford Lane Corner Greenock Lane
Alice Drive Northeast
corner
Dublin Avenue
Almont Street Both sides Knollwood Avenue
Almont Street Corner Lake Street
Anvil Drive North corner Lund Road
§ 320-4 TOWING § 320-4
306:1081
Stop Sign on
Sign
Location At Intersection of
Appleside Drive Southeast
corner
Kennedy Street
April Drive Corner South Main Street
April Drive Southwest
corner
Elgin Street
Arlington Street Corner Burke Street
Arthur's Lane Corner Edmatteric Drive
Ashland Street Corner Manchester Street
Ashland Street Northeast
corner
Edgewood Avenue
Ash Street Corner Kinsley Street
Ash Street Corner Lake Street
Ash Street Corner West Hollis Street
Ash Street Northwest
corner
Lovell Street
Atherton Avenue Corner Lock Street
Atherton Avenue East side South of its intersection with
East Stark Street
Avon Drive Both corners Atherton Avenue
Badger Street Corner Kinsley Street
Badger Street Corner West Hollis Street
Balcom Street Corner Gilman Street
Balcom Street Corner Lake Street
Baldwin Street Northwest
corner
Fairmount Street Extension
Baldwin Street South corner Prescott Street
Barisano Way Corner Lutheran Drive
Bates Drive Southeast
corner
At its easterly intersection
with Hills Ferry Road (across
from Colgate Road)
Bates Drive Southeast
corner
At its westerly intersection
with Hills Ferry Road
Baymeadow Drive Both corners Oriole Drive
Baymeadow Drive Both corners Watersedge Drive
Baymeadow Drive Southwest
corner
Thornton Road
Beach Street Corner West Hollis Street
§ 320-4 NASHUA CODE § 320-4
306:1082
Stop Sign on
Sign
Location At Intersection of
Beasom Street [Added
11-28-2017 by Ord.
No. O-17-048]
Northeast and
southwest
corners
Berkeley Street
Beasom Street [Added
11-28-2017 by Ord.
No. O-17-048]
Northeast and
southwest
corners
Raymond Street
Beausite Drive Corner South Main Street
Beausite Drive Southwest
corner
Appleside Drive
Beauview Avenue Both corners Manchester Street
Beaver Street Northwest
corner
Marie Avenue
Beckmann Lane Southwest
corner
East Dunstable Road
Beech Street Northeast
corner
Pleasant Street
Bell Street North side Route U.S. 3 (8-315-3)
Belmont Street Corner Elm Street
Berkeley Street Both corners Courtland Street
Berkeley Street Both corners East Stark Street
Berkeley Street Both corners Laton Street
Berkeley Street Both corners Swart Street
Berkeley Street Corner Beasom Street
Berkshire Road Southern
corner
Pine Hill Avenue
Berwick Street Southwest
corner
Bradford Street
Bicentennial Drive Corner East Dunstable Road
Birch Hill Drive Southwest
corner
Woodland Drive
Biscayne Parkway Both corners Vespa Lane
Biscayne Parkway Corner Tinker Road
Bitirnas Street Southeast
corner
North Intervale Street
Blaine Street Both corners Monroe Street
Blaine Street Northeast
corner
Almont Street
Blanchard Street Both corners Caldwell Road
§ 320-4 TOWING § 320-4
306:1083
Stop Sign on
Sign
Location At Intersection of
Blanchard Street Southwest
corner
Almont Street
Blanchard Street Southwest
corner
Fairview Avenue
Bloomingdale Drive Northeast
corner
Ayer Road
Blossom Street Both corners Ritter Street
Blossom Street Corner Woodward Avenue
Blossom Street Southwest
corner
Pine Street
Bolic Street Southwest
corner
Raleigh Drive
Bond Street Both corners Watson Street
Bond Street Southwest
corner
Wellman Avenue
Booth Street North and
south sides
Caldwell Road
Boulder Circle Corner Westgate Crossing
Bowers Street Both corners Arlington Street
Bowers Street Both corners Harbor Avenue
Bowers Street Both corners Marshall Street
Bowers Street Northeast
corner
Copp Street
Bowers Street Northeast
corner
Newbury Street
Bowman Lane Southerly
corner
Northeastern Boulevard
Brackenwood Drive Northeast
corner
Decatur Drive
Brackenwood Drive Northeast
corner
Spindlewick Drive
Brackenwood Drive Southeast
corner
Timberline Drive
Bradford Street Both corners Berwick and Chatham
Streets
Bradford Street Northeast
corner
Thornton Road
Bramble Drive Corner Harris Road
Brewster Street Both sides Linwood Street
§ 320-4 NASHUA CODE § 320-4
306:1084
Stop Sign on
Sign
Location At Intersection of
Briarcliff Drive Both corners Valhalla Drive
Briarcliff Drive [Added
10-8-2013 by Ord.
No. O-13-052]
Northeast
corner
Fordham Drive
Briarwood Drive Corner Wheaton Drive
Bridle Path Corner Lake Street
Brinton Drive Corner Caron Avenue
Broad Street School
driveway exit
Corner Upstone Drive
Brookfield Drive Northwest
corner
Route 130
Brook Street Both corners Chestnut Street
Brook Village Road Both corners Spit Brook Road
Browning Avenue Corner East Dunstable Road
Buck Meadow Road Corner Ridge Road
Buck Meadow Road Northeast
corner
Main Dunstable Road
Buck Street Southwest
corner
Ash Street
Buck Street Southwest
corner
Chestnut Street
Buck Street Southwest
corner
Vine Street
Bulova Drive Northeast
corner
South Main Street
Bulova Drive Southwest
corner
Elgin Street
Burgess Street Both corners Watson Street
Burgess Street Corner Cox Street
Burgess Street Southeast
corner
Beauview Avenue
Burgundy Drive Northwest
corner
Conant Road
Burgundy Drive Southeast
corner
South London Drive
Burke Street Northeast
corner
Allds Street
Burnham Avenue Southeast
corner
East Stark Street
§ 320-4 TOWING § 320-4
306:1085
Stop Sign on
Sign
Location At Intersection of
Burnside Street Both corners Beauview Avenue
Burnside Street Both corners Watson Street
Burnside Street Corner Charlotte Avenue
Burnside Street Corner Cox Street
Burritt Street Corner Lake Street
Byron Drive Both corners Timberline Drive
Caldwell Road Both corners Fairview Avenue
Caldwell Road Corner Lake Street
Caldwell Road Corner Lund Road
Cambridge Drive Corner Conant Road
Candia Street Corner Bradford Street
Cannon Drive Corner Taschereau Boulevard
Cape Avenue [Added
4-24-2012 by Ord.
No. O-12-007]
Northeast
corner
Countryside Drive
Capitol Street Southwest
corner
State Street
Carmine Road Both corners Knowlton Road
Carmine Road Corner Upstone Drive
Carolina Drive Corner Taylor Street
Carroll Street Southbound
traffic
Marie Avenue
Caron Avenue Both corners Pennichuck Street
Catalina Lane Both corners Biscayne Parkway
Catalina Lane Both corners Deerhaven Drive
Cathedral Circle Southeast
corner
Parrish Hill Drive
Catherine Street Corner Lawndale Avenue
Cedar Street Southwest
corner
Elm Street
Celina Avenue East corner Northwest Boulevard
Central Street Corner Ash Street
Central Street Corner Chestnut Street
Central Street Corner Vine Street
Central Street Corner Walnut Street
§ 320-4 NASHUA CODE § 320-4
306:1086
Stop Sign on
Sign
Location At Intersection of
Central Street
[Repealed
11-13-2012 by Ord.
No. O-12-025]
Central Street
[Repealed
11-13-2012 by Ord.
No. O-12-025]
Chandler Street Both corners Lock Street
Chandler Street Corner Linden Street
Charles Street
[Repealed 7-10-2012
by Ord. No.
O-12-015]
Charles Street Northwest
corner
Franklin Street
Charlotte Avenue Corner Charlotte Street
Charlotte Avenue Corner Manchester Street
Charlotte Street Corner Amherst Street
Chatham Street Northeast
corner
Bradford Street
Chester Street Both corners Courtland Street
Chester Street Both corners East Stark Street
Chester Street Corner Beasom Street
Chestnut Street Both corners Brook Street
Chestnut Street Corner Central Street extension
Chestnut Street Corner Kinsley Street
Chestnut Street Corner Lake Street
Chestnut Street Corner West Hollis Street
Church Street Northeast
corner
Court Street
Cider Lane Southeast
corner
Hampton Drive, both
northern and southern
Clairmoor Drive Northeast
corner
South Main Street
Clark Road Southwest
corner
Whitford Road
Clearview Drive Corner Erion Drive
Clement Street Both corners South Main Street
§ 320-4 TOWING § 320-4
306:1087
Stop Sign on
Sign
Location At Intersection of
Clement Street Both corners Taft Street
Clement Street Corner Orchard Avenue
Cleveland Street Both corners Almont Street
Cleveland Street Both corners Linwood Street
Cleveland Street Both corners Monroe Street
Cleveland Street Corner Lund Street
Coburn Avenue Corner Route 130 (5-315-15)
Coburn Avenue Corner Pine Hill Road
Coleridge Road Southwest
corner
Whitman Road
Colgate Road Northwest
corner
Hills Ferry Road
Colgate Road Southeast
corner
Roby Road and Lafrance
Avenue
Colonial Avenue
[Added 4-24-2012 by
Ord. No. O-12-007]
Both corners Countryside Drive
Colony Way Both corners New Searles Road
Colony Way Northeast
corner
Tenby Drive
Columbia Avenue Corner Webster Street
Comanche Street Both corners Marie Avenue
Commercial Street Corner Temple Street
Conant Road Northeast
corner
Main Dunstable Road
Conant Road Northeast
corner
New Dunstable Road
Conant Road Northeast
corner
Route 111A
Conant Road Southwest
corner
Searles Road
Congress Street Both corners Northeastern Boulevard
Connector ramp
located approximately
250 feet northeasterly
from the intersection of
Route 111A and
Northeastern
Boulevard
2 stop signs -
one for
vehicles
turning left
and one for
vehicles
turning right
Route 111A
§ 320-4 NASHUA CODE § 320-4
306:1088
Stop Sign on
Sign
Location At Intersection of
Cortez Drive Corner Westgate Crossing
Cote Avenue Corner Lake Street
Cotton Road Southwest
corner
Driveway to the Digital
Equipment Plant
Countryside Drive Corner Gilson Road
Countryside Drive Corner West Hollis Street
Courtland Street Both corners Berkeley Street
Courtland Street Both corners Webster Street
Courtland Street Both corners Wood Street
Courtland Street
[Added 3-12-2013 by
Ord. No. O-12-027]
Southwest and
northeast
corners
Chester Street
Cox Street Southwest
corner
Manchester Street
Cox Street Southwest
corner
Watson Street
Cross Street Corner Canal Street
Cross Street [Added
9-27-2016 by Ord.
No. O-16-016]
Northwest and
southeast
corners
Lock Street
Crown Street Corner Allds Street
Crown Street Southwest
corner
Arlington Street
Cypress Lane Corner Rugby Road
D Street Corner Bridge Street
Dale Street Corner Main Dunstable Road
Dale Street Corner New Dunstable Road
Dalton Street Northeast
corner
Natick Street
Dalton Street Both corners Winchester Street
Danbury Road Southeast
corner
Watson Street
Danforth Road Both corners Sanders Road
Daniel Street Corner West Hollis Street
Dartmouth Street Both corners Sargent Avenue
David Drive Corner Atherton Avenue
Dawn Street Corner Blue Hill Avenue
§ 320-4 TOWING § 320-4
306:1089
Stop Sign on
Sign
Location At Intersection of
Dearborn Street Both corners Prospect Street
Dearborn Street Both corners Tyler Street
Dearborn Street Northeast
corner
Medical Center Drive
Dearborn Street Northeast
corner
Spring Street
Dearborn Street Northwest
corner
Otterson Street
Decatur Drive Northwest
corner
Brackenwood Drive
Dedham Street East corner Route 130
Deerwood Drive Corner Milford Road
Dexter Street Corner Lake Street
Dexter Street Corner Nowell Street
Dickerman Street Southwest
corner
Fifield Street
Dodge Street North side Route U.S. 3 (8-315-4)
Dolan Street Corner Allds Street
Dolan Street Corner Marshall Street
Donna Street Corner New Dunstable Road
Douglas Street Corner Adams Street
Dow Street [Added
4-9-2013 by Ord. No.
O-13-036]
Northeast
corner
Lock Street
Drive to Pennichuck
Water Works
North side Route U.S. 3 (8-315-7)
Dublin Avenue Both corners Fremont Street
Dublin Avenue Both corners Woodland Drive
Dublin Avenue Southeast
corner
Pine Hill Road
Ducas Avenue Northwest
corner
Route 130
Dudley Street Both corners April Drive
Dudley Street Both corners East Hobart Street
Dunbarton Drive Both corners Freedom Street
Dunbarton Drive Northwest
corner
Birch Hill Drive
§ 320-4 NASHUA CODE § 320-4
306:1090
Stop Sign on
Sign
Location At Intersection of
E Street Northwest
corner
East Hollis Street
East Dunstable Road Both corners Lamb Road
East Dunstable Road Both corners Lamb Road
East Dunstable Road Southeast
corner
Spit Brook Road
East Glenwood Street Both corners Dudley Street
East Glenwood Street Both corners Elgin Street
East Glenwood Street Northeast
corner
South Main Street
East Hobart Street Both corners Dudley Street
East Hobart Street Northeast
corner
South Main Street
East Pearl Street Corner Spring Street
East Stark Street Both corners Berkeley Street
East Stark Street South corner Atherton Avenue
Eastman Street Both corners Learned Street
Eastman Street Northeast
corner
East Dunstable Road
Eaton Street Corner West Hollis Street
Echo Avenue Both corners Acacia Street
Edgewood Avenue Both corners Ashland Street
Edgewood Avenue Corner Amherst Street
Edmond Drive Both corners Marie Avenue
Edson Street Northwest
corner
East Stark Street
Edwards Street Corner Kinsley Street
Edwards Street Corner New Dunstable Road
Edwards Street Corner West Hollis Street
Eldorado Circle Southeast
corner
Westgate Crossing
Eleventh Street Southeast
corner
Ledge Street
Elliott Street Both corners Webster Street
Elm Street Corner Lake Street
Elm Street Southeast
corner
West Pearl Street
§ 320-4 TOWING § 320-4
306:1091
Stop Sign on
Sign
Location At Intersection of
Erion Drive Northeast
corner
Timberline Drive
Euclid Avenue Corner Kinsley Street
Euclid Avenue Corner Lake Street
Fairlane Avenue Corner Almont Street
Fairmount Street Both corners North Intervale Street and
North Intervale Street
extended
Fairmount Street
[Added 7-10-2012 by
Ord. No. O-12-015]
North corner Charles Street
Fairmount Street Southwest
corner
Intervale Street
Fairview Avenue Both corners Caldwell Road
Fairview Avenue Corner Cleveland Street, across from
the Fairgrounds Elementary
School
Fairview Avenue Corner Kinsley Street
Fairview Avenue Corner Lake Street
Fairway Street Northwest
corner
South Main Street
Farley Street Both corners Stark Street
Farmer's Trail Corner Old Coach Road
Farmington Road Northeast
corner
South Main Street
Fawn Lane Both corners Deerhaven Drive
Fernwood Street Corner Revere Street
Fernwood Street Southeast
corner
Field Street
Ferry Road Northwest
corner
St. Laurent Street
Ferry Road Southwest
corner
Manchester Street
Ferson Street Both corners Swan Street
Ferson Street Corner Kinsley Street
Ferson Street Corner Lake Street
Field Street Southwest
corner
Fernwood Street
§ 320-4 NASHUA CODE § 320-4
306:1092
Stop Sign on
Sign
Location At Intersection of
Fifield Street Both corners Taylor Street
Fifield Street Corner Allds Street
North exit of Fleet
Bank parking lot
Northeast
corner
Church Street
South exit of Fleet Bank
parking lot
Southwest
corner
Spring Street
Fletcher Street Corner Beard Street
Fletcher Way Northeast
corner
Otterson Street
Fletcher Way Southwest
corner
Simoneau Plaza
Flintlocke Drive Corner Jill Drive
Fordham Street Corner Leslie Street
Forest Park Drive Both corners Lund Road
Forest Park Drive Corner Almont Street
Forge Drive North corner Lund Road
Foundry Street Northwest
corner
Quincy Street
Fowell Avenue Both corners Lawndale Avenue
Franconia Drive Both corners Stony Brook Road
Franconia Drive Northeast
corner
Dublin Avenue
Freedom Street Southwest
corner
Dublin Avenue
Freedom Street Southwest
corner
Dunbarton Drive
Fremont Street Both corners Dublin Avenue
Fremont Street Corner Woodland Avenue
French Street Corner Merrimack Street
French Street Southwest
corner
Abbott Street
Fulton Street Corner Lake Street
Gaffney Street Corner Kinsley Street
Gaffney Street Corner New Dunstable Road
Gaffney Street Corner West Hollis Street
Gendron Street Southeast
corner
Gendron Street
§ 320-4 TOWING § 320-4
306:1093
Stop Sign on
Sign
Location At Intersection of
Gendron Street Southeast
corner
Leslie Lane
George Street Corner West Hollis Street
Gettysburg Drive Northeast
corner
Concord Street
Gillis Street Both corners Arlington Street
Gillis Street Corner Allds Street
Gilman Street Both corners Ritter Street
Gilman Street Corner Woodward Avenue
Gilman Street Southwest
corner
Pine Street
Gilson Road Southwest
corner
Route 111A
Gingras Drive Both corners Kern Drive
Gingras Drive Northeast
corner
Lake Street
Glen Drive Corner Northeastern Boulevard
Glenhoe Street Corner West Glenwood Street
Gordon Street Corner Adams Street
Gosselin Road Southeast
corner
Westgate Crossing
Grand Avenue Both corners North Seventh Street
Grand Avenue Corner Ledge Street
Granite Street Corner Laton Street
Granite Street Corner Lock Street
Greeley Street Both corners Merrimack Street
Greenlay Street Northwest
corner
Marie Avenue
Greenwood Drive Both corners Bowman Lane
Greenwood Drive Both corners Glen Drive
Gregg Road Southeast
corner
Route 111A
Groton Road Southeast
corner
Route 111A
Grove Street Northwest
corner
Canal Street
Guilford Industries
Railroad Crossing
Both sides Hills Ferry Road
§ 320-4 NASHUA CODE § 320-4
306:1094
Stop Sign on
Sign
Location At Intersection of
Haines Street Both corners Arlington Street
Haines Street Both corners Newbury Street
Haines Street Corner Allds Street
Hall Avenue Both corners Webster Street
Hamilton Street Both corners Brook Street
Hamilton Street Corner Lake Street
Hamlet Drive Corner Spit Brook Road
Hanover Street Corner Kinsley Street
Hanover Street Corner West Hollis Street
Hardy Street Northeast
corner
Amherst Street
Harris Road Southwest
corner
Conant Road
Harvard Street Corner Allds Street
Harvard Street Corner Arlington Street
Havana Street Corner West Hollis Street
Hayden Street Corner Learned Street
Hazel Avenue Northwest
corner
Gosselin Road
Heidi Lane Northwest
corner
West Hollis Street
Hereford Drive Northeast
corner
Robinhood Road
Herrick Street Northwest
corner
Robinson Road
Highland Street Southeast
corner
Fairmount Street
High Pine Avenue Both corners Cypress Lane
High Street Corner Walnut Street
Hillside Drive Northeast
corner
Hills Ferry Road
Hill Street Both corners Dinsmore Street
Hill Street Corner Adams Street
Holbrook Drive Corner Yarmouth Drive
Hollyhock Avenue
[Added 4-12-2016 by
Ord. No. O-16-006]
Northwest
corner
Cherrywood Drive
§ 320-4 TOWING § 320-4
306:1095
Stop Sign on
Sign
Location At Intersection of
Hooker Street Northwest
corner
Beauview Avenue
Horsepond Avenue Northwest
corner
Broad Street
Houde Street Southeast
corner
Ledge Street
Howard Street Both corners Worcester Street
Hunters Lane Northeast
corner
Wheaton Drive
Huntingdon Lane Corner Nightingale Road
Hunt Street Corner Lake Street
Hunt Street Corner Pine Street
Hyannis Street Southeast
corner
Route 130
Indiana Drive Northwest
corner
Vermont Drive
Indian Rock Road Corner Coburn Avenue
Indian Rock Road Corner Pine Hill Road
Ingalls Street Corner Marshall Street and Burke
Street
Intervale Street
Extended
Northeast
corner
Intervale Street
Jalbert Drive Corner Lund Road
Jefferson Street Northeast
corner
Tolles Street
Jessica Drive Corner Both intersections with Lund
Road
Joffre Street Corner Kinsley Street
Joffre Street Corner New Dunstable Road
Joffre Street Corner West Hollis Street
Jolari Lane Corner Hazel Avenue
June Street Both corners April Drive
Kanata Street North
intersection
Sanborn Drive
Kanmare Road Northeast
corner
Raleigh Drive
§ 320-4 NASHUA CODE § 320-4
306:1096
Stop Sign on
Sign
Location At Intersection of
Keats Street [Added
9-13-2011 by Ord.
No. O-11-80]
Northwest
corner
Browning Avenue
Kelly Street Northwest
corner
Timberline Drive
Kendrick Street Both corners Lock Street
Kendrick Street Both corners Summer Street
Kennedy Drive Northeast
corner
South Main Street
Kennedy Street Southwest
corner
Peach Drive
Kingston Drive Corner Lake Street
King Street Both sides Newbury Street
King Street Corner Allds Street
King Street Southwest
corner
Arlington Street
Kinsley Street Corner New Dunstable Road
Knowlton Road Southeastern
corner
Broad Street
Knowlton Road Southwest
corner
Briand Drive
Lafrance Avenue Northeast
corner
Lamplighter Drive
Lake Avenue Corner Lake Street
Lake Avenue Corner Lewis Street
Lakeside Avenue Corner Lake Street
Lake Street Corner New Dunstable Road
Lake Street North side Route 111A
Lamb Road Both corners East Dunstable Road
Lamb Road Southeast
corner
Middle Dunstable Road
Lamb Road Southwest
corner
East Dunstable Road
Lamplighter Drive Northeast
corner
Damon Avenue
Langholm Drive Both corners Lockness Drive
Lansing Drive Both corners Bicentennial Drive
§ 320-4 TOWING § 320-4
306:1097
Stop Sign on
Sign
Location At Intersection of
Lansing Drive Northeast
corner
Queensway Circle
Laton Street Both corners Berkeley Street
Laton Street Both corners Wood Street
Lavoie Lane Southerly end Dunloggin Road
Lawndale Avenue Northwest
corner
Burnett Street
Learned Street Northeasterly
corner
Eastman Street
Ledge Street Both corners Simon Street
Ledge Street
[Repealed
11-13-2012 by Ord.
No. O-12-025]
Ledgewood Hills Drive Corner West Hollis Street
Lewis Street Corner Lake Street
Lewis Street Northwest
corner
Monroe Street
Lewis Street Southeast
corner
Monroe Street
Liberty Street Corner Kinsley Street
Liberty Street Corner New Dunstable Road
Lillie Road Both corners Browning Avenue
Lillie Road Both corners Shelley Drive
Lincoln Avenue Southwest
corner
Fifield Street
Linden Street Corner Tolles Street
Linton Street [Added
12-23-2013 by Ord.
No. O-13-067]
Northeast and
southwest
corners
Dudley Street
Linwood Street Corner Lake Street
Linwood Street Corner Lewis Street
Linwood Street Corner Nowell Street
Lisa Drive Southwest
corner
Lamb Road
Lisbon Lane Southwest
corner
South Main Street
§ 320-4 NASHUA CODE § 320-4
306:1098
Stop Sign on
Sign
Location At Intersection of
Lock Street [Added
9-27-2016 by Ord.
No. O-16-016]
Northeast and
southwest
corners
Cross Street
Lock Street Both corners Tolles Street
Lock Street [Added
7-10-2018 by Ord.
No. O-18-017]
Northwest
corner
Orange Street
Long Avenue Both corners Blue Hill Avenue
Lovewell Street Both corners Pine Street
Lovewell Street Northeast
corner
Ash Street
Lovewell Street Northeast
corner
Ritter Street
Lowell Street [Added
11-27-2012 by Ord.
No. O-12-026]
Southwest
corner
Orange Street
Luke Street Southwest
corner
Marie Avenue
Lund Road Corner New Dunstable Road
Lund Street Corner Lake Street
Lund Street Corner Nowell Street
Lyons Street Corner Harbor Avenue
Lyons Street Corner Marshall Street
Madison Street Both corners Gilman Street
Main Dunstable Road Corner West Hollis Street
Main Dunstable Road Southwest
corner
Lund Road
Main Dunstable Road Southwest
corner
Markar Street
Major Drive Corner Marshall Street and Burke
Street
Major Drive Northeast
corner
Ingalls Street
Manchester Road East side Bypass U.S. 3 (8-315-9A)
Manchester Road West side Bypass U.S. 3 (8-315-9)
Manchester Street Northwest
corner
Tinker Road
Manila Street Corner West Hollis Street
§ 320-4 TOWING § 320-4
306:1099
Stop Sign on
Sign
Location At Intersection of
Maple Street Corner West Hollis Street
Maple Street Northwest
corner
Mulberry Street
Marie Avenue Both corners Edmond Drive
Marie Avenue Corner Greenlay Street
Marie Avenue Eastbound
traffic
Luke Street
Marie Avenue Westbound
traffic
Carroll Street
Markar Street Corner New Dunstable Road
Markar Street Southeast
corner
Main Dunstable Road
Marlowe Road Both corners Browning Avenue
Marlowe Road Both corners Shelley Drive
Marlowe Road Northwest
corner
Scott Avenue
Marshall Street Both corners Bowers Street
Marshall Street Both corners Harbor Avenue
Maurice Street Both corners Delude Street
May Street Northeast
corner
Dodge Street
Maywood Drive Northeast
corner
Royal Oak Drive
Maywood Drive Southeast
corner
Hills Ferry Road
McKean Street Both corners Newbury Street
McKean Street Corner Allds Street
McKean Street Southwest
side
Arlington Street
McKenna Drive (east
end)
Corner Conant Road
McKenna Drive (west
end)
Corner Conant Road
Meade Street Both corners Beauview Avenue
Meade Street Corner Cox Street
Meade Street Corner Watson Street
Meadow Brook Drive Northeast
corner
Palisade Drive
§ 320-4 NASHUA CODE § 320-4
306:1100
Stop Sign on
Sign
Location At Intersection of
Meadowview Circle Corner Middle Dunstable Road
Medical Center Drive Corner East Hollis Street and Spring
Street
Melissa Drive Both corners Nottingham Drive
Merrill Street Corner Allds Street
Merrimack Street Northeast
corner
Abbott Street
Middle Dunstable Road Corner East Dunstable Road
Middle Dunstable Road Corner Ridge Road
Middle Dunstable Road Northwest
corner
Lamb Road
Middle Street Corner Oak Street
Milford Street Corner Amherst Street
Millbrook Drive Southwest
corner
Valhalla Drive
Mill Street Southwest
corner
Gillis Street
Mizoras Drive Southwest
corner
East Dunstable Road
Moe Street Corner Conant Road
Monadnock Street Corner Reservoir Street
Monroe Street Corner Lake Street
Monroe Street Corner Lewis Street
Monroe Street Corner Nowell Street
Montgomery Avenue Southwest
corner
Fifield Street
Monza Road Southeast
corner
Tinker Road
Morningside Drive Both corners Orchard Avenue
Morton Street Corner Park Avenue
Morton Street Both corners Stevens Street
Mt. Pleasant Street Northeast
corner
Abbott Street
Mt. Pleasant Street
[Added 4-26-2011 by
Ord. No. O-11-67]
Southwest
corner
Concord Street
Mt. Vernon Street Corner Troy Street
Mulberry Street Both corners Elm Street
§ 320-4 TOWING § 320-4
306:1101
Stop Sign on
Sign
Location At Intersection of
Musket Drive Both corners Whitford Road
Musket Drive Southeast
corner
Northeasterly intersection
with Pioneer Drive
Myrtle Street Northeast
corner
Pine Street
Nagle Street Corner Lake Street
Nagle Street Corner Pine Street
Nancy Court Corner Leslie Lane
Nashville Street
[Repealed 3-24-2015
by Ord. No.
O-15-043]
Nashville Street Southwest
corner
Concord Street
Natick Street Southeast
corner
Route 130
Nevada Street Both corners Vine Street
Nevada Street Northeast
corner
Ash Street
Newburgh Road Both corners Conant Road
Newbury Street Both corners Haines Street
Newbury Street Both corners King Street
Newbury Street Both corners McKean Street
Newbury Street Both corners Underhill Street
Newbury Street Corner Marshall Street and Burke
Street
New Dunstable Road Corner Edwards Street
New Route 111A In island of old
Route 111A
for eastbound
traffic
Kinsley Street
New Route 111A Old Route
111A, west
side
Kinsley Street
New Route 111A West side New Route 111
End of the New Searles
Elementary School
driveway
Corner Shady Lane
§ 320-4 NASHUA CODE § 320-4
306:1102
Stop Sign on
Sign
Location At Intersection of
New Searles Road Northwest
corner
Searles Road
Nightingale Road Corner Barnesdale Road
Ninth Street Southeast
corner
Ledge Street
Norfolk Street Northeast
corner
Amherst Street
North Field Drive Northwest
corner
Pine Hill Road
North London Drive Northwest
corner
Holbrook Drive
North Seventh Street Corner Ledge Street
North Southwood Drive Southwest
corner
Tinker Road
Norton Street Both corners Summer Street
Norton Street Corner Laton Street
Norton Street Corner Lock Street
Norwich Road Both corners Tenby Drive
Norwich Road Corner Westwood Drive
Norwich Street Both corners Langholm Drive
Nottingham Drive Both corners Bowman Lane
Nottingham Drive Both corners Melissa Drive
Nottingham Drive Corner Glen Drive
Nottingham Drive Northwest
corner
Flintlocke Drive
Nottingham Drive Northwest
side
Shingle Mill Drive
Nowell Street Corner Almont Street
Nye Avenue Corner Allds Street
Oakdale Avenue Corner Bryant Road
Oakdale Avenue Corner Timberline Drive
Oak Hill Lane Northeast
corner
Spit Brook Road
Oak Street Corner Elm Street
Old Coach Road Southwest
corner
Main Dunstable Road
Old Ridge Road South corner Ridge Road
§ 320-4 TOWING § 320-4
306:1103
Stop Sign on
Sign
Location At Intersection of
Old Ridge Road Southeast
corner
Route 111A
Old Route 111 New
approach,
west side
New Route 111
Olive Street Southwest
corner
Church Street
Oneida Circle Corner Lynn Street
One-lane northbound
access drive which
provides access to
Panther Drive from
West Hollis Street
eastbound with the
main two-lane portion
of Panther Drive
Southwesterly
intersection
Panther Drive
Orange Street Both corners Lock Street
Orange Street Both corners Lowell Street
Orchard Avenue Southwest
corner
Fifield Street
Oriole Drive Both corners Baymeadow Drive
Oriole Drive Southeast
corner
Watersedge Drive
Osgood Street Northeast
corner
South Main Street
Otterson Street Both corners Elm Street
Otterson Street Corner Chestnut Street
Otterson Street Northeast
corner
Vine Street
Palisade Drive Both corners Meadow Brook Drive
Palisade Drive Corner Harris Road
Palisade Drive Northeast
corner
Sudbury Drive
Palm Street Both corners Lovewell Street
Palm Street Corner Kinsley Street
Palm Street [Repealed
11-13-2012 by Ord.
No. O-12-025]
Park Avenue Both corners Lawndale Avenue
§ 320-4 NASHUA CODE § 320-4
306:1104
Stop Sign on
Sign
Location At Intersection of
Park Street Northeast
corner
Olive Street
Parnell Place Southwest
corner
Robinson Road
Parrish Hill Drive Southwest
corner
Broad Street
Paul Avenue Both corners Roy Street
Paul Street Both corners Delude Street
Peele Road Both corners Browning Avenue
Peele Road Both corners Shelley Drive
Peele Road Southeast
corner
Erion Drive
Pelham Street Both corners Natick Street
Exit of Pennichuck
Junior High School
Northeast
corner
Manchester Street
Pennichuck Street North side Route U.S. 3 (8-315-6)
Perham Street Corner Lock Street
Perimeter Road Northeast
corner
University Drive
Pershing Street Corner Kinsley Street
Pershing Street Corner New Dunstable Road
Pershing Street Corner West Hollis Street
Phillips Street Northwest
corner
East Dunstable Road
Phillips Street Southeast
corner
Victor Avenue
Pierce Street Corner Kinsley Street
Pierce Street Corner West Hollis Street
Piermont Street East corner Route 130
Pine Hill Road Corner Coburn Avenue
Pine Hill Road [Added
5-12-2015 by Ord.
No. O-15-051]
Northeast
corner
Indian Rock Road
Pine Hill Road Westerly
corner
Coburn Avenue
Pine Street Corner West Hollis Street
§ 320-4 TOWING § 320-4
306:1105
Stop Sign on
Sign
Location At Intersection of
Pine Street Northeast side Approximately 107 feet
northeasterly from its
intersection with Hunt Street
Pine Street [Repealed
11-13-2012 by Ord.
No. O-12-025]
Pine Street Southwest
side
Approximately 43 feet from
its intersection with Hunt
Street
Pine Street West curb Projected line of West Pearl
Street
Pinehurst Avenue Corner Shadwell Road and Dickens
Street
Pinehurst Avenue Corner Timberline Drive
Pioneer Drive Northwest
corner
Southwesterly intersection
with Musket Drive
Pittsburgh Avenue Both corners Northeastern Boulevard
Pittsburgh Drive Southern
corner
Yarmouth Drive and
Cambridge Road
Pleasant Street Northeast
corner
Walnut Street
Pleasant Street Southwest
corner
Elm Street
Pond Street Corner Harbor Avenue
Pratt Street Northeast
corner
Lawndale Avenue
Prescott Street Both corners Baldwin Street
Princeton Road Northwest
corner
Hills Ferry Road
Proctor Street Corner Allds Street
Prospect Street Both corners Dearborn Street
Prospect Street Corner Harbor Avenue
Quincy Street [Added
12-22-2015 by Ord.
No. O-15-076]
Northwest
corner
East Hollis Street
Rachel Street Corner West Hollis Street
Railroad crossing Both sides Charron Avenue
Railroad Square Southwest
corner
Canal Street
§ 320-4 NASHUA CODE § 320-4
306:1106
Stop Sign on
Sign
Location At Intersection of
Raleigh Drive Northeast
corner
East Dunstable Road across
from Beckmann Lane
Raleigh Drive Northeast
corner
Southern intersection with
East Dunstable Road (across
from Niquette Drive)
Rancourt Street North corner Route U.S. 3 (8-315-5)
Rancourt Street Southwest
corner
Caron Avenue
Raymond Street Both corners Courtland Street
Raymond Street Both corners East Stark Street
Raymond Street Corner Beasom Street
Raymond Street Corner Laton Street
Rene Drive Northeast
corner
Main Dunstable Road (Route
111-A)
Rhode Island Avenue Corner Lynn Street
Rice Street Northwest
corner
Roby Street
Rice Street Southeast
corner
Burnett Street
Richmond Street Both corners Natick Street
Richmond Street Both corners Tilton Street
Ridge Road East corner Route 111A
Ridge Street Northeast
corner
Tolles Street
Ridge Street Southeast
corner
Whitney Street
Rita Street Corner Allds Street
Ritter Street Corner Kinsley Street
Ritter Street Southwest
corner
Ross Street
Robinhood Road Both corners Glen Drive
Robinhood Road Both corners Nottingham Drive
Robinhood Road Northeast
corner
Nightingale Road
Robinson Road Corner Daniel Webster Highway
Robinson Road Corner East Dunstable Road
Robinson Road South side Route U.S. 3 (8-315-14)
§ 320-4 TOWING § 320-4
306:1107
Stop Sign on
Sign
Location At Intersection of
Roby Road Southwest
corner
Colgate Road and Lafrance
Avenue
Rockne Drive Corner Daniel Webster Highway
South
Rose Street Corner West Hollis Street
Ross Street Corner Balcom Street
Route 111A Westbound
spur of the onramp
to Route
111
Route 111
Royal Oak Southwest
corner
Maywood Drive
Russell Avenue Both corners Fifield Street
Russell Street Corner Lake Street
Sagamore Road Corner Conant Road
Sagamore Road Northeast
corner
Main Dunstable Road
Sagamore Road Southwest
corner
Conant Road
St. Joseph Drive Corner Kinsley Street
Saint Laurent Street West side Bypass U.S. 3 (8-315-10)
Salem Street Northwest
corner
Whitney Street
Salem Street Southeast
corner
Lock Street
Sanborn Drive Northwest
corner
Cheyenne Drive
Sapling Circle Southeast
corner
Spit Brook Road
Sawyer Street Corner Kinsley Street
Sawyer Street Corner Lake Street
School Street Corner High Street
Scott Avenue Both corners Browning Avenue
Scott Avenue Both corners Peele Road
Scott Avenue Both corners Shelley Drive
Scripture Street Southwest
corner
Worcester Street
Searles Road Corner East Dunstable Road
§ 320-4 NASHUA CODE § 320-4
306:1108
Stop Sign on
Sign
Location At Intersection of
Searles Road Southeast
corner
Conant Road
Searles Road Southwest
corner
Middle Dunstable Road
Seminole Drive Southwest
corner
Edmond Drive
Seventh Street Corner Ledge Street
Shadowbrook Drive Northeast
corner
Byron Drive
Shady Hill Drive Corner Stonybrook Road
Shady Hill Road Corner Hunters Lane
Shady Hill Road Corner Northwood Drive
Shady Lane Both sides New Searles School's
entrance drive
Shady Lane Northwest
corner
New Searles Road
Shady Lane Southeast
corner
Palisade Drive
Shattuck Street Corner Tolles Street
Shawn Avenue Northeast
corner
Gilson Road
Shelburne Road Southwest
corner
Torrey Road
Shelley Drive Corner East Dunstable Road
Shelton Street Both corners Westwood Drive
Shelton Street Corner Norwich Road
Shelton Street South corner Wethersfield Road
Sheridan Street Southeast
corner
Beauview Drive
Sherman Street Southeast
corner
Beauview Avenue
Sherri-Ann Avenue Both corners Cox Street
Sherwood Drive Corner Franconia Drive
Shingle Mill Drive Both corners Nottingham Drive
Simon Street Both corners Ledge Street
Simon Street Corner West Hollis Street
Sioux Avenue Northwest
corner
Sanborn Drive
§ 320-4 TOWING § 320-4
306:1109
Stop Sign on
Sign
Location At Intersection of
Somerset Parkway Southeast
corner
Trafalgar Square Road
South London Drive Corner Elaine Drive
South London Drive Southeast
corner
Holbrook Drive
Southwood Drive
[Added 4-26-2011 by
Ord. No. O-11-65]
Southeast
corner
Southwood Drive
Spaulding Street Both corners Ingalls Street
Spaulding Street Corner Allds Street
Spaulding Street Southwest
corner
Benson Avenue
Spencer Drive Corner Thoreau Drive
Spindlewick Drive Northwest
corner
Timberline Drive
Spindlewick Drive Northwest
side
Topaz Drive
Spindlewick Drive Southeast side Brackenwood Drive
Stanford Road Northwest
corner
Hills Ferry Road
Stark Street Both corners Webster Street
Stark Street Corner Reservoir Street
Stevens Street Northeasterly
corner
Lawndale Avenue
Stevens Street [Added
2-28-2012 by Ord.
No. O-12-002]
Southwest
corner
Lawndale Avenue
Stirling Lane Corner Harris Road
Stonehaven Road Southeast
corner
Westwood Drive
Stonybrook Road Corner Franconia Drive
Sudbury Drive Corner Palisade Drive
Sullivan Street Both corners Pine Hill Avenue
Sullivan Street Corner Amherst Street
Summer Street Both corners Norton Street
Summer Street Southwest
corner
Tolles Street
§ 320-4 NASHUA CODE § 320-4
306:1110
Stop Sign on
Sign
Location At Intersection of
Superior Drive Southwest
corner
South Main Street
Swift Drive Both corners Coleridge Road
Syracuse Road Northwest
corner
Hills Ferry Road
Tacoma Circle [Added
2-14-2017 by Ord.
No. O-16-027]
Southwest
corner
Olympia Circle
Taft Street Both corners Clement Street
Taschereau Boulevard Easterly
corner
Harris Road
Taylor Street Both sides Fifield Street
Temple Street Southwest
corner
East Pearl Street
Exit from the Temple
Street parking lot
Northwest
corner
Temple Street
Tempo Drive Southeast
corner
Topaz Drive
Tenby Drive Both corners Colony Way
Tenby Drive Both corners Norwich Road
Tenby Drive North corner Searles Road
Tenby Drive Southeasterly
corner
Harris Road
Terry Street Both corners Beauview Avenue
Terry Street Corner Cox Street
Terry Street Corner Watson Street
Thistle Court Northeast
corner
Broad Street
Thompson Road Southeast
corner
Robinson Road
Thoreau Drive Northwest
corner
Bicentennial Drive
Thoreau Street Northeast
corner
Browning Avenue
Thorndike Street Both corners Monroe Street
Thornton Road Corner Milford Road
Tilton Street East corner Route 130
Timberline Drive Corner East Dunstable Road
§ 320-4 TOWING § 320-4
306:1111
Stop Sign on
Sign
Location At Intersection of
Tinker Road Southwest
corner
Manchester Street
Tolles Street Both corners Girouard Avenue
Tomolonis Drive Southwest
corner
East Dunstable Road
Topaz Drive Southeast
corner
Spindlewick Drive
Topsfield Drive Northwest
corner
Cambridge Drive
Torrey Road Southeast
corner
Shelburne Road
Trafalgar Square Road Northeast
corner
Somerset Parkway
Trafalgar Square Road Northwest
corner
Airport Road jughandle
Trombly Terrace Northeast
corner
Main Dunstable Road (Route
111-A)
Tufts Drive Southeast
corner
Easterly intersection with
Hills Ferry Road (across from
Syracuse Road)
Tufts Drive Southeast
corner
Westerly intersection with
Hills Ferry Road (across from
Stanford Road)
Twelfth Street Corner West Hollis Street
Twelfth Street Northeast
corner
Ledge Street
Twelfth Street Northwest
corner
Will Street
Tyler Street Southwest
corner
Harbor Avenue
Union Street Northeast
corner
Amory Street
University Drive Corner Pine Hill Road
Unnamed street
connecting Pearson
Avenue and Park Street
[Added 2-10-2015 by
Ord. No. O-14-033]
Southeast
corner
Pearson Avenue
Upstone Drive Corner Carmine Road
§ 320-4 NASHUA CODE § 320-4
306:1112
Stop Sign on
Sign
Location At Intersection of
Upstone Drive Northeast
corner
Broad Street
Valhalla Drive Corner Port Chester Drive
Vespa Lane Northwest
corner
Biscayne Parkway
Veterans Drive Corner South Main Street
Victor Avenue Both corners Delude Street
Victor Avenue Northeast
corner
Lund Road
Vieckis Drive Southwest
corner
East Dunstable Road
Vine Street Both corners Nevada Street
Vine Street Corner Central Street
Vine Street Corner Kinsley Street
Vine Street Corner Lake Street
Vine Street Corner West Hollis Street
Wadleigh Street Northwest
corner
Lewis Street
Walnut Street Corner Kinsley Street
Walnut Street Corner West Hollis Street
Walnut Street Northeast
corner
Factory Street
Walnut Street Southwest
corner
Otterson Street
Waltham Drive Northeast
corner
South Main Street
Wanda Lane Northwest
corner
Middle Dunstable Road
Wason Avenue Corner Kinsley Street
Wason Avenue Corner Lake Street
Wason Avenue Southwest
corner
Fairview Avenue
Watersedge Road Northwesterly
corner
Thornton Road
Water Street Northeast
corner
Factory Street
Watson Street Corner Amherst Street
§ 320-4 TOWING § 320-4
306:1113
Stop Sign on
Sign
Location At Intersection of
Watson Street Southwest
corner
Manchester Street
Waverly Street Northwest
corner
Lynn Street
Webster Street Both corners Columbia Avenue
Webster Street Both corners Courtland Street
Webster Street Both corners Elliott Street
Webster Street Both corners Stark Street
Webster Street Corner Hall Avenue
Wellesley Road Corner West Hollis Street
Wellesley Road Northeast
corner
Shore Drive
Wellington Street Both corners Columbia Avenue
Wellington Street Both corners Elliott Street
Wentworth Street Corner Taylor Street
Westgate Crossing Corner Main Dunstable Road
Westgate Crossing Corner West Hollis Street
West Glenwood Street Southwest
corner
South Main Street
West Hobart Street Southwest
corner
South Main Street
Exit of Westside Plaza Northerly
corner
Northwest Boulevard
Westwood Drive Northeast
corner
Tenby Drive
Westwood Drive Northwest
corner
Stonehaven Drive
Wethersfield Road Both corners Shelton Street
Wethersfield Road Both corners Wilmington Street
Wethersfield Road East corner Cannon Drive
Wheaton Drive Corner Pine Hill Road
Wheaton Drive Corner Stonybrook Road
Wheaton Drive West line Opposite the north line of
Hunters Lane
Whipple Street Northwest
corner
Simon Street
White Oak Drive Northeast
corner
Thornton Road
§ 320-4 NASHUA CODE § 320-4
306:1114
Stop Sign on
Sign
Location At Intersection of
White Plains Drive Both corners Valhalla Drive
White Plains Drive Northwest
corner
Fordham Drive
Whitford Road Southeast
corner
Pioneer Drive
Whitford Road Southwest
corner
Route 111A
Whitman Road Southeast
corner
Whitman Road
Whitney Street Both corners Cross Street
Whitney Street Both corners Tolles Street
Whitney Street Northeast
corner
Lock Street
Wilder Street Corner Kinsley Street
Wilder Street Corner West Hollis Street
Williams Street Both sides Newbury Street
Williams Street Corner Allds Street
Will Street Both corners Simon Street
Will Street Northeast
corner
Twelfth Street
Wilmington Street Corner Westwood Drive
Wilmington Street Southwest
corner
New Searles Road
Winn Road Corner Ridge Road
Woodbury Drive Northwest
corner
Route 111A
Woodfield Street Both corners Westwood Drive
Woodland Drive Both corners Dover Street and Epping
Street
Woodland Drive Northeast
corner
Dunbarton Drive
Wood Street Both corners Courtland Street
Wood Street Both corners East Stark Street
Wood Street Both corners Beasom Street
Wood Street Northwest
corner
Laton Street
Woodward Avenue Corner Kinsley Street
§ 320-4 TOWING § 320-4
306:1115
§ 320-5. Yield intersections.
Stop Sign on
Sign
Location At Intersection of
Yarmouth Drive Northeast
corner
Conant Road
Yvonne Street Corner West Hollis Street
A. Preferential right-of-way at an intersection may be indicated by yield
signs.
B. The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign, if required for safety to
stop, shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, in the event that there is no crosswalk, at a clearly
marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting
roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway.
C. The following shall be yield intersections:
Yield Sign on At Intersection With
Blueberry Lane Old Coach Road
Central Street [Repealed
10-9-2018 by Ord. No.
O-18-024]
Northeast corner of Crown Street Arlington Street
Fairhaven Farmington Road
Harbor Avenue Allds Street
Harris Road Conant Road
Harris Road at southeast corner Continuation of Harris Road in the
southeast direction
Milk Street [Added 10-28-2008
by Ord. No. O-08-39]
Hillside Drive
Reservoir Street Manchester Street
Riverside Street Eastbound lane of Riverside
Street with Panther Drive
Northeast corner and southwest
corner of Shawnee Drive
Cherokee Avenue
South Main Street Main Street
Troy Street Pine Hill Avenue
Walnut Street [Added 10-9-2018
by Ord. No. O-18-024]
Central Street
Water Street, west side Factory Street
§ 320-4 NASHUA CODE § 320-6
306:1116
§ 320-6. Fire station signals.95
The following locations shall have traffic signals installed and maintained in
accordance with the standards established by the United States Department
of Transportation's Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices of 1971,
or as may be amended or revised, and the State Department of Public
Works and Highways' Traffic Division Standards on Fire Station Signals.
Such signals shall be designed so as to indicate a flashing amber indication
in each approaching direction during normal operation and a steady red
indication at such times as deemed appropriate by the City Fire
Department.
Name of Street Location
Amherst Street Amherst Street fire station
East Hollis Street [Added
4-10-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-005]
Crown Hill fire station
Lake Street [Added 4-10-2018 by
Ord. No. O-18-005]
Fire alarm headquarters
Lake Street Lake Street fire station
Main Dunstable Road and Route
111A
Conant Road
Pine Hill Road [Added 4-10-2018
by Ord. No. O-18-005]
Airport fire station
Spit Brook Road Spit Brook Road fire station
§ 320-7. City-maintained yield right-of-way signs.
The following locations shall have yield right-of-way signs maintained by the
City:
Location
Northeast corner of Buckmeadow Road at Route 111A (Main Dunstable
Road)
North side of northbound on-ramp to turnpike and Everett Turnpike
North side of northbound off-ramp from Everett Turnpike and Route 101A
South side of southbound off-ramp from Everett Turnpike and Route 101A
Northeast corner of Main Street at the northerly end of the Daniel
Webster Highway-adjacent to Rivier College
Westbound ramp from turnpike and New Routes 111 and 111A east of
bridge
On-ramp from Old Route 111 to Everett Turnpike and Everett Turnpike at
Edgcomb Steel Co.
95.Editor's Note: Original § 13-40, City stop signs, was omitted as being duplicative of
§ 320-4.
§ 320-6 TOWING § 320-7
306:1117
Location
Southbound on-ramp from Old Route 111A and Everett Turnpike
South side eastbound ramp from Old Route 111A and Kinsley Street Route
111
Old Route 111 and New Route 111, north side, and New Route 111 west
of turnpike
Southwest outer ramp and Route 101A at Station 22 + 75
Northbound on-ramp from Route 101A East and Everett Turnpike
Southbound on-ramp from Route 101A East and Everett Turnpike
Northbound on-ramp from Route 101A West and Everett Turnpike
Southbound on-ramp from Route 101A West and Everett Turnpike
West side entrance ramp for southbound from Route 130 and southbound
lane of Everett Turnpike
West side southbound off-ramp from Routes 111 and 111A and turnpike
southbound
South side on-ramp to Routes 111 and 111A from southbound lane to
Everett Turnpike
Return-ramp to Nashua from Routes 111A and 111 and eastbound Ramp
111 and 111A to Nashua
Southeast corner and northwest corner of the traffic circle along North
Southwood Drive [Added 6-26-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-011]
§ 320-8. City-maintained flashing beacons. [Amended 2-26-2008 by
Ord. No. O-08-07]
The following locations shall have flashing beacons maintained by the City
in accordance with the standards established by the United States
Department of Transportation's Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
of 1971, or as may be amended or revised:
Location
East Dunstable Road and Lamb Road
In the vicinity of Kinsley Street and Liberty Street
Kinsley Street and Woodward Street
Lock Street and Orange Street
Main Street at Woolworth's Department Store crosswalk
Manchester Street, Sargents Avenue, and Courtland Street
Pearl and Elm Street
Pine Hill Road, Indian Rock Road, and Coburn Avenue [Added 5-12-2015
by Ord. No. O-15-051]
§ 320-7 NASHUA CODE § 320-9
306:1118
§ 320-9. Other signs in street rights-of-way.
The following procedures shall be followed for the installation of all signs
in City street rights-of-way which are requested by any nongovernmental
agencies, organizations or private enterprises:
A. Requests for the installation of signs shall be made, in writing, to the
Board of Aldermen, and shall be referred to the appropriate aldermanic
committee. Requests shall include written and pictorial descriptions of
the proposed signs, the locations where they are proposed to be
erected, and their purpose or intended function. [Amended 5-12-2015
by Ord. No. O-15-047]
B. Upon receipt of such request, the appropriate aldermanic committee
shall invite the person making the request to attend its committee
meeting to discuss the proposal. The Board shall also refer the request
to the Public Works Division for review and comment on the locations of
the proposed signs. [Amended 5-12-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-047]
C. Once the sign locations have been reviewed and the person requesting
the signs has been consulted, the appropriate aldermanic committee
will forward their recommendation to the full Board of Aldermen to
grant, grant with modifications or deny the request. In reviewing a sign
request, the Board shall take into consideration whether the applicant
is a for-profit or nonprofit organization, the size, shape and information
displayed on the sign, its location, and the character of the areas in
which the signs will be located. Permissible signs shall only include
those intended for directional or informational purposes. In no instance
shall advertising or proprietary names be used on such signs. Notice of
final Board action on a request shall be forwarded to the person making
the request, the City Clerk and the Public Works Division. [Amended
5-12-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-047]
D. If the requested signs are approved, the person making the request
shall consult with the Public Works Division as to suitable methods of
installation. The Public Works Division shall inspect the signs once they
are installed to ensure their proper location and method of installation.
[Amended 5-12-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-047]
E. The Public Works Division and the City Clerk shall maintain a file of all
approved sign requests. [Amended 5-12-2015 by Ord. No.
O-15-047]
F. Any request which is granted may be revoked by a vote of the Board of
Aldermen, which shall give 30 days' written notice to the person who
requested the signs. If that party does not remove the signs within the
specified time period, the Board shall authorize their removal by the
Public Works Division. [Amended 5-12-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-047]
G. Any sign installed in a City street right-of-way according to the
procedures outlined in this chapter shall not be subject to the
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.96
§ 320-9 TOWING § 320-9
306:1119
§ 320-10. Traffic calming.
H. All existing signs in any public way within the City which fall under the
conditions of this section shall be removed by the sign owner within one
year after passage of this chapter, unless a sign permit is obtained in
accordance with this section. Failure to comply with this subsection
shall constitute sufficient grounds for the Board of Aldermen to order
removal of such nonconforming signs by the Public Works Division as
may remain in public ways one year after passage of this chapter.
[Amended 5-12-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-047]
I. Any sign installed in a City street right-of-way without having obtained
the approvals required in this section may be removed by the Public
Works Division at the direction of the Board of Aldermen. [Amended
5-12-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-047]
A. Purpose and intent. Recognizing that the regulation of speed and
volume of traffic on the surface streets of Nashua is essential to the
maintenance of the public safety, and further recognizing that such
speed may be controlled in part by the design of roadways, it is the
purpose and intent of this section to extend authority to utilize a
common body of street engineering techniques known collectively as
"traffic calming." Such techniques are to be used in the design,
modification, and maintenance of the City's roadways for the purpose of
promoting travel at rates of speed which are at or below the speed
limits on those roadways. It is not the intent of this section to promote
techniques which cause continual stopping and starting of traffic on
those roadways.
B. Adoption of authority and standards. Pursuant to the purpose of this
section, the City of Nashua hereby adopts traffic calming as a technique
for local roadway design and adopts the standards for traffic-calming
measures as set forth in Traffic Calming: State of the Practice,
published August 1999, by the Institute of Transportation Engineers
and the Federal Highway Administration, and referenced as FHWARD-
99-135. Any successor to this publication is hereby incorporated by
reference. This section shall not be construed to disallow any other
traffic-calming measure not described in the aforementioned
publication, provided that such measure is adopted by the process
provided below.
C. Procedure for adoption of traffic-calming measures. The adoption of
specific traffic-calming measures on particular streets shall be by
ordinance. The Board of Aldermen shall refer each such proposed
ordinance to the Board of Public Works for its advice, and the Board of
Public Works shall issue a recommendation to the Board of Aldermen
within 30 days of receipt of such referral.
96.Editors Note: See Ch. 190, Land Use.
§ 320-9 NASHUA CODE § 320-11
306:1120
§ 320-11. Streets with traffic-calming measures.
Pursuant to § 320-10, the following described traffic-calming measures shall
be installed and maintained:
Name of Street Location
Broad Street [Amended
9-10-2013 by Ord. No.
O-13-047]
Roundabout at its intersection with
Coburn Avenue and Titan Way
Broad Street [Repealed
12-23-2014 by Ord. No.
O-14-034]
Chestnut Street Raised crosswalks, rumble strips,
bumpout(s), and a median island on the
portion of Chestnut Street located
between its intersection with Central
Street and its intersection with West
Hollis Street
East Pearl Street Raised crosswalks on the portion of East
Pearl Street located between its
intersection with Temple Street and its
intersection with Main Street
Edgewood Avenue A bumpout at its intersection with
Ashland Street
Ledge Street Raised crosswalks and curbed bumpouts
on the portion of Ledge Street located
between its intersection with Seventh
Street and its intersection with Sixth
Street
Ledge Street [Added
9-15-2010 by Ord. No.
O-10-30]
Raised crosswalks and curbed bumpouts
on the portion of Ledge Street located
between its intersection with Twelfth
Street and its intersection with Eleventh
Street
Main Street Roundabout at its intersection with
South Main Street and Daniel Webster
Highway
Manchester Street [Added
3-25-2008 by Ord. No.
O-08-12]
Raised crosswalks and curbed bumpouts
on a portion of Manchester Street
located at its intersection with Reservoir
Street
Middle Dunstable Road Traffic humps between its intersection
with East Dunstable Road and its
intersection with Lamb Road
§ 320-11 TOWING § 320-11
306:1121
Name of Street Location
Palm Street [Added
11-13-2012 by Ord. No.
O-12-025]
Raised crosswalk at No. 48 Palm Street
Palm Street [Added
11-13-2012 by Ord. No.
O-12-025]
Raised crosswalk at No. 65 Palm Street
Palm Street [Added
11-13-2012 by Ord. No.
O-12-025]
Raised crosswalk at No. 78 Palm Street
Pine Street [Added 11-13-2012
by Ord. No. O-12-025]
Raised crosswalk at No. 57 Pine Street
Palm Street [Added
11-13-2012 by Ord. No.
O-12-025]
Raised crosswalk at No. 96 Pine Street
Spring Street Raised crosswalks on the portion of
Spring Street located between its
intersection with East Hollis Street and
its intersection with Temple Street
Temple Street Raised crosswalks on the portion of
Temple Street located between its
intersection with East Pearl Street and
its intersection with Spring Street
§ 320-11 NASHUA CODE § 320-11
306:1122
ARTICLE IV
Turning Movements
§ 320-12. U-turns.
It shall be unlawful for an operator of any vehicle to make a U-turn at any
of the following locations:
Name of Street Location
Amherst Street Between the westerly side of Airport
Road and the easterly side of Henri A.
Burque Highway
Amherst Street Westerly at its intersection with
Blackstone Drive
Amherst Street East- and westbound at its intersection
with Somerset Parkway
Circumferential Highway Off-
Ramp
At its intersection with Daniel Webster
Highway, for vehicles traveling west
Daniel Webster Highway Southbound at its intersection with exits
and entrances to Costco and Pheasant
Lane Mall
Daniel Webster Highway Southbound at its intersection with Dan
Chan Street
Daniel Webster Highway Between Poisson Avenue and Autumn
Leaf Drive at median island curb cuts
designated for emergency vehicles only
Daniel Webster Highway Northbound at its intersection with Spit
Brook Road
Daniel Webster Highway
[Repealed 2-10-2015 by Ord.
No. O-14-036]
Main Dunstable Road Southbound on Main Dunstable Road at
a point approximately 150 feet south of
its intersection with Northeastern
Boulevard
Main Street Between the northerly side of Franklin
Street and the southerly side of Kinsley
Street
Somerset Parkway At Trafalgar Square for vehicles
traveling northeasterly on Somerset
Parkway
Spit Brook Road Westbound at its intersection with
Brook Village Road
Spit Brook Road Westbound at its intersection with Tara
Boulevard
§ 320-12 TOWING § 320-13
306:1123
§ 320-13. Left turn prohibited at all times.
A. Left turns shall be prohibited at all times at the following intersections:
Name of Street Location
Amherst Street [Repealed
2-14-2017 by Ord. No.
O-17-028]
Amherst Street Onto Edgewood Avenue from Amherst
Street, between the hours of 3:30 p.m.
and 7:30 p.m.
Amherst Street Between the F. E. Everett Turnpike and
Airport Road, for vehicles moving both
easterly and westerly on Amherst
Street
Canal Street Onto Canal Street from the exit of the
western parking lot located at 42 Main
Street
Clocktower Place From the easternmost exit of
Clocktower Place onto Factory Street
Concord Street Onto Nashville Street, for vehicles
moving in a northerly direction on
Concord Street
Court Street Onto Court Street, for vehicles moving
in a westerly direction on Church
Street
Daniel Webster Highway At the median island curb cuts
designated for emergency vehicles only
on Daniel Webster Highway between
Poisson Avenue and Autumn Leaf Drive
Daniel Webster Highway
[Added 5-27-2014 by Ord.
No. O-14-019]
Southbound at its intersection with the
eastbound J-ramp
East Hollis Street Onto East Hollis Street from 44 East
Hollis Street
East Hollis Street Onto East Hollis Street from 240-242
Main Street
Eldridge Street Onto Main Street from Eldridge Street
High Street Onto Main Street from High Street
Main Street Onto Main Street from 223 Main Street
Main Street Onto Main Street from 238 Main Street
Main Street Onto Main Street from 240-242 Main
Street
Main Street Onto Mulberry Street from Main Street
§ 320-13 NASHUA CODE § 320-13
306:1124
§ 320-14. Left turn prohibited at specified times.
Name of Street Location
Pearson Avenue Onto Main Street from Pearson
Avenue, except trailer-trucks exiting
from delivery on Pearson Avenue
Prospect Street From Prospect Street onto Main Street,
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
7:00 p.m.
Railroad Square Onto Main Street, for vehicles moving
in a westerly direction on the northern
section of Railroad Square
Riverside Street Onto Redmond Street from Riverside
Street
Trafalgar Square From Trafalgar Square, for vehicles
traveling northbound, to Somerset
Parkway
Tyler Street Onto Main Street, for vehicles moving
in a westerly direction on Tyler Street
Water Street Ramp Onto Factory Street from the Water
Street Ramp
West Hollis Street Onto the southbound entrance ramp of
Interchange Number 5 of the F. E.
Everett Turnpike
West Hollis Street Onto West Hollis Street from the
westerly most exit of the parking lot
located at 591 West Hollis Street
B. The above provisions shall not prevent left turns for emergency
vehicles.
A. The Police Department may determine the time at which drivers of
vehicles shall not make a left turn at the following intersections, and
shall place proper signs at such intersections:
Location
Main Street, Factory Street and Temple Street
Main Street and High Street
Main Street and Hollis Street
Main Street and Park Street
Main Street and Pearl Street
B. The making of left turns may be prohibited between such times as the
Police Department may determine and may be permitted at other hours,
§ 320-13 TOWING § 320-14
306:1125
§ 320-15. Crossing streets.
Vehicles crossing from one side of a street to the other, in any street or part
thereof named in this article, shall, except in case of necessity, do so by
turning to the left so as to head in the same direction as the traffic on that
side of the street.
§ 320-16. Right turn on red prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for a vehicle to proceed to make a right turn on a red
traffic light indication at the following intersections, and authority is hereby
granted for the erection of signs so indicating:97
Name of Street Hours Location
Amherst Street 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
At Main Street, south corner
Broad Street All At Amherst Street, south corner
Charron Avenue 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
Onto Amherst Street
Costco exit All At its intersection with Daniel
Webster Highway
East Pearl Street 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
At Main Street, north corner
Factory Street 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
At Main Street, south corner
Kinsley Street 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
At Pine Street, southeast corner
which shall be plainly indicated on the signs, or the signs may be
removed when such turns are permitted.
C. No left turn certain hours. There shall be no left turn from the firstnamed
street onto the second-named street between the hours
indicated:
Name of Street
Prohibited Left Turn
Onto Hours
Denton Street East Hollis Street Between the hours of
4:00 p.m. and 6:00
p.m. daily, except
Saturdays, Sundays
and holidays
Prospect Avenue Main Street Between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 7:00
p.m.
97.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 13-81, Right turn prohibited at all times was repealed
4-11-2006 by Ord. No. O-06-08.
§ 320-14 NASHUA CODE § 320-16
306:1126
Name of Street Hours Location
Main Street 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
At Spring Street, southeast corner
Main Street,
southbound
All At its intersection with East
Dunstable Road
Nashua Mall exit All At Broad Street, southeast corner
Newcastle Drive All At its intersection with Spit Brook
Road
Park Street 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
At Main Street, northeast corner
Riverside Street 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
At West Hollis Street, northeast
corner
Route 3 (F.E. Everett
Turnpike), Exit 4,
southbound off-ramp
All Onto East Dunstable Road
Simon Street All Onto West Hollis Street
§ 320-17. Right lane for right turn only.
At the following intersections, the right lane shall be used only for right
turns:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Right Turn Only Onto
East Dunstable Road Southwesterly Harris Road
Main Street Northerly Canal Street
Park Street Westbound Main Street
Temple Street Westerly Main Street
§ 320-18. Left lane for left turn only.
At the following intersections, the left lane shall be used only for left turns:
Name of Street Direction of Travel Left Turn Only Onto
Park Street Westbound Main Street
§ 320-16 TOWING § 320-18
306:1127

ARTICLE V
Crosswalks
§ 320-19. Pedestrian right-of-way.
When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in operation, the driver
of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need
be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk
when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle
is traveling or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the
opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger.
§ 320-20. No passing.
Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked
crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway,
the driver of any vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and
pass such stopped vehicle.
§ 320-21. Signs.
Authority is hereby granted to the Traffic Department to erect signs at
appropriate crosswalks, where the traffic volume is substantial, indicating
the crosswalk and the fact that pedestrians have the right-of-way.
§ 320-22. Violations and penalties.
Violators of any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to
punishment as provided in § 1-12.
§ 320-19 TOWING § 320-22
306:1129

ARTICLE VI
Speed Limits
§ 320-23. Speed limit signs.
A. The prima facie speed limits on all streets and highways in the City
which are not part of the State highway system shall be as follows:
(1) Twenty miles per hour when passing a school during recess or
while children are going to or leaving school during opening or
closing hours.
(2) Thirty miles per hour in any business or urban residence district.
(3) Thirty-five miles per hour in any rural residence district and on any
Class V highway outside the compact part.
(4) Forty miles per hour on Daniel Webster Highway South between F.
E. Everett Turnpike and the Massachusetts state line.
B. The following streets shall have a speed limit as indicated:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Abbott Street 25 Entire length
Alder Drive 25 Entire length
Algonquin Lane 25 Entire length
Allds Street 25 Entire length
Almont Street 25 Entire length
Annabelle Court
[Added 6-24-2015 by
Ord. No. O-15-056]
25 Entire length
Anvil Drive 25 Entire length
April Drive 25 Entire length
Ashland Street 25 Entire length
Ash Street 25 Entire length
Ayer Street 25 Entire length
Aztec Road 25 Entire length
Badger Street 25 Entire length
Bailey Street 25 Entire length
Baldwin Street 25 Entire length
Ballerina Court
[Added 6-24-2015 by
Ord. No. O-15-056]
25 Entire length
§ 320-23 TOWING § 320-23
306:1131
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Bayberry Circle
[Added 6-24-2015 by
Ord. No. O-15-056]
25 Entire length
Bay Meadow Drive 25 Entire length
Beach Street 25 Entire length
Beasom Street 25 Entire length
Beauview Avenue
[Added 9-9-2015 by
Ord. No. O-15-062]
25 Entire length
Beaver Street 25 Entire length
Belmont Street 25 Entire length
Berkley Street 25 Entire length
Berkshire Road 25 Entire length
Berkshire Street 25 Entire length
Bicentennial Drive 25 Entire length
Blackstone Drive 25 Entire length
Blueberry Lane
[Added 10-22-2013
by Ord. No.
O-13-060]
25 Entire length
Briand Drive 25 Entire length
Briarcliff Drive [Added
10-22-2013 by Ord.
No. O-13-060]
25 Entire length
Buck Street 25 Entire length
Bulova Drive 25 Entire length
Caldwell Road 25 Entire length
Camanche Street 25 Entire length
Cannon Drive 25 Entire length
Carmine Road 25 Entire length
Carnation Circle
[Added 6-24-2015 by
Ord. No. O-15-056]
25 Entire length
Carroll Street 25 Entire length
Cathedral Circle 25 Entire length
Cedar Street 25 Entire length
Central Street 25 Entire length
§ 320-23 NASHUA CODE § 320-23
306:1132
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Chandler Street 25 Entire length
Chestnut Street 25 Entire length
Cherrywood Drive
[Added 6-24-2015 by
Ord. No. O-15-056]
25 Entire length
Cheyenne Drive 25 Entire length
Chokeberry Lane
[Added 6-24-2015 by
Ord. No. O-15-056]
25 Entire length
Cider Lane 25 Entire length
Coburn Avenue 25 Entire length
Corona Avenue 25 Entire length
Cotillion Lane [Added
6-24-2015 by Ord.
No. O-15-056]
25 Entire length
Courtland Street 25 Entire length
Cushing Avenue 25 Entire length
Daffodil Drive [Added
6-24-2015 by Ord.
No. O-15-056]
25 Entire length
Daylily Drive [Added
6-24-2015 by Ord.
No. O-15-056]
25 Entire length
Deerhaven Drive 25 Entire length
Denise Street 25 Entire length
Denver Drive 25 Entire length
Dexter Street 25 Entire length
Dudley Street 25 Entire length
Dunbarton Drive 25 Entire length
East Dunstable Road
[Added 2-26-2008 by
Ord. No. O-08-07]
30 Between Spit Brook Road
and Lamb Road
East Glenwood Street 25 Entire length
East Stark Street 25 Entire length
Edgewood Avenue 25 Entire length
Edmond Drive 25 Entire length
Elgin Street 25 Entire length
§ 320-23 TOWING § 320-23
306:1133
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Elm Street 25 Entire length
Factory Street 25 Entire length
Fairmount Street 25 Entire length
Farmers Trail [Added
10-22-2013 by Ord.
No. O-13-060]
25 Entire length
Fordham Drive
[Added 10-22-2013
by Ord. No.
O-13-060]
25 Entire length
Forsythia Drive
[Added 6-24-2015 by
Ord. No. O-15-056]
25 Entire length
Garden Street 25 Entire length
Gendron Street 25 Entire length
Glen Drive 25 Entire length
Grand Avenue 25 Entire length
Granite Street 25 Entire length
Greenlay Street 25 Entire length
Hall Avenue 25 Entire length
Hampton Drive 25 Entire length
Hanover Street 25 Entire length
Harris Road 25 Between Northeastern
Boulevard and Conant
Road
Hibiscus Way [Added
6-24-2015 by Ord.
No. O-15-056]
25 Entire length
Hills Ferry Road 25 Entire length
Holly Drive 25 Entire length
Hollyhock Avenue
[Added 6-24-2015 by
Ord. No. O-15-056]
25 Entire length
Hopi Drive 25 Entire length
Houde Street 25 Entire length
Hunt Street 25 Entire length
Huron Drive 25 Entire length
§ 320-23 NASHUA CODE § 320-23
306:1134
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Hydrangea Road
[Added 6-24-2015 by
Ord. No. O-15-056]
25 Entire length
Inca Drive 25 Entire length
Intervale Street 25 Entire length
Jonquil Lane [Added
6-24-2015 by Ord.
No. O-15-056]
25 Entire length
June Street 25 Entire length
Kanata Drive 25 Entire length
Knowlton Road 25 Entire length
Lafrance Avenue 25 Entire length
Lamb Road 25 Entire length
Larchmont Drive
[Added 10-22-2013
by Ord. No.
O-13-060]
25 Entire length
Laton Street 25 Entire length
Lawndale Avenue
[Added 3-9-2010 by
Ord. No. O-10-07]
25 Entire length
Ledge Street 25 Entire length
Leslie Lane [Added
10-22-2013 by Ord.
No. O-13-060]
25 Entire length
Lewis Street 25 Entire length
Linwood Street 25 Between Lake Street and
Nowell Street
Lock Street 25 Entire length
Long Avenue 25 Entire length
Lovewell Street 25 Entire length
Luke Street 25 Entire length
Lund Street 25 Entire length
Main Street 25 Between Amherst Street
and Allds Street
Manchester Street 25 Between Concord Street
and the Henri A. Burque
Highway
§ 320-23 TOWING § 320-23
306:1135
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Maple Street 25 Entire length
March Street 25 Entire length
Marie Avenue 25 Entire length
Medallion Court
[Added 6-24-2015 by
Ord. No. O-15-056]
25 Entire length
Memory Avenue
[Added 10-22-2013
by Ord. No.
O-13-060]
25 Entire length
Middle Dunstable Road
[Amended 6-24-2015
by Ord. No.
O-15-055]
25 Between East Dunstable
Road and Lamb Road
Middle Street 25 Entire length
Millbrook Drive
[Added 10-22-2013
by Ord. No.
O-13-060]
25 Entire length
Moonstone Court
[Added 6-24-2015 by
Ord. No. O-15-056]
25 Entire length
Monadnock Street 25 Entire length
Monroe Street 25 Entire length
Mulberry Street 25 Entire length
Nagle Street 25 Entire length
Nancy Court [Added
10-22-2013 by Ord.
No. O-13-060]
25 Entire length
National Street 25 Entire length
Navaho Street 25 Entire length
Nevada Street 25 Entire length
North Intervale Street 25 Entire length
North Seventh Street 25 Entire length
North Southwood
Drive
25 Entire length
Nottingham Drive 25 Entire length
Oak Street 25 Entire length
§ 320-23 NASHUA CODE § 320-23
306:1136
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Old Coach Road
[Added 10-22-2013
by Ord. No.
O-13-060]
25 Entire length
Otterson Street 25 West of Main Street
Palisade Drive 25 Entire length
Palm Street 25 Entire length
Parrish Hill Drive 25 Entire length
Peele Road 25 Entire length
Pierce Street 25 Entire length
Pine Hill Avenue 25 Entire length
Pinehurst Avenue 25 Entire length
Pine Street 25 Entire length
Pleasant Street 25 Entire length
Portchester Drive
[Added 10-22-2013
by Ord. No.
O-13-060]
25 Entire length
Ritter Street 25 Entire length
Roby Road 25 Entire length
Ross Street 25 Entire length
Sagamore Road 25 Entire length
Sanborn Drive 25 Entire length
Sargents Avenue 25 Entire length
Searles Road 25 Entire length
Seminole Drive 25 Entire length
Sioux Avenue 25 Entire length
Spindlewick Drive 25 Entire length
Stark Street 25 Entire length
Sugarberry Drive
[Added 10-22-2013
by Ord. No.
O-13-060]
25 Entire length
Sullivan Street 25 Entire length
Summer Street 25 Entire length
§ 320-23 TOWING § 320-23
306:1137
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Sunblaze Drive
[Added 6-24-2015 by
Ord. No. O-15-056]
25 Entire length
Sweet William Circle
[Added 6-24-2015 by
Ord. No. O-15-056]
25 Entire length
Tamora Court [Added
6-24-2015 by Ord.
No. O-15-056]
25 Entire length
Tampa Street 25 Entire length
Teak Drive 25 Between Gosselin Road
and its terminus at a culde-
sac near its
intersection with Twilight
Drive
Tenby Drive 25 Entire length
Thorton Road 25 Entire length
Timberline Drive
[Added 6-24-2015 by
Ord. No. O-15-055]
25 Entire length
Tinker Road [Added
2-26-2008 by Ord.
No. O-08-07]
30 Entire length
Tolles Street 25 Entire length
Trinity Drive 25 Entire length
Troy Street 25 Entire length
Twelfth Street 25 Entire length
Twilight Drive 25 Between Teak Drive and
Acacia Street
Tyler Street 25 Entire length
Upstone Drive 25 Entire length
Valhalla Drive [Added
10-22-2013 by Ord.
No. O-13-060]
25 Entire length
Vine Street 25 Entire length
Walnut Street 25 Entire length
Waltham Drive 25 Entire length
Water Street 25 Entire length
Watson Street 25 Entire length
§ 320-23 NASHUA CODE § 320-23
306:1138
§ 320-24. School safety zones.
The following streets and parts of streets are hereby established as school
safety zones, and a speed limit of 20 miles per hour is hereby established in
such zones and will be enforced during school opening, closing or recess:
Name of Street Location
Abbott Street From its intersection with Hopkins Street south
to its intersection with Crescent Street
Allds Street From its intersection with East Hollis Street
south to its intersection with Heon Court
Almont Street From its intersection with Lake Street south to
its intersection with Wilson Street and from its
intersection with Fairlane Avenue south to its
intersection with Lund Road
Amherst Street From its intersection with Bruce Street
northwest to its intersection with Cushing
Avenue
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Westgate Crossing 25 Entire length
West Hollis Street 35 From Everett Turnpike to
Pacific Boulevard
West Hollis Street 40 From Pacific Boulevard to
the Hollis Town line
West Pearl Street 25 Entire length
White Oak Drive 25 Entire length
White Plains Drive
[Added 10-22-2013
by Ord. No.
O-13-060]
25 Entire length
Whitney Street 25 Entire length
Wilder Street 25 Entire length
Will Street 25 Entire length
C. School safety zones will have a speed limit of 20 miles per hour from
Main Street to Charles Street.
D. The Traffic Committee of the Board of Aldermen may purchase and
install, whenever and wherever it may deem proper, adequate signs
proclaiming the fact that a speed limit of not over 25 miles per hour will
be enforced within the limits of the City.
§ 320-23 TOWING § 320-24
306:1139
Name of Street Location
Arlington Street From its intersection with East Hollis Street
south to its intersection with Arlington Avenue
and from its intersection with Gillis Street south
to its intersection with Bachelder Street
Bartlett Avenue From its intersection with Concord Street west to
its intersection with Webster Street
Belmont Street Entire length
Bicentennial Drive From its intersection with Thoreau Drive west to
East Dunstable Road
Birch Hill Drive Entire length
Blanchard Street From its intersection with Almont Street west to
its intersection with Caldwell Road
Bridal Path Entire length
Broad Street From its intersection with Knowlton Road west to
its intersection with Chapel Hill Drive
Brookline Street Entire length
Caldwell Road From its intersection with Lake Street south to
its intersection with Fairview Avenue
Carmine Road From its intersection with Knowlton Road west to
its intersection with Upstone Drive
Charlotte Avenue From its intersection with Charlotte Street east
to its intersection with Burnside Street
Charlotte Street From its intersection with Amherst Street north
to its intersection with Beauview Avenue
Chestnut Street From its intersection with West Hollis Street
south to its intersection with Kinsley Street and
from its intersection with Otterson Street south
to its intersection with Lake Street
Cleveland Street From its intersection with Almont Street east to
its intersection with Fairview Avenue
Concord Street From its intersection with the Henri Burque
Highway south to its intersection with the north
entrance to Greeley Park
Concord Street From its intersection with Swart Street south to
its intersection with Beasom Street
Crown Street From its intersection with Allds Street east to its
intersection with Arlington Street
Cushing Avenue From its intersection with Manchester Street
north to its intersection with Dartmouth Street
Dudley Street From its intersection with East Glenwood Street
north to its intersection with Linton Street
§ 320-24 NASHUA CODE § 320-24
306:1140
Name of Street Location
Earley Street Entire length
Elm Street From its intersection with Lake Street north to
its intersection with Otterson Street
Fairview Avenue From its intersection with Caldwell Road east
and then south to its end
Ferry Road From its intersection with Dunlap Drive
northeasterly to its intersection with Manchester
Street
French Street Entire length
Harvard Street From its intersection with Allds Street east to its
intersection with Arlington Street
Hills Ferry Road From its intersection with Concord Street west to
its intersection with Manchester Street
Kinsley Street From its intersection with Ash Street east to its
intersection with Walnut Street
Lake Street From its intersection with Wason Avenue east
to its intersection with Russell Street and from
its intersection with Chestnut Street east to its
intersection with Main Street
Ledge Street From its intersection with Houde Street east to
its intersection with Eighth Street
Lewis Street From its intersection with Lake Street east to its
intersection with Woodward Avenue
Linton Street From a point 100 feet east of its intersection with
Dudley Street west to its end
Linwood Street From its intersection with Lake Street north to
its intersection with Earley Street
Lisa Drive From its intersection with East Dunstable Road
westerly a distance of 700 feet.
Lund Road From its intersection with Wildwood Lane south
to its intersection with Foxmeadow Road
Main Dunstable Road From a point 100 feet south of its intersection
with Whitford Road to a point 200 feet north
thereof
Manchester Street From its intersection with Concord Street north
to its intersection with Hopkins Street and from
its intersection with Courtland Street north to its
intersection with Gordon Street
Manchester Street From its intersection with Deerhaven Drive south
to its intersection with the Henri Burque
Highway
§ 320-24 TOWING § 320-24
306:1141
Name of Street Location
Manchester Street From its intersection with Royal Oak Drive north
to its intersection with the Henri Burque
Highway
Metropolitan Avenue From its intersection with Hills Ferry Road north
to the beginning of the Pennichuck Junior High
School sidewalk
Middle Dunstable Road From its intersection with East Dunstable Road
westerly a distance of 400 feet.
Monroe Street From its intersection with Lake Street north to
its intersection with Earley Street
Mount Pleasant Street Entire length
Osgood Street Entire length
Otterson Street From its intersection with Main Street west to its
intersection with Chestnut Street
Riverside Street From its easterly end to its intersection with
Panther Drive
Sargent Avenue From its intersection with Dartmouth Street west
to its intersection with Amherst Street
Shady Lane [Amended
9-10-2014 by Ord. No.
O-14-031]
From a point 200 feet south of its intersection
with the New Searles School driveway to a point
900 feet north thereof
South Main Street From a point 100 feet south of its intersection
with Osgood Street to a point 200 feet north
thereof
Spit Brook Road [Added
12-22-2015 by Ord.
No. O-15-074]
From 350 feet west of the crosswalk between
World Academy and Roby Park to 300 feet east
of that crosswalk
Titan Way [Added
9-10-2013 by Ord. No.
O-13-047]
Entire length
Upstone Drive From its intersection with Broad Street south to
its intersection with Denver Drive
Vine Street From its intersection with Kinsley Street north to
its intersection with West Hollis Street
West Hollis Street From its intersection with Walnut Street west to
its intersection with Ash Street
Wethersfield Road From a point 100 feet east of its intersection with
Shelton Street to a point 200 feet west thereof
Whitford Road From its intersection with Main Dunstable Road
to its intersection with Musket Drive
§ 320-24 NASHUA CODE § 320-24
306:1142
Name of Street Location
Woodland Drive From its intersection with Dublin Avenue to a
point 100 feet north of its intersection with Birch
Hill Drive
§ 320-25. Elderly area safety zones.
The following streets and parts of streets are established as elderly area
safety zones:
Name of Street Location
Tyler Street From Harbor Avenue to the westerly end of the
Nashua Housing Authority property
§ 320-26. School speed limits when flashing.
At the following school safety zones, flashing speed limit signs shall be
installed, at a location to be determined by the Department of Streets. Such
safety zones are as follows:
Name of Street Location
Amherst Street From its intersection with Bruce Street
northwest to its intersection with Cushing
Avenue
Arlington Street From its intersection with McKean Street north
to its intersection with Gillis Street
Broad Street From its intersection with Coburn Avenue
northeast to its intersection with Knowlton Road
East Dunstable Road Approximately 700 feet from school property
Lamb Road Approximately 700 feet from school property
Ledge Street From its intersection with Houde Street east to
its intersection with Eighth Street
Manchester Street
[Added 4-8-2014 by
Ord. No. O-14-013]
Near its intersection with Gordon Street
Manchester Street
[Added 4-8-2014 by
Ord. No. O-14-013]
Near its intersection with Hopkins Street
Shady Lane [Added
4-8-2014 by Ord. No.
O-14-013; amended
9-10-2014 by Ord. No.
O-14-031]
Approximately 700 feet north of the New Searles
School driveway
South Main Street From its intersection with Anders Lane south to
its intersection with April Drive
§ 320-24 TOWING § 320-26
306:1143
Name of Street Location
Spit Brook Road [Added
12-22-2015 by Ord.
No. O-15-074]
Approximately 300 feet east of the crosswalk
between World Academy and Roby Park
Spit Brook Road [Added
12-22-2015 by Ord.
No. O-15-074]
Approximately 350 feet west of the crosswalk
between World Academy and Roby Park
§ 320-26 NASHUA CODE § 320-26
306:1144
ARTICLE VII
One-Way Streets
§ 320-27. One-way streets at all times.
The following streets are hereby designated as one-way streets:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Location
Abbott Street [Added
4-26-2011 by Ord. No.
O-11-67]
Northerly From French Street to Mount
Pleasant Street
Abbott Street Southerly From Manchester Street to
Hopkins Street
Access Road Easterly From East Hollis Street to the
rotary between East Hollis
Street and Crown Street
Alstead Avenue Westerly Entire length
Arlington Avenue Westerly and
southerly
Between Arlington Street and
Gillis Street
Ash Street Southerly Between Central Street and
Kinsley Street
Ash Street Southerly Between Myrtle Street and
Kinsley Street
Badger Street Southerly Entire length
Beech Street Northerly Between Mulberry Street and
West Hollis Street
Belmont Street Westerly From Main Street to Elm
Street
Berkshire Street Northeasterly From Pine Hill Avenue to
Amherst Street
Bowers Street Easterly Between Allds Street and
Newbury Street
Bowers Street Easterly Between Main Street and
Dearborn Street
Bridge Street Westerly Between East Hollis Street
and E Street
Buck Street Easterly Between Palm Street and
Chestnut Street
Burton Drive Southwesterly From the southern
intersection of Burton Drive
and Parnell Place
Cedar Street Westerly Between Elm Street and
Walnut Street
§ 320-27 TOWING § 320-27
306:1145
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Location
Central Street Easterly Between Pine Street and
Walnut Street
Chestnut Street Southerly Between Factory Street and
Kinsley Street
Church Street Easterly Between Olive Street and
Cottage Street
Clark Road Northeasterly From Main Dunstable
Elementary School property
to Whitford Road
Clinton Street Southerly Entire length
Cottage Avenue Westerly Entire length
Cottage Street Southerly From a point 100 feet north
of the northerly curbline of
Cottage Avenue to the
northerly end of Cottage
Street
Court Street Northerly From Temple Street to
Church Street
Crown Street Westerly Between the east end of a
grass plot there located in a
westerly direction to its
intersection with Allds Street
Crown Street (south
side)
Easterly From Allds Street in an
easterly direction to the east
end of a grass plot there
located
D Street Northerly From East Hollis Street to
Bridge Street
Dearborn Street Northerly Between John Street and East
Hollis Street
Denton Street Northerly Between Crown Street and
East Hollis Street
E Street Southerly Entire length
East Hollis Street Easterly Between E Street and the
intersection of Bridge Street
East Pearl Street Westerly Entire length
Edwards Street Northerly Entire length
Eldridge Street Westerly From Spring Street to the
end
§ 320-27 NASHUA CODE § 320-27
306:1146
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Location
Elm Street Southerly Between Kinsley Street and
Otterson Street
Factory Street Easterly Between Water Street and
Main Street
Factory Street Westerly Between Walnut Street and
Chestnut Street
Ferson Street Northerly Between Lake Street and
Kinsley Street
Fifield Street Both All vehicles entering Fifield
Street from Allds Street shall
enter to the west of the
monument, and all vehicles
exiting Fifield Street onto
Allds Street shall exit to the
east of the monument; "Keep
Right" signs as well as "Do
Not Enter" signs shall be
posted to direct the above
traffic flow
First Street Southerly Entire length
Fletcher Street Westerly Between Main Street and
Beard Street
Fletcher Way Southerly Entire length
Foundry Street Westerly Between Mason Street and
Quincy Street
French Street Southerly From Manchester Street to
Abbott Street
Gaffney Street Southerly Between West Hollis Street
and Main Dunstable Road
Gorman Avenue Northerly Between Hoyt's Lane and
Temple Street
Granite Street Southerly Between Summer Street and
Lock Street
Greeley Street Easterly Between Merrimack Street
and Abbott Street
Hanover Street Southerly Between West Hollis Street
and Kinsley Street
Hartshorn Avenue Northerly From a point 150 feet north
of the north curbline of
Church Street to the north
end of Hartshorn Avenue
§ 320-27 TOWING § 320-27
306:1147
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Location
Hartshorn Avenue Southerly Between Park Street and
Church Street
Havana Street Northerly Between West Hollis Street
and South Groton Street
Hobbs Avenue Northerly From Crown Street to East
Hollis Street
Holman Street Westerly From Cross Street to the end
Hopkins Street Extension Easterly Between Abbott Street and
Manchester Street
Hoyt's Lane Easterly Between Scripture Street and
Gorman Avenue
Hoyt's Lane Easterly Between Shedds Avenue and
Gorman Avenue
Joffre Street Southerly Entire length
Kehoe Avenue Westerly Between Harbor Avenue and
a point 215 feet easterly of
Harbor Avenue
Kendrick Street Southerly Between Summer Street and
Lock Street
Kinsley Street Easterly Entire length
Kirk Street Southerly From Amherst Street to the
end
Liberty Street Northerly From Kinsley Street to
Dunstable Road
Liberty Street Northerly Between Main Dunstable
Road and West Hollis Street
Lock Street Westerly Between Orange Street and
Lowell Street
Lovewell Street Westerly From Vine Street to Pine
Street
Lowell Street Easterly Between Lock Street and
Canal Street
Main Dunstable Road Easterly 50 feet easterly from
Northeastern Boulevard
Main Dunstable Road Westerly Between West Hollis Street
and Market Street
Main Street Easterly Between 100-104 Main Street
and 112-116 Main Street
Manila Street Southerly From South Groton Street to
West Hollis Street
§ 320-27 NASHUA CODE § 320-27
306:1148
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Location
Maple Street Southerly Entire length
Marshall Street Northerly From Allds Street to Lyons
Street
McLaren Avenue Northerly Entire length98
Mechanic Street Northerly Entire length
Merrimack Street Northerly Between Greeley Street and
Amherst Street
Morgan Street Westerly From Chandler Street to
Tolles Street
Morrill Street Southerly Between Lock Street and
Whitney Street
Mount Pleasant Street Easterly From Abbott Street to
Manchester Street
Mount Pleasant Street
[Added 4-26-2011 by
Ord. No. O-11-67]
Easterly Between Manchester Street
and Concord Street
Mount Pleasant Street
[Repealed 4-26-2011
by Ord. No. O-11-67]
Mulberry Street Easterly From Chestnut Street to Main
Street
Mulberry Street Westerly Between Elm Street and Main
Street
Nashua Drive Easterly From Canal Street (opposite
Grove Street) to Canal Street
(vicinity of Tolles Street)
Nashville Street [Added
3-24-2015 by Ord. No.
O-15-043]
Westerly Entire length
Orange Street Northerly On the right of Foster's
Monument, from the
intersection of Orange Street
and Lock Street southerly to
a point of intersection at
Orange Street and Foster
Square
98.Editor's Note: The legislation enacting this provision also provided that it shall become
effective at such time as the new street connecting McLaren Avenue, Parkinson Court,
Patten Court and the new as-yet-unnamed street connecting these streets to the Broad
Street Parkway is completed and operational.
§ 320-27 TOWING § 320-27
306:1149
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Location
Orchard Avenue Easterly From its intersection with
Main Street to its intersection
with a proposed street about
200 feet easterly
Otterson Street Easterly Between Main Street and
Dearborn Street
Palm Street [Amended
11-13-2012 by Ord.
No. O-12-025]
Northerly From Kinsley Street to
Central Street
Panther Drive Northerly Entire length
Parkinson Court Southerly Entire length99
Park Street Westerly Entire length
Patten Court Northerly Entire length100
Perham Street Southerly Between Tolles Street and
Lock Street
Pierce Street Northerly Entire length
Pine Street [Amended
11-13-2012 by Ord.
No. O-12-025]
Southerly From Central Street to
Kinsley Street
Pleasant Street Westerly Between Elm Street and
Walnut Street
Putnam Street Southerly From Amherst Street to
Prescott Street
School Street Easterly and
northerly
Between Walnut Street and
High Street
Scripture Street Southerly From Temple Street to the
end
Shedds Avenue Northerly Entire length
Short Avenue Southerly Entire length
South Street Southerly From Temple Street to the
end
Spring Street Northerly Between East Hollis Street
and East Pearl Street
99.Editor's Note: The legislation enacting this provision also provided that it shall become
effective at such time as the new street connecting McLaren Avenue, Parkinson Court,
Patten Court and the new as-yet-unnamed street connecting these streets to the Broad
Street Parkway is completed and operational.
100. Editor's Note: The legislation enacting this provision also provided that it shall become
effective at such time as the new street connecting McLaren Avenue, Parkinson Court,
Patten Court and the new as-yet-unnamed street connecting these streets to the Broad
Street Parkway is completed and operational.
§ 320-27 NASHUA CODE § 320-27
306:1150
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Location
Sullivan Street Southerly Between Amherst Street and
Pine Hill Avenue
Temple Place Easterly Entire length
Temple Street Easterly Between Spring Street and
East Pearl Street
Tolles Street Southerly Between Lock Street and
Whitney Street
Tolles Street Southerly Between Whitney Street and
Canal Street
Union Street Southerly Entire length
Unnamed street
connecting the new
Broad Street Parkway to
the southerly end of
Everett Street, McLaren
Avenue, Parkinson Court,
Patten Court and Stevens
Street
Southwesterly Between the Broad Street
Parkway and Stevens
Street101
Vine Street Northerly Between Kinsley Street and
Central Street
Walnut Street Northerly Between Kinsley Street and
Factory Street
West Hollis Street Westerly Between Main Street and
Simon Street
West Pearl Street Easterly Between Chestnut Street and
Walnut Street
West Pearl Street Westerly Between Main Street and
Walnut Street
Wilder Street Northerly Between Kinsley Street and
West Hollis Street
Williams Court Southerly Between Temple Street and
South Street
Worcester Street Easterly Entire length
§ 320-28. One-way streets at specified times.
The following streets are hereby designated as one-way streets at the
following specified times:
101. Editor's Note: The legislation enacting this provision also provided that it shall become
effective at such time as the new street connecting McLaren Avenue, Parkinson Court,
Patten Court and the new as-yet-unnamed street connecting these streets to the Broad
Street Parkway is completed and operational.
§ 320-27 TOWING § 320-28
306:1151
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Bridge Street Westerly Between
4:00 p.m.
and 6:00
p.m.
Between East Hollis
Street and E Street
Chandler Street Southerly Between
5:30 a.m.
and 12:30
p.m. on
Sundays
From Lock Street to
Whitney Street
Crown Street Westerly Between
6:00 a.m.
and 1:00
p.m. on
Sundays
Between Allds Street and
Arlington Street
East Hollis Street Easterly Between
4:00 p.m.
and 6:00
p.m.
Between E Street and
Bridge Street
Spring Street Northerly Between
6:00 a.m.
and 1:00
p.m.
Between East Hollis
Street and East Pearl
Street
§ 320-28 NASHUA CODE § 320-28
306:1152
ARTICLE VIII
Certain Classes of Traffic on Certain Streets
§ 320-29. Truck traffic prohibited.
A. Trucks shall be prohibited from certain streets as follows:
Name of Street Location
Alan Street No motor truck shall enter or be operated
on Alan Street unless providing a delivery or
service to a resident of Alan Street or unless
owned or operated by the City
Alpine Street No trailer-trucks shall enter or be operated
on Alpine Street between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m.; no trailer trucks shall
enter or be operated on Alpine Street except
those trailer-trucks which service residents of
Alpine Street
Amherst Street No trucks having a gross vehicle weight of
more than 18,000 pounds shall make a left
turn or a U-turn at the median cut on Amherst
Street at the Public Service Company of New
Hampshire building; Public Service Company
of New Hampshire vehicles are hereby
excepted
Ashland Street No through trucks with more than 2 axles
shall be operated as through traffic on
Ashland Street, with the exception of any
vehicle owned and operated by the City,
emergency vehicles, public transportation
and school buses
Blue Hill Avenue No trucks shall enter or be operated on Blue
Hill Avenue, except those trucks which
service the residents of Blue Hill Avenue
Buker Street No motor trucks shall be operated as through
traffic on Buker Street, with the exception of
any vehicle owned and operated by the City,
emergency vehicles, public transportation
and school buses
Charles Street No trailer-trucks shall enter or be operated
on Charles Street, except those trailer-trucks
which service the residents of Charles Street
Chase Street No trailer-trucks shall enter or be operated
on Chase Street between East Hollis Street
and Crown Street
§ 320-29 TOWING § 320-29
306:1153
Name of Street Location
Coburn Avenue No through trucks whose width exceeds 80
inches shall be operated on Coburn Avenue
between Pine Hill Road and Broad Street;
emergency vehicles and school buses are
exempted
Conant Road No commercial motor vehicle shall be
operated as through traffic on Conant Road,
with the exception of any vehicle owned and
operated by the City, emergency vehicles,
public transportation and school buses
Cottage Avenue No trailer-trucks shall enter or be operated
on Cottage Avenue
Countryside Drive All trucks, other than those provided for
herein, shall travel at a speed not to exceed
15 m.p.h. and shall travel in a northerly
direction. No trucks other than those
provided for herein shall be permitted to
operate between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. or be operated on Sundays or
holidays on Countryside Drive. The following
trucks shall not be subject to the above
provisions:
(1) Trucks having a gross weight of less
than 2 1/2 tons
(2) Trucks owned and operated by the City
(3) Delivery vans, moving vans and other
like vehicles serving persons residing
on Countryside Drive, Colonial Avenue
or Cape Avenue
(4) Privately operated rubbish vehicles
operated between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
Dearborn Street All motor trucks shall be excluded from
Dearborn Street from its intersection with
Prospect Street to its intersection with Tyler
Street
Dublin Avenue No through trucks whose width exceeds 80
inches shall be operated on Dublin Avenue
between Pine Hill Road and Broad Street;
emergency vehicles and school buses
exempted
§ 320-29 NASHUA CODE § 320-29
306:1154
Name of Street Location
East Dunstable Road No trailer-trucks shall enter or be operated
on that portion of East Dunstable Road under
the control of the City between Main Street
and the F.E. Everett Turnpike, except those
trailer-trucks which service the residents of
East Dunstable Road
East Dunstable Road No trailer-truck shall be operated as through
traffic on East Dunstable Road between
Bicentennial Drive and Timberline Drive, with
the exception of any vehicle owned and
operated by the City, emergency vehicles,
public transportation and school buses
Edgewood Avenue No commercial motor vehicle of greater than
2 axles shall be operated as through traffic
on Edgewood Avenue, with the exception of
any vehicle owned and operated by the City,
emergency vehicles, public transportation
and school buses
Elm Street No commercial motor vehicle of greater than
2 axles shall be operated as through traffic
on Elm Street between Kinsley Street and
Otterson Street, with the exception of any
vehicle owned and operated by the City,
emergency vehicles, public transportation
and school buses
Fairmount Street No trailer-trucks whatever shall enter or be
operated on Fairmount Street between the
hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. No trailertrucks
shall enter or be operated on
Fairmount Street between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 7:00 p.m. except those which service
residents and businesses on Fairmount
Street. The signs indicating this regulation
of Fairmount Street shall be located at the
intersection of Fairmount Street and Baldwin
Street.
Farley Road No through trucks whose width exceeds 80
inches shall be operated on Farley Road,
emergency vehicles, vehicles bearing farm
registration plates and school buses
exempted
Gillis Street [Amended
11-24-2015 by Ord.
No. O-15-070]
No trailer-trucks shall enter or be operated
on Gillis Street between Arlington Street and
Haines Street, except for those trailer-trucks
servicing the residents of Gillis Street
between Arlington Street and Haines Street
§ 320-29 TOWING § 320-29
306:1155
Name of Street Location
Gregg Road No through trucks over 18,000 pounds' gross
vehicle weight shall be operated on Gregg
Road, emergency vehicles exempted
Groton Road No through trucks over 18,000 pounds' gross
vehicle weight shall be operated on Groton
Road from its intersection with Route 111A
to the New Hampshire/Massachusetts State
line, emergency vehicles exempted
Groton Road No through trucks whose length, including
load, is greater than 35 feet shall be operated
on Groton Road between Route 111-A and the
New Hampshire/Massachusetts State line,
emergency vehicles, vehicles bearing farm
registration plates and school buses
exempted
Groton Road No through trucks whose width exceeds 80
inches shall be operated on Groton Road
between Route 111-A and the New
Hampshire/Massachusetts State line,
emergency vehicles, vehicles bearing farm
registration plates and school buses
exempted
Groton Road No through trucks with more than 2 axles
shall be operated on Groton Road between
Route 111-A and the New Hampshire/
Massachusetts State line, emergency
vehicles, vehicles bearing farm registration
plates and school buses exempted
Haines Street No trailer-trucks shall enter or be operated
on Haines Street between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
Harris Road No trucks shall enter or be operated on
Harris Road from Northeastern Boulevard to
Conant Road, except as required to service
local residents
Highway No. 3 All trucks entering the City on State Highway
Route No. 3 between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
for destination points outside the City shall be
operated only over the following designated
routes:
(1) Southbound: When entering the City
from the north for a destination point
south of the City, trucks shall be
operated on the Burque Highway and
the F. E. Everett Turnpike
§ 320-29 NASHUA CODE § 320-29
306:1156
Name of Street Location
(2) Northbound: When entering the City
from the south for a destination point
north of the City, trucks shall be
operated on the F. E. Everett Turnpike
and shall not deviate from that route
until it reaches the Burque Highway
All trucks carrying flammables entering the
City on State Highway No. 3 for destination
points outside the City shall be operated only
over the following designated routes:
(1) Southbound: When entering the City
from the north for a destination point
south of the City, trucks shall be
operated on the Burque Highway and
the F.E. Everett Turnpike
(2) Northbound: When entering the City
from the south for a destination point
north of the City, trucks shall be
operated on the F. E. Everett Turnpike
and shall not deviate from that route
until it reaches the Burque Highway
Hills Ferry Road No motor truck shall enter or be operated on
Hills Ferry Road between Concord Street and
Manchester Street, except those trucks which
service residents of that section of Hills Ferry
Road
Houde Street No commercial motor vehicle shall be
operated as through traffic on Houde Street,
with the exception of any vehicle owned and
operated by the City, emergency vehicles,
public transportation and school buses
Howard Street No trucks having a gross vehicle weight of
more than 18,000 pounds shall travel or make
a U-turn on Howard Street between
Worcester Street and Hoyt's Lane
Hughey Street No trailer-trucks shall enter or be operated
on Hughey Street, except those which service
residents of Hughey Street
King Street No trailer-trucks shall enter or be operated
on King Street between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
§ 320-29 TOWING § 320-29
306:1157
Name of Street Location
King Street No commercial motor vehicle shall be
operated as through traffic on King Street
between Allds Street and Arlington Street,
with the exception of any vehicle owned and
operated by the City, emergency vehicles,
public transportation and school buses
Lake Street No through trucks with more than 2 axles
shall be operated on Lake Street between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
Ledge Street All trailer-trucks traveling on Ledge Street
between Houde Street and Stevens Avenue
shall travel in an easterly direction and not
otherwise. No trailer-trucks shall travel on
Ledge Street between Houde Street and
Stevens Avenue between the hours of 7:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
Lincoln Avenue No motor truck shall enter or be operated on
Lincoln Avenue, unless providing a delivery
or service to a resident of Lincoln Avenue,
or unless owned or operated by the City, or
unless working on Lincoln Avenue
Maple Street No through trucks with more than 2 axles
shall be operated on Maple Street, except:
(1) Trucks owned and operated by the City
(2) Delivery vans, moving vans and other
like vehicles serving persons residing
on Maple Street or on streets only
accessible from Maple Street
(3) Privately operated rubbish vehicles
operating between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 7:00 p.m. and making rubbish
collections
Marshall Street No commercial motor vehicle shall be
operated as through traffic on Marshall
Street between Allds Street and Bowers
Street, with the exception of any vehicle
owned and operated by the City, emergency
vehicles, public transportation and school
buses
Middle Dunstable Road No commercial motor vehicle shall be
operated as through traffic on Middle
Dunstable Road, with the exception of any
vehicle owned and operated by the City,
emergency vehicles, public transportation
and school buses
§ 320-29 NASHUA CODE § 320-29
306:1158
Name of Street Location
Mulberry Street No trucks shall be operated on the section
of Mulberry Street between Main Street and
Elm Street, except those trucks which service
properties on that section of Mulberry Street
Musket Drive All trucks other than those provided for
herein shall be excluded from Musket Drive
from its intersection of Gilson Road to its
intersection of Whitford Road:
(1) No trucks over 18,000 pounds' gross
vehicle weight shall be operated on
Musket Drive
(2) Trucks owned and operated by the City
(3) Delivery vans, moving vans and other
like vehicles serving persons residing
on Musket Road, Pioneer Drive or
Whitford Road
(4) Privately operated rubbish vehicles
operated between the hours of 7:00
a.m. to 7:00 p.m. and making rubbish
collections on Musket Drive, Pioneer
Drive or Whitford Road
North Southwood Drive No truck with more than 2 axles shall be
operated as through traffic on North
Southwood Drive, except any vehicle owned
and operated by the City, emergency vehicles,
public transportation, and school buses102
Notre Dame Street No trailer-trucks shall enter or be operated
on Notre Dame Street between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
Nutt Street No motor truck shall enter or be operated
on Nutt Street, unless providing a delivery or
service to a resident of Nutt Street, or unless
owned or operated by the City, or unless
working on Nutt Street
Palm Street No through truck traffic having a gross
vehicle weight of more than 18,000 pounds
shall travel on Palm Street between Kinsley
Street and West Hollis Street
102. Editor's Note: Ord. No. O-15-120 provided that it "shall become effective at the time the
North Southwood Drive — Tinker Road connection becomes a public highway per
resolution R-05-292."
§ 320-29 TOWING § 320-29
306:1159
Name of Street Location
Pershing Street No through trucks over 18,000 pounds' gross
vehicle weight. shall be operated on Pershing
Street, emergency vehicles and school buses
exempted
Pierce Street No motor truck shall enter or be operated
on Pierce Street, except those trucks which
service residents or businesses on Pierce
Street
Pine Hill Road No trucks shall enter or be operated on Pine
Hill Road between Blue Hill Avenue and
Charron Avenue, except those trucks which
service the residents of Pine Hill Road
Pine Hill Road No trucks shall enter or be operated on Pine
Hill Road between Charron Avenue and
Dublin Avenue between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
Ridge Road No through trucks over 18,000 . pounds'
gross vehicle weight shall be operated on
Ridge Road
Robinson Road [Added
3-9-2010 by Ord. No.
O-10-09]
No trailer-trucks shall enter or be operated
on Robinson Road, except those trailer-trucks
which service the residents of Robinson Road
Sagamore Road No commercial motor vehicle shall be
operated as through traffic on Sagamore
Road, with the exception of any vehicle
owned and operated by the City, emergency
vehicles, public transportation and school
buses
Searles Road No through trucks with more than 2 axles
shall be operated on Searles Road, except:
(1) Trucks owned and operated by the City
(2) Delivery vans, moving vans and other
like vehicles serving persons residing
on Searles Road or on streets accessible
from Searles Road
(3) Privately operated rubbish vehicles
operating between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 7:00 p.m. and making rubbish
collections
South Main Street No through trucks with more than 2 axles
shall be operated on Main Street from
Fairway Street to Veterans Drive
§ 320-29 NASHUA CODE § 320-29
306:1160
Name of Street Location
Tetreau Street No trailer-trucks shall enter or be operated
on Tetreau Street between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
Vine Street No trucks over 18,000 pounds' gross vehicle
weight shall be operated on Vine Street
between Kinsley Street and Central Street,
except:
(1) Trucks owned and operated by the City
(2) Delivery vans, moving vans and other
like vehicles serving persons residing
on Vine Street
(3) Privately operated rubbish vehicles
operated between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 7:00 p.m. and making rubbish
collections on Vine Street
Whitford Road All trucks, other than those provided for
herein, shall be excluded from Whitford Road
from its intersection of Musket Drive to its
intersection of Main Dunstable Road:
(1) No trucks over 18,000 pounds' gross
vehicle weight shall be operated on
Whitford Road
(2) Trucks owned and operated by the City
(3) Delivery vans, moving vans and other
like vehicles serving persons residing
on Musket Drive, Pioneer Drive or
Whitford Road
(4) Privately operated rubbish vehicles
operated between the hours of 7:00
a.m. to 7:00 p.m. and making rubbish
collections on Musket Drive, Pioneer
Drive or Whitford Road
Wilder Street No through trailer-trucks shall enter or be
operated on Wilder Street between Kinsley
Street and West Hollis Street
Worcester Street No tractor-trailers shall enter or be operated
on Worcester Street, except tractor-trailers
servicing residents of Worcester Street
B. With the exception of emergency vehicles, school buses and trucks
delivering services or products to addresses on the streets in this
subsection, "trucks," as defined in NH RSA 259:115-b, having over
10,000 pounds' gross vehicle weight rating or requiring semiannual
inspection shall not operate on the following streets:
§ 320-29 TOWING § 320-29
306:1161
§ 320-30. Vehicle weight limits.
§ 320-30.1. No through traffic. [Added 2-10-2015 by Ord. No.
O-14-033]
Through traffic is prohibited on the following streets, with the exception of
any vehicle owned and operated by the City and emergency vehicles:
Name of Street Location
Unnamed street connecting Pearson
Avenue and Park Street
Entire length
Name of Street
Beasom Street
Chandler Street [Added 5-10-2016 by Ord. No. O-16-007]
Courtland Street, east of Concord Street
Cross Street [Added 12-23-2014 by Ord. No. O-14-030]
East Stark Street
Laton Street
Orange Street
Summer Street
Swart Street
Swart Terrace
A. No vehicles with a gross weight of over 12,000 pounds, or more than
eight feet six inches high, shall be permitted to travel over the Taylor
Falls Bridge from the intersection of West Hollis Street and Bridge
Street to the Nashua-Hudson Town line.
B. Fire apparatus, or other vehicles where special permits are granted by
the City and the Town of Hudson, shall be permitted to cross Taylor
Falls Bridge in excess of the gross weight of 12,000 pounds at a speed
not to exceed 15 miles per hour.
C. Any person violating any part of this section shall be subject to a fine
pursuant to RSA 263:61 and RSA 263:69, at the discretion of the
District Court.
§ 320-29 NASHUA CODE § 320-30.1
306:1162
ARTICLE IX
Motor Vehicle Specifications
§ 320-31. Emergency lights on snow-removal vehicles.
All motor vehicles utilized for the plowing of snow on any premises not
owned by the operator of the vehicle shall be equipped with emergency
lights. Such emergency lights shall be in accordance with the terms and
conditions contained in RSA 266:74, as it may be from time to time
amended, and shall be kept in operation at all times during any snowremoval
operations.
§ 320-32. Violations and penalties.
Any person found in violation of the terms and conditions of this article shall
be fined $50.
§ 320-31 TOWING § 320-32
306:1163

ARTICLE X
Parking Time Limits in Non-Parking-Lot Areas
§ 320-33. Ten-minute parking.
No vehicle shall be stationed or remain for a period exceeding 10 minutes
on the following streets:
Name of Street Location
Temple Street The parking space immediately in front of the
entrance to 59 Temple Street on the southerly
side of the street
§ 320-34. (Reserved)103
§ 320-35. Fifteen-minute parking.
A. No vehicle shall be stationed or remain for a period exceeding 15
minutes on the following streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Amherst Street
[Added 4-26-2011
by Ord. No.
O-11-66]
South From a point 25 feet west from the
west line of Beacon Street westerly
a distance of 18 feet
Arlington Street
[Added 11-9-2016
by Ord. No.
O-16-018]
West Beginning at a point 30 feet south of
Gillis Street and extending southerly
to a point 50 feet south of Gillis
Street
Ash Street
[Repealed
9-9-2015 by Ord.
No. O-15-059]
Central Street
[Added 8-13-2013
by Ord. No.
O-13-046]
South From Chestnut Street westerly for a
distance of 95 feet
Central Street
[Added 8-13-2013
by Ord. No.
O-13-046]
South From Palm Street easterly for a
distance of 116 feet
Chestnut Street East Beginning 186 feet in a northerly
direction from the southeast corner
of Chestnut Street and West Hollis
Street for a distance of 20 feet
103. Editor's Note: Former § 320-34, Twelve-minute parking, was repealed 6-28-2011 by Ord.
No. O-11-71.
§ 320-33 TOWING § 320-35
306:1165
Name of Street Side Location
Chestnut Street West From Central Street southerly for a
distance of 80 feet
Court Street
[Repealed
6-28-2011 by Ord.
No. O-11-71]
Gillis Street [Added
11-9-2016 by Ord.
No. O-16-018]
South Beginning at a point 25 feet west of
Arlington Street and extending
westerly to a point 65 feet west of
Arlington Street
Harbor Avenue East From a point 30 feet from the
projected curb at Bowers Street and
Harbor Avenue southerly for a
distance of 20 feet
High Street
[Repealed
6-28-2011 by Ord.
No. O-11-71]
Kinsley Street
[Repealed
11-13-2012 by Ord.
No. O-12-025]
Park Street South Between Court Street and Olive
Street
Pine Street
[Repealed
11-13-2012 by Ord.
No. O-12-025]
Pine Street East Starting 92 feet south of Kinsley
Street for a distance of 48 feet
School Street
[Repealed
6-28-2011 by Ord.
No. O-11-71]
Walnut Street East From Cedar Street to West Pearl
Street
West Hollis Street South From a point 130 feet west of the
westerly curbline of Ash Street west
to the easterly curbline of Palm
Street
West Hollis Street South In front of 44 West Hollis Street
B. (Reserved)104
§ 320-35 NASHUA CODE § 320-35
306:1166
§ 320-36. Thirty-minute parking.
No vehicle shall be stationed or remain for a period exceeding 30 minutes
on the following streets:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Allds Street East 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Between Bowers Street
and Williams Street
Amherst Street
[Amended
4-26-2011 by
Ord. No.
O-11-66]
South All Beginning at a point 43
feet west of Beacon Street
and extending to a point
200 feet west of Beacon
Street
Broad Street North and
south
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From the junction of Broad
Street and Amherst Street
westerly to Chautauqua
Avenue
C. No motor vehicle shall be stationed or remain for a period exceeding 15
minutes from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on any day, except Saturdays,
Sundays and holidays, on the following streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Lowell Street South From a point 25 feet west of the
westerly curbline of Orange Street
extended to a point 75 feet west of
the westerly curbline of Orange
Street
Spring Street
[Repealed
6-28-2011 by Ord.
No. O-11-71]
D. No vehicle shall be stationed for a period exceeding 15 minutes on that
portion of the west side of Main Street commencing at the south line of
the premises at 221 Main Street, and extending north a distance of 25
feet. All parking in such area shall be unmetered, and such area shall be
used for service loading only.
E. No vehicle shall be stationed or remain for a period exceeding 15
minutes, from May 1 through September 1, on the following streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Manchester Street East From Courtland Street for 100 feet
north
104. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, which listed streets where no motor vehicle or horsedrawn
vehicle was permitted to remain for more than 15 minutes on Thursdays from 9:00
a.m. to 9:00 p.m., and on any other weekday from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., was repealed
6-28-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-71.
§ 320-35 TOWING § 320-36
306:1167
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Broad Street South 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
daily
From Amherst Street west
to Jones Avenue
Central Street
[Repealed
8-13-2013 by
Ord. No.
O-13-046]
Crown Street South All From Colburn Street
easterly for a distance of
120 feet
Crown Street South All From the curb cut
adjacent to 29 1/2 Crown
Street easterly for a
distance of 100 feet
Kinsley Street North 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Between Pine Street and
Ash Street
Liberty Street
[Added
5-14-2013 by
Ord. No.
O-13-038]
West All Beginning at a point 50
feet north of Kinsley
Street and extending to a
point 133 feet north of
Kinsley Street
Lowell Street
[Added
12-26-2012 by
Ord. No.
O-12-029]
South All Beginning at a point 84
feet east of Clinton Street
and extending easterly 94
feet
Main Street
[Repealed
2-8-2011 by Ord.
No. O-10-45;
6-28-2011 by
Ord. No.
O-11-71]
Mellon Court East All Entire length
Orange Street East All A distance of 80 feet north
from a point 25 feet north
of the north line of Lowell
Street
Palm Street East 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Between Buck Street and
Kinsley Street
§ 320-36 NASHUA CODE § 320-36
306:1168
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Palm Street
[Repealed
11-13-2012 by
Ord. No.
O-12-025]
Pershing Street East All Between New Dunstable
Road and West Hollis
Street
Railroad Square
[Repealed
6-28-2011 by
Ord. No.
O-11-71]
Railroad Square
[Repealed
6-28-2011 by
Ord. No.
O-11-71]
Walnut Street West All From the Cedar Street
extension to West Pearl
Street
§ 320-37. One-hour parking.
A. No vehicles shall be stationed or remain for a period exceeding one
hour from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on the following streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Amherst Street South From its intersection with Broad
Street westerly to its intersection
with Hardy Street
Burke Street South From Arlington Street to the
Improved Paper Machine Company
entrance
Central Street
[Repealed
8-13-2013 by
Ord. No.
O-13-046]
Fairmount Street South From the bridge west to Hillcrest
Circle
Fletcher Street North From Beard Street to Green Street
§ 320-36 TOWING § 320-37
306:1169
Name of Street Side Location
Lowell Street
[Repealed
6-28-2011 by
Ord. No. O-11-71]
Myrtle Street South From Pine Street to the dead end
Olive Street Both Between Church Street and Park
Street
Orange Street East A distance of 130 feet north from a
point 25 feet north of the north line of
Lowell Street
Tetreau Street East From Hains Street to the south end of
Tetreau Street
Tetreau Street West From Haines Street to the south end
of Tetreau Street
West Hollis Street South From the westerly curbline of Beech
Street westerly to Chestnut Street,
except for in front of 44 West Hollis
Street
West Hollis Street South From the westerly curbline of Vine
Street west to a point 130 feet west of
the westerly curbline of Ash Street
B. No vehicle shall be stationed or remain for a period exceeding one hour
from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. daily, except Thursdays, when the hours
shall be 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., and except Sundays and holidays, on the
following streets:
Name of Street Side Location
East Hollis Street North From a point 100 feet west of the
westerly curbline of Arlington Street
extended westerly for a distance of
200 feet
East Hollis Street North Between Belknap Street and C Street
East Hollis Street South Between Chase Street and Hobbs
Avenue
East Hollis Street South From a point 25 feet east of the
easterly curbline of Dearborn Street
easterly to a point 50 feet west of the
westerly curbline of Quincy Street
extended
§ 320-37 NASHUA CODE § 320-37
306:1170
Name of Street Side Location
Park Street North Parallel parking, from a point on the
north side of Park Street 100 feet
east of the east line of Main Street
east for a distance of 280 feet to the
west line of Olive Street extended
C. No vehicle shall be stationed or remain for a period exceeding one hour
on any weekday from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on the following streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Burke Street North From Arlington Street for a distance
of 300 feet west from Arlington Street
Charles Street East Between the intersection of Franklin
Street and Fairmount Street
Franklin Street
[Repealed
6-28-2011 by Ord.
No. O-11-71]
Green Street Both Entire length
Lake Street North From a point 40 feet east of the east
line of Ash Street to a point 10 feet
west of the west line of Vine Street
Lake Street South From a point 10 feet east of the east
line of Pine Street to a point 40 feet
west of the west line of Ash Street
Locust Street Both Entire length
Myrtle Street South From Pine Street to Palm Street
Palm Street East From the south line of Central Street
to the north line of the Boston and
Maine Railroad
Palm Street West Between Myrtle Street and the fence
now or formerly of Nashua
Manufacturing Company
Pine Street
[Repealed
11-13-2012 by
Ord. No.
O-12-025]
Railroad Square
[Repealed
6-28-2011 by Ord.
No. O-11-71]
§ 320-37 TOWING § 320-37
306:1171
Name of Street Side Location
Temple Street North Beginning at the projection of the
east line of South Street to the
projection of the east line of Spruce
Street
Underhill Street North From Arlington Street for a distance
of 100 feet west from Arlington Street
Vine Street East and
west
Between West Pearl Street and
Myrtle Street, daily except Sundays
Walnut Street West Between Factory Street and West
Pearl Street
Winter Street North Entire length
D. No vehicle shall be stationed or remain for a period exceeding one hour
on any weekday from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., except Sundays and
holidays, on the following streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Aetna Court Both Entire length
Arlington Street West From Underhill Street to Burke
Street
Ash Street East Between Nevada Street and Brook
Street
Beech Street East From Pleasant Street to West Hollis
Street
Concord Street West From Crescent Street southerly for a
distance of 100 feet
Edgeville Street West Entire length
Harvard Street North Entire length
King Street North From Arlington Street to the east end
of King Street
Lock Street South From Chandler Street for a distance
of 120 feet east
Merrimack Street West From Abbott Street south for a
distance of 387 feet
Merrimack Street East From French Street to Greeley Street
Scripture Street East From Temple Street to Hoyt's Lane
Temple Street South Beginning at the east line of South
Street and running east to the east
line of Gorman Avenue, except a
distance of 50 feet in front of St.
Casimir Church, where there shall be
no parking at any time
§ 320-37 NASHUA CODE § 320-37
306:1172
Name of Street Side Location
Walnut Street East Between West Pearl Street and Cedar
Street
Walnut Street East From the southeast corner of
Pleasant Street south to the Boston
and Maine Corporation right-of-way
north of West Hollis Street
Walnut Street West From the north line of Oak Street
south to Otterson Street
West Pearl Street South From Walnut Street to Ash Street
Worcester Street North From Spruce Street to Mason Street
Yvonne Street Both Entire length
E. No vehicle shall be stationed or remain for a period exceeding one hour
on any weekday from 6:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., except Saturdays, Sundays
and holidays, on the following streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Belmont Street South Entire length
Lake Street South Between Ash Street and Pine Street
Lock Street South Between Chandler Street and Aetna
Court
Maple Street
[Added
12-23-2008 by
Ord. No. O-08-50]
East Entire length
F. One-hour parking shall be in effect at all times on the following streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Arlington Street West Between Crown Street and East Hollis
Street, except Sundays and holidays
Bridge Street South From a point 100 feet east of the
intersection of Armory Street and
Bridge Street, thence east to the
Boston and Maine Railroad tracks
Canal Street
[Added 3-9-2015
by Ord. No.
O-15-039]
North From a point 15 feet west of Cross
Street to a point 60 feet west of Cross
Street
Lowell Street
[Added 7-10-2012
by Ord. No.
O-12-010]
South First seven parking spaces on the
south side of Lowell Street from the
corner of Orange Street west from a
point 27 feet west to a point 185 feet
west of Orange Street
§ 320-37 TOWING § 320-37
306:1173
§ 320-38. Two-hour parking. [Amended 6-28-2011 by Ord. No.
O-11-71]
Name of Street Side Location
Main Street East From Tyler Street to Otterson Street
Main Street West From Kinsley Street to Otterson Street
Mulberry Street South From Elm Street westerly a distance of
125 feet
Palm Street East From West Hollis Street south a
distance of 135 feet
G. One-hour parking, 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., except Saturdays, Sundays
and holidays, shall be in effect on the following streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Canal Street
[Added 3-9-2015
by Ord. No.
O-15-039]
North From a point 60 feet west of Cross
Street to the east side of Grove Street
Canal Street
[Amended
3-9-2015 by Ord.
No. O-15-039]
North From the west line of Salvail Court
westerly to the east line of Cross Street
Canal Street South From the west line of Nashua Drive
(west portion) to the projected east line
of Reeds Court
A. Parking shall be limited to two hours at all times on the following
streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Amherst Street South From a point 400 feet to 490 feet west
of the west curbline of Putnam Avenue
Arlington Street West From Underhill Street to King Street.
Ash Street East The 5 head-in parking spaces
immediately north of 40 Ash Street
Atherton Avenue East From Lock Street to a point 750 feet
north of the north line of Lock Street
Bowers Street North Beginning 340 feet easterly from Main
Street for a distance of 120 feet
Bowers Street North From Main Street easterly for a
distance of 140 feet
Bowers Street North Beginning 140 feet easterly from Main
Street for a distance of 130 feet
§ 320-37 NASHUA CODE § 320-38
306:1174
Name of Street Side Location
Bowers Street North Beginning 274 feet easterly from Main
Street for a distance of 195 feet
Broad Street North Between Hardy Street and Kirk Street
Cottage Street
[Added
11-28-2017 by
Ord. No.
O-17-049]
Both Between Temple Street and East
Pearl Street
Cottage Street
[Added
11-28-2017 by
Ord. No.
O-17-049]
East From Temple Street to the library
parking lot
Elm Street West From the northeast corner of Lake
Street north for 150 feet
Graham Drive North From Daniel Webster Highway to
Marmon Drive
Hardy Street East Entire length
Hunt Street West From Lake Street to Acton Street
Ledge Street North From a point 50 feet southwest of the
projected corner of the west side of
Pine Street southwest to the railroad
right-of-way
Ledge Street South From Pine Street southwest for a
distance of 200 feet
Lowell Street North From a point 150 feet west of the west
line of Orange Street west for a
distance of 100 feet
Lowell Street South Beginning 75 feet west of Orange
Street west for a distance of 109 feet
Main Street East From the south line of Salmon Brook
Bridge for a distance of 280 feet south
Main Street West From Kinsley Street to Prospect Street
Main Street West From Lake Street to Belmont Street
Manchester Street West Between Mount Pleasant Street and
French Street
Marmon Drive East and
west
From Graham Drive to Rockne Drive
Marshall Street West From East Hollis Street to the Boston
and Maine Railroad tracks (Acton
Branch)
§ 320-38 TOWING § 320-38
306:1175
Name of Street Side Location
Notre Dame Street East and
west
From Haines Street to Burke Street
Olive Street West Entire length
Otterson Street North Between Harbor Avenue and Pond
Street
Pine Street
[Repealed
11-13-2012 by
Ord. No.
O-12-025]
Prospect Street South From Main Street easterly for a
distance of 355 feet
Quincy Street
[Added
11-28-2017 by
Ord. No.
O-17-050]
West Entire length
Revere Street Both From Main Street west for a distance
of 150 feet
Sanders Street West From Bridge Street north
Temple Street South From the east line of Temple Place
east for a distance of 166 feet
Terrace Street South Entire length
Thayer Court North From Main Street to the end of Thayer
Court
West Hollis Street
[Added 2-28-2012
by Ord. No.
O-12-003]
South From Palm Street to a point 75 feet
west thereof
Will Street South Beginning at the intersection of Will
Street and Simon Street for a distance
of 186 feet in an easterly direction
B. Parking shall be limited to two hours daily, except Sundays and
holidays, on the following streets:
§ 320-38 NASHUA CODE § 320-38
306:1176
Name of Street Side Location
Elm Street
[Amended
11-12-2013 by
Ord. No.
O-13-055]
East From Lake Street to a point 100 feet
north of Belmont Street
Kinsley Street North From a point 125 feet west of the
intersection of the west side of Main
Street and Kinsley Street west to Elm
Street
Tyler Street South From Dearborn Street easterly for a
distance of 200 feet
Tyler Street South From Main Street to Dearborn Street
C. Parking shall be limited to two hours daily, 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
except Sundays and holidays, on the following streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Ash Street West From Buck Street to Kinsley Street
Ash Street West From a point 150 feet south of the
south curbline of Lake Street
southerly for a distance of 120 feet
Belknap Street East From East Hollis Street to Bridge
Street
Bridge Street South Between C Street and E Street
C Street Both Entire length
Canal Street Bridge South From Public Service Company of New
Hampshire Pole No. 3 east
approximately 80 feet to Public
Service Company of New Hampshire
Pole No. 5
Central Street
[Repealed
8-13-2013 by Ord.
No. O-13-046]
Chandler Street West From the north line of Whitney Street
north for 114 feet
East Pearl Street South From the southeast side of Quincy
Street to the southwest side of South
Street
Elm Street
[Amended
6-28-2011 by Ord.
No. O-11-71]
West From Mulberry Street to Kinsley
Street
§ 320-38 TOWING § 320-38
306:1177
Name of Street Side Location
Fletcher Street North From Main Street to Beard Street;
excepting, however, the area lying
between 336 feet and 376.5 feet west
of Main Street, which is posted and is
to remain posted as "No parking at
any time" (opposite garage doors)
Foundry Street North Entire length
Franklin Street
[Repealed
6-28-2011 by Ord.
No. O-11-71]
Holmes Street Both Entire length
Indian Head Avenue East From Beaucher Avenue to a point 200
feet north
Jackson Avenue West From Beaucher Avenue for 450 feet
north
King Street South From Arlington Street to the east end
of King Street
Kinsley Street South From Main Street to Elm Street
Lake Street South From Main Street to Bridle Path
Main Street East From the southeast corner of Tyler
Street to the northeast corner of
Prospect Street
Maple Street
[Repealed
12-23-2008 by
Ord. No. O-08-50]
Maple Street
[Repealed
12-23-2008 by
Ord. No. O-08-50]
Revere Street North From Main Street west for 150 feet
Temple Street North Beginning at the projection of the east
line of South Street to the projection
of the east line of Spruce Street
Underhill Street South From Arlington Street west for a
distance of 350 feet
D. Parking shall be limited to two hours daily, 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, on the following streets:
§ 320-38 NASHUA CODE § 320-38
306:1178
Name of Street Side Location
Almont Street Both From the intersection of Lund Road to
the intersection of Alder Drive
Arlington Street East From Burke Street to King Street
Belknap Street West From Bridge Street to East Hollis
Street
Bridge Street North From the west side of Sanders Street
westerly to the B and M Railroad
tracks
Brook Street North From the northeast corner of Brook
Street east for 175 feet
Central Street
[Amended
8-13-2013 by Ord.
No. O-13-046]
North From Pine Street east to Chestnut
Street
Central Street
[Added 8-13-2013
by Ord. No.
O-13-046]
South From Pine Street east to Palm Street,
then from 116 feet east of Palm Street
to 95 feet west of Chestnut Street
Charles Street West From Franklin Street to Terrace Street
Cottage Avenue South Entire length
Cottage Street
[Repealed
6-28-2011 by Ord.
No. O-11-71]
East Pearl Street
[Repealed
6-28-2011 by Ord.
No. O-11-71]
East Pearl Street
[Repealed
6-28-2011 by Ord.
No. O-11-71]
Hamilton Street East Starting 130 feet south of its
intersection with Lake Street
southerly for the rest of the street
Knollwood Avenue Both From Fox Meadow Road to Forest Park
Drive
Lund Road Both From Almont Street to Forest Park
Drive
Morgan Street North Entire length
Myrtle Street North From a point opposite the southwest
corner of Vine Street east for 120 feet
§ 320-38 TOWING § 320-38
306:1179
Name of Street Side Location
Otterson Street North From Harbor Avenue west to Pond
Street
Pine Street
[Repealed
11-13-2012 by
Ord. No.
O-12-025]
Temple Street
[Repealed
6-28-2011 by Ord.
No. O-11-71]
Temple Street
[Repealed
6-28-2011 by Ord.
No. O-11-71]
Temple Street North From a point opposite Scripture Street
east to a point opposite the northeast
corner of Commercial Street
Temple Street North From a point 50 feet east of the
easterly edge of the pavement of
Temple Place to a point 110 feet west
of the extended east line of South
Street
Whitney Street North From Chandler Street to Tolles Street
Whitney Street South From Chandler Street west to 35 feet
east of Ridge Street
Whitney Street South From Tolles Street to Ridge Street
E. Parking shall be limited to two hours daily, 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.,
except Thursdays, 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., and except Sundays and
holidays, on the following streets: [Amended 6-28-2011 by Ord. No.
O-11-71]
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
F. Parking shall be limited to two hours daily, except Saturdays, Sundays
and holidays, on the following streets:
§ 320-38 NASHUA CODE § 320-38
306:1180
Name of Street Side Location
Auburn Street
[Amended
9-15-2010 by Ord.
No. O-10-31;
11-9-2010 by Ord.
No. O-10-38]
Both Between Amherst Street and Beard
Street
Cedar Street South Entire length
Elm Street Both Between Kinsley Street and Oak
Street
G. Parking shall be limited to two hours daily, 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
except Sundays and holidays, on the following streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Chandler Street West From the corner of Morgan Street to
the corner of Lock Street
H. Parking shall be limited to two hours daily, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.,
except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, on the following streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Grove Street
[Added 6-28-2011
by Ord. No.
O-11-72]
West From 82 feet south of the northerly line
of Holman Street to Canal Street
Grove Street
[Amended
6-28-2011 by
Ord. No. O-11-72]
West Between Whitney Street and the
northerly line of Holman Street
Pleasant Street North Between Elm Street and Walnut Street
Tolles Street West From a point 30 feet north of the
intersection of Martin Street to
Whitney Street
I. Parking shall be limited to two hours daily, 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.,
except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, on the following streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Broad Street North From Amherst Street west to
Chautauqua Avenue
Broad Street South From Jones Avenue west to
Chautauqua Avenue
Cottage Street
[Repealed
6-28-2011 by Ord.
No. O-11-71]
East From Temple Street to the library
parking lot
§ 320-38 TOWING § 320-38
306:1181
§ 320-39. (Reserved)105
§ 320-40. Twenty-four-hour parking.
Parking shall be limited to 24 hours on the following streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Dudley Street East From Linton Street north to the City's
property
Old House Lane
[Added
9-10-2013 by
Ord. No.
O-13-049]
Name of Street Side Location
Lock Street South From a point 120 feet east of the
corner of Chandler Street east to the
railroad overpass
Walnut Street East From Mulberry Street south to a point
60 feet from Kinsley Street
Walnut Street West From Mulberry Street to Kinsley
Street
Whitney Street North From Salam Street east for a distance
of 70 feet
J. Parking shall be limited to two hours daily, 8:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.,
except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, on the following streets:
[Added 2-8-2011 by Ord. No. O-10-45]
Name of Street Side Location
Main Street West 4 parking spaces north of the
northwest corner of Main Street
Bridge
105. Editor's Note: Former § 320-39, Ten-hour parking, was repealed 6-28-2011 by Ord. No.
O-11-71.
§ 320-38 NASHUA CODE § 320-40
306:1182
ARTICLE XI
Parking Meters
§ 320-41. Definitions.
The following terms, when used in this article, shall have the following
meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
PARKING — The stopping of a vehicle upon a restricted street otherwise
than in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals for a period
longer than reasonably necessary to load or unload passengers or freight.
PARKING LOT — Any municipally controlled property or structure
designated for the parking of motor vehicles, whether for a fee or at no
charge.
PARKING METER — That mechanism having a fee-receiving and a feeactuating
mechanism all enclosed and mounted on top of a post, including
electrical and/or mechanical devices designed to indicate entrance or
expiration time to a parking space. Any use of the term "parking meter"
or "metered" in this article can also mean a parking pay station as the
mechanism to pay for the use of a parking space for a period of
time.[Amended 11-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-88]
PARKING METER ZONE — Any restricted street, parking garage or parking
lot upon which parking meters are installed and in operation.
RESTRICTED STREET — That part of any public street, avenue, road,
boulevard, highway or other public place established for the use of vehicles
within the City and with parking restricted to a limited period only.
VEHICLE — Any device in, upon or by which any person or property may be
or is transported upon a highway.
§ 320-42. Purpose; operation of meters.
§ 320-43. Use of fees.
The revenue derived from the use of meters shall be expended to finance
the purchase, maintenance and policing of such meters, or to maintain and
improve streets and highways, or to acquire, construct, improve, maintain
and manage public parking areas and public transportation systems, or for
A. The purpose of this article is to assure the general public a free use of
the City's streets by regulating and enforcing the privilege of parking
and thereby hastening the departure of parked vehicles on restricted
streets and to aid parking enforcement and the police in enforcing
regulations governing the parking of vehicles. [Amended 10-9-2018
by Ord. No. O-18-023]
B. Parking a vehicle within a parking zone for a period of time not longer
than the established time limit shall be permitted only upon the
payment of a fee, as designated on the parking meter. [Amended
11-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-88]
§ 320-41 TOWING § 320-43
306:1183
any combination of the foregoing purposes, but for no purpose not expressly
authorized in this section.
§ 320-43.1. Funding for downtown improvements. [Added 8-9-2011
by Ord. No. O-11-76]
Starting with the FY2013 budget, an amount equivalent to the sum of any
parking revenue received over and above $728,000 shall be appropriated
annually in the budget to be used for the purpose of improving the
Downtown - 1 zoning district. Uses of these funds shall include, but not be
limited to, improvements to infrastructure, beautification, and marketing
and promotion. The time frame for the calculation of the amount shall be
January 1 to December 31. Beginning in 2013, if at the end of the year
the parking revenue shall fall below $1,128,000 or exceed $1,378,000, the
Board of Aldermen shall review the amount of $728,000 above, and adjust
that amount as necessary.
§ 320-43.2. Downtown Improvements Committee. [Added 8-9-2011
by Ord. No. O-11-76]
A. There shall be a Downtown Improvements Committee consisting of 11
members and two alternates, who shall advise the Mayor as to how to
appropriate the funding for downtown improvements. The final
determination of what purpose or purposes the funding shall be used
for shall be determined by the Mayor and the Board of Aldermen
through the regular budget process. The Committee shall also provide
recommendations on matters impacting downtown. [Amended
10-24-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-041]
B. The members of the Committee appointed by the Mayor shall serve for
three-year terms. The initial appointments shall be made for terms of
one, two, and three years so that the members' terms will be staggered.
The members of the Committee shall be as follows:
(1) The Economic Development Director, whose term shall be
commensurate with his or her employment with the City.
(2) The Mayor shall appoint and the Board of Aldermen shall confirm
four members who shall be City residents, and at least one of those
four residents shall live within the Downtown - 1 zoning district.
(3) The Mayor shall appoint and the Board of Aldermen shall confirm
four members who shall be any of the following: consumers of
businesses or nonprofits located within the Downtown -1 zoning
district; business owners or employees of businesses located within
the Downtown - 1 zoning district; nonprofit employees or
volunteers doing work within the Downtown - 1 zoning district;
owners of property located within the Downtown - 1 zoning district;
or residents that live within the Downtown - 1 zoning district.
§ 320-43 NASHUA CODE § 320-43.2
306:1184
§ 320-44. Exceptions.
§ 320-45. Installation and maintenance of meters. [Amended
11-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-88; 9-12-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-020]
Parking meters shall be installed, operated, maintained, policed and
supervised on the restricted streets, lots and garages as designated in
this chapter. Such parking meters shall be so devised and regulated as to
provide for parking periods not in excess of the legal time limit within the
restricted streets, lots and garages.
§ 320-46. Meter specifications.
Each parking meter installed shall indicate by proper legend the legal
parking time.
§ 320-47. Parking meter and reserved space fees; permits; meter
bags.
(4) The Mayor shall appoint and the Board of Aldermen shall confirm
two additional members who are either a City resident who lives
within the Downtown - 1 zoning district or a business owner of a
business located within the Downtown - 1 zoning district. [Added
10-24-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-041106]
(5) The Mayor shall appoint and the Board of Aldermen shall confirm
two alternates to the Committee, one who meets the requirements
of Subsection B(2) and one who meets the requirements of
Subsection B(3). [Added 10-24-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-041]
(6) The Committee shall also have a nonvoting Aldermanic liaison and
alternate who shall be appointed by the President of the Board of
Aldermen.
A. This article shall not apply to the Police Department or Fire Department
of the City.
B. The Chief of Police, upon due cause shown, may permit the use of the
restricted area free from any cost to the user.
C. Aldermen shall be entitled to receive a parking sticker or placard for
their vehicle which entitles them to park in parking meter spaces for
free while they are conducting City business.
A. The parking fee for all public metered parking lots, garages and
metered on-street parking shall be as follows: [Amended 6-28-2011
by Ord. No. O-11-71]
(1) In Zone I, $0.25 per 15 minutes.
106. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection B(4) as Subsection
B(6).
§ 320-43.2 TOWING § 320-47
306:1185
(2) In Zone II, $0.25 per 20 minutes.
(3) In Zone III, $0.25 per 30 minutes.
(a) The parking fees in Subsection A(3) above, which includes the
metered spaces in the Elm Street and High Street parking
garages, shall not be enforced from December 10, 2018,
through January 4, 2019. [Added 11-12-2014 by Ord. No.
O-14-008; amended 9-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-054;
12-13-2016 by Ord. No. O-16-023; 11-28-2017 by Ord.
No. O-17-052; 10-9-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-022]
B. Multi-day parking permits can be purchased for metered spaces in the
Elm Street parking garage at a cost of $10 per day. Prepaid monthly
permitted garage spaces shall be $30 per month for rooftop spaces or
$45 per month for street- or middle-level spaces. City Hall employees
shall be provided free parking on the second and third levels of the Elm
Street parking garage. The foregoing notwithstanding, the monthly fee
for persons aged 62 and greater residing within 300 feet of either the
High Street or Elm Street parking garage shall be $25 per month. Up to
eight residents of Dalianis House may obtain a prepaid yearly permitted
rooftop space in the High Street parking garage for $10 per year. The
Parking Department Manager, or a person designated by said Manager
shall maintain a record and validate the name, address and age of those
persons who are eligible as indicated in this section. The daily time limit
for which all of these reserved parking spaces are leased shall be from
7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. daily. The reserved parking space regulations
shall not apply on Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays. [Amended
1-26-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-04; 6-28-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-71;
9-9-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-058; 10-9-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-023]
C. Issuance of permits.
(1) The Aldermanic Infrastructure Committee may, upon request by
owners or tenants of property or employers of businesses located
within a reasonable distance of Temple Street, Riverside Park,
Library, Water Street, Pearson Avenue, Maple Street, High Street
(behind 55 taxi stand), Spring Street, Factory Street, and Crown
Street Park and Ride municipal parking lots, authorize the issuance
of reserved parking permits, provided that an ample number of
unused spaces are available on a regular basis to accommodate
such reserved spaces. The fee for each parking space shall be $50
per month, payable on a quarterly basis if issued to a business or
corporation and on a monthly basis if issued to an individual. The
daily time limit for which these reserved parking spaces are leased
shall be from 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. daily. The reserved parking
space regulations shall not apply on Saturdays, Sundays and legal
holidays. [Amended 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-021]
(2) Requests for such reserved spaces shall be made to the Parking
Department Manager, or a person designated by said Manager,
§ 320-47 NASHUA CODE § 320-47
306:1186
who shall forward the request to the Infrastructure Committee.
If the Infrastructure Committee determines that adequate unused
spaces exist, then it may authorize the issuance of permits by
the Parking Department Manager, or a person designated by said
Manager. [Amended 1-26-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-04;
10-9-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-023]
(3) Once approved by the Infrastructure Committee and payment of
the permit fee is made, the person making the request shall obtain
a permit from the Parking Department Manager, or a person
designated by said Manager. The permit fee shall be paid in
advance of the permit period. The applicant shall complete an
application form, which shall indicate the applicant's name,
business and residence address and telephone numbers for which
the permit is to be issued, the expiration date, and the name of the
parking lot for which the permit issued. The City will provide a card
or other device identifying the location of the parking lot for which
the permit is issued, the name of the company leasing the parking
space, and the date of expiration of the permit. [Amended
1-26-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-04; 10-9-2018 by Ord. No.
O-18-023]
(4) Parking permits shall be displayed on the driver's side of the
dashboard of the vehicle for which the permit is issued and shall be
positioned so as to be easily seen through the windshield of the
vehicle. Vehicles may only be parked in spaces designated for
reserved parking and only within the area specified on their permit
and on the posted signing.
(5) Permits are not transferable, and the permit holder is responsible
for ensuring a timely renewal of the permit. Permits may be
revoked by the Parking Department Manager, or a person
designated by said Manager, upon the giving of sufficient notice to
the permit holder. [Amended 1-26-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-04;
10-9-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-023]
(6) Vehicles which do not properly display a valid permit shall be
subject to the penalties of this chapter.
D. The Parking Department Manager, or a person designated by said
Manager, is authorized to issue meter bags or traffic cones to the
owners/operators of downtown businesses for the purpose of
facilitating construction renovation or weddings. Unless used by the
City or for funerals or weddings, each meter bag or traffic cone shall
cost $10 per day, per space, paid in advance. The person using the
meter bag or traffic cone shall remove it after the authorized period of
use has expired and return them to the Parking Department Manager.
No meter bag shall be issued for a period longer than two weeks, at
which time a business may apply for an extension of time. No more than
four parking spaces for no more than two hours may be reserved per
wedding. [Amended 1-26-2010 by Ord. No. O-10-04; 6-28-2011 by
§ 320-47 TOWING § 320-47
306:1187
§ 320-48. Parking meter lots. [Amended 6-28-2011 by Ord. No.
O-11-71]
The following described areas lying within the corporate limits of the City
are designated as public parking areas and shall constitute parking meter
lots in the listed zones:
Ord. No. O-11-71; 11-24-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-060; 10-9-2018
by Ord. No. O-18-023]
E. Upon authorization by the Infrastructure Committee, the City may lease
parking lots or spaces to non-City entities at a rate approved by the
Infrastructure Committee. Notwithstanding this subsection, the City
leases 100 parking spaces to the Senior Activity Center for free.
F. (Reserved)107
G. Agreements for reserved parking spaces in City-owned parking lots and
garages shall be subject to the following conditions:
(1) Motor vehicles parked in such spaces must have valid, unexpired
registration and inspection.
(2) No repair or maintenance shall be performed on motor vehicles
parked in such spaces, except for emergency measures
necessitated by an unforeseen breakdown and necessary to render
a vehicle operable.
H. In addition to revocation of reserved-space parking permits by the
Aldermanic Infrastructure Committee, owners and operators of motor
vehicles parked in violation of Subsection G shall be subject to fine
under § 1-12 of the Code of the City of Nashua, and such vehicles shall
be subject to towing at the owner's expense.
A. 108Zone II.
(1) Railroad Square parking lot.
(2) Le Parc de Notre Renaissance Francaise parking lot.
(3) Pearson Avenue parking lot.
(4) Spring Street parking lot.
(5) Library parking lot (west half of lot).
(6) City Hall parking lot (west and south of City Hall, north of Nashua
Heritage Rail Trail).109
107. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, which stated when increased parking meter and
reserved space fees enacted by Ord. No. 02-62 would take effect, was repealed 6-28-2011
by Ord. No. O-11-71.
108. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, Zone I, was repealed 11-26-2013 by Ord. No.
O-13-063. This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections B and
C as Subsections A and B, respectively.
§ 320-47 NASHUA CODE § 320-48
306:1188
§ 320-49. Time limits in parking lots.
§ 320-50. Parking time limits on streets. [Amended 6-28-2011 by
Ord. No. O-11-71]
(7) Garden Street parking lot (north and east of Elm Street parking
garage). [Added 11-26-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-063]
(8) Factory Street parking lot. [Added 11-26-2013 by Ord. No.
O-13-063]
(9) High Street parking lot. [Added 11-26-2013 by Ord. No.
O-13-063]
(10)Water Street parking lot. [Added 11-26-2013 by Ord. No.
O-13-063]
B. Zone III.
(1) Maple Street parking lot.
(2) School Street parking lot.
(3) Library parking lot (east half of lot).
(4) Elm Street parking garage (street level only). [Added 11-22-2011
by Ord. No. O-11-88]
(5) High Street parking garage (street level only). [Added
11-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-88]
A. Time limits in parking lots shall be as follows: [Amended 6-28-2011
by Ord. No. O-11-71]
(1) 110In Zone II, from 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., daily, except for
Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, with a one-hundredtwenty-
minute time limit. [Amended 8-24-2011 by Ord. No.
O-11-81; 10-8-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-053]
(2) In Zone III, from 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., daily, except for Saturdays,
Sundays, and legal holidays, with no time limit. [Amended
8-24-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-81; 10-8-2013 by Ord. No.
O-13-053]
B. Overnight parking of private passenger vehicles shall be permitted in
all public parking lots between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
[Amended 10-8-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-053]
109. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(7), Elm Street parking garage, and B(8), High Street
parking garage, were repealed 11-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-88.
110. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(1), regarding Zone 1, as amended, was repealed
11-26-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-063. This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of
former Subsections A(2) and (3) as Subsections A(1) and (2), respectively.
§ 320-48 TOWING § 320-50
306:1189
§ 320-51. Parking meter streets. [Amended 11-25-2008 by Ord. No.
O-08-47; 6-28-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-71; 11-22-2011 by Ord. No.
O-11-88]
The following streets are designated as parking meter streets in the listed
zones, and authority is hereby granted to install and maintain parking
meters on these streets in appropriate locations:
A. Except as otherwise provided, the time limit during which the parking
meter regulations shall be effective in streets shall be as follows:
(1) In Zone I and Zone II: from 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. daily. [Amended
8-24-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-81; 10-8-2013 by Ord. No.
O-13-053]
(2) In Zone III: from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. daily. [Amended
10-8-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-053]
B. In Zone I, the parking meter regulations shall not apply on Sundays and
legal holidays, and no deposit shall be required in the meter. In Zone II
and Zone III, the parking meter regulations shall not apply on
Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, and no deposit shall be
required in the meter. [Amended 8-24-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-81]
C. 111The parking time limit on all parking meter streets shall be as
follows:
(1) In Zone I: ninety-minute time limit.
(2) In Zone II: one-hundred-twenty-minute time limit.
(3) In Zone III: no time limit.
A. Zone I.
Name of Street Side Location
East Pearl Street Both Between Main Street and Spring
Street
Factory Street South From the Factory Street parking lot
to the High Street parking garage
Garden Street
[Amended
12-22-2015 by Ord.
No. O-15-078]
West Adjacent to the Elm Street Parking
Garage, excluding spaces reserved
for use of the transit system
High Street Both Between Walnut Street and Main
Street
111. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C, which listed an exception to parking meter
regulations on a certain portion of Main Street, on election days only, was repealed
9-12-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-020. This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of
former Subsection D as Subsection C.
§ 320-50 NASHUA CODE § 320-51
306:1190
Name of Street Side Location
Main Street Both Between East and West Hollis
Streets and Franklin and Canal
Streets, with the exception of that
portion of the west side of Main
Street commencing at the south line
of the premises at 221 Main Street,
and extending north a distance of 25
feet
Spring Street East Between East Pearl Street and
Eldridge Street
Temple Street Both Between Main Street and Spring
Street
West Pearl Street Both Between Main Street and Elm Street
B. Zone II.
Name of Street Side Location
Court Street Both Between Temple Street and Park
Street
Elm Street Both Between West Pearl Street and
Pleasant Street
Factory Street South From Water Street to the Factory
Street parking lot
Franklin Street South Between Main Street and Front
Street
Main Street Both Between Franklin and Canal Streets
and Amherst Street
Railroad Square North From Main Street east to the exit
from the Railroad Square parking lot
Railroad Square South From Main Street to the west line of
Orange Street projected
Railroad Square and
Deschenes Oval
Both Between Canal Street and Clinton
Street
School Street North
and west
Between Walnut Street and High
Street
Spring Street Both Between Temple Street and East
Pearl Street
Spring Street East Between the south and north
entrances to the United States Post
Office
Water Street South Between Main Street and Factory
Street
§ 320-51 TOWING § 320-51
306:1191
Name of Street Side Location
West Hollis Street Both Between Main Street and Maple
Street
West Pearl Street Both Between Elm Street and Walnut
Street
C. Zone III.
Name of Street Side Location
Canal Street South Between the west line of Orange
Street projected and the west line of
the west portion of Nashua Drive
Church Street Both Between Cottage Street and Court
Street
Clinton Street Both Between Lowell Street and Railroad
Square
Cottage Street
[Repealed
11-28-2017 by Ord.
No. O-17-049]
Cottage Street
[Repealed
11-28-2017 by Ord.
No. O-17-049]
East Hollis Street
[Amended 3-9-2015
by Ord. No.
O-15-041]
North Between Spring Street and Main
Street
East Hollis Street North Between Quincy Street and Mason
Street
East Pearl Street North Between Spring Street and Holmes
Street
East Pearl Street South Between Spring Street and Quincy
Street
Elm Street Both Between Pleasant Street and
Mulberry Street
Factory Street South From Walnut Street to Water Street
Lowell Street Both Between Main Street and Clinton
Street
Quincy Street
[Repealed
12-23-2013 by Ord.
No. O-13-058]
§ 320-51 NASHUA CODE § 320-51
306:1192
§ 320-52. Presumptions.
§ 320-53. Use by multiple vehicles.
Any designated parking meter space may be used by more than one but not
to exceed three motorcycles, mopeds or similar motor vehicles, provided
that the meter fee is paid in accordance with this article, and provided that
no vehicle using the space extends outside the space designated.
Name of Street Side Location
Temple Street
[Amended
11-22-2011 by Ord.
No. O-11-89]
Both Between Spring Street and Cottage
Street
West Hollis Street Both Between Maple Street and Beech
Street
A. The fact that time has expired on any parking meter shall be
presumptive evidence that the person who parked the vehicle then
found standing in the parking space controlled by the meter failed to
pay a fee as required therein; and the indication by the meter of illegal
parking shall be presumptive evidence of overtime parking. [Amended
11-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-88]
B. Any overtime parking violation under this article shall raise the
presumption that the vehicle involved was operated by the person in
whose name the vehicle is registered.
§ 320-51 TOWING § 320-53
306:1193

ARTICLE XII
Parking, Stopping and Standing
§ 320-54. Parking on sidewalks.
§ 320-55. Parking by authorized vehicles only in designated areas.
§ 320-56. Parking in front of private driveways. [Amended
10-13-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-069]
§ 320-57. Safety zones.
No vehicle shall enter or remain in any part of a highway established and
designated as a safety zone by the Police Department.
§ 320-58. Emergency lanes.
A. No person shall at any time park an automobile, van, motorcycle or
other motor vehicle on any sidewalk in the City for any period of time or
obstruct any sidewalk in any way.
B. Anyone violating this provision shall be fined a minimum of $50. If not
paid within seven days, the fine shall increase to $60.
A. No parking shall be allowed in any duly designated municipal employee
parking lot during the hours of City Hall operation except by authorized
vehicles displaying an appropriate parking decal. However, no parking
shall be allowed in the duly designated library municipal employee
parking lot during the hours of library operation except by authorized
vehicles displaying an appropriate parking decal. [Amended
9-12-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-020]
B. On the Elm Street Junior High property, no parking shall be allowed
between 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on days when school is in session
except by authorized vehicles displaying an appropriate parking decal.
A. At no time shall any vehicle be stationed in front of any private
driveway, or within two feet of any private driveway on either side
thereof, or across the street from any driveway so as to impede the free
movement of vehicles using such private driveway. Any vehicles parked
in violation of this section may be towed or moved as directed by the
Chief of Police or his or her designee(s).
B. Anyone violating this provision shall be fined $50, and shall be
responsible for the cost of towing or moving fees. If not paid within
seven days, the fine shall increase by $10 to $60.
A. For places of public assembly, or any structure with a gross first-floor
area of over 3,000 square feet, the Fire Chief and Police Chief, upon a
joint determination that a hazardous or potentially hazardous condition
exists or may exist, may require the establishment of emergency lanes
within any private way or private parking lot to prohibit parking within
§ 320-54 TOWING § 320-58
306:1195
§ 320-59. Parking near fire hydrants.
§ 320-60. Parking near stop signs.
§ 320-61. Parking in school zones.
There shall be no parking or stopping in a school zone during school hours:
said emergency lanes. These provisions shall apply to both new and
existing buildings, excluding single-family residences, but including
planned residential developments and condominium developments,
whether single-family or not, and are for the purpose of providing
access by emergency vehicles.
B. Within established emergency lanes prohibiting parking, the Fire Chief
and Police Chief may require the words "No Parking—Fire Lane" to be
painted and maintained by the owner on the macadam of the way or lot
in standard traffic-safety-size letters. In conjunction with the painting,
the Police Chief and Fire Chief may require the owner to install and
maintain signs reading "No Parking—Fire Lane—Tow Zone" in
conspicuous places but at a distance of no closer than every 50 feet
Such markings and sign installations shall be accomplished not later
than 60 days after written notification by the Police Chief and Fire Chief
that they are required and the specifications which are to be followed.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be fined a minimum of $100. Each discrete instance or each
day that such violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. The
Police Department may, in addition, cause any vehicle parked in an
emergency lane, other than attended delivery trucks actively loading or
unloading merchandise and not substantially interfering with vehicle
movements in the emergency lane, to be towed from such emergency
lane at the expense of the owner of such vehicle.
A. No vehicle shall be stationed, without its driver, within 15 feet of any
fire hydrant upon any street.
B. Any person who violates this section shall be fined a minimum of $50.
A. At no time shall any vehicle be stationed within 25 feet of a stop sign.
B. Any person who violates this section shall be fined a minimum of $25.
A. Between duly erected signs stating "No Parking Between Signs During
School Hours." The following street(s) shall have no parking during
school hours:
§ 320-58 NASHUA CODE § 320-61
306:1196
§ 320-61.1. Parking on school property. [Added 5-27-2014 by Ord.
No. O-14-016]
§ 320-62. No parking between signs where indicated.
Name of Street Side Location
Sargent Avenue North 135 feet from its intersection with
Amherst Street east a distance of 915
feet to its intersection with Dartmouth
Street
B. In school bus loops having posted signs at entrances or in pathways.
Restricted parking includes but is not limited to:
Name of Street Side Location
-- -- Fairgrounds Elementary School: one
way sign at entrance on Cleveland
Street into bus loop
-- -- Fairgrounds Elementary School:
sign(s) posted declaring "Do Not Enter
Between the Hours of 7:15 a.m.—8:20
a.m. and 2:15 p.m.—2:50 p.m."
Arlington Street East From a point 160 feet south of the
south edge of Bowers Street for a
distance of 200 feet
Cleveland Street
[Added 1-12-2010
by Ord. No.
O-10-01]
North Fairgrounds Elementary School: bus
parking only along the north side of
Cleveland Street from the eastern most
entrance of Fairgrounds Elementary
School easterly for a distance of 125
feet
C. Vehicles are not permitted in bus loops when buses are present.
A. No parking shall be permitted on school property which has been
designated by the Superintendent of schools as parking by permit only
and marked as such, except by vehicles displaying the required parking
permit.
B. No parking shall be permitted on school property which has been
designated by the Superintendent of schools as parking for staff and/or
faculty only and marked as such, except by members of the staff or
faculty.
A. There shall be no parking whatsoever between duly erected signs
stating "No Parking Between Signs."
B. The following shall be "No Parking Between Signs" areas:
§ 320-61 TOWING § 320-62
306:1197
§ 320-63. Parking at bus stops.
Name of Street Side Location
Chandler Street West From Salvail Court north a distance of
200 feet
Danforth Road -- At the end of the road in an area
immediately in front of the fire lane
gate
Eighth Street East and
west
From a point 15 feet from the end of
the road to the end of the road
Lowell Street
[Added 5-12-2015
by Ord. No.
O-15-048]
North Between 95 feet east of Lock Street
and 115 feet east of Lock Street
Lund Road NortheastAt the entrance of the driveway to the
rear parking lot of Bishop Guertin
High School for a distance of 75 feet
on each side of said driveway
Progress Avenue
[Added
11-22-2011 by
Ord. No. O-11-90]
South Beginning 75 feet east of the
westernmost driveway to 15 Progress
Avenue and extending east a distance
of 30 feet
Railroad Square South From a point 42 feet east of the east
edge of the pedestrian crossing lane at
the intersection of Orange Street and
Railroad Square for a distance of 20
feet
Railroad Square South From a point 39 feet west of the west
edge of the pedestrian crossing lane at
the intersection of Orange Street and
Railroad Square for a distance of 20
feet
Tolles Street East From the Public Service Company Pole
No. 51 south a distance of
approximately 30 feet
West Hollis Street South From 100 feet west of Chestnut Street
west a distance of approximately 125
feet (St. Louis Church entrance)
Whipple Street -- For a width of 20 feet at the north end
of the Whipple Street cul-de-sac, at
the front of the bridge to Mines Falls
soccer fields
A. There shall be no parking, standing or stopping at:
(1) Public bus stops.
§ 320-62 NASHUA CODE § 320-63
306:1198
§ 320-64. Parking near polling places.
During the voting hours on election days, no person shall park a vehicle in
front of the entrance to the polling place in each ward, for a distance of
100 feet on each side of the entrance, except for the purpose of voting. Two
spaces shall be reserved for use by the elderly and handicapped and shall
be so designated by temporary signs.
§ 320-65. Parking near street corners.
§ 320-66. Obstructing traffic.
(2) School bus stops:
(a) Bishop Guertin School: Almont Street, east side, adjacent to
school entrance.
(b) Mount Pleasant School: Manchester Street, west side, from
Mount Pleasant Street to French Street.
B. There shall be no parking whatsoever at bus stops with posted "no
parking" signs for a distance of 40 feet.
C. Anyone in violation of this provision shall be fined $50. If not paid within
seven days, the fine shall increase by $10 to $60.112
A. No person shall park or otherwise leave a vehicle unattended adjacent
to the curb or the edge of the pavement within 25 feet of the
intersection of any street, with the exception of the following
specifically named streets: [Amended 11-13-2012 by Ord. No.
O-12-025]
(1) Parking shall be prohibited within two feet of the northwest corner
of the intersection of Elm Street and Cedar Street.
(2) Parking shall be prohibited within 15 feet of the northeast corner of
the intersection of Canal Street and Cross Street (along Canal
Street). [Added 3-9-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-039]
(3) Parking shall be prohibited within 10 feet of the northeast corner of
the intersection of Lowell Street and Lock Street (along Lowell
Street). [Added 5-12-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-048]
B. Any person who violates this section shall be fined a minimum of $25.
A. No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless
there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or
crosswalk to accommodate the vehicles already in the intersection or
112. Editor's Note: Original Section 13-281, which immediately followed this section and
pertained to parking adjacent to theaters, as amended 3-13-1978 by Ord. No. O-78-17, was
repealed 9-13-2004 by Ord. No. O-04-33.
§ 320-63 TOWING § 320-66
306:1199
§ 320-67. Parking during snow emergency or snow-removal
operations; snow-removal schedules; towing and storage fees.
§ 320-68. No parking or stopping on certain streets.
the crosswalk and the vehicle being operated by the driver,
notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed
B. Any person violating the requirements of this section shall be fined a
minimum of $100.
A. No person shall park or leave a motor vehicle on any public way or in a
public parking lot, excluding City-owned parking garages, during a
snow emergency, as declared by the Mayor or Director of Public Works.
Penalty for violation shall be a minimum of $100. Any vehicle left
parked on any public way or in a public parking lot, excluding Cityowned
parking garages, during a snow emergency may be towed as
directed by the Chief of Police or his or her designee(s).
B. No person shall park or leave a motor vehicle on any public way in the
City during snow-removal operations. Snow-removal schedules shall be
posted in public ways at least three hours before the snow-removal
operations are to commence. Penalty for violation shall be a minimum of
$50. Any vehicle which impedes the snow-removal process may be
towed as directed by the Chief of Police or his or her designee(s).
C. No person shall park or leave a motor vehicle in a public parking lot
during snow-removal or plowing operations. Snow-removal or plowing
schedules shall be posted in public parking lots at least eight hours
before the snow-removal or plowing operations are to commence.
Penalty for violation shall be a minimum of $100. Any vehicle left
parked in any public parking lot during snow-removal or plowing
operations may be towed or moved, as directed by the Chief of Police or
his or her designee(s).
D. The owner of any towed or moved vehicle is responsible for the cost of
towing or moving fees and all other costs associated with towing or
moving. Said fine and any towing or moving costs must be satisfactorily
paid in full prior to the vehicle being released to its owner. After 24
hours, the vehicle will be subject to a daily storage fee.113 [Amended
10-13-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-069]
A. No parking or stopping of any vehicle shall be permitted on the
following streets:
113. Editor's Note: Original Section 13-286, which immediately followed this section and
pertained to reserved parking, as amended 5-1-1978 by Ord. No. O-78-36 and 8-8-1978 by
Ord. No. O-78-33, was repealed 10-14-2003 by Ord. No. O-03-202.
§ 320-66 NASHUA CODE § 320-68
306:1200
Name of Street Side Location
Balcom Street
[Repealed
9-13-2011 by Ord.
No. O-11-79]
Bartlett Avenue North Between Concord Street and
Wellington Street
Caldwell Road Southeast From Fairview Avenue to Demanche
Street
Canal Street North From the east line of Amory Street
projected westerly to the west line of
Salvail Court
Canal Street North From the west line of Grove Street to
the east line of Lowell Street
Canal Street North From the west line of Orange Street
to the exit of the Railroad Square
parking lot
Canal Street South From the west line of Armory Street
west to the east line of the projection
of Reeds Court
Coliseum Avenue Both From Broad Street to Lincoln Park
Cross Street West From the north line of Lock Street
northerly for a distance of 130 feet
East Hollis Street
[Amended
3-9-2015 by Ord.
No. O-15-041]
South Between Main Street and Medical
Center Drive, plus an additional 262
feet east from the easterly curbline of
Medical Center Drive
East Pearl Street
[Added 9-12-2018
by Ord. No.
O-18-020]
South Beginning at a point 75 feet west of
Spring Street and extending westerly
a distance of 20 feet to a point 95 feet
west of East Pearl Street
Elm Street parking
garage area
Both Both sides of the entrance to the south
end of the parking garage on the
newly relocated Garden Street from
Elm Street east to the present Garden
Street
Graham Drive South From Daniel Webster Highway
easterly for a distance of 245 feet
Groton Road Both Starting at its beginning at Main
Dunstable Road southwesterly to a
point 1,500 feet from the southwest
corner of the intersection of Main
Dunstable Road and Old Ridge Road
§ 320-68 TOWING § 320-68
306:1201
Name of Street Side Location
Hills Ferry Road East Between Canal Street and Whitney
Street
Hills Ferry Road South From the east line of Concord Street
easterly for a distance of 50 feet
Ledge Street North East of the elementary school front
driveway, from the east line of said
driveway easterly for a distance of 100
feet
Le Pare de Notre
Renaissance
Francaise parking
lot
NorthwestAt the northwest end, starting at the
northwesterly line of Clocktower
Place's rear driveway, northeasterly
for a distance of 180 feet
Lutheran Drive Both 50 feet from the intersection of Broad
Street and Lutheran Drive
Main Dunstable
Road
Both Starting at the southwest corner of the
intersection of Main Dunstable Road
and Old Ridge Road, southwesterly to
the beginning of Groton Road
Medical Center
Drive
Both From Main Street to East Hollis Street
Merrimack Street East From Amherst Street a distance of 50
feet north
Osgood Road South Starting at a point 470 feet east of
South Main Street for a distance of
280 feet, ending at the property line of
Sunset Heights Elementary School
Otterson Street North From Main Street to Elm Street
Otterson Street South Between Chestnut Street and Elm
Street, except from a point 85 feet
from the intersection with Elm Street
extending westerly for a distance of 80
feet
Railroad Square North From Main Street east to Orange
Street
Railroad Square South From Main Street east for a distance
of 225 feet
Spruce Street West From Temple Street southerly to the
railroad right-of-way
Walnut Street East From the northeast corner of Kinsley
Street northerly for a distance of 60
feet
§ 320-68 NASHUA CODE § 320-68
306:1202
§ 320-69. No parking on certain streets.
No parking whatsoever shall be permitted on the following streets, except
as provided by law:
Name of Street Side Location
Abbott Street Both From Hopkins Street extended 100 feet
Abbott Street East From Mt. Pleasant Street southerly to
Greely Street
Abbott Street
[Added 9-27-2011
by Ord. No.
O-11-82; amended
11-26-2013 by Ord.
No. O-13-054]
West From Amherst Street to French Street
Aetna Court [Added
9-9-2008 by Ord.
No. O-08-30]
Both Entire length
Allds Street North From Main Street east a distance of 135
feet
Allds Street West Between Gillis Street and McKean
Street
Name of Street Side Location
Whitford Road -- Starting at the southeast corner of
Musket Drive and Whitford Road
southerly for a distance of 350 feet
B. No parking or stopping of any vehicle shall be permitted on the
following streets between the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00
p.m. to 3:30 p.m., except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays:
Name of Street Side Location
Birch Hill Drive Both Between Dunbarton Drive and the
Birch Hill Elementary School
Dunbarton Drive Both From its intersection with Birch Hill
Drive north for a distance of 50 feet
Rosecliff Drive East From its intersection with
Bicentennial Drive south for a
distance of 400 feet
C. No parking or stopping of any vehicle shall be permitted on the
following streets on Saturdays, Sundays or holidays:
Name of Street Side Location
Harvard Street North From the easterly corner of Allds
Street easterly a distance of 75 feet
§ 320-68 TOWING § 320-69
306:1203
Name of Street Side Location
Almont Street North From Lund Road to Forest Park Drive
Almont Street Northerly 100 feet in an easterly direction and
100 feet in a westerly direction from the
center line of the Hassel Brook culvert
Almont Street Southeast From Lund Road to Alan Street
Alstead Avenue South Entire length
Amherst Street Both From Everett Turnpike west to Cotton
Road
Amherst Street North From Concord Street west to 80 feet
west of the Edgewood Cemetery
entrance
Amherst Street South From a point on the south line of
Amherst Street, being 213 feet
measured north along the west line of
Main Street and west along the south
line of Amherst Street, from the
junction point of the west line of Main
Street and the north line of Fletcher
Street for a distance of 105 feet
Amherst Street South From Beacon Street for a distance of
160 feet east
Amherst Street South From Putnam Street westerly a distance
of 400 feet
Arlington Avenue South and
east
Entire length
Arlington Street East From the junction point of the east line
of Arlington Street and the south line of
Crown Street south for a distance of 100
feet
Arlington Street East From Crown Street to East Hollis Street
Arlington Street East From Edgewood Avenue south on
Amherst Street for a distance of 50 feet
Arlington Street West From East Hollis Street to Harvard
Street
Artillery Lane East and
south
From Sargent Avenue to the east end of
the Stadium fence
Ash Street Both From West Hollis Street a distance of 75
feet north
Ash Street Both From West Hollis Street a distance of 40
feet south
Ash Street East Between Lake Street and Brook Street
§ 320-69 NASHUA CODE § 320-69
306:1204
Name of Street Side Location
Atherton Avenue West From Lock Street to the intersection of
Avon Drive
Atherton Avenue East From Lock Street a distance of 100 feet
north
Atwood Court West Entire length
Auburn Street
[Added 11-12-2013
by Ord. No.
12-23-2013]
South From Charles Street to Locust Street
Badger Street West Entire length
Baldwin Street East From Amherst Street to Prescott Street
Beacon Street East Entire length
Beard Street West Entire length
Beech Street Both From Mulberry Street to West Hollis
Street
Beech Street West Between Pleasant Street and West
Hollis Street
Belknap Street West From Bridge Street to East Hollis Street
Belmont Street North Between Main Street and Elm Street
Blossom Street North Between Pine Street and Ritter Street
Bordeaux Street
[Added 3-11-2008
by Ord. No.
O-08-10]
Both Entire length
Bowers Street
[Added 11-24-2015
by Ord. No.
O-15-072]
North From Arlington Street to a point 100
feet easterly
Bowers Street North From Dearborn Street to Harbor
Avenue
Bowers Street South A distance of 50 feet from the southeast
line of Allds Street east
Bowers Street South From Allds Street to Arlington Street
Bowers Street South From Arlington Street east to the end of
Bowers Street
Bowers Street South From Main Street in an easterly
direction for a distance of 274 feet
Bowery Street South From Harbor Avenue west for a
distance of 90 feet
§ 320-69 TOWING § 320-69
306:1205
Name of Street Side Location
Bridge Street North From the east line of Amory Street
projected to the west end of Veterans
Memorial Bridge
Bridge Street South Between Belknap Street and C Street
Bridge Street South Between Belknap Street and E Street
Bridle Path Both Entire length
Broad Street North From Dublin Avenue west for 270 feet
Broad Street North Between Pine Hill Avenue and the
northeasterly terminus of Exit 6 of the
F.E. Everett Turnpike
Broad Street South Between Beaver Street and Denise
Street
Broad Street
Parkway/Pine Street
Extension [Added
11-13-2012 by Ord.
No. O-12-025]
Both From Broad Street to Central Street
Bruce Street East From Amherst Street to Prescott Street
Buchanan Street South From the east line of Main Street for a
distance of 85 feet east
Buck Street North From Palm Street to Chestnut Street
Buck Street [Added
7-8-2008 by Ord.
No. O-08-23]
South From Chestnut Street west a distance of
80 feet
Buck Street South From Palm Street to Ash Street
Burrit Street West Entire length
C Street West From Bridge Street to East Hollis Street
Caldwell Road East Entire length
Canal Street South Between the exit of the east parking lot
of Dunkin Donuts and Main Street
Caron Street East From Santerre Street north for a
distance of 100 feet
Cedar Street North From Elm Street to Walnut Street
Cellu Drive Both Entire length
Chandler Street East From Canal Street north to Linden
Street
Charles Street West From Franklin Street to Terrace Street
§ 320-69 NASHUA CODE § 320-69
306:1206
Name of Street Side Location
Charlotte Avenue
[Added 6-26-2012
by Ord. No.
O-12-013]
South From the Western driveway exit from
the Charlotte Street School westerly for
a distance of 150 feet
Chase Street Both From Crown Street to East Hollis Street
Chautauqua Avenue Both From Broad Street southwest for a
distance of 65 feet
Chestnut Street Both From West Hollis Street for a distance
of 75 feet north
Chestnut Street East From Factory Street to a point 50 feet
south
Chestnut Street East Between Lake Street and the Acton
Branch of the Boston and Maine
Railroad tracks
Chestnut Street East From West Hollis Street to Kinsley
Street
Chestnut Street West From the intersection of the north line
of Factory Street and the west line of
Chestnut Street to a point 50 feet south
of the south curb of Factory Street
projected
Chestnut Street West From West Hollis Street for a distance
of 100 feet south
Chuck Druding Drive
[Repealed
9-10-2013 by Ord.
No. O-13-047]
Church Street South From the line of Olive Street for a
distance of 200 feet east
Church Street South From the west line of Olive Street
discontinued to the west line of Cottage
Street
Clay Street West Entire length
Clement Street East From South Main Street to Orchard
Avenue
Clement Street West From South Main Street to Taft Street
Coliseum Avenue Both From Broad Street to Lincoln Park
Concord Street East Between Orange Street and Swart
Street
Concord Street West Between Amherst Street and Nashville
Street
§ 320-69 TOWING § 320-69
306:1207
Name of Street Side Location
Concord Street
[Added 7-12-2011
by Ord. No.
O-11-74]
West From the north edge of the Start House
driveway to a point 15 feet to the north
Copp Street West Entire length
Cottage Avenue North Entire length
Cottage Street West From the south line of Church Street
to the north line of Temple Street, west
side, and from the north line of Temple
Street in a northerly direction to the
Nashua River
Court Street East Between Church Street and Park Street
Court Street West From Park Street to a point 16 feet from
the northeast corner of the American
Legion Home
Court Street West From the north curbline of Temple
Street north a distance of 28 feet
Crescent Street North and
south
From Manchester Street for a distance
of 150 feet west
Cross Street West From a point 30 feet north of the
intersection of Canal Street for a
distance of 30 feet north
Crown Street North From Chase Street east a distance of
90 feet, north and south sides, and from
the railroad crossing to a point 100 feet
west
Danforth Road -- In and around the cul-de-sac at the west
end of Danforth Road
Danforth Road North From Daniel Webster Highway to the
dead end
Daniels Street North At its terminus
Daniel Webster
Highway South
Both Entire length
Dearborn Street East From East Hollis Street to Tyler Street
Dearborn Street East From Prospect Street southerly to
Bowers Street
Dearborn Street East From Tyler Street to Prospect Street
Dearborn Street West Between Tyler Street and Otterson
Street
Denton Street East From Crown Street to East Hollis Street
§ 320-69 NASHUA CODE § 320-69
306:1208
Name of Street Side Location
Depot Road [Added
2-8-2011 by Ord.
No. O-10-48]
Both From the Hollis town line south 670 feet
to the dead end
Dickerman Street North From Main Street east a distance of 75
feet
Downtown Connector
Trail
-- From Main Street to George Street
Dudley Street West From the corner of Linton Street north
to the property line of Sunset Heights
Elementary School
E Street West From Bridge Street to East Hollis Street
Earley Street Northwest Between Woodward Avenue and
Monroe Street
Earley Street Southeast Between Woodward Avenue and
Linwood Street
East Dunstable Road East From New Searles Road to the
southeast corner of Shelley Drive
East Dunstable Road North From Lund Road east a distance of 200
feet
East Dunstable Road West From New Searles Road to Mizoras
Drive
East Dunstable Road West From Spitbrook Road south for a
distance of 800 feet
East Hollis Street North From a point 100 feet west of the
westerly curbline of Arlington Street
extended easterly for a distance of 230
feet
East Hollis Street North From C Street east to the easterly
terminus of East Hollis Street
East Hollis Street North From the easterly curbline of Denton
Street extended easterly to Belknap
Street
East Hollis Street North From Main Street easterly to a point
300 feet west of the westerly curbline of
Arlington Street extended
East Hollis Street South From Hobbs Street easterly to the
easterly terminus of East Hollis Street
East Hollis Street
[Repealed 3-9-2015
by Ord. No.
O-15-041]
§ 320-69 TOWING § 320-69
306:1209
Name of Street Side Location
East Hollis Street South From a point 100 feet west of the
westerly curbline of Mason Street
extended easterly to Chase Street
East Hollis Street South From a point 50 feet west of the
westerly curbline of Quincy Street
extended easterly for a distance of 200
feet
East Pearl Street North From the corner of Cottage Street to the
junction of East Pearl Street and Temple
Street
Eaton Street West From the corner of Ledge Street
southerly to a point 110 feet from Ledge
Street
Eldridge Street North Entire length
Eldridge Street South From Spring Street west a distance of
50 feet
Elm Street East From West Hollis Street to Kinsley
Street
Elm Street East From West Hollis Street north to West
Pearl Street
Elm Street West From Oak Street to a point 35 feet in a
southerly direction
Euclid Avenue West From Savoy Street southerly for a
distance of 85 feet
Factory Street North From Main Street to Chestnut Street
Factory Street South From Main Street to the exit from the
parking garage
Fairmount Street North From the bridge west to Hillcrest Circle
Fairway Street North From South Main Street to Taylor Street
Faxon Street South From Main Street east for a distance of
150 feet
Ferryalls Court Both From Canal Street north for a distance
of 80 feet
Field Street South From Main Street to the end of Field
Street
First Street Both Entire length
Fletcher Street North From Beard Street to the west line of
Green Street
§ 320-69 NASHUA CODE § 320-69
306:1210
Name of Street Side Location
Fletcher Street North At a point opposite a three-stall garage
located in front of 21 Fletcher Street
(identified at "Fletcher Street, Two-
Hour Parking" as "the area lying
between 336 feet and 376.5 feet west of
Main Street")
Fletcher Street South Entire length
Fletcher Way Both From Otterson Street to Simoneau
Plaza
Foundry Street North From Holmes Street to Quincy Street
Foundry Street South Entire length
Franklin Street North From Main Street west to Green Street
Franklin Street South From the east intersection of Front
Street to the west intersection of Front
Street
Franklin Street South From Main Street westerly for a
distance of 112 feet
French Street South Entire length
Front Street
[Repealed
2-27-2018 by Ord.
No. O-18-001]
Front Street
[Repealed
2-27-2018 by Ord.
No. O-18-001]
Front Street
[Repealed
2-27-2018 by Ord.
No. O-18-001]
Front Street
[Repealed
2-27-2018 by Ord.
No. O-18-001]
Front Street [Added
2-27-2018 by Ord.
No. O-18-001]
Both Entire length
Fulton Street West Entire length
Garden Street South Entire length
Gillis Street South Beginning at the west curb cut of Gray's
Avenue for a distance of 50 feet in a
westerly direction
§ 320-69 TOWING § 320-69
306:1211
Name of Street Side Location
Gorman's Avenue East From Temple Street southerly for a
distance of 80 feet
Gorman's Avenue West From Hoyt's Lane to Temple Street
Grand Avenue North From North Seventh Street east for a
distance of 100 feet
Granite Street East From the north line of Lock Street to the
south line of Laton Street
Gray's Avenue West Entire length
Greeley Street Both From Merrimack Street to Abbott
Street
Groton Road Both Between West Groton Road and the
State border
Grove Street East Between Whitney Street and Canal
Street
Grove Street West From the corner of Harbor Avenue and
East Hollis Street to a point 150 feet
south of Tyler Street
Grove Street
[Amended
6-28-2011 by Ord.
No. O-11-72]
West For a distance of 82 feet south of the
northerly line of Holman Street
Grove Street West Between Lock Street and Whitney
Street
Hall Avenue South From Manchester Street to the east line
of Farley Street projected
Hamilton Street East From Lake Street a distance of 130 feet
in a southerly direction
Harbor Avenue East Beginning 50 feet from the curb
projected at Harbor Avenue and Bowers
Street to 100 feet south of the south line
of Bowery Street projected
Harbor Avenue West From Bowers Street southerly for a
distance of 60 feet
Harbor Avenue West From a point 175 feet north from the
corner of Prospect Street for a distance
of 74 feet north from that point
Harbor Avenue West 50 feet from the southwest corner of
Tyler Street south and 50 feet from the
northwest corner of Tyler Street north
Harbor Avenue West From Tyler Street to the south end of
land of the Nashua Housing Authority
known as Sullivan Terrace
§ 320-69 NASHUA CODE § 320-69
306:1212
Name of Street Side Location
Harbor Court North Entire length
Hardy Street Northwest From Broad Street to Amherst Street
Harrison Street West Entire length
Harris Road Southeast From Palisade Drive southwest for a
distance of 530 feet
Hartshorn Avenue Both From Church Street to the Library
municipal parking lot
Hartshorn Avenue West Beginning at the north line of Church
Street north a distance of 180 feet
Highland Place Both Entire length
High Street North From a point 238 feet west of Main
Street for a distance of 188 feet west
High Street North From the intersection of Main Street for
a distance of 120 feet west
High Street North From Walnut Street for a distance of
100 feet east[
High Street South From Main Street west to Walnut Street
Hills Ferry Road Both From Manchester Street east for a
distance of 1,000 feet
Hobbs Avenue East From East Hollis Street to Crown Street
Holman Street South Entire length
Holiday Circle -- On a portion of the cul-de-sac for 88 feet
at the northeast end of Holiday Circle
Hosmer Avenue North From Spring Street to the end of the
street
Hosmer Avenue South Entire length
Howard Street East From Hoyt's Lane to Worcester Street
Hoyt's Lane -- From Scripture Street to Shedd's
Avenue
Hudson Street South From the east intersection of the north
line of East Hollis Street west for 25 feet
Indian Head Avenue West Entire length
Ingalls Street West From Burke Street for a distance of 300
feet
Jackson Avenue East From Canal Street north to the end of
the street
Jackson Avenue West Entire length
§ 320-69 TOWING § 320-69
306:1213
Name of Street Side Location
Jackson Street East 202 feet from its intersection with
Bridge Street north to the end of
Jackson Street
Jefferson Street South From Tolles Street to Chandler Street
John Street [Added
9-8-2009 by Ord.
No. O-09-68]
North Entire length
Jones Court Northwest Entire length
Kendrick Street East From Lock Street to Summer Street
Kinsley Street North From the southeast line of Main
Dunstable Road to the east line of
Pierce Street
Kinsley Street North From Main Street west for a distance of
125 feet
Kinsley Street North From a point 125 feet west of the west
line of Main Street west to the east line
of Elm Street
Kinsley Street North From the east line of Wilder Street for
60 feet east
Kinsley Street South Between Elm Street and Main Street
Kinsley Street
[Repealed
11-13-2012 by Ord.
No. O-12-025]
Kinsley Street South From the west line of Ritter Street
westerly for a distance of 72 feet
Kinsley Street South From the main entrance of Saint
Joseph's Hospital easterly to the
intersection of Woodward Avenue
Lakeside Avenue West From Lake Street south to the dead end
Lake Street North From the east line of Ash Street for a
distance of 40 feet east
Lake Street North Between Ash Street and Pine Street
Lake Street North Between Balcom Street and Pine Street
Lake Street North From Chestnut Street for 100 feet west
Lake Street North Between Main Street and Elm Street
Lake Street North From Monroe Street to Wason Avenue
Lake Street North Between Russell Street and Sawyer
Street
§ 320-69 NASHUA CODE § 320-69
306:1214
Name of Street Side Location
Lake Street South From the west line of Ash Street for a
distance of 40 feet west
Lake Street South From Chestnut Street to Ash Street
Lake Street [Added
2-26-2008 by Ord.
No. O-08-07]
South From Bridal Path to Fulton Street
Lake Street South From Hunt Street to Lakeside Avenue
Lake Street South From Main Street west to Bridle Path
Lake Street South Between Wason Avenue and Kingston
Drive
Laton Street North From Concord Street to Berkeley Street
Laton Street South From Concord Street east for a distance
of 100 feet
Ledge Street North From Pine Street to Grand Avenue
Ledge Street South From the northeast corner of First
Street for a distance of 1,105 feet in an
easterly direction
Ledge Street South From the west line of Ninth Street to
the east line of Houde Street
Lemoine Street Both Between Pine Street and Wilder Street
Lemon Street West From Whitney Street to Lowell Street
Lewis Street North From Lake Street east to Monroe Street
Lock Street North From a point 100 feet east of the
northeast corner of Granite Street east
to Chandler Street
Lock Street North From Chandler Street for 75 feet west
Lock Street North From a point 100 yards west of Perham
Street west to a point 100 feet east of
the northeast corner of Granite Street
Lock Street South From Chandler Street east to the end of
Lock Street
Lock Street
[Amended
3-22-2011 by Ord.
No. O-11-60]
South Between Tolles Street and Lucier Street
Locust Street Both From Franklin Street north for a
distance of 60 feet
Lovell Street South Between Chestnut Street and Ash
Street
Lovewell Street Both Between Pine Street and Vine Street
§ 320-69 TOWING § 320-69
306:1215
Name of Street Side Location
Lovewell Street Westerly From Vine Street to Pine Street
Lowell Street
[Added 7-10-2012
by Ord. No.
O-12-010]
North From Orange Street westerly for a
distance of 200 feet
Lucier Street West From Lock Street for 100 feet south
Luke Street West From Broad Street south for a distance
of 60 feet
Lund Road Northeast From Almont Street southeasterly for a
distance of 130 feet
Lund Road West From Almont Street to Fox Meadow
Road
Main Dunstable Road South From the west line of Markar Street for
60 feet west
Main Street East From the southeast corner of Allds
Street (Public Service Company Pole
No. 31) south for a distance of 150 feet
Main Street East From Allds Street south to the north
terminus of Daniel Webster Highway
Main Street East From the north line of East Hollis Street
northerly for a distance of 280 feet
Main Street East From the northeast corner of Lincoln
Avenue a distance of 35 feet north
Main Street East From the north line of Prospect Street
to the south line of Tyler Street
Main Street East East side of Salmon Brook Bridge
Main Street East From the northeast corner of Simoneau
Plaza north to the south line of Prospect
Street
Main Street East From the northeast corner of Simoneau
Plaza to Salmon Brook Bridge
Main Street East From a point 62 feet south of the south
line of Temple Street to Temple Street;
this area to be reserved for a bus stop
Main Street East From the north line projected of Thayer
Court to the south curb of Lowell Street
Main Street East From the corner of Tyler Street to the
junction of East Hollis Street and Main
Street
§ 320-69 NASHUA CODE § 320-69
306:1216
Name of Street Side Location
Main Street North and
south
The north curbline and south curbline of
Deschenes Oval from the rear line of the
World War II monument west
Main Street West From Amherst Street to Fletcher Street
Main Street West Between Fletcher Street and Thayers
Court
Main Street West From Franklin Street south to land now
or formerly of the Boston and Maine
Railroad
Main Street West From the south line of Kinsley Street
to the north line of Prospect Street
(extended)
Main Street West From the south line of Lake Street south
for a distance of 750 feet
Main Street West From the south line of Mulberry Street
to the north line of Kinsley Street
Main Street West From Pratt Street opposite a point 50
feet north of the north curb of Buchanan
Street projected
Main Street West From the south line of Prospect Street
extended south to the north line of Lake
Street
Main Street West From a point 35 feet of the south line of
Water Street to a point 60 feet north of
the north line of Water Street
Main Street West From West Allds Street south to the
north terminus of Daniel Webster
Highway
Main Street West From the northwest corner of West
Hollis Street northerly for a distance of
205 feet
Main Street West From the south line of West Hollis
Street to the north line of Mulberry
Street
Manchester Street
[Added 2-14-2017
by Ord. No.
O-17-032]
Both From Preserve Drive north to the Town
of Merrimack border
Manchester Street East 167 feet south from its intersection with
Mt. Pleasant Street
Manchester Street West From its intersection with Abbott Street
northerly for a distance of 80 feet
§ 320-69 TOWING § 320-69
306:1217
Name of Street Side Location
Manchester Street West From Sargent Avenue to a point 540
feet north of the north line of Cushing
Avenue
Maple Street
[Amended
12-23-2008 by Ord.
No. O-08-50]
West Entire length
Markar Street East 60 feet south from the south line of
Main Dunstable Road
Markar Street West 60 feet south from the south line of
Main Dunstable Road
Martin Street North From Pearson Street to Tolles Street
Martin Street South From No. 12 Martin Street to Tolles
Street
McLaren Avenue East and
west
Between Ledge Street and the Boston
and Maine Railroad right-of-way
Mechanic Street Both Entire length
Merrimack Street East Between French Street and Abbott
Street
Merrimack Street West Between Amherst Street and Greeley
Street
Middle Street West From Oak Street to Otterson Street
Morgan Street Both Entire length
Morrill Street East Entire length
Mountain View
Street
East From Orchard Avenue to Clement
Street
Mount Pleasant
Street
North From Manchester Street east for a
distance of 152 feet
Mount Pleasant
Street
South From Manchester Street easterly to
Concord Street
Mt. Vernon Street Northwest From Amherst Street to Troy Street
Mulberry Street North From Elm Street to Maple Street
Mulberry Street North From Chestnut Street to Elm Street
Mulberry Street North Between Main Street and Maple Street
Mulberry Street South From Main Street to Elm Street
Myrtle Street North From Pine Street to the end
Myrtle Street South From Chestnut Street to Pine Street
§ 320-69 NASHUA CODE § 320-69
306:1218
Name of Street Side Location
Myrtle Street Project
Area
-- Bounded on the north by the north line
of Factory Street, on the west by the
west line of Chestnut Street, on the
south by the south line of Central
Street, as the same now exists, and on
the east by the east line of Walnut Street
Nashua Drive, east
end exit [Added
2-26-2008 by Ord.
No. O-08-07]
Both From Canal Street to the railroad tracks
Nashville Street
[Repealed
3-24-2015 by Ord.
No. O-15-043]
Nashville Street South From Concord Street to Amherst Street
Nevada Street North A distance of 75 feet west from the west
line of Chestnut Street
Nevada Street South From Chestnut Street to Ash Street
Northeastern
Boulevard
Northeast From Route 111A (Main Dunstable
Road) to Pittsburgh Avenue
Northeastern
Boulevard
Southwest From Main Dunstable Road to
Pittsburgh Avenue
Northeastern
Boulevard
West From Harris Road to Bowman Lane
North Groton Street North Entire length
North Intervale
Street
Both Entire length
North Seventh Street East From Ledge Street to Grand Avenue
North Seventh Street West Between Grand Avenue and Perry
Avenue
Norton Street West Between Summer Street and Laton
Street
Norton Street West From Summer Street to Lock Street
Oldfield Road Southwest From Clement Street to a point in line
with the southeast side of Weld Street
Orange Street East From Lock Street for a distance of 80
feet south
Orange Street West Between Canal Street and Concord
Street
Otterson Street North From Dearborn Street westerly a
distance of 40 feet
§ 320-69 TOWING § 320-69
306:1219
Name of Street Side Location
Otterson Street North From a point 102 feet from the west line
of Dearborn Street west for a distance
of 98 feet
Otterson Street North Between Elm Street and Main Street
Otterson Street North From Harbor Avenue west to a point
where Pond Street, if extended, would
intersect Otterson Street
Otterson Street South From Harbor Avenue to Pond Street
Palm Street
[Repealed
11-13-2012 by Ord.
No. O-12-025]
Palm Street
[Repealed
11-13-2012 by Ord.
No. O-12-025]
Palm Street
[Repealed
11-13-2012 by Ord.
No. O-12-025]
Palm Street
[Repealed
11-13-2012 by Ord.
No. O-12-025]
Palm Street
[Repealed
11-13-2012 by Ord.
No. O-12-025]
Palm Street
[Repealed
11-13-2012 by Ord.
No. O-12-025]
Palm Street
[Repealed
11-13-2012 by Ord.
No. O-12-025]
Palm Street
[Repealed
11-13-2012 by Ord.
No. O-12-025]
Palm Street [Added
11-13-2012 by Ord.
No. O-12-025]
East From Central Street to Kinsley Street
§ 320-69 NASHUA CODE § 320-69
306:1220
Name of Street Side Location
Palm Street [Added
11-13-2012 by Ord.
No. O-12-025]
West From Central Street to Kinsley Street
(unless specifically designated with
City-maintained signs and/or pavement
markings)
Palm Street [Added
10-13-2015 by Ord.
No. O-15-052]
West From a point 200 feet north of Kinsley
Street north for a distance of 37 feet
Park Street North From Main Street to Court Street
Park Street South From Court Street east to Olive Street
Park Street South Between Main Street and Court Street
Patten Court East From Ledge Street southerly, including
its terminus
Pearson Avenue North Entire length
Pearson Avenue South From Main Street to a point 165 feet
east of Main Street
Perham Street East From Lock Street to Girouard Avenue
Pierce Court North Entire length
Pierce Street East Entire length
Pine Hill Road
[Added 10-26-2010
by Ord. No.
O-10-34]
Both Between University Drive and Indian
Rock Road and Coburn Avenue
Pine Street
[Repealed
11-13-2012 by Ord.
No. O-12-025]
Pine Street [Added
11-13-2012 by Ord.
No. O-12-025]
East From Central Street to Kinsley Street
Pine Street East From Kinsley Street southerly for a
distance of 40 feet
Pine Street East From Kinsley Street to Pine Motor Parts
Pine Street
[Repealed
11-13-2012 by Ord.
No. O-12-025]
Pine Street
[Repealed
11-13-2012 by Ord.
No. O-12-025]
§ 320-69 TOWING § 320-69
306:1221
Name of Street Side Location
Pine Street [Added
11-13-2012 by Ord.
No. O-12-025]
West From Central Street to Kinsley Street
(unless specifically designated with
City-maintained signs and/or pavement
markings)
Pine Street West From West Hollis Street south to Hunt
Street
Pittsburgh Avenue South Entire cul-de-sac
Pleasant Street South From Elm Street to Walnut Street
Prescott Street South Entire length
Prospect Avenue North From Main Street westerly to the end of
the street
Prospect Avenue South From Main Street westerly for a
distance of 64 feet
Prospect Avenue South From a distance of 128 feet from Main
Street westerly to the end of the street
Prospect Street North From Dearborn Street westerly for a
distance of 80 feet; this area is to be
used for the loading and unloading of
handicapped persons
Prospect Street North From Main Street easterly for a
distance of 355 feet
Prospect Street
[Repealed
11-10-2009 by Ord.
No. O-09-79]
Prospect Street
[Added 4-10-2018
by Ord. No.
O-18-009]
South 15 feet on either side of the driveway to
the Medical Center building at 17
Prospect Street
Quincy Street
[Amended
6-10-2008 by Ord.
No. O-08-19]
East Entire length
Quincy Street West 15 feet on either side of the driveways
into the U.S. Post Office property
Rancourt Street South From the intersection of Concord Street
east for a distance of 50 feet
Redmond Street East and
west
Entire length
Reservoir Street West From the north line of Stark Street
projected to the east line of Manchester
Street
§ 320-69 NASHUA CODE § 320-69
306:1222
Name of Street Side Location
Revere Street
[Amended 3-9-2010
by Ord. No.
O-10-08]
South Entire length
Ridge Street Both On that portion of Ridge Street which
runs north and south off Whitney Street
Ridge Street South East from Tolles Street
Ritter Street Both From West Hollis Street to the east end
of the Nashua High School parking lot
entrance
Ritter Street West From Kinsley Street to Blossom Street
Riverside Street South From Redmond Street to the end of
Riverside Street
Robinson Road South From a point at the southeast extension
of Herrick Street southwest for a
distance of 630 feet
Rochette Avenue South Entire length
Rockne Drive South From Daniel Webster Highway to
Marmon Drive
St. Joseph Drive
[Added 3-24-2009
by Ord. No.
O-09-59]
East Between its western intersections with
Belleaire Drive and Kinsley Street
St. Laurent Street North From Henri Burque Highway to McCoy
Avenue
St. Laurent Street South From the Henri Burque Highway to
Public Service Company Pole No. 4
Salem Street East From Lock Street south for a distance of
65 feet
Salem Street East From the junction point of the east side
of Salem Street with the north side of
Lock Street continuing north for a
distance of 100 feet
Salem Street West Entire length
Salmon Street North From Main Street to the Salmon Brook
Bridge
Salvail Court Both Entire length
Sanders Street East From the intersection of Bridge Street
north
§ 320-69 TOWING § 320-69
306:1223
Name of Street Side Location
Sanders Street East Between Bridge Street and the present
location of the Maine Manufacturing
Company gate
Savory Street Both From Euclid Avenue to the end of
Savory Street
School Street East Entire length
School Street South Except where 15-minute parking is
allowed, and loading zone
Scripture Street East From Hoyt's Lane to Worcester Street
Scripture Street West From Temple Street to Worcester Street
Sexton Avenue North A distance of 200 feet from Daniel
Webster Highway
Shelton Street Both From its intersection with Wethersfield
Road southwest for a distance of 60 feet
Simon Street East Between West Hollis Street and Will
Street
South Main Street East From Fairway Street to the Daniel
Webster Highway
South Main Street North From the intersection of Main Street
and South Main Street south to Fairway
Street
South Main Street South From Clement Street westerly for a
distance of 200 feet
South Main Street West Between Clement Street and a point
180 feet north of Weld Street
South Main Street West From Main Street to Clement Street
South Street
[Repealed
10-14-2008 by Ord.
No. O-08-36]
South Street
[Amended
10-14-2008 by Ord.
No. O-08-36]
East and
west
Entire length
Spit Brook Road Northerly From a distance of 300 feet east of the
entrance to the Royal Ridge Mall to the
Daniel Webster Highway South
Spit Brook Road South From Daniel Webster Highway South to
the northbound off-ramp of the F. E.
Everett Turnpike
§ 320-69 NASHUA CODE § 320-69
306:1224
Name of Street Side Location
Spring Street East From East Hollis Street north to the
south line of the entrance to the U.S.
Post Office
Stevens Avenue East and
west
Entire length
Summer Street South From Concord Street east for a distance
of 100 feet
Temple Place East Entire length
Temple Place West From Temple Street to Cottage Avenue
Temple Street North From the westerly side of the driveway
leading into the A and P parking lot east
to Court Street
Temple Street North From Cottage Street east for a distance
of 900 feet to a point opposite South
Street
Temple Street North From Main Street for 65 feet east
Temple Street South From Court Street to Spring Street
Temple Street South From East Hollis Street for 635 feet
northwest towards Amory Street
Temple Street South From Main Street for a distance of 37
feet east
Temple Street South A distance of 50 feet in front of St.
Casimir Church
Temple Street South From South Street east to Williams
Court
Temple Street South From the west curbline of Spring Street
west for a distance of 250 feet
Temple Street South In front of the main entrance at 41
Temple Street, also known as Temple
Street Manor, for 1 vehicle
Temple Street West From East Hollis Street southwest for a
distance of 50 feet
Tenth Street East From Ledge Street southerly for a
distance of 140 feet
Terrace Street North Entire length
Terrace Street
Extended
South Entire length
Thompson Road South At its terminus
Thornton Road Both From Amherst Street northeast for a
distance of 210 feet
§ 320-69 TOWING § 320-69
306:1225
Name of Street Side Location
Tinker Road Both Between Manchester Street and
Biscayne Parkway
Titan Way [Added
9-10-2013 by Ord.
No. O-13-047]
Both Entire length
Tolles Street East From Canal Street to Whitney Street
Tolles Street East From a point opposite the south side
of Laton Street to the north side of
Summer Street
Tolles Street West From a point 86 feet north of Canal
Street for a distance of 30 feet
Tolles Street West From the north line of Lock Street for
35 feet north
Tolles Street West From Martin Street for a distance of 30
feet
Tolles Street West From Whitney Street to Lock Street
Troy Street East Entire length
Tyler Street North Entire length
Tyler Street South From Harbor Avenue to the west end of
land of the Nashua Housing Authority
known as Sullivan Terrace
University Drive Both From Perimeter Road southerly for a
distance of 800 feet
Van Buren Street East From the Gas Service Company
entrance south for a distance of 25 feet
Van Buren Street West From Bridge Street to the end of such
street, at land now of Gas Service, Inc.
Vernon Street East Entire length
Veterans Drive Both Entire length
Vieckis Drive Both A distance of 130 feet from the corner
of East Dunstable Road
Vine Street Both From West Hollis Street north for a
distance of 75 feet
Vine Street East From West Hollis Street south for a
distance of 125 feet
Vine Street East Between Kinsley Street and Buck Street
Vine Street West From Kinsley Street to Lake Street
Vine Street West A distance of 75 feet north from the
north line of Nevada Street
§ 320-69 NASHUA CODE § 320-69
306:1226
Name of Street Side Location
Walnut Street East From a point 60 feet north of the north
line of Kinsley Street north for 70 feet
Walnut Street East From Kinsley Street to Mulberry Street
Walnut Street East From Otterson Street north for a
distance of 75 feet
Walnut Street East From West Hollis Street north for a
distance of 75 feet
Warren Street West From Bridge Street to the end of such
street at land now of Public Service
Company of New Hampshire
Washington Street East From High Street to Water Street
Washington Street West Entire length
Water Street and
Water Street Ramp
North From Main Street to Factory Street
Water Street and
Water Street Ramp
South From Factory Street to Mechanic Street
Water Street and
Water Street Ramp
South From Mechanic Street a distance of 127
feet easterly towards Main Street and
from Main Street a distance of 100 feet
westerly towards Mechanic Street
Webster Street
[Added 5-14-2013
by Ord. No.
O-13-035]
East Beginning at a point 130 feet north of
Columbia Avenue and continuing to a
point 170 feet north of Columbia
Avenue
West Allds Street North From Main Street west for a distance of
160 feet
West Allds Street South From Main Street west for a distance of
50 feet
West Hollis Street Both From the southwest line of Simon Street
west for a distance of 400 feet
West Hollis Street North From a point 95 feet west of the
westerly curbline of Main Street
westerly to Eaton Street
West Hollis Street North From Twelfth Street to Simon Street
West Hollis Street Northwest From Norma Drive westerly to the
easterly side of Pitary's Market, a
distance of 300 feet
West Hollis Street South From Chestnut Street to Vine Street
West Hollis Street South From the westerly curbline of Maple
Street westerly for a distance of 63 feet
§ 320-69 TOWING § 320-69
306:1227
Name of Street Side Location
West Hollis Street
[Amended
2-28-2012 by Ord.
No. O-12-003]
South From a point 75 feet west of Palm Street
westerly to the westerly curbline of
Eaton Street extended
West Hollis Street South From the west line of Settlement Way
westerly for a distance of 125 feet
West Pearl Street North From a point 38 feet east of the east line
of Elm Street extended, thence west 86
feet
West Pearl Street North From Walnut Street to Pine Street
West Pearl Street South From Main Street west to Elm Street
Wethersfield Road Northeast From Shelton Street, between two
driveways, for a distance of 130 feet
Wethersfield Road Southwest From Shelton Street northwest for a
distance of 60 feet
Wethersfield Road Southwest From Shelton Street southeast for a
distance of 38 feet
Whipple Street
[Added 12-23-2013
by Ord. No.
O-13-066]
– In the middle of the cul-de-sac at the
north end of Whipple Street
Whitney Street Both From Lock Street to Lemon Street
Whitney Street South From its intersection with Lock Street
and Chandler Street
Whitney Street South From Ridge Street for a distance of 35
feet east
Wilder Street East From West Hollis Street south for a
distance of 100 feet
Williams Court Both From Temple Street to South Street
Will Street North From Simon Street easterly to its
terminus at Ninth Street
Will Street South From 186 feet east of Simon Street
easterly to its terminus at Ninth Street
Winter Street South Entire length
Woodward Avenue East From Kinsley Street southerly to the
north line of Blossom Street
Woodward Avenue West Between Earley Street and Lewis Street
Worcester Street South From Scripture Street to Howard Street
§ 320-69 NASHUA CODE § 320-70
306:1228
§ 320-70. No parking certain hours and days.
No parking whatsoever shall be permitted on the following streets during
the hours and days indicated:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Alder Drive Both 7:00 a.m. to
10:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday,
school days
Entire length
Algonquin Lane, west
of Edmond Drive
Both 7:00 a.m. to
10:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday,
school days
Entire length
Archery Lane Both 7:00 a.m. to
10:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday,
school days
Entire length
Arrow Lane Both 7:00 a.m. to
10:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday,
school days
Entire length
Ash Street West 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All except
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
From the
southwest corner
of Lake Street
southerly for a
distance of 150
feet
Aztec Road, west of
Edmond Drive
Both 7:00 a.m. to
10:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday,
school days
Entire length
Bridge Street South All/All except
Sundays and
holidays
From Belknap
Street for 340 feet
west
Bowers Street [Added
11-24-2015 by Ord.
No. O-15-072]
North 7:30 a.m. to 8:30
a.m. and 2:00
p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
school days
From a point 100
feet east of
Arlington Street to
a point 650 feet
east of Arlington
Street
§ 320-70 TOWING § 320-70
306:1229
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Broadcrest Lane, west
of Edmond Drive
Both 7:00 a.m. to
10:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday,
school days
Entire length
Camanche Street, west
of Edmond Drive
Both 7:00 a.m. to
10:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday,
school days
Entire length
Carmine Road North 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All except
Sundays and
holidays
From Upstone
Drive to a point
200 feet east of
Upstone Drive
Chandler Street East 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All except
Sundays and
holidays
From the northeast
corner of Canal
Street and the
southeast corner of
Whitney Street
extended
Chandler Street West 9:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m./All except
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
From Morgan
Street to Whitney
Street
Charles Street East 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All except
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
Entire length
Chautauqua Avenue
[Added 11-27-2012
by Ord. No.
O-12-017; amended
8-13-2013 by Ord.
No. O-13-045]
West Between
December 15 and
March 1
From a distance of
65 feet southwest
of Broad Street
southerly to the
railroad tracks
Cheshire Street, west
of Edmond Drive
South 7:00 a.m. to
10:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday,
school days
South of the
intersection with
Dalton Street
Chestnut Street West 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All except
Sundays and
holidays
From Myrtle Street
north for a
distance of 90 feet
§ 320-70 NASHUA CODE § 320-70
306:1230
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Cheyenne Drive, west
of Edmond Drive
Both 7:00 a.m. to
10:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday,
school days
Between Huron
Drive and
Cheyenne Drive's
southwest
termination at the
Nashua North
High School
emergency access
Christopher Drive Both 7:00 a.m. to
10:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday,
school days
Entire length
Concord Street East 9:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m./All except
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
From the exit road
of the Park
Department office
area southerly for
a distance of 50
feet
Cushing Avenue North 7:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m./All except
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
From Manchester
Street to Brookline
Street
D Street West 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All
From Bridge Street
south to East Hollis
Street
Dearborn Street West 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All except
Sundays and
holidays
From East Hollis
Street to Tyler
Street
Denver Drive, west of
Edmond Drive
Both 7:00 a.m. to
10:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday,
school days
Entire length
Dora Street Both 7:00 a.m. to
10:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday,
school days
Entire length
§ 320-70 TOWING § 320-70
306:1231
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Dunbarton Drive East 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All except
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
Entire length
East Hollis Street North 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. and 4:00
p.m. to 6:00
p.m./All except
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
From a point 130
feet east of the
westerly curbline
of Arlington Street
extended to the
easterly curbline of
Denton Street
extended
East Hollis Street South 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All except
Sundays and
holidays
From Denton
Street to a point 35
feet west of Denton
Street
East Hollis Street South 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All except
Sundays
Between Public
Service Company
Poles No. 21 and
No. 23
East Pearl Street North All/All No stopping,
standing or
parking from the
intersection of the
east curbline of
Main Street with
the north curbline
of East Pearl Street
for a distance of
132 feet east
Eckler Avenue East 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All except
Sundays and
holidays
From Union Street
to the end of
Eckler Avenue
Elm Street West 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All except
Sundays and
holidays
Between Mulberry
Street and Kinsley
Street
Euclid Avenue West 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All except
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
Between Kinsley
Street and Savoy
Street
§ 320-70 NASHUA CODE § 320-70
306:1232
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Euclid Avenue West 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All except
Sundays and
holidays
From Lake Street
to Kinsley Street
Factory Street South All/All No stopping,
standing or
parking from the
intersection of the
west curbline of
Main Street with
the south curbline
of Factory Street
for a distance of
105 feet west
Factory Street South 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All except
Sundays and
holidays
From the
intersection of the
curb at Chestnut
Street and Factory
Street to the
intersection of the
curb at Walnut
Street and Factory
Street
Fairlane Avenue Both 7:00 a.m. to
10:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday,
school days
Entire length
Forest Park Drive Both 7:00 a.m. to
10:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday,
school days
Entire length
Fox Meadow Road Both 7:00 a.m. to
10:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday,
school days
Entire length
Franklin Street North 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All except
Sundays and
holidays
From Green Street
west to Charles
Street
§ 320-70 TOWING § 320-70
306:1233
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Franklin Street South 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All except
Sundays and
holidays
From Main Street
for a distance of
120 feet west
George Street West 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All except
Sundays and
holidays
From West Hollis
Street to the dead
end
Harbor Avenue West 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All except
Sundays and
holidays
From Tyler Street
extending south a
distance of 80 feet
Hartshorn Avenue East 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All except
Sundays and
holidays
From Park Street
to Church Street
Hopi Drive, west of
Edmond Drive
Both 7:00 a.m. to
10:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday,
school days
Entire length
Huron Drive, west of
Edmond Drive
Both 7:00 a.m. to
10:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday,
school days
Entire length
Inca Drive, west of
Edmond Drive
Both 7:00 a.m. to
10:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday,
school days
Entire length
Jackson Street [Added
7-10-2012 by Ord.
No. O-12-014]
Both 7:00 a.m. to
10:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday
Entire length
Jalbert Drive Both 7:00 a.m. to
10:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday,
school days
Entire length
James Street Both 7:00 a.m. to
10:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday,
school days
Entire length
§ 320-70 NASHUA CODE § 320-70
306:1234
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Kanata Drive, west of
Edmond Drive
Both 7:00 a.m. to
10:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday,
school days
Entire length
Knowlton Drive, west
of Edmond Drive
Both 7:00 a.m. to
10:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday,
school days
Entire length
Lake Street North 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All except
Sundays and
holidays
From a point 120
feet east of Wason
Avenue for a
distance of 830
feet to a point 100
feet east of Lewis
Street
Lake Street [Repealed
2-26-2008 by Ord.
No. O-08-07]
Lewis Street North 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All except
Sundays and
holidays
From the
intersection of
Lake Street for a
distance of 270
feet
Lisa Drive South 7:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m./All except
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
From East
Dunstable Road
westerly to Kevin
Road
Main Street Both 1:00 a.m. to 5:00
a.m./All
Between Pearson
Avenue and
Railroad Square
Manchester Street East 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All except
Sundays and
holidays
From Concord
Street to the
center line
extension of
French Street
Marie Avenue, west of
Edmond Drive
Both 7:00 a.m. to
10:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday,
school days
Entire length
§ 320-70 TOWING § 320-70
306:1235
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Mill Street West 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All except
Sundays and
holidays
Entire length
Mulberry Street South 7:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m./All except
Saturdays and
Sundays
From Walnut
Street to Elm
Street
Myrtle Street South 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All except
Sundays and
holidays
Between Pine
Street and
Chestnut Street
Nashua Drive
[Repealed 2-26-2008
by Ord. No. O-08-07]
Nashua Drive East East 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All except
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
From a point 30
feet south of the
Canal Street
southern curbline
southerly to the B
and M Railroad
Otterson Street South All/All except
Sundays
Between Main
Street and Elm
Street
Palm Street
[Repealed
11-13-2012 by Ord.
No. O-12-025]
Palm Street
[Repealed
11-13-2012 by Ord.
No. O-12-025]
Park Street North 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All except
Sundays and
holidays
From Olive Street
to Hartshorn
Avenue
Park Street South 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All except
Sundays and
holidays
From Olive Street
to Cottage Street
§ 320-70 NASHUA CODE § 320-70
306:1236
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Pell Avenue Both 7:00 a.m. to
10:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday,
school days
Entire length
Pike Street East and
west
6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All except
Sundays and
holidays
Entire length
Pine Street [Repealed
11-13-2012 by Ord.
No. O-12-025]
Pine Street [Amended
11-13-2012 by Ord.
No. O-12-025]
West 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All except
Sundays and
holidays
From a point at the
intersection of
Kinsley Street and
Pine Street south
to the intersection
of Lake Street and
Pine Street
Pine Street [Added
8-14-2018 by Ord.
No. O-18-016]
West 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All except
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
Beginning at a
point 280 feet
north of West
Hollis Street and
extending
northerly 30 feet
Prospect Avenue North 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All except
Sundays and
holidays
From the west
boundary of land of
Sun Oil Company
west to the end of
the street
Prospect Avenue South 6:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m./All
From a point 64
feet from Main
Street for a
distance of 64 feet
Railroad Square
[Amended 5-13-2008
by Ord. No. O-08-16]
North 1:00 a.m. to 5:00
a.m./All except
Sundays and
holidays
From a point 190
feet west of the
west line of Orange
Street west for a
distance of 41 feet
Raven Street Both 7:00 a.m. to
10:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday,
school days
Entire length
§ 320-70 TOWING § 320-70
306:1237
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Robinson Court
[Added 7-10-2012 by
Ord. No. O-12-014]
Both 7:00 a.m. to
10:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday
Entire length
Sanborn Drive, west of
Edmond Drive
Both 7:00 a.m. to
10:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday,
school days
Entire length
Sargent Avenue Both 10:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m./All
except during any
events at Holman
Stadium or
Amherst Street
School, when the
parking ban shall
take effect 1 hour
after the event
ends
Entire length
Sawyer Street East 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All except
Sundays
Between Kinsley
Street and Blossom
Street
Seminole Drive, west
of Edmond Drive
Both 7:00 a.m. to
10:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday,
school days
Entire length
Simon Street East 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All except
Sundays
From the north
side of Wills Street
for a distance of
130 feet north
Sioux Avenue, west of
Edmond Drive
Both 7:00 a.m. to
10:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday,
school days
Entire length
Souhegan Drive, west
of Edmond Drive
Both 7:00 a.m. to
10:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday,
school days
Entire length
§ 320-70 NASHUA CODE § 320-70
306:1238
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Spring Street East All/All No stopping,
standing or
parking from the
intersection of the
south curbline of
Temple Street with
the east curbline of
Spring Street for a
distance of 33 feet
south
Spring Street East 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All except
Sundays and
holidays
Between Public
Service Company
Poles No. 13 and
No. 36
Spring Street West All/All No stopping,
standing or
parking from the
intersection of the
south curbline of
Temple Street with
the west curbline
of Spring Street for
a distance of 33
feet south
Spring Street West 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All except
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
From East Hollis
Street to East Pearl
Street
Temple Street North 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All except
Sundays
Beginning at the
projection of the
east line of Spruce
Street and running
east to the
projection of the
east line of
Scripture Street
Temple Street North 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All
From Cottage
Street west to
Court Street
§ 320-70 TOWING § 320-70
306:1239
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Temple Street South All/All No stopping,
standing or
parking from the
intersection of the
east curbline of
Spring Street with
the south curbline
of Temple Street
for a distance of 33
feet east
Temple Street and
Church Street
Both All/All except
Sundays
From a point in the
north line of
Temple Street,
such point being
the east curbline of
Spring Street
produced, to a
point in the south
line of Church
Street opposite the
center line of Olive
Street
Upstone Drive, west of
Edmond Drive
Both 7:00 a.m. to
10:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday,
school days
Entire length
Upstone Drive West 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All except
Sundays and
holidays
Between Carmine
Road and Broad
Street
Van Buren Street
[Added 7-10-2012 by
Ord. No. O-12-014]
Both 7:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m./
Monday through
Friday
Entire length
Vine Street East 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon/All
except Sundays
From West Hollis
Street south to
Buck Street
Vine Street West 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All except
Sundays and
holidays
Between Pearl
Street and West
Hollis Street
§ 320-70 NASHUA CODE § 320-70
306:1240
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Walnut Street West 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All except
Sundays and
holidays
Between Pleasant
Street and West
Hollis Street
Warren Street [Added
7-10-2012 by Ord.
No. O-12-014]
Both 7:00 a.m. to
10:00
a.m.,/Monday
through Friday
Entire length
West Pearl Street South All/All No stopping,
standing or
parking from the
intersection of the
west curbline of
Main Street with
the south curbline
of West Pearl
Street for a
distance of 105
feet west
Wildwood Lane Both 7:00 a.m. to
10:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday,
school days
Entire length
Woodward Avenue East 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All except
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
Between Gilman
Street and Lewis
Street
§ 320-71. Loading zones.
A. The following areas are designated as loading zones, and no parking
shall be permitted therein between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., Monday
through Saturday:
Name of Street Side Location
Clinton Street West From the south line of the Hunt
Memorial Building north for a
distance of 20 feet
Holiday Circle Southeast From Harris Road for a distance of
70 feet
Manchester Street West From the south line of Mount
Pleasant Street southerly for a
distance of 80 feet
§ 320-70 TOWING § 320-71
306:1241
§ 320-72. Handicapped parking. [Amended 9-12-2012 by Ord. No.
O-12-020]
No vehicles other than those which are identified as motor vehicles of
handicapped persons in accordance with RSA Chapter 260, as it may be
from time to time amended, shall be allowed to park in areas designated
by this section. Parking spaces which are so designated shall be created to
the minimum dimension of 12 feet in width where they are to be used for
head-in parking and 20 feet in length where they are to be used for parallel
parking and shall be clearly marked with the international handicapped
symbol. Handicapped parking spaces shall include any adjacent marked
loading area.
Name of Street Side Location
Oldfield Road Northeast From a point 25 feet from Clement
Street for a distance of 100 feet
Railroad Square North From Canal Street for a distance
of 93 feet westerly, 15 minute time
limit
School Street South Starting a distance of 230 feet east
of Walnut Street and extending
easterly for a distance of 40 feet
B. The following areas are designated as loading zones, and no parking
shall be permitted therein between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., Monday
through Saturday, and no vehicle utilizing these loading zones shall be
stationed or remain for a period exceeding one hour:
Name of Street Side Location
Elm Street West Starting a distance of 70 feet south
of West Pearl Street and extending
southerly for a distance of 30 feet
Garden Street
parking lot
North Beginning at the entrance of the
Garden Street pathway for a distance
of 40 feet, being directly behind
84-86 West Pearl Street
Water Street North From the entrance to Le Parc de
Notre Renaissance Francaise easterly
for a distance of 40 feet
A. The following parking spaces are designated as spaces for the
handicapped:
§ 320-71 NASHUA CODE § 320-72
306:1242
Name of Street
Number of
Spaces/Type Location
Ash Street 1 head-in Immediately north of 40 Ash
Street on the easterly side of
the street
Ash Street 2 In front of 50 Ash Street on
the west side of the street
Ash Street [Added
3-24-2015 by Ord.
No. O-14-032]
1 parallel In front of 66 Ash Street on
the east side of the street
Beacon Court
[Added
11-24-2015 by
Ord. No.
O-15-071]
1 parallel In front of 3 Beacon Court on
the north side of the street
City parking lot to
the west and south
of City Hall
2 head-in On the north side of the
parking lot adjacent to the
walkway
Concord Street 1 parallel On the east side of Concord
Street beginning 116 feet from
the southerly entrance into the
Parks Maintenance/Recreation
Services offices in a southerly
direction for a distance of 20
feet, at which point crosshatch
begins for a distance of 16 feet
to the beginning of the
crosswalk
Concord Street 1 parallel On the east side of Concord
Street beginning 439 feet from
Swart Street in a northerly
direction for a distance of 20
feet, at which point crosshatch
begins for a distance of 16 feet
to the beginning of the
crosswalk
Concord Street 1 parallel On the west side of Concord
Street beginning 352 feet from
the entranceway to Greeley
Park (west side) in a southerly
direction for a distance of 20
feet, at which point crosshatch
begins for a distance of 16 feet
to the beginning of the
crosswalk
§ 320-72 TOWING § 320-72
306:1243
Name of Street
Number of
Spaces/Type Location
Concord Street 1 parallel On the west side of Concord
Street beginning 364 feet from
Thornton Avenue in a
northerly direction for a
distance of 20 feet, at which
point crosshatch begins for a
distance of 16 feet to the
beginning of the crosswalk
Court Street 2 head-in On the easterly side, 1 located
most directly adjacent to the
front entrance of the Nashua
Public Library and 1 more
directly adjacent to the front
entrance of the Arts and
Science Center
District Courthouse
parking lot
2 head-in Most directly adjacent to the
existing handicapped entrance
ramp on the westerly side of
the District Court building
East Pearl Street 1 Immediately in front of the
entrance of 50 East Pearl
Street on the southerly side of
the street
Elm Street 2 head-in On the westerly side of Elm
Street most directly adjacent
to the entrance to the Junior
High School Auditorium
Elm Street [Added
11-25-2008 by
Ord. No. O-08-46]
2 West side, 25 feet south of
Mulberry Street extending 50
feet to a point 75 feet south of
Mulberry Street. Two spaces
at 25 feet each
Garden Street 2 head-in On the west side of Garden
Street at the north end of the
Elm Street parking garage
High Street parking
lot
1 head-in In the southeast corner of the
parking lot
Lemon Street
[Added 4-8-2014
by Ord. No.
O-14-015]
1 parallel In front of 7-9 Lemon Street on
the east side of the street
§ 320-72 NASHUA CODE § 320-72
306:1244
Name of Street
Number of
Spaces/Type Location
Main Street First space from the corner of
Temple Street and Main
Street, east side, and first
space from the corner of
Factory Street and Main
Street, west side
Main Street
[Amended
2-8-2011 by Ord.
No. O-10-45]
First space from the corner of
West Pearl Street and Main
Street, west side, and first
space on the east side of Main
Street north of Eldridge Street
Main Street [Added
3-9-2010 by Ord.
No. O-10-11]
1 25 feet south of the
southernmost exit of 223 Main
Street
Maple Street
parking lot
2 head-in In the northwest corner of the
parking lot
Merrill Street
[Added
11-28-2017 by
Ord. No.
O-17-047]
1/parallel From a point five feet west of
the driveway for 15 Merrill
Street for a distance of 20 feet
westerly
Mount Pleasant
Street [Added
12-23-2013 by
Ord. No.
O-13-061]
1 parallel In front of 9 Mount Pleasant
Street, on the north side of the
street, the space closest to
Manchester Street
Mount Pleasant
Street [Added
3-12-2013 by Ord.
No. O-13-033]
1 In front of 11 Mount Pleasant
Street, the space closest to the
driveway
Municipal parking
garage
Head-in On each floor most directly
adjacent to the elevator
Nashua High School 2 head-in Most directly adjacent to the
front main entrance on the
easterly side of the High
School building
Nashua Public
Works Garage
1 head-in Most directly adjacent to the
main entrance of the Public
Works Garage
Palm Street 1 In front of 69 Palm Street on
the west side of the street
§ 320-72 TOWING § 320-72
306:1245
Name of Street
Number of
Spaces/Type Location
Pierce Street
[Added
12-23-2013 by
Ord. No.
O-13-061]
1 parallel In front of 5 Pierce Street on
the west side of the street
Prospect Street South side between the
driveway at 17 Prospect Street
easterly to the property line at
the YWCA/YMCA, to be
designated as reserved
parking for handicapped for a
distance of 62 feet
Prospect Street
[Added
11-10-2009 by
Ord. No. O-09-79]
4 parallel On the southerly side of
Prospect Street from Dearborn
Street westerly for a distance
of 80 feet
School Street
parking lot
2 head-in Northeast corner, facing High
Street
Spring Street
parking lot
2 head-in Southeast side, near Spring
Street
Spruce Street 1 parking space on the east
side of Spruce Street 320 feet
south of its intersection with
Temple Street, for a distance
of 20 feet
Temple Street
parking lot
5 head-in At west end of parking lot
University Drive 3 head-in On University Drive in front of
Daniel Webster Hall
Water Street
[Amended
11-25-2008 by
Ord. No. O-08-47]
1/parallel South side, beginning at a
point 217 feet east of
Mechanic Street and
extending 20 feet to a point
237 feet east of Mechanic
Street (toward Main Street)
Water Street
parking lot
1 head-in Near the rear entrance to 23
Factory Street
Water Street
parking lot
1 head-in In the northeast corner of the
parking lot
West Hollis Street First space on the north side of
West Hollis Street west of its
intersection with Main Street
§ 320-72 NASHUA CODE § 320-72
306:1246
§ 320-73. Parking of tractor-trailer-trucks on certain streets.
It shall be unlawful for any tractor-trailer-truck, the tractor alone or the
trailer alone to be left parked or stationed at any time, except during the
actual loading or unloading of materials therefrom, on any public street
or way in the City, except for the following streets, not to counteract the
overnight parking legislation currently on the books:
Airport Road
Bancroft Street
Beaucher Avenue
Bridge Street
Briggs Street
Bud Way
Burke Street, west of Arlington Street
Calawa Avenue
Canal Street
Capitol Street
Celina Avenue
Charron Avenue
Clinton Street
Name of Street
Number of
Spaces/Type Location
West Pearl Street First space on the east side of
the intersection of West Pearl
Street and Walnut Street on
the south side of West Pearl
Street
Whitney Street South 1 parking space in front of 3
Whitney Street
Williams Street South 1 parking space in front of 19
Williams Street
B. Any parking space, whether on public or private property, specifically
designated for the physically handicapped shall be indicated by means
of a sign with the international symbol of accessibility (and indicating
"van accessible" if applicable) mounted high enough so it can be seen
while a vehicle is parked in the space. The dimensions of such spaces
shall be clearly delineated by means of sign arrows attached to
signposts.
C. Any person violating this section shall be fined $200; and if such fine is
not paid within seven days, the fine shall be increased by $10 to a total
of $210.
§ 320-72 TOWING § 320-73
306:1247
Colburn Street
Coliseum Avenue
Commercial Street
Congress Street
Cotton Road
Crown Street, from Denton Street east
Dan Chan Street
Danforth Road
Daniels Street
Daniel Webster Highway South
Diesel Road
East DeSilvio Drive
East Hollis Street
Elm Street, between Mulberry Street and West Pearl Street
Factory Street
Fletcher Street, between Beard Street and Main Street
Franklin Street
Garden Street
George Street
Graham Drive
High Street
Holiday Circle
Howard Street
Hudson Street
Indian Head Avenue
Industrial Park Drive
Jackson Avenue
Main Dunstable Road, between Northeastern Boulevard and the F.E.
Everett Turnpike
Main Street, between Allds Street and Concord Street
Marmon Drive
Mason Street, between Foundry Street and East Hollis Street
Murphy Drive
Nashua Drive
New Dunstable Road, from the F.E. Everett Turnpike to Lund Road
Northeastern Boulevard
Northwestern Boulevard
§ 320-73 NASHUA CODE § 320-73
306:1248
Norwood Street
Otterson Street, between Main Street and Harbor Avenue
Pine Street Extension, north of Central Street
Pittsburgh Avenue, from Northeastern Boulevard to Progress Avenue
Poisson Avenue
Pond Street
Progress Avenue
Quincy Street, between Foundry Street and East Hollis Street
Railroad Square
Redmond Street
Riverside Street
Rockne Drive
Rose Street
Sanders Street
School Street
Sexton Avenue
Simon Street
Spit Brook Road, between the entrance to the Royal Ridge Mall and the
Merrimack River
Spring Street
Spruce Street
State Street
Stetson Street
Tanguay Avenue
Tara Boulevard
Temple Street, between Spruce Street and East Hollis Street
Thayer Court
West Hollis Street, between Pine Street and Main Street
Whipple Street
Will Street, from Houde Street westerly
§ 320-74. No parking in leased parking spaces in City parking lots.
A. There shall be no parking, standing and/or stopping in reserved,
designated, posted parking spaces in the City parking lot areas as
outlined in § 320-47C of the Code of the City of Nashua, as amended.
B. Any unauthorized vehicle found parked in posted reserved parking
spaces shall be towed at the owner's expense, and the owner shall be
fined $15; and if such fine is not paid within seven days, that fine shall
§ 320-73 TOWING § 320-74
306:1249
§ 320-75. Parking limited in certain City parking lots.
§ 320-76. Parking on private roads adjacent to City-owned land.
[Amended 9-12-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-020]
The following parking regulations relative to private roads adjacent to Cityowned
land shall be in effect:
Campton Street: No motor vehicle parking on the south side of Campton
Street, except during daylight hours
§ 320-77. Unregistered vehicles. [Amended 10-13-2015 by Ord. No.
O-15-069]
No unregistered vehicle shall be parked on any public street or in any Cityowned
public parking lot or garage. The last owner of record, according to
the State of New Hampshire registration records, of any vehicle violating
this section shall be fined at least $50, and shall be responsible for the cost
of towing.
§ 320-77.1. Parking of motor vehicles for sale, lease or rent on
public streets or in City-owned public parking lots by any vehicle
sales, lease or rental business. [Added 4-9-2013 by Ord. No.
O-13-034]
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle sales, lease or rental business to cause
or permit a vehicle to be parked on a public street or in a City-owned public
parking lot while such vehicle is in the custody, control, or possession of the
business for the purpose of being parked or offered for sale, lease or rent.
For the purposes of this section, “vehicle sales, lease or rental business”
means the business of offering any new or used vehicle for sale, lease, or
rent. The fine for a violation of this provision shall be $50 and $75 for a
seven-day delay.
be increased by $10 to a total of $25. Fines shall be paid to the
City Traffic Violations Bureau. Any person desiring a hearing shall,
within seven days, make request therefor, whereupon complaint shall
be entered in City District Court.
A. Lincoln Park. No vehicle shall be stationed or remain for a period
exceeding four hours on the east side of the Lincoln Park parking lot.
[Amended 2-26-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-07]
B. Le Parc de Notre Renaissance Francaise. No vehicle may be parked in
the southwest parcel of Le Parc de Notre Renaissance Francaise
parking lot (25 Water Street; southwest of Mechanic Street) between
8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on Sundays between June 1 and October 31.
During this time period, vehicles may exit the easterly portion of the lot
by means of the easterly driveway. [Added 5-10-2016 by Ord. No.
O-16-009]
§ 320-74 NASHUA CODE § 320-77.1
306:1250
ARTICLE XIII
Night Parking
§ 320-78. Parking time limits.
§ 320-78.1. Overnight on-street parking program in designated
downtown areas. [Added 10-8-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-041; amended
12-23-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-062; 3-25-2014 by Ord. No. O-14-012;
11-25-2014 by Ord. No. O-14-029; 4-28-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-045;
9-9-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-061; 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-067;
12-22-2015 by Ord. No. O-15-075; 3-8-2016 by Ord. No. O-16-005;
5-10-2016 by Ord. No. O-16-008; 12-13-2016 by Ord. No. O-16-024]
There shall be a program for on-street overnight parking as described
below.
A. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for an operator of
any vehicle to park the vehicle for a period longer than two hours
between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m., daily, on any public way in the
City where overnight on-street permit parking is not allowed. It shall be
unlawful for an operator of any vehicle to park the vehicle for any time
period between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m., daily,
without a permit on the public ways where overnight on-street permit
parking is allowed. [Amended 12-23-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-062]
B. Anyone violating this provision shall be fined a minimum of $25. If such
fine is not paid within seven days, the fine shall increase by $10, to
$35.114
C. Residences within the City of Nashua who have overnight guests
occasionally may call the Parking Department and ask for temporary
relief from the overnight ban when their guests must park on city
streets. [Added 10-8-2013 by Ord. No. O-13-041; amended
10-9-2018 by Ord. No. O-18-023]
A. On-street overnight parking shall be allowed between the hours of
12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on designated streets only to vehicles
with a permit. On-street overnight parking for any time period between
the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on designated streets
without a permit is a violation of § 320-78 and is not allowed.
(1) Residents of the streets where overnight parking is permitted will
be allowed to purchase an annual permit, with a maximum number
of 550 permits to be issued. Additionally, residents of the following
locations are also allowed to purchase annual permits: [Amended
11-28-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-051]
114. Editor's Note: Ord. No. 0-96-109, adopted 1-14-1997, repealed former § 13-312 in its
entirety, which pertained to night snow removal schedules and derived from the following:
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 1052; Ord. No. O-86-67, 5-27-1986; Ord. No. O-88-12, 2-23-1988; Ord.
No. O-89-160, 12-26-1989; and Ord. No. O-96-44, 10-8-1996.
§ 320-78 TOWING § 320-78.1
306:1251
(a) 13 Main Street.
(b) Buck Street.
(c) 136 West Pearl Street.
(d) Railroad Square.
(e) Mulberry Street.
(f) Salem Street.
(g) Orange Street.
(h) Whitney Street.
(i) Atwood Court.
(j) Jefferson Street. [Added 2-14-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-030]
(k) Badger Street. [Added 3-21-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-034]
(l) (Reserved)115
(m) Morgan Street. [Added 6-13-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-038]
(2) Applicants for a permit must show current proof of residence, to be
demonstrated by a current New Hampshire vehicle registration
certificate or proof of vehicle's insurance at that residence and one
of the following additional documents:
(a) Valid certificate of title;
(b) Title application prepared by the Tax Collector that is not
marked "nonresident";
(c) Lease or rental agreement;
(d) Notarized letter from a landlord at the address provided;
(e) Mortgage statement at the address provided;
(f) Any current utility bill with service at the address provided;
(g) Property tax bill at the address provided; or
(h) Government check, payroll check, payroll document or
employment contract.
(3) Permits are not permitted for commercial vehicles, recreational
vehicles, or boats.
(4) Permit stickers shall be displayed in the rear driver side window.
115. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(1)(l), listing Ash Street, added 6-13-2017 by Ord. No.
O-17-038, was repealed 11-28-2017 by Ord. No. O-17-051.
§ 320-78.1 NASHUA CODE § 320-78.1
306:1252
(5) Regardless of when a permit is obtained, annual parking permits
shall be effective to December 31 of that year, and the fee for every
permit for a year or a portion of a year shall be $10.
(6) Permits shall be issued by the City Clerk's Office, who shall
maintain an electronic record of the number of permits per
address.
(7) It is the intent of the Board of Aldermen that the revenue received
from the issuance of permits will first cover the cost of
administering the program, and any remaining revenue in excess of
the administrative costs will be used for neighborhood
improvements in the neighborhoods in which permits are allowed.
B. There shall be no overnight parking in areas where parking is not
permitted during the daytime.
C. There shall be no overnight parking during a declared snow emergency.
D. There shall be no parking in the same location for more than 48
consecutive hours.
E. The streets where overnight parking is permitted are as follows:
Name of Street Location
Ash Street East side, from Central Street to
Kinsley Street
Ash Street [Added 11-28-2017
by Ord. No. O-17-051;
amended 10-9-2018 by Ord.
No. O-18-028]
East side, from Kinsley Street to
Lake Street
Auburn Street [Added
11-28-2017 by Ord. No.
O-17-051; amended 10-9-2018
by Ord. No. O-18-028]
North side between Charles Street
and Locust Street
Beech Street From West Hollis Street to
Pleasant Street
Beacon Court North side
Belmont Street [Added
11-28-2017 by Ord. No.
O-17-051; amended 10-9-2018
by Ord. No. O-18-028]
South side
Cedar Street South side
Central Street From Chestnut Street to Pine
Street
§ 320-78.1 TOWING § 320-78.1
306:1253
Name of Street Location
Charles Street [Added
11-28-2017 by Ord. No.
O-17-051; amended 10-9-2018
by Ord. No. O-18-028]
East side, from Auburn Street to
Fairmount Street
Chestnut Street From Central Street to Kinsley
Street
Chestnut Street [Added
11-28-2017 by Ord. No.
O-17-051; amended 10-9-2018
by Ord. No. O-18-028]
East side, from Kinsley Street to
Lake Street
Cross Street East side, from Whitney Street to
Lock Street
Cross Street From Lock Street to Summer
Street
Cross Street West side, from Canal Street to
Whitney Street
Cross Street West side, from Summer Street to
northern terminus
Dow Street East side
Elm Street From West Pearl Street to Kinsley
Street
Fairmount Street [Added
11-28-2017 by Ord. No.
O-17-051; amended 10-9-2018
by Ord. No. O-18-028]
East side, from Amherst Street to
Charles Street
Fletcher Street North side
Franklin Street [Added
11-28-2017 by Ord. No.
O-17-051; amended 10-9-2018
by Ord. No. O-18-028]
South side, from Front Street to
Locust Street
Granite Street West side
Grove Street West side, from Canal Street to
Whitney Street
Green Street West side
Hanover Street From West Hollis Street to Kinsley
Street
Kinsley Street From Chestnut Street to Badger
Street
Lowell Street Entire length, except for the south
side beginning at Clinton Street
and extending 120 feet east
§ 320-78.1 NASHUA CODE § 320-78.1
306:1254
§ 320-79. Idling of large vehicles in residential districts.
Name of Street Location
Oak Street Entire length
Palm Street From Central Street to Kinsley
Street
Pierce Street West side
Pine Street From Central Street to Kinsley
Street
Pleasant Street North side
Tolles Street East side, from Whitney Street to
Summer Street
Tolles Street West side, from Canal Street to
Whitney Street
Tolles Street West side, from Summer Street to
Courtland Street
Vine Street From Central Street to Kinsley
Street
Walnut Street From Central Street to Kinsley
Street
West Hollis Street From Elm Street to Palm Street
West Pearl Street From Elm Street to Walnut Street
Wilder Street From West Hollis Street to Kinsley
Street
Wilder Street West side, from Kinsley Street to
Blossom Street
Permitted parking spaces on these streets shall be defined in paint.
On-street overnight parking between the hours of 12:00 midnight and
6:00 a.m. on designated streets for vehicles with a permit must be in
designated spaces. On-street overnight parking between the hours of
12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on designated streets but outside of a
designated space is not allowed for vehicles with or without a permit.
A. No vehicle over 18,000 pounds' gross vehicle weight shall remain
parked or stopped, whether attended or unattended, on public or
private property within any residential district of the City, with its
engine or any other auxiliary engine, power source or similar
mechanical device operating, for a period in excess of 15 minutes
between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. daily.
B. Any person found in violation of the terms and conditions of this section
shall be fined $50.
§ 320-78.1 TOWING § 320-79
306:1255

ARTICLE XIV
Manner of Parking
§ 320-80. Forty-five-degree angle.
On the following streets, every vehicle remaining in any one place thereon
shall be parked at an angle of 45 degrees, with the right front wheel to the
curb:
Name of Street Side Location
Canal Street South Intersection of the west line of
Orange Street west to the east
entrance of the Municipal Parking
Square
Deschenes Oval North and
south
Hudson Street South From west to east
Myrtle Street North From Chestnut Street to a point
opposite the west line of Palm Street
Railroad Square North From the west line of Orange Street
west to the east line of Clinton Street
Sargent Avenue Southeast From Amherst Street to Manchester
Street
Spruce Street East From Worcester Street to the railroad
right-of-way
Spruce Street West From Temple Street to a point 96 feet
north of the intersection of Spruce
Street and Worcester Street
§ 320-81. Left side of vehicle to curb.
No vehicle, without necessity, shall stop with its left side to the curb on any
of the locations where limited parking has been provided by the sections of
this chapter relating to time-limit parking and no parking.
§ 320-82. Parallel parking.
On the following street or parts thereof, every motor vehicle remaining in
any one place thereon shall be parked parallel with the curb with the right
wheels of the vehicle to the curb tandem style; that is, there shall be five
feet of space between each two vehicles so parked:
A. Main street.
(1) East side, from Canal Street to East Hollis Street; provided,
however, that there shall be no parking on the east side from the
north lane of East Hollis Street to the Worcester and Portland
Division of the Boston and Maine Railroad tracks, no parking on the
§ 320-80 TOWING § 320-82
306:1257
§ 320-83. Distance from curb.
On all streets or parts of streets named in this article, excepting those on
which no parking is allowed and those on which angle parking is required
and the following streets or parts thereof, any vehicle remaining in any one
place thereon shall be stationed within 12 inches of the curb and parallel
thereto:
Name of Street Side Location
Harbor Court South Entire length
Main Street West From Franklin Street to Amherst
Street
Railroad Square and Canal
Street
The intersection of Main Street
and the south side of Railroad
Square east to the south side of
Canal Street to the intersection of
Orange Street
§ 320-84. Leaving room for traffic.
No person shall park any vehicle upon a public street, other than an alley,
in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than 10
feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic.
§ 320-85. Direction of parking.
No person shall stand or park a vehicle on a roadway other than parallel
with the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of lawful traffic
movement, and with any part of the vehicle beyond 12 inches from the curb
or edge of the roadway, and on the following streets, except as otherwise
provided:
east side from a point 62 feet south of the south line of Temple
Street to Temple Street, and no parking in front of the State
Theater.
(2) West side, from Franklin Street to West Hollis Street; provided,
however, that there shall be no parking on the west side from a
point 35 feet south of the south line of Water Street to a point 60
feet north of the north line of Water Street and no parking on the
west side from the north line of High Street north to the south line
of Factory Street, which shall be reserved for a bus stop
B. Woodward Avenue, west side, from a point 56 feet south of Kinsley
Street southerly to the north line of Earley Street
§ 320-82 NASHUA CODE § 320-85
306:1258
Name of Street Side Location
Main Street Bridge West Entire length
Spruce Street West From Temple Street to the railroad
right-of-way
§ 320-85.1. No parking in striped areas. [Added 9-12-2012 by Ord.
No. O-12-020]
No person shall stand or park any vehicle on a public street or in a public
lot or garage in an area that has been marked with diagonal striped lines or
hash marks.
§ 320-86. Exceptions for commercial vehicles.
A. Commercial vehicles, while actually taking on or discharging
merchandise, or any vehicle while taking on or leaving passengers, may
stand for a reasonable period, not exceeding five minutes, at a
reasonable distance from the curb and parallel thereto, when such
vehicle cannot find a nearby parking position on any street in the City.
B. No commercial or private vehicle shall block or partially block any
travel lane on Main Street from its intersection at Amherst Street to its
intersection at Lake Street for a period greater than one minute
between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. and between 3:00 p.m.
and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
C. Commercial vehicles loading and unloading on Main Street between
Amherst Street and Lake Street may use more than one metered
parking space from 6:00 a.m. to 7:30 a.m., provided that the travel lane
is not obstructed.
§ 320-85 TOWING § 320-86
306:1259

ARTICLE XV
Violations and Penalties
§ 320-87. Stopping, standing or parking violations. [Amended
6-28-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-71]
A. It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of §§ 320-41
through 320-53: [Amended 11-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-88;
9-12-2012 by Ord. No. O-12-020]
(1) For any person to pay a fee for the purpose of increasing or
extending the parking meter time of any vehicle beyond the legal
parking time limit.
(2) For any such person to allow a vehicle operated by such person to
be parked after the meter for that spot has expired.
(3) For any person operating a vehicle of less length than a parking
meter space on a street to park in a position such that the vehicle is
not completely within that space, or for any person to park any
vehicle in a parking meter space in a parking lot in such a position
that the vehicle is not entirely within the limits of that space.
B. Offenses and fines.
(1) Any person violating Subsection A(1) through A(3), §§ 320-41
through 320-53, 320-55, 320-68 through 320-71, 320-76 or
320-85.1 shall be fined as follows: [Amended 9-12-2012 by Ord.
No. O-12-020]
(a) First offense within a calendar year: $10.
(b) Second offense within a calendar year: $20.
(c) Third offense within a calendar year: $50.
(d) Any subsequent offense within a calendar year: $50 and towing
of the vehicle.
(2) Until such time as the city can record multiple offenses per year, all
offenses shall be treated as the first offense. If any fine is not paid
within seven days, that fine shall be increased by $10. [Amended
11-22-2011 by Ord. No. O-11-88]
C. Fines shall be paid to the City Traffic Violations Bureau. Any person
desiring a hearing shall, within seven days, make request therefor,
whereupon a complaint shall be entered in City District Court.
(1) Failure to make payment prior to the closing of business on the next
business day shall render the owner or operator subject to the
penalties in § 320-88 for violation of the general provisions of this
chapter. Such money collected under this subsection shall be
§ 320-87 TOWING § 320-87
306:1261
§ 320-88. Violations not otherwise provided for.
Unless otherwise specified, any person who shall fail to pay the penalty
described in § 320-87 prior to the closing of business on the next business
day as provided therein or shall violate any other provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subjected to punishment as provided in
§ 1-12 of this Code.
§ 320-89. Unpaid non-moving violations. [Amended 10-13-2015 by
Ord. No. O-15-069]
earmarked for the same purposes as parking meter fees under
§ 320-43.
(2) It will constitute a separate offense from the original violation of a
legal parking time limit contained in §§ 320-33 through 320-40,
320-49 through 320-51, 320-75 and 320-78 for each subsequent
like period of time thereafter during which a person permits or
causes a vehicle to remain parked in the location where the original
violation occurred.
A. Between April 1 and October 31, any time an owner of a vehicle has
unpaid non-moving fines totaling $200 or more, the owner will be
subject to an additional $50 fine and all towing fees incurred. The
owner's vehicle will be towed and will not be released until the total fine
and all towing fees are paid in full.
B. Between November 1 and March 31, any time an owner of a vehicle has
unpaid non-moving fines totaling $100 or more, the owner will be
subject to an additional $50 fine and all towing fees incurred. The
owner's vehicle will be towed and will not be released until the total fine
and all towing fees are paid in full.
§ 320-87 NASHUA CODE § 320-89
306:1262
ARTICLE XVI
Motor Vehicle Registration Fee Exemptions
§ 320-90. Former prisoners of war.
The fee charged for the registration of one motor vehicle per year shall
be waived by the City if the owner of the vehicle was captured and
incarcerated for 30 days or more while serving in a qualifying war or
conflict, as defined in RSA 72:28 IV, was honorably discharged, and presents
documentation as set forth in this article.
§ 320-91. Documentation.
In order to qualify for the waiver provided in § 320-90, a person claiming
such waiver shall present to the City Treasurer certified records of the
armed forces evidencing honorable discharge and the dates and length of
time of capture and incarceration.
§ 320-90 TOWING § 320-91
306:1263
Chapter 320 Attachment 1
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC HISTORICAL INFORMATION
§ 320-91 NASHUA CODE § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1264
ARTICLE I
List of Amendments
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
320-1 NRO 1975, T. 12, § 1; 13-1 O-00-41 6-27-2000
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 201; 13-16
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 202; 13-16 O-95-148 12-26-1995
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 203; 13-18
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 204; 13-19
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 205; 13-20
320-2 NRO 1975, T. 12, § 401; 13-36 O-78-102 11-14-1978
O-78-111 11-15-1978
O-79-223 10-11-1979
O-83-107 4-26-1983
O-84-19,
O-84-20,
O-84-21,
O-84-22,
O-84-23 2-14-1984
O-85-120 1-22-1985
O-85-131 3-26-1985
O-85-189,
O-85-190,
O-85-191,
O-85-192,
O-85-193,
O-85-194,
O-85-195 10-8-1985
O-89-118 4-11-1989
O-89-121 4-11-1989
O-90-69 11-13-1990
O-91-80 4-9-1991
O-92-16 12-8-1992
O-96-96 11-12-1996
O-96-101 2-25-1997
O-97-125 5-13-1997
O-99-164 10-12-1999
O-00-42 7-11-2000
O-02-49 6-25-2002
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC HISTORICAL § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1265
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
O-02-82 8-13-2002
R-05-194 5-10-2005
O-06-62 12-12-2006
320-4 NRO 1975, T. 12, § 402; 13-37 O-74-169 7-14-1975
O-74-170 1-30-1975
O-75-193 5-16-1975
O-75-220 6-11-1975
O-75-241 9-16-1975
O-75-242 9-16-1975
O-75-243 9-16-1975
O-75-250 10-20-1975
O-75-253 10-20-1975
O-75-259 10-20-1975
O-75-271 12-15-1975
O-75-272 12-15-1975
O-75-274 12-15-1975
O-75-277 12-29-1975
O-75-278 12-29-1975
O-75-279 12-29-1975
O-76-10 3-26-1976
O-76-11 3-15-1976
O-76-12 3-15-1976
O-76-23 4-16-1976
O-76-31 5-17-1976
O-76-38 5-28-1976
O-76-41 9-12-1976
O-76-42 6-24-1976
O-76-47 6-24-1976
O-76-50 6-24-1976
O-76-54 7-16-1976
O-76-70 9-22-1976
O-76-71 9-22-1976
O-76-72 9-22-1976
O-76-73 9-22-1976
O-76-74 9-22-1976
§ 320-91 NASHUA CODE § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1266
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
O-76-75 9-22-1976
O-76-76 10-1-1976
O-76-77 9-22-1976
O-76-79 9-22-1976
O-76-81 9-22-1976
O-76-85 9-22-1976
O-76-87 10-1-1976
O-76-88 10-1-1976
O-76-90 10-1-1976
O-76-92 12-16-1976
O-76-93 12-30-1976
O-76-94 11-26-1976
O-76-96 12-16-1976
O-76-108 11-26-1976
O-76-110 12-16-1976
O-76-111 12-16-1976
O-76-112 12-16-1976
O-76-37 1-13-1977
O-76-114 1-13-1977
O-76-124 1-13-1977
O-76-133 3-16-1977
O-76-136 2-10-1977
O-77-142 4-19-1977
O-77-143 4-19-1977
O-77-182 5-26-1977
O-77-185 7-5-1977
O-77-186 7-5-1977
O-77-187 7-5-1977
O-77-209 8-15-1977
O-77-214 9-30-1977
O-77-215 10-13-1977
O-77-225 10-13-1977
O-77-226 10-13-1977
O-77-227 10-13-1977
O-77-228 10-13-1977
§ 320-91 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC HISTORICAL § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1267
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
O-77-229 10-13-1977
O-77-230 11-14-1977
O-77-231 11-14-1977
O-77-253 10-31-1977
O-77-254 10-31-1977
O-77-255 10-13-1977
O-77-272 11-26-1977
O-78-2 2-14-1978
O-78-30 5-1-1978
O-78-31 5-1-1978
O-78-46 5-24-1978
O-78-47 5-24-1978
O-78-56 7-12-1978
O-78-62 7-12-1978
O-78-64 7-12-1978
O-78-65 7-12-1978
O-78-69 7-12-1978
O-78-70 7-12-1978
O-78-75 9-15-1978
O-78-76 9-15-1978
O-78-77 8-10-1978
O-78-81 11-27-1979
O-78-82 8-10-1978
O-78-83 9-15-1978
O-78-84 9-15-1978
O-78-104 11-15-1978
O-78-105 11-15-1978
O-78-106 11-15-1978
O-78-133 12-14-1978
O-78-154 12-29-1978
O-79-174 3-29-1979
O-79-206 9-13-1979
O-79-232 10-26-1979
O-79-235 10-26-1979
O-79-236 10-26-1979
§ 320-91 NASHUA CODE § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1268
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
O-79-241 11-28-1979
O-79-242 11-28-1979
O-79-247 12-31-1979
O-80-07 2-12-1980
O-80-09 2-12-1980
O-80-15 3-25-1980
O-80-16 3-25-1980
O-80-36 10-14-1980
O-80-39 8-13-1980
O-80-40 9-10-1980
O-80-50 10-14-1980
O-80-64 10-14-1980
O-80-65 10-14-1980
O-80-69 12-23-1980
O-80-74 11-25-1980
O-80-84 11-25-1980
O-80-87 11-25-1980
O-80-88 11-25-1980
O-80-92 12-23-1980
O-80-97 12-23-1980
O-80-98 1-13-1981
O-81-104 2-11-1981
O-81-107 4-14-1981
O-81-108 3-24-1981
O-81-109 3-24-1981
O-81-116 3-24-1981
O-81-117 3-24-1981
O-81-120 4-14-1981
O-81-121 4-14-1981
O-81-130 5-12-1981
O-81-139 9-28-1981
O-81-145 10-13-1981
O-81-146 10-13-1981
O-81-165 12-22-1981
O-81-168 12-22-1981
§ 320-91 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC HISTORICAL § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1269
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
O-82-06 2-23-1982
O-82-07 2-23-1982
O-82-14 6-8-1982
O-83-99 5-24-1983
O-83-108 8-9-1983
O-83-121 7-12-1983
O-83-122 7-12-1983
O-83-135 10-11-1983
O-83-145 10-26-1983
O-83-146 10-26-1983
O-83-148 12-13-1983
O-83-152 12-13-1983
O-84-13 6-26-1984
O-84-16 6-26-1984
O-84-24 2-14-1984
O-84-39 6-12-1984
O-84-40 6-26-1984
O-84-43 6-26-1984
O-84-44 6-26-1984
O-84-45 6-26-1984
O-84-65 11-27-1984
O-84-80 11-27-1984
O-84-81 11-27-1984
O-84-82 11-27-1984
O-84-90 10-23-1984
O-84-100 11-27-1984
O-84-101 11-27-1984
O-84-107 11-27-1984
O-84-108 11-27-1984
O-84-115 1-22-1985
O-84-116 1-22-1985
O-85-121 1-22-1985
O-85-122 1-22-1985
O-85-127 3-26-1985
O-85-128 2-26-1985
§ 320-91 NASHUA CODE § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1270
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
O-85-132 4-9-1985
O-85-133 4-9-1985
O-85-145 4-23-1985
O-85-146 4-23-1985
O-85-147 4-23-1985
O-85-170 8-13-1985
O-85-174 10-8-1985
O-85-196 11-26-1985
O-85-197 11-26-1985
O-85-210 12-10-1985
O-85-214 12-26-1985
O-85-215 12-26-1985
O-86-09 2-25-1986
O-86-10 2-25-1986
O-86-11 2-25-1986
O-86-12 2-25-1986
O-86-14 2-25-1986
O-86-15 2-25-1986
O-86-28 3-25-1986
O-86-43 4-22-1986
O-86-44 4-22-1986
O-86-45 4-22-1986
O-86-55 5-27-1986
O-86-56 5-27-1986
O-86-57 5-27-1986
O-86-58 5-27-1986
O-86-59 5-27-1986
O-86-60 5-27-1986
O-86-61 5-27-1986
O-86-62 5-27-1986
O-86-63 6-27-1986
O-86-64 5-27-1986
O-86-65 5-27-1986
O-86-78 5-27-1986
O-86-82 7-8-1986
§ 320-91 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC HISTORICAL § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1271
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
O-86-83 7-8-1986
O-86-95 2-10-1987
O-86-102 12-9-1986
O-86-103 12-9-1986
O-86-108 10-28-1986
O-86-116 12-9-1986
O-86-118,
O-86-125 12-23-1986
O-86-127 12-23-1986
O-87-134 3-10-1987
O-87-147 4-14-1987
O-87-155 9-8-1987
O-87-163 9-22-1987
O-87-169 11-24-1987
O-88-08 2-9-1988
O-88-37 5-24-1988
O-88-44 6-14-1988
O-88-51 8-9-1988
O-88-52 8-9-1988
O-88-53 8-9-1988
O-88-54 8-9-1988
O-88-55 8-9-1988
O-88-56 8-9-1988
O-88-57 8-9-1988
O-88-58 8-9-1988
O-88-59 8-9-1988
O-88-66 10-25-1988
O-88-67 10-25-1988
O-88-68 12-13-1988
O-88-70 12-13-1988
O-88-71 12-13-1988
O-88-72 12-13-1988
O-88-73 12-13-1988
O-89-109 2-28-1989
O-89-110 2-28-1989
§ 320-91 NASHUA CODE § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1272
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
O-89-127 7-11-1989
O-89-133 8-8-1989
O-89-134 8-8-1989
O-89-156 12-26-1989
O-89-162 12-12-1989
O-89-163 12-12-1989
O-89-164 12-12-1989
O-90-01 2-13-1990
O-90-25 5-8-1990
O-90-33 6-26-1990
O-90-40 9-12-1990
O-90-41 9-12-1990
O-90-53 9-12-1990
O-90-56 9-12-1990
O-90-64 10-9-1990
O-90-65 10-9-1990
O-90-71 1-22-1991
O-90-76 1-22-1991
O-91-78 1-22-1991
O-91-83 4-9-1991
O-91-84 10-8-1991
O-91-95 10-8-1991
O-91-96 10-8-1991
O-91-97 10-8-1991
O-91-98 10-8-1991
O-91-99 10-8-1991
O-91-100 10-8-1991
O-91-101
O-92-17 4-13-1993
O-93-30
O-93-31 11-9-1993
O-93-32 11-9-1993
O-93-34 11-9-1993
O-93-35 11-9-1993
O-94-06 3-8-1994
§ 320-91 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC HISTORICAL § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1273
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
O-94-15 2-22-1994
O-94-29 4-26-1994
O-94-53 9-14-1994
O-94-54 9-14-1994
O-94-82 12-13-1994
O-95-106 5-23-1995
O-95-107 5-23-1995
O-95-111 4-25-1995
O-95-112 4-25-1995
O-95-133 10-24-1995
O-95-134 10-24-1995
O-95-135 10-24-1995
O-95-140 12-13-1995
O-95-146 12-26-1995
O-95-147 12-26-1995
O-96-13 3-26-1996
O-96-20 4-23-1996
O-96-21 4-23-1996
O-96-22 4-23-1996
O-96-22 4-23-1996
O-96-23 4-23-1996
O-96-25 4-23-1996
O-96-26 4-23-1996
O-96-32 4-23-1996
O-96-42 8-13-1996
O-96-46 8-13-1996
O-96-59 9-11-1996
O-96-64 8-13-1996
O-96-65 8-13-1996
O-96-66 8-13-1996
O-96-74 8-13-1996
O-96-75 9-11-1996
O-96-87 11-26-1996
O-96-88 11-26-1996
O-96-97 12-23-1996
§ 320-91 NASHUA CODE § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1274
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
O-96-98 11-26-1996
O-96-96 12-23-1996
O-96-97 12-23-1996
O-96-100 12-23-1996
O-96-115 1-14-1997
O-97-127 4-22-1997
O-97-146 6-10-1997
O-97-149 8-12-1997
O-97-150 8-12-1997
O-97-166 10-28-1997
O-97-168 10-28-1997
O-97-183 12-30-1997
O-97-186 12-30-1997
O-97-189 12-30-1997
O-98-10 4-14-1998
O-98-11 3-10-1998
O-98-12 3-10-1998
O-98-36 5-26-1998
O-98-37 5-26-1998
O-98-39 5-26-1998
O-98-47 8-11-1998
O-98-48 8-11-1998
O-98-49 8-11-1998
O-98-50 8-11-1998
O-98-52 8-11-1998
O-98-53 8-11-1998
O-98-54 10-13-1998
O-98-56 8-11-1998
O-98-57 8-11-1998
O-98-65 9-22-1998
O-98-66 9-22-1998
O-98-72 10-13-1998
O-98-75 10-27-1998
O-98-76 11-24-1998
O-98-82 12-22-1998
§ 320-91 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC HISTORICAL § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1275
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
O-98-83 2-9-1999
O-99-94 2-9-1999
O-99-95 2-9-1999
O-99-98 2-23-1999
O-99-92 2-23-1999
O-99-96 2-9-1999
O-99-97 2-23-1999
O-99-99 2-23-1999
O-99-100 2-23-1999
O-99-101 2-23-1999
O-99-110 4-27-1999
O-99-111 4-27-1999
O-99-112 5-11-1999
O-99-115 5-11-1999
O-99-117 5-11-1999
O-99-121 5-11-1999
O-99-122 5-11-1999
O-99-123 5-11-1999
O-99-124 5-11-1999
O-99-125 5-11-1999
O-99-126 5-11-1999
O-99-127 5-11-1999
O-99-128 5-11-1999
O-99-132 6-29-1999
O-99-136 6-29-1999
O-99-137 9-28-1999
O-99-138 8-10-1999
O-99-145 8-10-1999
O-99-146 8-10-1999
O-99-147 8-10-1999
O-99-148 8-10-1999
O-99-149 8-10-1999
O-99-150 8-10-1999
O-99-155 2-28-1999
O-99-158 9-14-1999
§ 320-91 NASHUA CODE § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1276
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
O-99-173 12-14-1999
O-00-03 1-25-2000
O-00-04 2-22-2000
O-00-05 2-22-2000
O-00-09 2-22-2000
O-00-07 3-20-2000
O-00-17 4-25-2000
O-00-31 5-9-2000
O-00-37 6-27-2000
O-00-42 7-11-2000
O-00-46 7-11-2000
O-00-49 8-8-2000
O-00-50 8-8-2000
O-00-51 8-8-2000
O-00-52 8-8-2000
O-00-58 9-13-2000
O-00-74 10-10-2000
O-00-79 10-10-2000
O-00-84 10-24-2000
O-00-86 10-24-2000
O-00-93 11-14-2000
O-00-76 3-13-2001
O-01-110 2-13-2001
O-01-114 1-23-2001
O-01-143 4-24-2001
O-01-144 4-24-2001
O-01-163 6-26-2001
O-01-164 6-26-2001
O-01-168 6-26-2001
O-01-168 7-10-2001
O-01-178 8-14-2001
O-01-189 10-23-2001
O-01-202 11-27-2001
O-01-204 11-27-2001
O-01-216 12-11-2001
§ 320-91 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC HISTORICAL § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1277
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
O-02-02 2-12-2002
O-02-10 4-9-2002
O-02-11 4-10-2002
O-02-20 4-23-2002
O-02-42 6-11-2002
O-02-43 6-25-2005
O-02-47 6-25-2002
O-02-48 6-25-2002
O-02-119 12-10-2002
O-03-190 9-16-2003
O-03-220 12-9-2003
O-03-225 12-9-2003
O-03-226 12-9-2003
O-03-227 12-9-2003
O-04-56 12-28-2004
R-05-194 5-10-2005
O-05-95 8-9-2005
O-05-100 8-9-2005
O-05-119 11-9-2005
O-05-11 11-9-2005
O-06-12 5-23-2006
O-06-14 5-23-2006
O-06-17 6-13-2006
O-06-20 5-23-2006
R-06-95 9-12-2006
O-07-77 1-23-2007
O-07-98 5-8-2007
O-07-125 9-17-2007
O-07-137 10-23-2007
O-07-140 11-13-2007
O-07-147 12-11-2007
O-07-148 12-26-2007
320-5 NRO 1975, T. 12, § 403; 13-38 O-75-261 12-29-1975
O-76-50 6-24-1976
O-78-141 12-14-1978
§ 320-91 NASHUA CODE § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1278
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
O-78-155 12-29-1978
O-78-117 3-1-1979
O-80-22 5-13-1980
O-82-15 6-8-1982
O-88-18 4-12-1988
O-90-23 6-12-1990
O-90-54 9-12-1990
O-93-33 11-9-1993
320-6 NRO 1975, T. 12, § 404; 13-39 O-78-142 12-14-1978
O-84-18 2-14-1984
O-89-119 4-11-1989
O-89-120 4-11-1989
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 405; 13-40 O-76-56 8-12-1976
O-77-269 11-26-1977
O-97-118 4-8-1997
O-98-37 5-26-1998
O-98-75 10-27-1998
O-99-115 5-11-1999
O-00-84 10-24-2000
O-03-74 6-24-2003
320-7 NRO 1975, T. 12, § 406; 13-41 O-77-269 11-26-1977
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 407; 13-42 O-77-269 11-26-1977
O-78-118 12-14-1978
320-8 NRO 1975, T. 12, § 408; 13-43 O-77-236 10-13-1977
O-78-101 11-15-1978
O-82-73 12-15-1982
O-95-123 5-9-1995
O-98-55 10-27-1998
O-99-137 9-28-1999
O-99-170 12-28-1999
320-9 NRO 1975, T. 12, § 409; 13-44 O-80-89 9-28-1981
320-10 13-45 O-01-207 11-27-2001
320-11 13-46 O-01-208 11-27-2001
O-02-23 5-14-2002
O-02-24 5-14-2002
§ 320-91 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC HISTORICAL § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1279
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
O-02-27 5-14-2002
O-02-29 5-14-2002
O-02-31 5-14-2002
O-03-224 12-9-2003
O-05-69 2-22-2005
O-05-110 10-11-2005
O-06-17 6-13-2006
O-06-20 5-23-2006
320-12 NRO 1975, T. 12, § 601; 13-76 O-83-132 8-9-1983
O-84-14 2-28-1984
O-90-49 9-12-1990
O-90-74 12-11-1990
O-94-08 2-22-1994
O-94-09 2-22-1994
O-94-10 2-22-1994
O-94-11 2-22-1994
O-94-12 2-22-1994
O-94-12 2-22-1994
O-94-14 2-22-1994
O-97-123 4-8-1997
O-97-124 4-8-1997
O-99-93 2-9-1999
O-05-116 11-9-2005
320-13 NRO 1975, T. 12, § 602; 13-77 O-84-48 9-25-1984
O-84-102 10-23-1984
O-85-135 5-14-1985
O-90-73 12-11-1990
O-94-07 2-22-1994
O-94-13 2-22-1994
O-96-15 4-23-1996
O-96-16 4-23-1996
O-96-17 4-23-1996
O-98-19 3-24-1998
O-01-174 9-25-2001
O-03-132 1-28-2003
§ 320-91 NASHUA CODE § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1280
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
O-03-166 6-10-2003
O-04-37 10-12-2004
O-04-51 11-23-2004
320-14 NRO 1975, T. 12, § 603; 13-78 O-85-136 5-14-1985
320-15 NRO 1975, T. 12, § 604; 13-79
320-16 NRO 1975, T. 12, § 605; 13-80 O-77-262 12-15-1977
O-77-238 11-14-1977
O-78-48 6-14-1978
O-80-83 11-25-1980
O-82-78 12-28-1982
O-89-129 8-8-1989
O-90-52 9-12-1990
O-94-47 8-9-1994
O-97-167 10-28-1997
O-00-53 8-8-2000
O-00-75 10-10-2000
O-04-38 10-12-2004
O-04-48 11-9-2004
O-06-03 3-14-2006
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 606; 13-81 O-77-177 5-26-1977
320-17 NRO 1975, T. 12, § 607; 13-82 O-84-30 5-8-1984
O-88-47 3-28-1989
O-88-95 3-28-1989
O-89-137 8-8-1989
320-18 13-83 O-88-95 3-28-1989
320-19
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 621;
13-101 O-84-09 2-14-1984
320-20
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 622;
13-102 O-84-09 2-14-1984
320-21
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 623;
13-103 O-84-09 2-14-1984
320-22
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 624;
13-104 O-84-09 2-14-1984
320-23
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 651;
13-121 O-75-247 12-15-1975
O-78-32 5-10-1978
§ 320-91 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC HISTORICAL § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1281
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
O-84-27 4-24-1984
O-96-107 4-8-1997
O-97-165 10-28-1997
O-97-192 12-30-1997
O-98-29 5-12-1998
O-98-31 5-12-1998
O-98-51 8-11-1998
O-98-62 9-8-1998
O-98-73 10-27-1998
O-98-77 11-24-1998
O-99-142 8-10-1999
O-99-156 9-28-1999
O-99-166 10-26-1999
O-99-172 11-9-1999
O-99-177 12-14-1999
O-99-180 12-14-1999
O-00-01 1-25-2000
O-00-08 3-14-2000
O-00-15 3-28-2000
O-00-40 6-27-2000
O-00-55 9-13-2000
O-00-56 9-13-2000
O-00-60 9-13-2000
O-00-61 10-10-2000
O-00-73 10-10-2000
O-00-85 10-24-2000
O-00-87 10-24-2000
O-00-94 11-14-2000
O-00-96 11-14-2000
O-00-108 1-23-2001
O-00-109 1-23-2001
O-01-128 4-10-2001
O-01-129 4-10-2001
O-01-131 4-24-2001
O-01-132 4-24-2001
§ 320-91 NASHUA CODE § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1282
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
O-01-140 4-24-2001
O-01-146 4-24-2001
O-01-147 4-24-2001
O-01-148 4-24-2001
O-01-150 6-12-2001
O-01-165 7-10-2001
O-01-173 8-14-2001
O-01-179 9-25-2001
O-01-187 10-23-2001
O-01-188 10-23-2001
O-01-213 12-11-2001
O-02-38 5-28-2002
O-02-40 5-28-2002
O-02-51 6-25-2002
O-02-63 7-9-2002
O-02-83 8-13-2002
O-02-87 8-13-2002
O-02-115 12-10-2002
O-02-120 12-10-2002
O-02-130 1-28-2003
O-03-146 3-25-2003
O-03-164 5-27-2003
O-03-172 6-10-2003
O-03-187 9-16-2003
O-04-27 8-10-2004
O-04-29 8-10-2004
O-04-35 10-12-2004
O-04-36 10-12-2004
O-04-52 11-23-2004
O-04-53 11-23-2004
O-04-58 3-10-2005
O-04-59 3-10-2005
O-04-60 3-10-2005
O-04-61 3-10-2005
O-05-84 5-24-2005
§ 320-91 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC HISTORICAL § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1283
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
O-05-119 11-9-2005
O-05-124 12-27-2005
R-06-95 9-12-2006
O-07-94 4-24-2007
O-07-130 10-9-2007
O-07-143 10-23-2007
320-24
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 652;
13-122 O-77-246 9-14-1977
O-79-203 9-13-1979
O-85-206 11-26-1985
O-88-76 12-13-1988
O-88-77 12-13-1988
O-88-78 12-13-1988
O-88-80 12-13-1988
O-88-81 12-13-1988
O-88-82 12-13-1988
O-88-83 12-13-1988
O-88-84 12-13-1988
O-88-85 12-13-1988
O-88-86 12-13-1988
O-88-87 12-13-1988
O-95-93 3-28-1995
O-95-94 3-28-1995
O-95-95 3-28-1995
O-95-96 3-28-1995
O-96-57 9-11-1996
320-25
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 653;
13-123 O-78-14 3-3-1978
320-26 13-124 O-91-79 4-9-1991
O-94-81 12-13-1994
O-95-91 3-28-1995
O-95-92 3-28-1995
320-27
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 701;
13-141
O-71-124,
O-74-171 8-15-1975
O-75-177 1-30-1975
O-75-251 9-16-1975
§ 320-91 NASHUA CODE § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1284
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
O-75-263 12-29-1975
O-76-82 11-26-1976
O-77-83 11-26-1976
O-77-237 10-13-1977
O-77-259 10-13-1977
O-78-15 3-3-1978
O-78-85 9-15-1978
O-80-93 1-13-1981
O-82-52 10-26-1982
O-82-64 12-14-1982
O-85-187 10-8-1985
O-85-216 12-26-1985
O-88-02 10-25-1988
O-88-79 12-13-1988
O-90-70 12-11-1990
O-94-05 3-8-1994
O-95-101 4-25-1995
O-95-102 4-25-1995
O-96-19 4-23-1996
O-96-36 8-13-1996
O-96-73 10-8-1996
O-98-22 4-14-1998
O-98-26 4-28-1998
O-99-118 5-11-1999
O-99-119 8-10-1999
O-00-35 9-13-2000
O-00-48 8-8-2000
O-00-57 9-13-2000
O-02-108 12-10-2002
O-03-177 6-24-2003
O-03-206 10-14-2003
320-28
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 702;
13-142
320-29
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 751;
13-161 O-74-131 1-20-1975
§ 320-91 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC HISTORICAL § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1285
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
O-75-282 12-29-1975
O-76-48 7-16-1976
O-77-173 4-29-1977
O-77-175 5-31-1977
O-77-212 10-13-1977
O-77-217 11-29-1977
O-77-250 10-31-1977
O-77-276 12-30-1977
O-78-68 7-3-1978
O-81-159 11-23-1981
O-82-13 4-28-1982
O-84-08 6-26-1984
O-85-188 11-26-1985
O-85-199 11-26-1985
O-85-200 11-26-1985
O-86-90 7-8-1986
O-86-91 7-8-1986
O-86-90 9-23-1986
O-86-91 9-23-1986
O-86-109 10-28-1986
O-86-110 10-28-1986
O-86-111 10-28-1986
O-87-141 5-12-1987
O-87-143 5-12-1987
O-87-173 11-24-1987
O-87-176 11-24-1987
O-88-42 5-24-1988
O-89-158 12-26-1989
O-95-124 5-9-1995
O-96-49 8-13-1996
O-96-89 10-8-1996
O-97-173 11-12-1997
O-98-30 5-12-1998
O-98-35 5-26-1998
O-98-60 8-11-1998
§ 320-91 NASHUA CODE § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1286
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
O-00-41 6-27-2000
O-00-54 9-13-2000
O-01-130 4-24-2001
O-01-133 4-24-2001
O-01-134 4-24-2001
O-01-153 6-12-2001
O-01-180 9-25-2001
O-01-186 10-23-2001
O-02-75 8-13-2002
O-02-84 8-13-2002
O-02-88 9-9-2002
O-02-89 9-9-2002
O-03-181 7-8-2003
O-03-207 10-28-2003
O-04-25 8-10-2004
O-05-120 11-9-2005
O-07-81 3-13-2007
320-30
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 752;
13-162
320-31
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 801;
13-181 O-81-125 11-23-1981
320-32
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 802;
13-182 O-81-125 11-23-1981
320-33 13-215 O-02-26 5-14-2002
320-34
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 901;
13-216 O-78-121 12-14-1978
O-82-32 8-11-1982
320-35
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 902;
13-217 O-75-225 7-14-1975
O-77-157 4-29-1977
O-78-122 12-14-1978
O-78-134 1-24-1979
O-79-173 3-29-1979
O-79-176 3-29-1979
O-85-171 8-13-1985
O-96-112 2-11-1997
§ 320-91 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC HISTORICAL § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1287
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
O-97-162 10-14-1997
O-99-178 12-14-1999
O-00-20 4-11-2000
O-01-120 3-13-2001
O-01-197 10-23-2001
O-02-36 5-28-2002
O-02-60 6-25-2002
O-02-117 12-10-2002
O-03-157 5-13-2002
O-02-163 5-13-2003
O-03-312 10-14-2003
O-06-37 10-24-2006
O-07-135 10-23-2007
320-36
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 903;
13-218 O-74-173 1-30-1975
O-77-157 4-29-1977
O-80-14 3-25-1980
O-80-38 6-13-1980
O-82-05 2-23-1982
O-82-65 11-23-1982
O-83-117 7-12-1983
O-94-51 9-14-1994
O-94-52 9-14-1994
O-96-113 2-11-1997
O-99-130 6-8-1999
O-99-135 6-29-1999
O-00-20 4-11-2000
O-04-06 4-27-2004
O-07-116 8-14-2007
320-37
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 904;
13-219 O-74-139 1-20-1975
O-74-140 3-14-1975
O-74-141 1-20-1975
O-74-153 1-20-1975
O-75-232 7-14-1975
§ 320-91 NASHUA CODE § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1288
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
O-76-129 12-16-1976
O-77-166 4-29-1977
O-78-07 2-3-1978
O-78-33 8-8-1978
O-78-87 9-15-1978
O-78-123 3-29-1978
O-78-146 12-14-1978
O-79-163 3-1-1979
O-79-161 10-15-1979
O-80-45 11-25-1980
O-80-71 11-25-1980
O-81-131 5-12-1981
O-82-27 8-11-1982
O-82-31 8-11-1982
O-82-40 9-28-1982
O-82-50 10-26-1982
O-82-65 11-23-1982
O-83-117 7-12-1983
O-84-28 4-24-1984
O-84-33 5-8-1984
O-84-86 9-25-1984
O-85-167 6-25-1985
O-85-218 12-26-1985
O-86-41 4-22-1986
O-86-42 4-22-1986
O-86-86 7-8-1986
O-88-14 3-8-1988
O-97-144 7-8-1997
O-97-191 12-30-1997
O-99-135 8-10-1999
O-00-22 4-25-2000
O-00-26 5-9-2000
O-01-137 4-24-2001
O-00-82 10-24-2000
O-02-25 5-14-2002
§ 320-91 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC HISTORICAL § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1289
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
O-02-30 5-14-2002
O-02-39 5-28-2002
O-02-117 12-10-2002
O-02-136 2-25-2003
O-03-199 10-14-2003
O-04-24 8-10-2004
O-06-15 6-13-2006
320-38
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 906;
13-220 O-74-175 1-30-1975
O-76-101 11-26-1976
O-77-158 4-29-1977
O-77-159 4-29-1977
O-77-210 9-30-1977
O-77-282 12-30-1977
O-78-33 8-8-1978
O-78-73 10-12-1978
O-78-147 12-14-1978
O-79-193 6-14-1979
O-79-221 10-11-1979
O-79-248 12-31-1979
O-80-20 3-25-1980
O-80-94 1-13-1981
O-81-150 10-13-1981
O-81-163 11-23-1981
O-82-34 8-11-1982
O-82-36 8-11-1982
O-82-59 11-23-1982
O-83-117 7-12-1983
O-83-131 8-9-1983
O-84-28 4-24-1984
O-84-33 5-8-1984
O-85-158 6-25-1985
O-85-186 10-8-1985
O-86-22 3-25-1986
O-86-52 5-27-1986
§ 320-91 NASHUA CODE § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1290
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
O-86-85 9-10-1986
O-86-92 9-10-1986
O-87-174 11-24-1987
O-87-183 12-22-1987
O-87-186 12-22-1987
O-87-187 12-22-1987
O-88-03 2-9-1988
O-88-92 2-28-1989
O-89-101 2-28-1989
O-90-28 5-8-1990
O-90-46 9-12-1990
O-90-47 9-12-1990
O-90-48 9-12-1990
O-89-140 9-26-1989
O-94-20 5-24-1994
O-94-21 5-24-1994
O-94-84 12-13-1994
O-94-73 3-28-1995
O-95-103 4-25-1995
O-95-113 4-25-1995
O-96-36 4-23-1996
O-97-178 11-25-1997
O-99-103 3-9-1999
O-00-22 4-25-2000
O-01-121 3-13-2001
O-01-149 6-12-2001
O-01-192 10-23-2001
O-02-01 2-12-2002
O-02-25 5-14-2002
O-02-30 5-14-2002
O-02-64 7-9-2002
O-02-91(A) 1-28-2003
O-02-112 12-10-2002
O-02-124 1-28-2003
O-03-157 5-13-2003
§ 320-91 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC HISTORICAL § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1291
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
O-03-162 5-27-2003
O-03-170 6-10-2003
O-03-179 6-24-2003
O-03-202 10-14-2003
O-03-205 10-14-2003
O-03-208 10-28-2003
O-04-24 8-10-2004
O-04-40 10-12-2004
O-04-21 7-13-2004
O-05-73 3-10-2005
O-07-112 9-25-2007
320-39
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 906;
13-221
320-40
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 907;
13-222
320-41
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 951;
13-241 O-78-57 8-10-1978
O-02-18 5-14-2002
320-42
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 952;
13-242 O-02-17 5-14-2002
320-43
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 953;
13-243 O-02-15 5-14-2002
320-44
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 954;
13-244 O-04-43 10-26-2004
320-45
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 955;
13-245 O-78-57 8-10-1978
O-78-151 5-11-1979
O-80-08 2-12-1980
O-81-169 11-25-1981
O-85-222 12-26-1985
O-06-44 12-28-2006
320-46
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 956;
13-246 O-78-57 8-10-1978
O-95-144 12-26-1995
320-47
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 957;
13-247 O-77-194 7-5-1977
O-78-57 8-10-1978
§ 320-91 NASHUA CODE § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1292
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
O-80-26 3-24-1981
O-80-33 4-14-1981
O-82-39 8-11-1982
O-82-51 10-26-1982
O-84-87 9-25-1984
O-85-223 12-10-1985
O-86-02 2-25-1986
O-86-93 9-10-1986
O-87-162 9-22-1987
O-90-22 5-8-1990
O-91-85 4-9-1991
O-96-54 9-11-1996
O-99-102 3-23-1999
O-02-62 7-9-2002
O-02-91 1-28-2003
O-03-168 6-10-2003
O-03-186 8-12-2003
O-03-213 12-23-2003
O-03-231 12-23-2003
O-04-67 2-22-2005
O-04-68 2-22-2005
320-48
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 958;
13-248 O-77-195 7-5-1977
O-78-57 8-10-1978
O-85-222 12-26-1985
O-02-16 5-14-2002
O-03-186 8-12-2003
320-49
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 959;
13-249 O-85-222 12-26-1985
O-86-67 5-27-1986
O-90-27 5-8-1990
O-00-14 3-28-2000
O-01-196 10-23-2001
O-02-41 7-9-2002
O-03-143 4-22-2003
§ 320-91 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC HISTORICAL § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1293
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
O-03-149 4-22-2003
O-03-168 6-10-2003
O-04-30 9-13-2004
O-04-30 9-13-2004
O-04-66 2-22-2005
O-06-22 6-27-2006
O-06-55 12-12-2006
320-50
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 960;
13-250 O-78-35 5-1-1978
O-01-196 10-23-2001
320-51
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 960a;
13-251 O-78-34 9-15-1978
O-83-129 8-9-1983
O-85-222 12-26-1985
O-86-30 3-25-1986
O-86-31 3-25-1986
O-90-26 5-8-1990
O-90-45 9-12-1990
O-01-124 3-13-2001
O-01-171 8-14-2001
O-02-14 5-14-2002
O-03-175 6-24-2003
320-52
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 961;
13-252
320-53
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 963;
13-253 O-76-44 5-28-1976
320-54 13-271 O-84-46 8-14-1984
O-88-23 4-26-1988
O-89-147 11-28-1989
O-89-160 12-26-1989
O-96-29 6-25-1996
320-55
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 1001;
13-272 O-00-80 10-24-2000
320-56
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 1002;
13-273 O-78-16 3-7-1978
O-89-147 11-28-1989
§ 320-91 NASHUA CODE § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1294
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
O-89-160 12-26-1989
O-96-28 6-25-1996
320-57
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 1003;
13-274
320-58
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 1003a;
13-275 O-75-285 12-29-1975
O-76-18 3-26-1976
O-82-43 12-13-1983
O-84-52 8-14-1984
O-84-58 9-12-1984
O-84-69 9-12-1984
O-85-124 3-26-1985
O-85-137 4-23-1985
O-87-137 3-10-1987
O-88-90 12-13-1988
O-95-142 12-26-1995
O-00-106 1-23-2001
320-59
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 1004;
13-276 O-01-181 9-15-2001
320-60
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 1005;
13-277 O-01-182 9-25-2001
320-61
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 1006;
13-278 O-96-95 11-26-1996
O-99-165 11-9-1999
O-00-34 5-23-2000
O-02-118 12-23-2002
320-62
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 1007;
13-279 O-78-98 9-18-1978
O-78-135 12-14-1978
O-80-99 1-13-1981
O-91-106 10-8-1991
O-92-18 12-8-1992
O-96-114 1-14-1997
320-63
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 1008;
13-280 O-78-88 9-15-1978
O-95-119 10-24-1995
O-95-143 12-26-1995
§ 320-91 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC HISTORICAL § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1295
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
O-96-35 6-25-1996
320-64
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 1010;
13-282 O-78-50 5-24-1978
320-65
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 1011;
13-283 O-75-199 5-16-1975
O-77-232 10-13-1977
O-78-103 11-15-1978
O-00-104 1-23-2001
O-03-205 10-14-2003
320-66
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 1012;
13-284 O-96-02 2-13-1996
320-67
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 1013;
13-285 O-87-131 2-10-1987
O-88-12 2-23-1988
O-89-160 12-26-1989
O-96-109 1-14-1997
O-03-150 3-25-20031
320-68
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 1015;
13-287 O-79-183 4-12-1979
O-80-66 10-14-1980
O-80-72 10-14-1980
O-80-102 1-13-1981
O-81-118 5-12-1981
O-82-41 8-11-1982
O-82-44 9-28-1982
O-83-117 7-12-1983
O-85-185 10-8-1985
O-85-220 12-26-1985
O-86-36 5-27-1986
O-86-17 12-9-1986
O-89-150 11-28-1989
O-91-82 4-9-1991
O-82-21 4-13-1993
O-93-25 5-11-1993
O-93-27 11-9-1993
O-93-28 11-9-1993
§ 320-91 NASHUA CODE § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1296
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
O-93-28 11-9-1993
O-94-27 4-26-1994
O-94-28 4-26-1994
O-94-32 5-24-1994
O-96-37 4-23-1996
O-96-86 10-8-1996
O-96-56 5-27-1997
O-00-59 9-13-2000
O-00-89 10-24-2000
O-01-139 4-24-2001
O-02-98 10-22-2002
O-02-128 12-23-2002
O-03-168 6-10-2003
R-05-194 5-10-2005
O-06-34 9-12-2006
O-06-15 6-13-2006
O-06-16 6-13-2006
O-07-113 7-10-2007
320-69
NRO 1975, T. 12, § 1016;
13-288(a)
O-74-159 1-28-1975
O-75-181 3-14-1975
O-75-208 7-14-1975
O-75-229 12-15-1975
O-75-239 8-15-1975
O-75-246 12-15-1975
O-75-252 9-16-1975
O-75-264 12-15-1975
O-75-269 12-15-1975
O-75-283 12-29-1975
O-76-16 4-16-1976
O-76-32 5-17-1976
O-76-34 4-28-1976
O-76-45 5-28-1976
O-76-59 7-16-1976
§ 320-91 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC HISTORICAL § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1297
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
O-76-86 9-22-1976
O-76-100 12-16-1976
O-77-153 3-16-1977
O-77-160 4-29-1977
O-77-191 7-5-1977
O-77-160 4-29-1977
O-77-191 7-5-1977
O-77-211 8-15-1977
O-77-233 10-13-1977
O-77-234 10-13-1977
O-77-235 10-13-1977
O-77-257 11-14-1977
O-77-270 11-26-1977
O-77-271 11-26-1977
O-77-281 12-30-1977
O-78-3 2-14-1978
O-78-12 3-3-1978
O-78-33 8-8-1978
O-78-38 5-1-1978
O-78-51 6-14-1978
O-78-66 7-12-1978
O-78-80 8-10-1978
O-78-87 9-15-1978
O-78-115 11-15-1978
O-78-116 11-15-1978
O-78-136 12-14-1978
O-78-137 12-14-1978
O-78-139 12-14-1978
O-78-152 12-29-1978
O-78-124 4-12-1979
O-78-127 3-29-1979
O-78-138 1-24-1979
O-79-165 3-14-1979
O-79-177 3-29-1979
O-79-183 4-12-1979
§ 320-91 NASHUA CODE § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1298
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
O-79-186 4-12-1979
O-79-189 5-10-1979
O-79-160 10-15-1979
O-79-201 7-11-1979
O-79-209 9-13-1979
O-79-211 8-20-1979
O-79-217 8-20-1979
O-79-227 10-26-1979
O-79-243 11-20-1979
O-80-27 5-13-1980
O-80-28 5-13-1980
O-80-44 11-25-1980
O-80-67 10-14-1980
O-80-68 11-25-1980
O-80-70 11-25-1980
O-80-73 10-14-1980
O-80-96 1-13-1981
O-81-118 5-12-1981
O-81-119 3-24-1981
O-81-124 4-14-1981
O-81-133 5-12-1981
O-81-134 5-12-1981
O-81-149 10-13-1981
O-81-154 10-13-1981
O-82-04 2-23-1982
O-82-28 8-11-1982
O-82-29 8-11-1982
O-82-37 8-11-1982
O-82-38 12-28-1982
O-82-44 9-28-1982
O-82-48 10-26-1982
O-82-49 10-26-1982
O-82-60 11-23-1982
O-83-89 3-22-1983
O-83-94 4-26-1983
§ 320-91 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC HISTORICAL § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1299
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
O-83-95 4-26-1983
O-83-96 4-26-1983
O-83-104 5-24-1983
O-83-106 7-12-1983
O-83-115 7-12-1983
O-83-116 8-9-1983
O-83-117 7-12-1983
O-83-119 7-12-1983
O-83-120 7-12-1983
O-83-130 8-9-1983
O-83-131 8-9-1983
O-83-134 10-11-1983
O-84-28 4-24-1984
O-84-32 5-8-1984
O-84-41 6-26-1984
O-84-55 8-14-1984
O-84-62 9-12-1984
O-84-72 9-12-1984
O-84-63 9-25-1984
O-84-83 9-25-1984
O-84-105 11-27-1984
O-85-178 9-10-1985
O-84-106 12-26-1984
O-85-129 2-26-1985
O-85-162 6-25-1985
O-85-167 6-25-1985
O-85-171 8-13-1985
O-85-178 9-10-1985
O-85-176 10-8-1985
O-85-177 9-10-1985
O-85-201 11-26-1985
O-85-217 12-26-1985
O-85-219 12-26-1985
O-86-03 2-4-1986
O-86-23 3-25-1986
§ 320-91 NASHUA CODE § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1300
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
O-86-16 4-22-1986
O-86-39 4-22-1986
O-86-40 4-22-1986
O-86-51 4-22-1986
O-86-72 5-27-1986
O-86-17 12-9-1986
O-86-46 10-14-1986
O-86-101 10-28-1986
O-86-113 12-9-1986
O-86-115 12-9-1986
O-87-142 4-14-1987
O-87-148 5-12-1987
O-87-154 7-14-1987
O-87-160 9-8-1987
O-87-164 9-22-1987
O-87-172 11-24-1987
O-87-182 11-24-1987
O-87-185 12-22-1987
O-87-188 12-22-1987
O-88-04 2-9-1988
O-88-10 3-22-1988
O-88-13 2-23-1988
O-88-20 4-26-1988
O-88-26 4-26-1988
O-88-27 4-26-1988
O-88-28 4-26-1988
O-88-29 4-26-1988
O-88-30 4-26-1988
O-88-31 5-10-1988
O-88-48 8-9-1988
O-88-49 8-9-1988
O-88-50 8-9-1988
O-88-74 12-13-1988
O-88-75 12-13-1988
O-88-91 12-13-1988
§ 320-91 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC HISTORICAL § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1301
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
O-88-93 12-13-1988
O-89-102 2-28-1989
O-89-103 2-28-1989
O-89-104 2-28-1989
O-89-105 2-28-1989
O-89-112 3-28-1989
O-89-114 3-28-1989
O-89-131 8-8-1989
O-89-132 8-8-1989
O-89-139 9-26-1989
O-90-05 2-27-1990
O-90-24 5-8-1990
O-90-42 9-12-1990
O-90-43 9-12-1990
O-90-44 9-12-1990
O-90-50 9-12-1990
O-90-51 9-12-1990
O-90-61 10-9-1990
O-90-62 10-9-1990
O-90-72 12-11-1990
O-90-75 1-22-1991
O-91-102 10-8-1991
O-91-103 10-8-1991
O-91-104 10-8-1991
O-91-105 10-8-1991
O-91-110
O-94-02 2-22-1994
O-94-03 3-22-1994
O-94-04 2-22-1994
O-94-16 2-22-1994
O-94-16 2-22-1994
O-94-24 5-24-1994
O-94-41 9-14-1994
O-94-68 12-13-1994
O-94-79 12-13-1994
§ 320-91 NASHUA CODE § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1302
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
O-94-80 12-13-1994
O-94-83 4-25-1995
O-95-104 4-25-1995
O-95-105 4-25-1995
O-95-122 5-23-1995
O-95-145 12-26-1995
O-96-18 4-23-1996
O-96-70 9-11-1996
O-96-71 9-11-1996
O-96-72 1-14-1997
O-96-102 1-14-1997
O-97-140 5-22-1997
O-97-142 8-12-1997
O-97-155 10-14-1997
O-97-157 10-14-1997
O-97-161 10-14-1997
O-97-172 11-12-1997
O-97-179 11-25-1997
O-97-182 11-25-1997
O-97-191 12-30-1997
O-97-193 12-30-1997
O-97-194 12-30-1997
O-98-21 4-28-1998
O-98-34 5-12-1998
O-98-45 8-11-1998
O-98-58 8-11-1998
O-98-85 1-26-1999
O-99-103 3-9-1999
O-99-108 4-27-1999
O-99-133 6-8-1999
O-99-157 9-14-1999
O-99-159 9-14-1999
O-99-162 9-14-1999
O-99-163 10-12-1999
O-99-171 11-9-1999
§ 320-91 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC HISTORICAL § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1303
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
O-00-24 5-9-2000
O-00-28 5-9-2000
O-00-30 5-9-2000
O-00-71 10-10-2000
O-00-81 10-24-2000
O-00-83 10-24-2000
O-00-82 10-24-2000
O-00-102 12-12-2000
O-00-105 1-23-2001
O-00-111 2-13-2001
O-01-119 3-13-2001
O-01-122 3-13-2001
O-01-136 4-24-2001
O-01-145 4-24-2001
O-01-152 4-24-2001
O-01-160 6-12-2001
O-01-170 8-14-2001
O-01-175 8-14-2001
O-01-183 8-14-2001
O-01-191 10-23-2001
O-01-195 10-23-2001
O-01-199 11-27-2001
O-01-200 11-27-2001
O-01-205 11-25-2001
O-01-206 11-27-2001
O-01-214 12-11-2001
O-01-215 12-11-2001
O-01-217 12-11-2001
O-01-220 12-26-2001
O-02-12 4-9-2002
O-02-28 5-14-2002
O-02-33 7-9-2002
O-02-45 6-25-2002
O-02-52 6-25-2002
O-02-57 6-25-2002
§ 320-91 NASHUA CODE § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1304
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
O-02-71 8-13-2002
O-02-72 8-13-2002
O-02-76 10-8-2002
O-02-79 8-13-2002
O-02-86 8-13-2002
O-02-95 9-9-2002
O-02-106 10-8-2002
O-02-109 12-10-2002
O-02-110 12-10-2002
O-02-111 12-10-2002
O-02-125 1-28-2003
O-03-133 1-13-2003
O-03-136 2-25-2003
O-03-156 4-8-2003
O-03-159 5-27-2003
O-03-162 5-27-2003
O-03-165 6-10-2003
O-03-167 6-10-2003
O-03-170 6-10-2003
O-03-179 6-24-2003
O-03-135 9-16-2003
O-03-188 9-16-2003
O-03-200 10-14-2003
O-03-205 10-14-2003
O-03-228 12-9-2003
O-03-230 12-23-2003
O-04-06 4-27-2004
O-04-20 6-22-2004
O-04-21 7-13-2004
O-04-62 2-22-2005
O-05-71 7-12-2005
O-05-73 3-10-2005
O-05-75 2-22-2005
O-06-37 10-24-2006
O-05-117 11-9-2005
§ 320-91 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC HISTORICAL § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1305
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
O-06-30 9-12-2006
O-05-123 11-22-2005
O-05-94 8-4-2005
O-05-98 8-9-2005
O-05-89 5-24-2005
O-06-10 4-25-2006
O-05-89 9-12-2006
O-06-67 1-9-2007
O-06-68 1-9-2007
O-07-84 3-13-2007
O-07-93 3-27-2007
O-07-109 7-10-2007
O-07-111 7-10-2007
O-07-126 9-17-2007
O-07-132 10-9-2007
O-07-135 10-23-2007
320-70 Derived from original
§ 13-288 (b) through (s)
See historical information for
§ 320-69.
320-71 NRO 1975, T. 12, § 1017;
13-289
O-78-114 11-15-1978
O-89-151 11-28-1989
O-90-55 9-12-1990
O-95-99 4-25-1995
O-95-100 4-25-1995
O-98-33 5-12-1998
O-01-214 12-11-2001
O-02-68 8-19-2002
O-03-178 6-24-2003
O-03-205 10-14-2003
O-04-31 9-13-2004
O-04-32 9-13-2004
O-07-84 3-13-2007
O-07-93 3-27-2007
320-72 NRO 1975, T. 12, § 1018;
13-290
O-79-179 10-26-1979
O-82-10 3-23-1982
§ 320-91 NASHUA CODE § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1306
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
O-82-75 12-28-1982
O-83-98 4-26-1983
O-85-221 12-26-1985
O-90-21 5-8-1990
O-91-81 4-9-1991
O-91-112 12-23-1991
O-95-108 4-25-1995
O-95-109 4-25-1995
O-95-110 4-25-1995
O-96-27 6-25-1996
O-00-90 10-24-2000
O-00-97 11-14-2000
O-01-138 4-24-2001
O-01-175 8-14-2001
O-01-190 10-23-2001
O-01-203 11-27-2001
O-02-32 5-14-2002
O-02-72 8-13-2002
O-02-101 10-22-2002
O-02-104 10-22-2002
O-02-123 12-23-2002
O-02-128 12-23-2002
O-03-144 4-22-2003
O-03-147 4-22-2003
O-03-148 4-22-2003
O-03-160 5-13-2003
O-04-03 2-24-2004
O-04-34 10-12-2004
O-06-11 5-23-2006
O-05-106 9-13-2005
O-05-107 9-13-2005
320-73 NRO 1975, T. 12, § 1019;
13-291
O-80-103 8-11-1981
O-01-215 12-11-2001
O-03-145 3-25-2003
§ 320-91 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC HISTORICAL § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1307
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
320-74 13-292 O-90-20 5-8-1990
O-05-108 9-27-2005
320-75 13-293 O-99-168 10-26-1999
320-76 13-294 O-03-229 12-23-2003
320-77 13-295 O-04-16 5-25-2004
320-78 NRO 1975, T. 12, § 1051;
13-311
O-80-21 3-25-1980
O-96-33 5-14-1996
O-99-181 12-28-19991
320-79 13-313 O-88-22 4-26-1988
320-80 NRO 1975, T. 12, § 1101;
13-331
O-83-115 6-12-1983
320-81 NRO 1975, T. 12, § 1102;
13-332
320-82 NRO 1975, T. 12, § 1103;
13-333
O-90-08 2-27-1990
O-95-120 5-23-1995
320-83 NRO 1975, T. 12, § 1104;
13-334
320-84 NRO 1975, T. 12, § 1105;
13-335
320-85 NRO 1975, T. 12, § 1106;
13-336
320-86 NRO 1975, T. 12, § 1107;
13-337
O-84-26 3-27-1984
O-88-19 4-12-1988
320-87 NRO 1975, T. 12, § 1201;
13-351
O-79-179 10-26-1979
O-79-195 7-11-1979
O-80-32 5-28-1980
O-82-20 6-8-1982
O-84-31 6-12-1984
O-85-225 12-26-1985
O-89-160 12-26-1989
O-90-19 3-27-1990
O-96-30 6-25-1996
O-96-31 6-25-1996
§ 320-91 NASHUA CODE § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1308
Section NRO Ordinance No.
Adoption
Date
O-00-104 1-23-2001
O-01-218 11-13-2001
O-04-09 4-27-2004
O-04-47 5-10-2005
O-05-108 9-27-2005
320-88 NRO 1975, T. 12, § 1202;
13-352
O-84-79 3-12-1985
320-89 13-353 O-97-126 5-27-1997
O-03-150 3-25-2003
320-90 13-411 O-85-208 11-12-1985
320-91 13-412 O-85-208 11-12-1985
§ 320-91 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC HISTORICAL § 320-91
320 Attachment 1:1309
Chapter 325
VEHICLES, OFF-HIGHWAY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 320.
§ 325-1. Operation in residential areas. [Amended 2-26-2008 by
Ord. No. O-08-07]
No off-highway recreational vehicles, as defined in RSA 215-A shall be
operated off a public way within 50 feet of a dwelling unit, as defined in
§ 190-264 of Chapter 190, Land Use, unless such dwelling unit is occupied
by the operator thereof.
§ 325-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall upon conviction be
fined not less than $10 nor more than $50. Each incident of operation shall
constitute a separate offense.
Chapter A400
GENERAL ASSISTANCE GUIDELINES
§ A400-1. Definitions.
As used in these guidelines, the following terms have the indicated
meaning:
APPLICANT — A person who expresses a desire to receive general
assistance, or to have his/her eligibility for assistance reviewed, and has
submitted a completed application.
APPLICATION — Action by which a person requests assistance from the
welfare office through a completed written application obtained from the
Welfare Department.
APPLICATION FORM — Form obtained from the welfare office upon which a
written request for assistance or consideration for assistance is made. Such
forms may be amended by the Welfare Officer and approved by the Mayor
and Board of Alderman.
ARREARAGES — Past due amounts on bills for basic needs (i.e.: rent, utility
bills); debts that remain after part of an overdue debt have been paid.
ASSETS — All real property, cash, real estate, personal property, future
interests and anything else of value owned by the applicant. This includes,
but is not limited to, annuities, insurance awards, expectancies and
retroactive government and insurance payments, etc.
§ 320-91 NASHUA CODE § A400-1
325:1310
ASSISTANCE (GENERAL ASSISTANCE) — Support given to applicants
through a voucher program administered and funded by each city and town
in New Hampshire.
AVAILABLE LIQUID ASSETS — Amount of liquid assets after exclusions
enumerated herein; includes, but is not limited to, cash on hand, checking
accounts, bank deposits, credit union accounts, stocks, bonds, and
securities. IRA (individual retirement account), 401K accounts and
insurance policies with a loan value and nonessential personal property
shall be considered as available liquid assets when they have been
converted into cash. Income tax refunds may also be considered.
CASE RECORD — Official files containing forms, correspondence and
narrative records pertaining to the application including determination of
eligibility, reasons for decisions and actions by the Welfare Official and types
of assistance.
CLIENT — A person utilizing the services of a social agency.
COMPLIANCE — Conformity in fulfilling official requests for information
and requirements of the Welfare Official.
ELIGIBILITY — Determination by the Welfare Official, with the assistance
of the welfare guidelines, of a person's poverty and inability to support
himself/herself and, therefore, the need for general assistance under the
eligibility formula in § A400-9.
FAIR HEARING — A hearing which the applicant may request in writing to
contest a denial, termination or reduction of assistance. A hearing will be
held before an impartial fair hearings officer, who is appointed having no
prior knowledge of the case.
HOUSEHOLD — The total number of persons (related or unrelated) living
together who share in or benefit from shelter/food expenses. The individuals
share living quarters, but are not financially liable for each other unless
they request to be treated as such. Expenses which are shared (rent,
utilities, etc.) are divided pro rata for the purposes of calculating the
applicant's need, based on the total number of persons in the household.
However, the total shelter cost must approximate the shelter guideline
amounts for the household size. (For example, three unrelated adults share
an apartment, one applies for assistance, rental assistance is determined as
1/3 of the total shelter cost for three people and the total shelter cost for all
three must approximate the guideline amounts for a household of three.)
LIABILITY FOR SUPPORT — Those persons deemed by New Hampshire law
to have financial responsibility for anyone applying for general assistance,
for example, adult children for parents, parents for adult children and
husbands and wives for each other.
MINOR — A person who has not attained the age of 18 years. Note that a
minor's residence is always that of the custodial parent.
NEED — The basic maintenance and support requirements of a person, as
determined by a Welfare Official under the standards of § A400-9E of these
guidelines.
§ A400-1 VEHICLES, OFF-HIGHWAY § A400-1
325:1311
NONRESIDENT — A person temporarily in Nashua while his/her residence
is elsewhere. Nonresidency does not preclude general assistance, however,
assistance will be of a temporary and reasonable nature given his/her
temporary status. Duplication of resources available through his/her city or
town of residence will be avoided except in cases of emergency. Cities or
towns will be contacted for reimbursement.
NOTICE OF DECISION — Written grounds for approval or denial of an
application detailing the amount and type of assistance issued, and/or the
type of assistance pending further verification. Additionally, it contains the
caseworker's name, date of applicant's next appointment, and a list of all
the information to be provided by the applicant at the next appointment.
PERMANENT RESIDENCE — Abode or domicile occupied by an applicant.
Permanent residency does not include temporary stays in shelters, motels,
or other residence not intended to be permanent. (RSA 21:6-a)
REAL ESTATE — Land, structures and fixtures attached to it.
RECIPIENT — A person who is receiving general assistance.
REIMBURSEMENT — Each recipient who becomes financially able must
reimburse the City of Nashua for assistance rendered when asked to do so.
A schedule of repayment will be determined by the Welfare Department,
in conjunction with the recipient, taking into consideration all necessary
current and future obligations. The Welfare Department may also take a lien
on real estate or civil judgments in the amount of assistance rendered. (RSA
165:28, 28-a)
RESIDENCE or RESIDENCY — A person's place of abode or domicile. The
place of abode or domicile is that place designated by a person as his/
her principal place of physical presence for the indefinite future to the
exclusion of all others. Such residence or residency shall not be interrupted
or lost by temporary absence from it, if there is intent to return to such
residency as the principal place of physical presence. RSA 165:1 (I); 21:6-a.
If another municipality moves a client into the City of Nashua, they should
provide assistance for the first 30 days of assistance according to the New
Hampshire Local Welfare Administrators Association's ethics policy.
RESIDENT — A person who has a residence within the City of Nashua.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT — All persons physically residing with the applicant,
including persons in the applicant's household and those not within the
household.
ROOMMATE — A person(s) who is/are financially responsible for himself/
themselves and living with a recipient(s) of general assistance. Persons
living together as domestic partners may be responsible for each other to
the extent that they are able.
SUSPENSION — Cessation of benefits due to noncompliance.
VOUCHER SYSTEM — The system whereby a Welfare Official issues
vouchers (authorizations for payment) directly to the recipient's vendors
§ A400-1 NASHUA CODE § A400-1
325:1312
and creditors rather than cash to the recipient. (RSA 165:1 (III). [See
Section VII.]
WELFARE OFFICER — The Welfare Officer of the City of Nashua which is
an indefinite position appointed by the Mayor under the Charter Section
42 of the City. The Welfare Officer is charged with operating the Welfare
Department in accordance with municipal, state and federal legislation.
WELFARE OFFICIAL — The official of the town or City, or his/her designee,
who performs the function of administering general assistance. Such person
has the authority to make all decisions regarding the granting of assistance
under RSA 165, subject to the overall fiscal responsibility vested in the
Mayor and Board of Aldermen. The term includes "overseers of public
welfare" (RSA 165:1) and "administrator of town or city welfare." (RSA
165:2)
WORK PROGRAM (NASHUA EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY PROGRAM)
— The City employment opportunity program that requires able-bodied
recipients to work for the City at any job within the person's capacity in
return for assistance. There are no wages paid. The recipient reimburses
the City Welfare Department at the going rate for the particular job they are
doing for general assistance provided. (RSA 165:31)
§ A400-2. Severability.
If any provision of these guidelines is held at law to be invalid or
inapplicable to any person or circumstance, the remaining provisions will
continue in full force and effect. The guidelines contained herein are
intended to be advisory and, as such, the Welfare Official or designee
shall have sole discretion towards the enforcement, application, or variance
of any of the guidelines contained herein. The Welfare Official shall not
exercise this discretion unreasonably.
§ A400-3. Confidentiality of information.
Information given by or about an applicant or recipient of general
assistance is confidential and privileged, and is not a public record under
the provisions of RSA 91-A, commonly known as the "Right to Know Law."
Such information will not be published, released or discussed with any
individual except when law requires disclosure or when necessary to carry
out the purpose of RSA Chapter 165.
§ A400-4. Roles of local governing body and Welfare Officer.
The responsibility for the day-to-day administration of the general
assistance program shall be vested in the appointed Welfare Officer of the
City. The Welfare Officer shall administer the general assistance program in
accordance with the written City of Nashua General Assistance Guidelines.
The local governing body (Mayor and Board of Aldermen) is responsible for
the adoption of the guidelines relative to General assistance under RSA 165.
§ A400-5. Maintenance of records.
§ A400-1 VEHICLES, OFF-HIGHWAY § A400-5
325:1313
§ A400-6. Application process.
A. The welfare office is required by law to keep complete records of
general assistance. In addition to general statistical records concerning
the number of persons given assistance and the cost for such support, a
separate case record shall be established for each individual or family
applying for general assistance. (RSA 41:46)
B. The purposes for keeping complete records of general assistance are:
(1) To provide a valid basis of accounting for expenditure of the
municipality's funds.
(2) To support decisions concerning the applicant's eligibility.
(3) To assure availability of information if the applicant or recipient
seeks administrative or judicial review of the Welfare Official's
decision.
(4) To provide social welfare agencies with accurate statistical
information, including the number of persons assisted and the
amount of money spent for their support, in order that taxpayers
and officials may be aware of the scope of the general assistance
program. RSA 165:2-c requires that an itemized account of all
general assistance furnished (without recipients' names) be
released to any citizen requesting it.
(5) To provide a complete history of an applicant's assistance that
might aid a welfare agency in the effort to rehabilitate the applicant
(subject to the confidentiality of such information).
C. The welfare office shall maintain case records containing, as a
minimum, the following information:
(1) The completed written application for assistance.
(2) Written grounds for approval or denial of an application, contained
in a notice of decision.
(3) A narrative history recording need for relief, the results of home
visits, if any, collateral information, referrals, changes in status,
etc.
(4) A tally sheet that has complete data concerning the type, amount
and dates of assistance given for purposes of reimbursement.
(5) A signed authorization by the applicant allowing the Welfare
Official to release, obtain or verify any pertinent information in the
course of determining eligibility of an applicant/recipient.
(6) Additional information requested by the Welfare Official pertinent
to the applicant's case.
A. Right to apply.
§ A400-5 NASHUA CODE § A400-6
325:1314
(1) Any person residing or temporarily present in Nashua has the right
to apply for general assistance by appearing in person or through
an authorized representative and by completing a written
application form. Clients are seen by appointment. If more than one
adult resides in a household, each household member shall be
required to appear at the welfare office, unless one is working or
otherwise reasonably unavailable.
(2) The Welfare Official shall not be required to accept an application
for general assistance from a person who is subject to
disqualification or suspension pursuant to RSA 165:1-b, provided
that any person who contests a determination of continuing
noncompliance with the guidelines may request a fair hearing; and
provided further that a recipient who has been suspended for at
least six months due to noncompliance may file a new application.
(3) Persons who are not legally residing in the United States shall not
be considered eligible for assistance for him or her self, however,
may be considered for assistance for their eligible children who are
here legally.
B. Welfare official's responsibilities. When application is made for general
assistance, the Welfare Official shall inform the applicant of the
following (including the applicant's responsibility in Subsection C):
(1) The requirement to submit a completed application containing all
necessary information: the applicant's signature agreeing to the
reimbursement, the signature allowing the Department to contact
all necessary agencies for investigation and verification, and that
they have been given, read (or the application has been read to
them) and understood all information. An uncompleted application
may be grounds for denial of assistance.
(2) Eligibility requirements, including a general description of the
guideline's amounts and the eligibility formula.
(3) Having to refer applicant(s) requiring emergency assistance to
agencies or resources who have agreed to provide emergency,
temporary assistance which will meet the needs of the applicant(s)
until an appointment can be arranged.
(4) The applicant's responsibility to provide documentation of all
claims, identification for all household members, receipts for
expenditures, documentation of employment, documentation of
application for other programs which would reduce or eliminate
the need for general assistance, documentation of income from any
source, loss of employment and any other similar claims materially
affecting eligibility.
(5) The necessity of applying for or utilizing other resources that could
reduce the need for or eliminate general assistance.
§ A400-6 VEHICLES, OFF-HIGHWAY § A400-6
325:1315
(6) The possible need to relocate to more affordable housing based on
client's anticipated income if deemed necessary by the Welfare
Official. Every effort will be made to maintain applicants and
recipients in their own housing unless it is clear that to do so would
probably require a continuing subsidy from the Department.
Decisions will be based on anticipated/probable income.
(7) The Welfare Official will conduct an investigation to verify and
substantiate facts and statements presented by the applicant; that
investigation may take place prior to, during or subsequent to the
applicant's receipt of assistance. This may include home visits in
the least intrusive manner as scheduled with the Welfare Officer
and the applicant. [Amended 2-26-2008 by Ord. No. O-08-07]
(8) The necessity of referral to a shelter for families or individuals
currently without housing and/or income.
(9) The joint responsibility of both the Welfare Official and applicant in
exploring the facts concerning eligibility, needs and resources.
(10) The applicant's responsibility for accurately and truthfully
reporting all facts necessary in determining eligibility.
(11) The applicant responsibility for notifying the Welfare Official of any
change in circumstances that would affect eligibility.
(12) The applicant's right to a fair hearing, and the manner in which the
review may be obtained.
(13) The applicant's responsibilities as set forth in Subsection C.
(14) The requirement of working on the welfare work program, if
physically and mentally capable.
(15) The statutory requirement of placing a lien on any real property
owned by the recipient, or any settlements or civil judgments, for
any assistance given, except for verifiable good cause and
approved by the officer or deputy officer. The applicant will be
requested to sign a lien document. Such document will be recorded
at the Hillsborough County Registry of Deeds per RSA 165:28.
However, neither the absence of signature of the applicant nor the
failure to record such lien document shall diminish the validity of
the lien.
(16) The requirement of reimbursement of all assistance when returned
to an income status and when the income is more than that
required to provide a reasonable subsistence compatible with
decency and health.
(17) The applicant's right to review the guidelines, and the
responsibilities as set forth in the guidelines.
C. Responsibilities of each applicant and recipient.
§ A400-6 NASHUA CODE § A400-6
325:1316
(1) Each applicant at the time of the initial application and at all times
thereafter, has the following responsibilities:
(a) To provide accurate, complete and current information
concerning needs and resources and the whereabouts and
circumstances of relatives who may be responsible under RSA
165:19; RSA 165:1-b.
(b) To provide identification and documentation of income and
resources of all household members applying for assistance,
including medical records if disability is claimed and any other
pertinent information when requested.
(c) To notify the welfare office within 72 hours when a change in
needs or resources may affect eligibility for continuing
assistance.
(d) Within seven days of application, to apply for and utilize any
benefits or resources, public or private, that will reduce or
eliminate the need for general assistance.
(e) To keep all scheduled appointments.
(f) To notify the Welfare Official within 72 hours of a change of
address and any changes in the members of the household or
family unit.
(g) To diligently search for employment and provide verification of
work search as directed by the Welfare Official.
(h) To accept employment when offered.
(i) To be available for full-time work.
(j) To secure and maintain adequate housing/shelter and comply
with rules and guidelines of housing/shelter.
(k) To grant home visits as reasonably requested by the Welfare
Officer.
(l) To provide a doctor's statement as to the level of work that may
be performed if the recipient claims an inability to work due to
medical problems.
(m) To participate in the welfare work program (NEOP) if
appropriate once assistance has been granted.
(n) To budget income/benefits and expenses as required by the
Welfare Official. If required by the Welfare Official, a recipient
may be required to "direct vendor" payments.
(2) Any applicant shall be denied assistance if he/she fails to fulfill any
responsibilities or requests by the Welfare Official as set forth in
the welfare guidelines without reasonable and verifiable
§ A400-6 VEHICLES, OFF-HIGHWAY § A400-6
325:1317
justification. A recipient's assistance may be terminated or
suspended for failure to fulfill any of these responsibilities without
reasonable and verifiable justification. Disqualification for general
assistance may occur as set forth in RSA 165:1-b.
(3) Any person may be denied or terminated from general assistance,
in accordance with the Nashua Welfare Guidelines and state law, or
may be prosecuted for a criminal offense if he/she, by means of
intentionally false statements, omissions, misrepresentation, by
impersonation, or other willfully fraudulent act or device, obtains
or attempts to obtain any assistance to which he/she is not entitled.
(RSA 641:3)
(4) Note: Applicant(s)/recipient(s) who claim their money or vouchers
were stolen must report these incidents to the appropriate police
jurisdiction where the incident occurred. Applicant(s)/recipient(s)
will provide proof that the incident has been reported.
D. Actions on applications.
(1) Decision. Unless an application is withdrawn, the Welfare Official
shall make a decision concerning the applicant's eligibility within
five business days after submission and acceptance of a completed
written application. A written notice of decision shall be produced
and provided to the applicant in person or mailed within three
business days following the decision. The notice of decision shall
state that assistance of a specific kind and amount has been given
and the time period of aid, or that the application has been denied,
in whole or in part, with reasons for denial. The first notice
outlining the requirements of the applicant shall be given as part of
the notice of decision when assistance has been granted. The
notice of decision shall notify the applicant of his/her right to a fair
hearing if dissatisfied with the Welfare Official's decision.
(2) Emergency assistance. At the time of initial contact, if the applicant
demonstrates and verifies that an immediate need exists in which
the applicant may suffer a loss of a basic necessity of living or
imminent threat to life or health (such as loss of shelter, heat
sources in winter, lack of food or prescriptions), then temporary aid
to fill such immediate need shall be given no later than 72 hours
from the time of the request. Such emergency assistance shall not
obligate the Welfare Official to provide further assistance after the
application process is completed.
(3) Temporary assistance. In circumstances where required records
are not available, the Welfare Official may give temporary approval
to an applicant pending receipt of required documents. Temporary
status shall not extend beyond two weeks.
(4) Withdrawn applications. An application is deemed withdrawn if:
§ A400-6 NASHUA CODE § A400-6
325:1318
§ A400-7. Verification of information.
Any determination or investigation of need or eligibility shall be conducted
in a professional manner so as not to violate the privacy or personal dignity
of an applicant.
(a) The applicant has failed to complete an application or to make
a good-faith effort to provide required verifications and
sufficient information for the completion of an application. If an
application is deemed withdrawn for these reasons, the
Welfare Official shall so notify the applicant in a written notice
of decision.
(b) The applicant dies before assistance is rendered.
(c) The applicant avails himself/herself of other resources in place
of assistance.
(d) The applicant requests that the application be withdrawn
(preferably in writing).
E. Home visits. A home visit may be made to any applicant/recipient as
determined necessary for the Welfare Official to understand all the
services needed to help the applicant, or whenever there is a
reasonable basis for such home visit. A home visit may be used as an
alternative form of verification of information when other forms of
verification are unavailable. Refusal to grant home visits without
reasonable justification shall be grounds for denial of assistance based
on the applicant's refusal to verify or provide required information to
determine eligibility/assistance.
(1) All home visits shall be conducted in such a manner as to preserve,
to the greatest extent possible, the privacy and dignity of the
applicant(s)/recipient(s).
(2) All home visits shall be prearranged, and shall take place between
the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on weekdays, unless the
applicant is unavailable and requests otherwise.
(3) During the home visit the Welfare Official may discuss any
noticeable applicable housing code violations with the applicant
and may report all violations to proper authorities. The Welfare
Official will follow up on all reported violations and may insure that
reprisal actions taken by the landlord are also reported to proper
authorities.
A. Verification will normally be required of the following:
(1) Applicant's address.
(2) Names of persons in applicant's household residential unit or
family unit.
§ A400-6 VEHICLES, OFF-HIGHWAY § A400-7
325:1319
(3) Picture identification(s), birth certificate(s), and social security
card(s). Immigration and Naturalization Service documentation for
applicant(s) and household members, where applicable.
(4) Proof of physical custody of children.
(5) Applicant's and household's/family unit's income and assets.
(6) Applicant's and household's/family unit's financial obligations.
(7) The physical and mental condition of household/family unit
members, only when relevant to their receipt of assistance, such as
ability to work, determination of needs or referrals to other forms
of assistance.
(8) Any special circumstances claimed by applicant.
(9) Applicant's past and present employment status and employability.
(10) Utility costs.
(11) Housing costs.
(12) Facts relevant to the applicant's residence.
(13) Names, addresses, and employment status of individuals
potentially liable to the City for reimbursement of benefits
provided. (RSA 165:19)
B. Verification may be made through records provided by the applicant
(for example, birth and marriage certificates, pay stubs, paychecks,
rent receipts, bankbooks, etc.) as primary sources. Failure of the
applicant to bring such records does not affect the Welfare Official's
responsibility to process the application promptly. The Welfare Official
shall inform the applicant in writing what records are necessary and the
applicant is required to produce records within seven days. [RSA
165:1-b II (a)]
C. Verification may also be made through other sources, such as relatives,
employers, banks, school personnel, and social or government
agencies. The cashier of a national bank or a treasurer of a savings and
trust company is authorized by law to furnish information regarding
amounts deposited to the credit of a recipient. (RSA 165:4)
D. When information is sought from such other sources, the Welfare
Official shall explain to the applicant or recipient what information is
desired, how it will be used and the necessity of obtaining it in order to
establish eligibility. Before contact is made with any other source, the
Welfare Official shall obtain written consent of the applicant or
recipient, unless the Welfare Official has reasonable grounds to suspect
fraud. In the case of suspected fraud, the Welfare Official shall carefully
record his/her reasons and actions. The applicant(s)/recipient(s) shall
§ A400-7 NASHUA CODE § A400-7
325:1320
§ A400-8. Disbursements. [Amended 12-23-2003 by Ord. No.
O-03-218]
be given an opportunity to explain or clarify the suspicious
circumstances.
E. Should the applicant or recipient refuse permission to have the Welfare
Official seek further information that is necessary, assistance will be
denied for lack of eligibility verification. [RSA 165:1 II (b)]
A. The City of Nashua pays through a voucher system directly to vendors
or creditors up to the dollar amount designated on the voucher. The City
will not pay any amount in excess of the amount listed on the voucher. A
recipient shall not change the amount listed on the voucher. A recipient
must sign the voucher to insure proper usage. Tobacco products,
alcoholic beverages, pet food, magazines, plants, cards, and children's
toys cannot be purchased with the food or maintenance vouchers. It is
the responsibility of the applicant to safeguard from theft, loss or
misuse of any voucher he/she receives. If an applicant/recipient causes,
permits or neglects to prevent the alteration, misuse, or transfer of a
voucher, than such act shall be considered misuse of that voucher and a
violation of welfare guidelines for which benefits may be denied or
suspended. No replacement voucher will be issued if the original is lost,
stolen, misplaced, or misused unless authorized by the Welfare Officer
or designee.
B. All assistance rendered will be in the form of vouchers or checks
directly payable to the vendor providing the service, and in accordance
with the general regulations below:
(1) Rent may only be made payable to the owner of the property unless
the Department is in receipt of a notarized agent authorization
form generated by the Department that allows otherwise. No rent
payment will be made until a rental verification form generated by
the Department has been completed. Forms not generated by the
Department will not be honored. Only property owner or
authorized agents as noted above will be recognized as having the
authority to complete the rental verification form. To be issued
payment, the vendor must be on the City's vendor file and the
property must be in compliance with current land use control
statutes and ordinances. To be placed on this file, the vendor must
supply the City's Finance Department with a completed current
W-9 form and any other documentation required by the City's
Finance Department.
(2) The rental verification form is to be considered a legal document
upon which the Department relies in determining eligibility. The
information is expected to be accurate and true. Forms which
misrepresent or inaccurately report information for the purposes of
obtaining assistance which otherwise may not be issued will be
grounds for stopping payment. Legal action may also be taken.
§ A400-7 VEHICLES, OFF-HIGHWAY § A400-8
325:1321
§ A400-9. Determination of eligibility and amount.
(3) Vouchers must be used by the void date. Prohibited food and
miscellaneous items are listed on the voucher. Stores allowing
those items to be purchased will not be reimbursed. A maintenance
voucher may be used for other than food items. All stores receiving
food, maintenance or diaper vouchers must attach the cash register
tape to the voucher in order to be reimbursed. Only the amount
used will be reimbursed.
(4) All authorizations are one time only, each authorization requiring
approval by a Welfare Official.
(5) The amount of assistance provided will be negotiated whenever
possible. The Department will always attempt to provide what is
necessary for the least cost possible. If negotiation is not possible,
the least expensive appropriate alternative will be sought.
(6) The Department will not pay charges that do not directly represent
an actual service or item except when there is no other alternative
or as provided by law. Examples include late charges, security
deposits, storage charges, key charges, damages, etc.
(7) The Welfare Official will verify if the landlord's acceptance of
vouchers for payment in instances where their tenants are under
eviction will stop the eviction proceedings. Failure to waive the
proceedings may result in the voucher being voided.
C. The City shall have no contractual agreement with a landlord/property
owner providing housing assistance to applicants, and therefore said
landlords/property owners shall have no legal recourse against the City
should the Welfare Official determine that the applicant/recipient is no
longer entitled to benefits under the welfare guidelines. If the applicant
continues to reside at the premises after general assistance from the
welfare office has been terminated any and all rents due to the landlord/
property owner, including any past and/or future rents will be the
contractual obligation of the tenant.
A. Eligibility formula.
(1) An applicant is eligible to receive assistance when:
(a) The applicant meets the nonfinancial eligibility factors; and
(b) When the applicant's basic maintenance needs (as determined
by the eligibility standards in Subsection E exceed available
income plus available liquid assets. If available income and
available liquid assets exceed the basic maintenance need the
person is not eligible for general assistance. If the need
exceeds the available income/assets, the amount of assistance
shall be the difference between the two amounts, in the
absence of circumstances justifying an exception.
§ A400-8 NASHUA CODE § A400-9
325:1322
(2) The welfare office requires applicants to utilize available resources
for basic needs: rent, food (minus food stamp allotment), cleaning
and hygiene items, utilities and prescriptions. Applicants may be
required to provide dated and signed receipts. Credit card
payments, rent-to-own furniture, cable services, internet service
and repayment of personal loans are examples of nonbasic needs.
B. Legal standard and interpretation. "Whenever a person in any town is
poor and unable to support himself/herself, he/she shall be relieved and
maintained by the Overseers of Public Welfare of such town, whether or
not he/she has residence there." (RSA 165:1)
(1) A person cannot be denied assistance solely because he/she is not a
resident.
(2) "Whenever" means at any or whatever times that person is poor
and unable to support himself/herself.
(3) "Poor and unable to support" means that an individual lacks income
and available liquid assets to adequately provide for the basic
maintenance needs for himself/herself or family as determined by
the guidelines.
(4) "Relieved" means a person shall be assisted, as the Welfare Official
shall determine, to meet those basic needs.
(5) "Maintained" means to be continued on assistance as long as
eligible.
C. Nonfinancial eligibility factors.
(1) Age. General assistance cannot be denied any person based on age.
However, age may make certain persons eligible for other kinds of
state or federal assistance, which may affect eligibility under these
guidelines.
(2) Minors. Minor applicants shall be referred to Protective Services of
the Division of Children, Youth, and Families for case management.
Minors have the residence of their custodial parent(s) or legal
guardian(s). Minors are the financial responsibility of their
parent(s) or legal guardian(s).
(3) Residence. Residence and residency shall mean a person's place of
abode or domicile. The place of abode or domicile is that
designated by a person as his/her principle place of physical
presence for the indefinite future to the exclusion of all others.
Such residence or residency shall not be interrupted or lost by a
temporary absence from it if there is an intent to return to such
residence or residency as the principal place of physical presence.
(RSA 21:6)
(4) Support actions. No applicant or recipient shall be compelled, as a
condition of eligibility or continued receipt of assistance, to take
§ A400-9 VEHICLES, OFF-HIGHWAY § A400-9
325:1323
any legal action against any other person. The City of Nashua may
pursue recovery against legally liable persons or governmental
units. See § A400-16.
(5) Eligibility for other categorical assistance. Applicants or recipients
whom the Welfare Official believes may be eligible for any other
form of public assistance must apply for such assistance no later
than seven days after being advised to do so by the Welfare Official.
Failure to do so may render the applicant or recipient ineligible for
assistance. [Amended 4-8-2014 by Ord. No. O-14-009]
(6) Employment. A person who is gainfully employed, but whose
income and assets are not sufficient to meet necessary family
expenses according to welfare guidelines, may be eligible to
receive general assistance. However, recipients who without
verifiable good cause refuse a job offer or referral to suitable
employment, participation in the Nashua Employment Opportunity
(NEOP) Welfare Work Program (RSA 165:31), or who voluntarily
leave a job (RSA 165:1 d) may be ineligible for continuing general
assistance in accordance with the procedures for suspension
outlined in the guidelines. The Welfare Official shall first determine
whether there is verifiable good cause for such refusal, taking into
account the ability and physical and mental capacity of the person,
transportation problems, working conditions that might involve
risks to health or safety, lack of adequate child care, lack of workers
compensation protection, or any other factors that might make
refusing a job reasonable. These employment requirements shall
extend to all adult members of the household/family unit.
(7) Registration with the Department of Employment Security and
work search.
(a) Registration with the Department of Employment Security
(DES) is not a precondition for initial eligibility for general
assistance. However, all applicants and adult members of their
household must, within one week from applying for general
assistance, register with DES and conduct a reasonable work
search in compliance with DES and as determined by the
Welfare Official. These work search requirements apply unless
the recipient or other adult member of the household is:
[1] Gainfully employed full time.
[2] A dependent 18 years of age or under who is regularly
attending school.
[3] Unable to work due to a verifiable debilitating condition.
[4] Unable to work due to illness or to a mental or physical
disability of himself/herself or another member of the
household/family unit verified by a doctor's note.
§ A400-9 NASHUA CODE § A400-9
325:1324
[5] Is solely responsible for the care of a child aged five or
under. A person responsible for the care of a child aged six
through 12 shall not be excused from work search
requirements, but shall be deemed to have verifiable good
cause to refuse a job requiring work during hours the child
is not actually in school, if there is no responsible person
available to provide care and no other care is available. A
person will be asked to demonstrate contacts made to
locate child care.
(b) The Welfare Official shall give all necessary and reasonable
assistance to ensure compliance with work placement
requirements, including the granting of allowance for
transportation. Failure of a recipient to comply with these
requirements without verifiable good cause will be reason for
denial or suspension of assistance. (RSA 165:1-b,d)
(8) Voluntary Quit Law. Applicant(s)/Recipient(s) subject to the New
Hampshire Voluntary Quit Law shall become ineligible for
assistance as provided by law. (RSA 165:1-d)
(9) Students. Students must be employed full-time or be available for
and seeking full time employment in order to be eligible for general
assistance.
(10) Employment of household/family unit members. All adults aged 18
to 65, who live in the same household/family unit as the recipient
and who are related to the recipient or legally liable to contribute
to the recipient's support are obligated to comply with the
employment requirements of these guidelines or participation in
the welfare work program unless they are either regularly
attending school, employed on a full-time basis, or are prevented
from maintaining employment and contributing to the support of
the person by reason of physical or mental disability which is
verifiable. The Welfare Official may waive this requirement where
failure of the other household/family unit members to comply is not
the fault of the recipient and the Welfare Official decides it would
be unreasonable for the recipient to establish a separate
household. The Welfare Official may suspend the noncompliant
recipient(s).
D. Available assets.
(1) Available liquid assets. Cash on hand, bank deposits, credit union
accounts and securities are available liquid assets, Insurance
policies with loan value and nonessential personal property may be
considered as available liquid assets when they have been
converted to cash. The Welfare Official shall allow a reasonable
time for such conversion. However, tools of a trade, livestock and
farm equipment, and necessary and ordinary household goods are
§ A400-9 VEHICLES, OFF-HIGHWAY § A400-9
325:1325
essential items of personal property, which shall not be considered
as available assets.
(2) Automobile ownership. The ownership of one automobile by an
applicant/recipient or their dependent(s) does not affect eligibility
if it is essential for medical or rehabilitation services,
transportation to and from employment, or it is essential for use
necessary to the maintenance of the individual or family.
"Essential" means that there is no other transportation available.
Car payments will not be considered justifiable expenses when
determining eligibility. The cost of purchase and maintenance of a
necessary vehicle must be appropriate to the applicant's/recipient's
income. Ownership of more than one vehicle per household may be
determined as nonessential by the Welfare Official. The book value
of a vehicle may be considered as a liquid asset and required
converted to cash prior to eligibility for anything other than
extreme emergency assistance such as food or medication.
(3) Insurance. The ownership of insurance policies in and of itself does
not affect eligibility. However, when a policy has cash or loan value,
the applicant will be required to obtain and/or borrow all available
funds, which shall then be considered available assets. Premium
payment shall not be included as "need" in determining eligibility
or amount of aid.
(4) Real estate. Real estate owned and occupied by the applicant as
primary residence shall be considered in the same manner as
rental assistance. The type and amount of real estate owned by an
applicant does not affect eligibility, although rent or other such
income from property should be considered as available to meet
need. Applicants owning real estate property, other than that
occupied as a home, shall be expected to make reasonable efforts
to dispose of it at fair market value. Applicants shall be informed
that a lien covering the amount of any general assistance they
receive shall be placed against any real estate they own (RSA
165:28). The Welfare Official shall not make mortgage payments
when the applicant has a cosigner on the note. Generally, any
mortgage payment made shall be applied to principle only. All
applicants will be required to execute any and all documents
necessary to perfect the City's lien interest aforementioned;
however, failure of applicant or recipient to do so does not limit the
City's ability to place a lien on such property.
(5) Property transfers. No person who is otherwise eligible shall
receive such assistance if he/she has made an assignment, transfer
or conveyance of property for the purpose of rendering himself/
herself eligible for assistance within three years immediately
preceding his/her application. (RSA 165:2-b)
E. Standard of need. The basic financial requirement for general
assistance is that a person is presently poor and unable to support
§ A400-9 NASHUA CODE § A400-9
325:1326
himself/herself. A person shall be considered poor when he/she has
insufficient available income/assets, not to exceed the standards posted
in the welfare office, to purchase either for himself/herself or
dependents any of the following:
(1) Shelter:
(a) The amount to be included as "need" for shelter is the actual
cost of rent or mortgage necessary to provide shelter for the
applicant's household. Such cost shall be based on approved
standards in the City welfare office [Subsection E(11)].
[1] Shelter arrearages, whether back rent, mortgage
payments, interest, condominium fees, or taxes, may not
be included in the "need" formula. Every effort will be
made by the Welfare Official to contact landlords or banks/
mortgage companies to prevent eviction or foreclosure.
Exception may be made only if such payment would
prevent eviction/foreclosure or to protect the health and
safety of the household and it does not exceed the cost of
alternative available housing.
[2] Security deposits may be considered in the "need" formula
only if the applicant is unable to secure housing with no
security deposit and is unable to secure a deposit through
other resources.
[3] Whenever a relative of an applicant is also the landlord for
the applicant, that landlord will be presumed able to assist
his/her relatives pursuant to RSA 165:19, and must prove
an inability to assist before any aid payment for shelter is
made.
[4] In cases in which the City has made an appropriate
referral for emergency, temporary shelter and the
applicant refuses to accept such a referral, or if the
applicant does not abide by the rules of the emergency
housing/shelter, the Welfare Official may suspend the
applicant by refusing to pay for alternative emergency
shelter, but may not suspend the applicant by denying
other forms of assistance to which he/she is otherwise
entitled. The applicant must accept the least costly
alternative for emergency housing assistance that is
deemed suitable by the Welfare Official for his/her
household.
(b) It is not the responsibility of the welfare office to locate
housing. Shelter assistance may be considered once the
applicant locates permanent housing.
(2) Utilities. When utility costs are not included in the shelter expense,
the most recent typical monthly utility bill will be included as part
§ A400-9 VEHICLES, OFF-HIGHWAY § A400-9
325:1327
of "need" by the Welfare Official. Utility accounts must be in the
applicant's name in order to render assistance. Applicants may be
required to make extended payment arrangements with the utility
company. Arrearages will not be included in "need" except as set
forth below:
(a) Arrearages. Arrearages will not be included except when
necessary to ensure the health and safety of the applicant
household or to prevent termination of utility service.
(b) Electric arrearages. Arrearages for electric service need not be
paid if the Welfare Official notifies the electric company that
the municipality guarantees payment of current bill, in
accordance with the rules of the New Hampshire Public
Utilities Commission relating to electric utilities.
(c) Restoration of service. When utility service has been
terminated and the Welfare Official has determined that
alternative utility service is not available and alternative
shelter is not feasible arrearages may be included in "need"
when restoration of service is necessary to ensure the health
and safety of the applicant household/family unit. The Welfare
Official may negotiate with the utility for payment, of less than
the full amount of the arrears and/or may attempt to arrange a
repayment plan to obtain restoration of service.
(3) Food. The amount included as "need" for food purchases will be in
accordance with the most recent standard food stamp allotment, as
determined under the food stamp program administered by the
New Hampshire Department of Health and Human Services under
RSA 161:2. This allotment may be adjusted to reflect on-hand
supplies of food or resources to obtain food. Food vouchers will not
be issued to applicants residing in shelters where food is provided
or readily available through local soup kitchens and food pantries.
(4) Telephone. If the absence of a telephone would create an
unreasonable risk to the recipient's health or safety (verifiable in
writing by a physician) than the lowest available basic monthly rate
will be budgeted as "need." The welfare office will not pay
telephone bills or provide telephone equipment.
(5) Transportation. If the Welfare Official determines that
transportation is necessary (e.g., for health or medical reasons, to
maintain employment, or to comply with conditions of assistance),
"need" should include the costs of public transportation or minimal
fuel purchases. No cost to prevent repossession of any kind, no
automobile payments, no registration or licensing costs will be
included.
(6) Maintenance of insurance. In the event that the Welfare Official in
consulting with the Welfare Officer determines that the
maintenance of medical insurance is essential, an applicant may
§ A400-9 NASHUA CODE § A400-9
325:1328
include as "need" the reasonable cost of such premiums. The
payment of such premiums by the welfare office shall only be
considered if the fiscal benefit for the City is greater than the cost
of the insurance.
(7) Medical expenses. The Welfare Official shall not provide for
medical, dental or eye services. The Welfare Officer shall make
modifications to this provision on an as-needed basis related to
medical necessity as documented by a medical professional. The
recipient or applicant must verify that all other potential sources
have been investigated and that there is no other source of
assistance; or that budgeted or deferred payment arrangements
cannot be made with the health care provider. Other sources to be
considered shall include state and federal programs, local and area
clinics, area service organizations and area hospital programs
(including the Hill-Burton Act) designed for such needs. When a
person applies for medical service, prescriptions, dental service or
eye service to the local welfare office, he/she must provide written
documentation from a medical professional (doctor, dentist,
licensed optometrist) indicating that these services are absolutely
necessary and cannot be postponed without creating a significant
risk that the applicant or recipient's well-being will be placed in
serious jeopardy. The Welfare Official may approve payment of any
medical fee up to the reimbursable amount set for the procedure by
the New Hampshire Medicaid Program. Medication prescriptions,
other than birth control or antagonist medications, will be
considered emergency assistance. Whenever possible, generic or
less expensive medications should be used, unless specified "brand
only" by the physician. Applicants/recipients shall be directed to
seek sample medications or apply for free medications through
their prescribing physician. The welfare office may not cover overthe-
counter medications or medications/prescriptions not covered
under the Medicaid Program.
(8) Emergency and other expenses. In the event that the applicant has
the following current expenses, the actual cost shall be included as
emergency and other expenses to determine eligibility and amount
of assistance:
(a) Legal expenses. Unless specifically required by statute, no
legal expenses will be included in the "need" formula. The
welfare office will not cover any legal expenses.
(b) Moving expenses. Moving expenses may be included in the
calculation of "need," however, will not be paid by the welfare
office. The welfare office may cover the expense of returning a
nonresident person to his/her residence at his/her request
pursuant to RSA 165:1-c. Furniture storage charges shall not
be allowed. The welfare office may assist recipients with the
first month rent to offset the cost of moving.
§ A400-9 VEHICLES, OFF-HIGHWAY § A400-9
325:1329
(c) Home ownership expenses. Where an applicant owns a home
and is eligible for assistance, the Welfare Official may
determine it necessary to pay property taxes to prevent
foreclosure and maintain the applicant in the current
household. A lien shall be placed on the property. (RSA 165:28)
(9) Unusual needs not otherwise provided for in these guidelines. If the
Welfare Official determines that the applicant's needs have
substantially changed, or that strict application of the standard of
need criteria will result in unnecessary or undue hardship (e.g.,
needed services are inaccessible to the person), such official may
make minor adjustments in the criteria, or may make allowances
using the emergency need standards stated in § A400-6D(2) of
these guidelines. Any such determination, and the reasons therefor,
shall be stated in writing in the applicant's case record.
(10) Shared expenses. If the applicant(s)/recipient(s) household/family
unit shares shelter, utility, or other expenses with a nonapplicant/
recipient (i.e., is part of a residential unit), then "need" should be
determined on a pro rata share, based on the total number of
persons in the residential unit and that all pro rata expenses have
been verified to be current (e.g., three persons in a residential unit,
but only one applies for assistance. Shelter need is 1/3 of shelter
allowance for a household of three persons).
(11) Maximum payment level determination. The Mayor and Board of
Aldermen shall approve payment levels determined by the Welfare
Officer for various allowable expenses per standard of need defined
in § A400-9. The maximum payment level for any particular
allowable expense shall be based on actual local market conditions
and costs. The payment levels shall be reviewed by the Welfare
Officer, and if warranted, will be updated to current market
conditions.116
F. Income. In determining eligibility and the amount of assistance, the
applicant's standard of need, as determined under Subsection E above,
shall be compared to the available income/assets. Computation of
income and expenses will be by the week or month and will be based on
maximum allowances posted in the welfare office as established by the
Welfare Officer and approved by the Mayor and Board of Aldermen. It is
the responsibility of the applicant to provide any information regarding
his/her income status to the Welfare Official at each appointment. The
following items will be included in the computation:
(1) Earned income. Income in cash, tips, or in-kind earned by the
applicant(s) or any member of his/her household through wages,
salary, commissions, or profit, whether self-employed or as an
employee, is to be included. Rent income and profits from produce
116. Editor’s Note: City of Nashua Welfare Department Financial Standards are included as
Appendix A at the end of this chapter.
§ A400-9 NASHUA CODE § A400-9
325:1330
sold are included in this category. With respect to self-employment,
total profit is determined by subtracting business expenses from
gross income in accordance with standard accounting principles.
When income consists of wages, the amount computed should be
that available after income taxes, social security and other payroll
deductions required by state, federal, or local law. Child-care costs,
court ordered support payments and work-related clothing costs
may also be deducted from income. Wages that are trusteed, or
income similarly unavailable to the applicant or applicant's
dependents should not be included.
(2) Income or support from other persons. Contributions from relatives
or other household members shall be considered as income only if
actually available and received by the applicant or recipient.
Persons in the relationship of father, mother, stepfather,
stepmother, son, daughter, husband or wife, are legally liable to
support the applicant(s) [RSA 165:19], and therefore may be
required to apply jointly with him/her if they are in the same
household/family unit. (Expenses shared with nonhousehold
members may affect determination of the level of need.) Any adult
(even an unrelated person or roommate) who resides in the same
household "in loco parentis" (in the role of substitute parent) to a
minor child is liable for contributing to that child's support (RSA
165:32), and is required to apply jointly with that household.
(3) Income from other assistance or social insurance programs.
(a) State categorical assistance benefits, OAA, social security
payments, VA benefits, unemployment insurance benefits,
pensions, and payments from other government sources shall
be considered income.
(b) Food stamps cannot be counted as income pursuant to federal
law. [7 U.S.C. § 2017(b)]
(c) Fuel assistance cannot be counted as income pursuant to
federal law. [42 U.S.C. § 8624(f)(1)]
(4) Court-ordered support payments. Alimony and child support shall
be considered income only if actually received by the applicant or
recipient.
(5) Income from other sources. Payment from pensions, trust funds,
and the like shall be considered income.
(6) Earnings of a child. No inquiry shall be made into the earnings of a
child 16 years of age or under unless that child makes a regular and
substantial contribution to the family.
(7) Deemed income. The Welfare Officer shall deem as income all or
any portion of any qualified state assistance reduction pursuant to
RSA 167:82, VIII, as set forth in RSA 165:1-e. When
§ A400-9 VEHICLES, OFF-HIGHWAY § A400-9
325:1331
§ A400-10. Nonresidents.
No determination of residency shall be made unless the applicant requests
return home transportation or unless the Welfare Official has reason to
believe the person is a resident of another municipality from which recovery
can be made under RSA 165:20.
applicant(s)/recipient(s) receiving benefits through the division of
human services is sanctioned by a reduction in benefits for
noncompliance, the amount of income considered available would
be the amount the applicant(s)/recipient(s) was/were receiving
prior to the sanction.
A. Eligibility. No persons shall be refused assistance solely on the basis of
residence. RSA 165:1.
B. Standards. The application procedure, eligibility standards and
standard of need shall be the same for nonresidents as for residents.
C. Verification. Verification records shall not be considered unavailable,
nor the applicant's responsibility for providing such records relaxed
solely because they are located in the applicant(s)' community of
residence.
D. Temporary or emergency aid. The standards for the fulfilling of
immediate or emergency needs of nonresidents and for temporary
assistance pending final decision shall be the same as for residents.
E. Determination of residence.
(1) Minors. The residence of a minor shall be presumed to be the
residence of his/her custodial parent/guardian.
(2) Adults. For competent adults, the standard for determining
residence shall be the overall intent of the applicant, as set forth in
the definition of "residence." The following criteria shall aid the
Welfare Official in determining the applicant's residence:
(a) Does the person have or immediately intend to establish a
dwelling place within the municipality?
(b) Does the person have property, an established dwelling place
or employment in any other municipality, to which he/she
intends to return?
(c) Does the person have a present intent to leave the municipality
at some specific future time?
(d) Has the person evidenced his/her intent to establish domicile
in some manner, such as registering a vehicle, paying
residence tax, registering to vote, opening local bank accounts,
etc. or does he/she intend to do so in the immediate future?
§ A400-9 NASHUA CODE § A400-10
325:1332
§ A400-11. Welfare work program (Nashua Employment
Opportunity Program).
F. Return home transportation. At the request of a nonresident applicant,
any aid, temporary or otherwise, for assistance to which he/she would
be otherwise entitled under the standards set forth in these guidelines,
may be used by the Welfare Official to cause the person to be returned
to his/her community of residence. (RSA 165:1-c)
G. Recovery. Any aid given to a nonresident, including the costs of return
home transportation, may be recovered from his/her community of
residence.
A. Any recipient of general assistance determined able-bodied may be
required to work through the Nashua Employment Opportunity
Program (NEOP) for the City or other appropriate local human service
agencies at any available bona fide jobs that are within his/her capacity
as reimbursement for benefits received. (RSA 165:31)
B. Participants in the welfare work program are not considered employees
of the City, and any work performed by welfare work program
participants does not give rise to any employee/employer relationship
between the recipient/welfare worker and the City. The Board of
Aldermen, through adoption of these guideline, has voted to make
provisions of Chapter 123, amending RSA 281-A:2, not to be applicable
to NEOP participants.
C. Required NEOP workers hours are based on the amount of aid rendered
and are calculated at the prevailing wage. All hours attributable to
welfare work participation shall be used to reimburse the City for
assistance given. No recipient shall work more hours than necessary to
reimburse the City for aid rendered. No NEOP participant will be
compensated in the form of a cash payment.
D. If, due to lack of available work or other verifiable good cause, a
recipient does not work a sufficient number of hours to fully
compensate the City for the amount of his/her aid, the full amount of aid
for which he/she is eligible under these standards shall still be paid.
E. The City shall provide reasonable time during working hours for the
recipient to secure work in the labor market.
F. Refusal to work does not include failure to appear for or to perform
under the circumstances listed below. The recipient should, however
attempt to schedule appointments so as not to conflict with the welfare
work program and must notify his/her Welfare Official in advance of the
appointment. The Welfare Official may require recipients to provide
documentation of the attendance at a conflicting interview or
appointment. The circumstances include when the recipient:
(1) Has a conflicting interview for a job possibility.
§ A400-10 VEHICLES, OFF-HIGHWAY § A400-11
325:1333
§ A400-12. Burials. [Amended 4-8-2014 by Ord. No. O-14-009]
City Welfare will assist with the burial costs when there is prior
authorization by the Welfare Officer and after attempts to find relatives or
other parties responsible for payment have failed. In order to be considered
for funeral assistance, a family member must appear in person at the
Welfare Office and apply for assistance of the deceased prior to the funeral
and burial. The Welfare Official will make a determination for assistance
based on the relative’s income and liabilities. If determined eligible for
assistance, the funeral may consist of cremation or burial in the City of
Nashua cemetery. Payment for burial from the Welfare Office is limited
to $750 where the total cost does not exceed $1,000 (RSA 165:27-a, I).
Resources from the Department of Health and Human Services, Social
Security or other sources as per RSA 165:3 will be applied toward reduction
of the Welfare Department cost.
§ A400-13. Notice of action.
All persons have a constitutional right to be free of unfair, arbitrary or
unreasonable action taken by local government. This includes applicants for
and recipients of general assistance whose aid has been denied, terminated
or reduced. Every applicant and recipient shall be given written notice of
every decision in an effort to ensure that the applicant understands the
decision.
(2) Has a conflicting interview at a service or welfare agency.
(3) Has a medical appointment or illness.
(4) Must care for children under the age of five. A person responsible
for a child over five but under 12 years of age shall be deemed to
have verifiable good cause to refuse to work during the hours the
child is not in school, if there is no responsible person available to
provide care and no other care is available.
(5) Is unable to work due to mental or physical disability as determined
by the Welfare Official or must remain at home because of illness or
disability to another member of the household. A physician must
verify any of these conditions in writing.
(6) Does not possess the materials or tools required to perform the
task and the municipality fails to provide for them.
G. Working hours shall be established by the Welfare Officer and are
subject to approval by the work program site supervisor. Failure of the
recipient to adhere to the established working hours will prompt review
of the recipient's eligibility for general assistance and/or possible
suspension.
A. Notice of assistance granted: When an applicant is granted assistance
the notice shall include the type of assistance given and the period of
time the assistance is given for.
§ A400-11 NASHUA CODE § A400-13
325:1334
B. Action taken for reasons other than noncompliance with the guidelines.
Whenever a decision is made to withdraw, suspend, or deny an
application for assistance a notice of the decision shall be given to the
applicant immediately or within five working days from the time
application is filled out and submitted. The notice shall contain:
(1) A clear statement of the reasons for the withdrawal, suspension, or
denial. If a denial or suspension is due to applicant's failure to
comply with these guidelines, the notice shall list those guidelines
with which the applicant has failed to comply, the specific actions
necessary to comply, and the consequence of noncompliance.
(2) A statement advising the individual of his/her right to a fair
hearing, and that any request for a fair hearing must be made in
writing within five days; a form for requesting a fair hearing; a
statement that assistance may continue, if there was initial
eligibility, until the date of hearing, if requested by the claimants.
Aid must be repaid if the claimant fails to prevail at the hearing.
C. Suspension for noncompliance with the guidelines.
(1) Compliance. Recipients must comply with these guidelines and the
reasonable request of Welfare Officials. Welfare officials must
enforce the guidelines while ensuring that all recipients and
applicants receive due process. Recipients should be given
reasonable notice of the conditions and requirements of eligibility
and continuing eligibility and notice that noncompliance may result
in termination or suspension.
(2) Conditions. Any person otherwise eligible for assistance shall
become ineligible under RSA 165:1-b if he/she willfully fails to
comply with the requirements of these guidelines relating to the
obligation to:
(a) Failure to disclose and provide verification of income,
resources or other financial material data, including any
changes in this information. This may be due to a failure to
keep scheduled appointments without verifiable good cause.
(b) Participate in the welfare work program as assigned by the
Welfare Official.
(c) Comply with the work search requirements imposed by the
Welfare Official.
(d) Apply for other public assistance, which would alleviate the
need for general assistance, as requested by the Welfare
Official.
(3) Notice of decision (first notice). No applicant or recipient otherwise
eligible shall be suspended for noncompliance with conditions
unless he/she has been given a written notice of the actions
§ A400-13 VEHICLES, OFF-HIGHWAY § A400-13
325:1335
required in order to remain eligible and a seven-day period within
which to comply. The first notice shall be given at the time of the
notice of decision and thereafter as the conditions change.
(4) Noncompliance. If a recipient willfully fails to come into
compliance during the seven-day period, or willfully falls into
noncompliance, the Welfare Official shall give the recipient a notice
of suspension.
(5) Suspension notice. Written notice of decision to a recipient that he/
she is suspended from assistance due to failure to comply with the
conditions required in a first notice shall include:
(a) A list of the requirements with which the recipient is not in
compliance and a description of those actions necessary for
compliance;
(b) The period of suspension [see Subsection C(6) below];
(c) Notice of the right to a fair hearing on the issue of willful
noncompliance and that such request must be made in writing
to the Welfare Officer or deputy Welfare Officer within five
days of receipt of the suspension notice;
(d) A statement that assistance may continue until the fair hearing
decision is made, if the recipient so requests in writing for a
fair hearing; however, if the recipient fails to prevail at the
hearing, the suspension will start after the decision and such
aid must be repaid by the recipient.
(6) Suspension period. The suspension period for failure to comply
with the guideline requirements shall last: [Amended 4-8-2014
by Ord. No. O-14-009]
(a) Either seven days, or 14 days if the recipient has had a prior
suspension which ended within the past six months; and
(b) Until the recipient complies with the guidelines if the recipient,
upon the expiration of the seven- or fourteen-day suspension
period, continues to fail to carry out the specific actions set
forth in this notice.
(c) Notwithstanding Subsection D(6)(b) above, a recipient who has
been suspended for non-compliance for at least six months may
file a new application for assistance without coming back into
compliance.
(7) Compliance after suspension. A recipient who has been subject to a
suspension and who has come back into compliance shall have his/
her assistance resumed, provided he/she is still otherwise eligible.
The burden of proof lies with the recipient to show that he/she has
come into compliance with the guidelines. The notice of decision
stating that assistance has been resumed should again set forth the
§ A400-13 NASHUA CODE § A400-13
325:1336
§ A400-14. Fair hearings.
actions required to remain eligible for assistance, but need not
provide a seven-day period for compliance unless new conditions
have been imposed.
A. Requests. A request for a fair hearing is a written request by the
applicant(s) or recipient(s) to the effect that he/she wants an
opportunity to present his/her case to a higher authority.
B. The Fair Hearing Officer. The Mayor assigns the Fair Hearing Officer.
The Fair Hearing Officer presiding over the fair hearing request must:
(1) Not have participated in the decision causing dissatisfaction.
(2) Be impartial.
(3) Be sufficiently skilled in interviewing to be able to obtain evidence
and facts necessary for a fair determination.
(4) Be capable of evaluating all evidence fairly and realistically, to
explain to the claimant the laws and regulations under which the
Welfare Official operated and to interpret to Welfare Officials any
evidence of unsound, unclear or inequitable policies, practices, or
actions.
C. Time limits for request and hearing.
(1) When an application is denied or when a recipient desires to
challenge a decision made by the Welfare Official relative to the
receipt of assistance, a request for a fair hearing must be received
within five working days of receipt of the notice of decision at issue.
(2) Hearings requested by claimants must be held within a reasonable
amount of time, not to exceed 10 working days of the receipt of the
request. The Welfare Official shall give notice to the claimant
setting forth time and location of the hearing. The notice must be
given to the claimant at least 48 hours in advance of the hearing or
mailed by certified mail to the claimant's last known address at
least 72 hours in advance of the hearing.
(3) Any applicant may withdraw, in writing, his/her request for a fair
hearing any time prior to the fair hearing and up to the time of the
fair hearing. An applicant believing to have good cause to request a
continuance or postponement may do so by contacting the Welfare
Officer at the earliest possible time prior to the fair hearing. Good
cause shall include, but not be limited to, medical emergency or
unforeseen circumstances that prevent the claimant from
attending the scheduled hearing. A claimant shall provide
documentation of such circumstance to the Welfare Officer no later
than 72 hours after the request is made. Failure to provide such
documentation and/or failure to show for a scheduled fair hearing
§ A400-13 VEHICLES, OFF-HIGHWAY § A400-14
325:1337
shall be deemed as a withdrawal of the fair hearing request of the
claimant.
D. Fair hearings.
(1) Claimant access to information. Prior to a fair hearing, a claimant
has the right to examine all records, papers and documents from
the claimant's case file which either party may wish to introduce at
the fair hearing, as well as available documents not contained in
the case file, but relevant to the action of the Welfare Official,
which is the basis for the claimant's complaint. The claimant may
introduce any such documents, papers or records into evidence. No
record, paper or document, which the claimant has not been
allowed to examine prior to the hearing, shall be introduced at the
hearing or become part of the record.
(2) Welfare Department access to information. The Welfare Official (or
a duly authorized representative) shall have the right to examine at
the fair hearing all documents on which the claimant plans to rely
at the fair hearing and may request a twenty-four-hour continuance
if such documents contain evidence not previously provided or
disclosed by the claimant.
(3) Procedures for fair hearings.
(a) All fair hearings shall be conducted in such a manner as to
ensure due process of law.
(b) Fair hearings shall not be conducted according to strict rules of
evidence or legal procedures.
(c) The burden of proof shall be on the claimant who shall be
required to establish his/her case by a preponderance of the
evidence that the Welfare Official was unlawful or
unreasonable under the welfare guidelines.
(d) The Welfare Official responsible for the decision complained of
shall attend the hearing and testify about his/her actions and
the reasons therefore.
(e) Both parties shall be given the opportunity to offer evidence
and explain their positions.
(f) The claimant or his/her representative and the Welfare Official
or his/her representative shall have the opportunity to examine
all records and documents used at the hearing. The claimant
shall have the opportunity to present his/her own case or at the
claimant's option, with the aid of others and to bring witnesses
to establish all pertinent facts, to advance any arguments,
without undue interference, to question or refute testimony or
evidence, including the opportunity to confront and cross
examine adverse witnesses.
§ A400-14 NASHUA CODE § A400-14
325:1338
(g) The decision of the Fair Hearing Officer must be based solely
on the record in light of these guidelines. Evidence, both
written and oral, which is admitted at the hearing shall be the
sole contents of the records. The hearing officer shall not
review the case record or other materials prior to introduction
at the hearing.
(h) The parties may stipulate to any facts.
(i) Any claimant may withdraw in writing his/her request for a fair
hearing at any time up to the time of the hearing. A claimant
who fails to appear for any scheduled fair hearing shall be
deemed to have withdrawn his request for such a hearing.
(j) A claimant who believes he has verifiable good cause to
request a continuance or postponement of a scheduled fair
hearing shall contact the Welfare Official at the earliest
possible time prior to the hearing. Upon verifiable good cause
shown, the Welfare Official may reschedule such hearing.
Verifiable good cause shall include, but not necessarily be
limited to, demonstrated medical emergency, or other
demonstrated unforeseen circumstances, which reasonably
prevents the claimant from attending such scheduled hearing.
A claimant shall provide documentation of such circumstances
to the satisfaction of the Welfare Official no later than 72 hours
after the request for postponement is made. If the claimant
does not provide documentation of such circumstances to the
Welfare Official within 72 hours, then the request shall be
deemed withdrawn by the claimant.
(4) Decisions.
(a) Fair hearing decisions shall be rendered within five working
days of the hearing. Decisions shall be in writing, setting forth
the reasons for decisions and the facts on which the Fair
Hearing Officer relied in reaching his/her decision. A copy of
the decision shall be mailed or delivered to the claimant and to
the Welfare Official.
(b) Fair hearing decisions will be rendered based on the evidence
presented, both oral and written, the officer's findings of fact,
these guidelines and state and federal law. The fair hearing
decision shall set forth appropriate relief.
(c) In the case of a hearing to review a denial of aid, the decision is
retroactive to the date of the action being appealed. If a
claimant fails to prevail at the hearing, the assistance given
pending the hearing shall be a debt owed by the individual to
the municipality and a repayment schedule shall be
established.
§ A400-14 VEHICLES, OFF-HIGHWAY § A400-14
325:1339
§ A400-15. Liens.
§ A400-16. Procedure for billing and recovering from government
unit of residence, relatives or other.
(d) The Welfare Official shall keep record of all fair hearing
decisions on file in chronological order. These records will
include an audio tape recording of the hearing, documentary
evidence presented at the hearing, and the written decision of
the fair hearings officer. However, neither the failure of the
hearings officer or of the Welfare Officer to record or retain
any such audiotape shall invalidate the decision of the fair
hearings officer.
(e) None of the procedures specified herein shall limit any right of
the claimant to subsequent court action to review or challenge
the adverse decision.
A. Real estate. (RSA 165:28). The amount of money spent by a town or City
to support or assist an applicant shall, except for good cause, be made a
lien for on any real estate owned by an assisted person. (This section
does not authorize the placement of a lien on the real estate of legally
liable relatives, as defined by RSA 165:19.) The Welfare Official shall
file a notice of lien with the Registry of Deeds, complete with the
owner's name and description of the property sufficient to identify it.
Interest at the rate of 6% per year shall be charged on the amount of
money constituting the lien commencing one year after the date the lien
is filed. The lien remains in effect until enforced or released or until the
amount of the lien is repaid to the City. The lien shall not be enforced so
long as the real estate is occupied as the sole residence of the assisted
person, his/her surviving spouse, or his/her surviving children who are
under age 18 or blind or permanently and totally disabled. Upon
repayment of a lien, the City must file written notice to discharge the
lien with the county Registry of Deeds.
B. Civil judgments. The City of Nashua shall be entitled to a lien upon
property passing under the terms of a will or by intestate succession, a
property settlement, or civil judgment of personal injuries awarded any
person granted assistance by the City under RSA 165 for the amount of
assistance granted by the City. The City shall be entitled to the lien only
if the assistance was granted no more than six years before the receipt
of the inheritance or award of the property settlement or civil judgment
(RSA 165:28-a). The lien shall take precedence over all other claims.
A. The amount of money spent by a municipality to support an applicant
who has a residence in another municipality, or has a father, mother,
stepfather, stepmother, husband, wife or adult child of sufficient ability
to also support the assisted applicant, may be recovered from the
municipality of residence or liable relatives. Sufficient ability shall be
deemed to exist when the relative's weekly income is more than
§ A400-14 NASHUA CODE § A400-16
325:1340
§ A400-17. Application of rents paid by City.
sufficient to provide a reasonable subsistence compatible with decency
and health. Written notice of money spent in support of an assisted
person must be given to the liable relative. The Welfare Official shall
make reasonable efforts to give such written notice prior to the giving
of aid, but aid to which an applicant is entitled under these Guidelines
shall not be delayed due to inability to contact liable relatives. Any legal
action for recovery brought under RSA 165:20 must be filed in court
within six years after the expenditure. (RSA 165:19, 20, 25). There
shall be no delay, refusal or termination of assistance while the Welfare
Official is pursuing reimbursement from responsible relatives or from
the municipality of residence.
B. The amount of money spent by the City to support a recipient who has a
court suit or settlement pending shall be recovered by notifying the
attorney or insurance carrier of the City's right to lien the suit or
settlement for all aid rendered (RSA 165:28-a). Any legal action to
recover must be filed in a court within six years after the expenditure.
C. The amount of money spent by a municipality to support a person who
has made initial application for SSI and has signed an interim
assistance program reimbursement form, shall be recovered through
the SSA and Department of Health and Human Services.
D. A former or current recipient who is returned to an income status after
receiving assistance agrees to reimburse the City for the assistance
provided. (RSA 165:20)
A. Whenever the owner of property to a person receiving assistance from
the City of Nashua is in arrears in sewer, water, tax payments to the
City, the City may apply, upon approval of the governing body, the
assistance which the property owner would have received in payment of
rent on behalf of such assisted person to the property owner's
delinquent balances, regardless of whether such delinquent balances
are in respect of property occupied by the assisted person. A payment
shall be considered in arrears if more than 30 days have elapsed since
the mailing of the bill or, in the case of real estate taxes, if interest has
begun to accrue pursuant to RSA 76:13. (RSA 165:4-a)
B. The procedure for application of such rent is as follows:
(1) The Welfare Official will issue a voucher on behalf of the tenant to
the landlord for allowed amount of rent. The voucher will indicate
any amount to be applied to a delinquent balance owed by the
landlord, specifying which delinquency and referring to the
authority of RSA 165:4-a.
(2) The Welfare Official will issue a duplicate voucher to the
appropriate department (i.e., Tax Collector, Water Department),
which shall issue a receipt of payment to the delinquent landlord.
§ A400-16 VEHICLES, OFF-HIGHWAY § A400-18
325:1341
§ A400-18. Interpretation and applicability of guidelines.
The Welfare Official is empowered to interpret and implement these
guidelines so as to best effectuate their purpose. If necessary or desirable
for the Welfare Official to vary the application of these guidelines in any
individual case, such variation shall be approved, in advance, by the Welfare
Officer appointed by the Mayor in accordance with Nashua Charter Section
42.
§ A400-18 NASHUA CODE § A400-18
325:1342

Zone standards
District Maximum Density Minimum Lot Area Minimum Frontage Minimum Lot Depth Minimum Front Setback Minimum Side Setback Minimum Rear Setback Maximum Height Maximum Stories Open Space Percentage Maximum Floor Area Ratio
R-40 1.0 40,000 150 120 125 40 - 25 - 50 35 2.5 75 - 
R-30 1.5 30,000 130 105 120 30 - 20 - 40 35 2.5 60 - 
R-18 2.5 18,000 120 100 100 20 - 10 - 30 35 2.5 50 - 
R-9 4 9,000 90 75 60 90 20 - 10 - 30 35 2.5 50 - 
R-A 6 7,500 75 60 90 25 - 10 - 25 35 2.5 50 0.5
R-B 7 6,000 60 50 80 10 - 7 - 20 45 3 35 0.5
R-C 12.5 10,000 50 50 75 10 - 7 - 10 60 5 10 35 1.0
LB 5 - 30 30 75 10 - 7 - 10 60 5 10 1.25
GB 12.5 10,000 50 50 75 10 - 7 - 10 60 4 - - 
D-1 - - - - - 0 10 0 10 10 90 6 - - 
D-3 - - - - - 0 10 0 10 10 60 4 - - 
HB 12.5 20,000 100 80 80 20 - 10 - 20 60 5 20 0.75
PI - 30,000 120 50 150 30 - 20 - 20 75 5 20 - 
GI - 5,000 50 50 75 10 - 10 - 15 60 5 10 2.0 
AI - 40,000 160 50 200 30 - 30 - 50 45 2 20 - 