MUNICIPAL CODE OF THE TOWN OF NEWMARKET, NEW HAMPSHIRE 
____________ 
Published in 2015 by Order of the Town Council 
____________ 

TOWN OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Gary Levy, Chairman 
Dale Pike, Vice-Chair 
John Bentley 
Philip Nazzaro 
Daniel Wright 
Toni Weinstein 
Edward Carmichael 
Town Council 
____________ 
Steve Fournier 
Town Administrator 
____________ 
Donahue, Tucker & Ciandella, PLLC 
Town Attorney 
____________ 
Terri Littlefield 
Town Clerk 
CURRENT OFFICIALS of the TOWN OF NEWMARKET, NEW HAMPSHIRE 
____________ 
Dale Pike, Chairman 
Toni Weinstein, Vice-Chair 
Gretchen Kast 
Casey Finch 
Amy Thompson 
Amy Burns 
Kyle Bowden 
Town Council 
____________ 
Steve Fournier 
Town Administrator 
____________ 
Donahue, Tucker & Ciandella, PLLC 
Town Attorney 
____________ 
Terri Littlefield 
Town Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the Town of Newmarket, New Hampshire. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the prior Code, as amended through May 7, 2014, and ordinances adopted by the town. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate legislation included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1 SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE SACT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and Beth Tattershall, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Eric Maher, Attorney-at-Law, for his cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that his efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the town readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of town's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Newmarket, New Hampshire. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to, organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Newmarket, New Hampshire. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Newmarket, New Hampshire. 2015. 
TOWN OF NEWMARKET, NEW HAMPSHIRE 
By the Newmarket Town Council 
ORDINANCE NO. 2014/2015-02 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE TOWN OF NEWMARKET, NEW HAMPSHIRE; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
The Town of Newmarket ordains: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Municipal Code of the Town of Newmarket, New Hampshire," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 30, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general permanent nature enacting on or before May 7, 2014, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00. Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance: (1) with respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense; and (2) with respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each act constitutes a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the town may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate an intention to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after May 7, 2014, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective upon final adoption. 
First Reading: April 1, 2015 
Second Reading: April 15, 2015 
Third Reading: May 6, 2015 
Council Approval: May 6, 2015 
Approved: _____
Philip Nazzaro, Town Council Chairman A True Copy Attest: _____
Terri Littlefield, Town Clerk  
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date
Adopted Include/
Omit Supp. No. 2014/2015-01 12-17-14 Include 1 2014/2015-02  5- 6-14 Include 1 2014/2015-03  5- 6-15 Include 1 2014/2015-04  5-20-15 Include 1 2014/2015-05  5-20-15 Include 1 2015/2016-01  7-15-15 Include 1 2015/2016-02  1-20-16 Include 2 2016/2017-01  3- 1-17 Include 3 2-2016/2017  4-19-17 Include 3 3-2016/2017  5- 3-17 Include 3 Ord. of 06-13-2017  6-13-17 Include 3 Ord. of 06-21-2017  6-21-17 Include 3 4-2016/2017  6-21-17 Include 3 5-2016/2017  6-21-17 Include 3 Ord. of 10-18-2017 10-18-17 Include 3 2-2017/2018  1-17-18 Include 4 3-2017/2018  4-18-18 Include 4 Amend. of 1-24-17  1-24-18 Include 4 5-2017/2018  6-20-18 Include 4  
PART I - TOWN CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed in this part is the town Charter which was originally adopted on March 13, 1990, and effective on January 1, 1991. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings and catchlines has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE 1. - INCORPORATION; FORM OF GOVERNMENT; POWER 

Sec. 1.1. - Incorporation. 
    The inhabitants of the Town of Newmarket in the County of Rockingham shall continue to be a body corporate and politic under the name of the Town of Newmarket as incorporated on December 15, 1727. 
(Amd. of 5-9-1995) 
Sec. 1.2. - Form of government. 
    Newmarket has a Town Council form of government with a Town Administrator under RSA 49-D:3. The administration of the fiscal, prudential, municipal, and other affairs of the Town, with the governance thereof, shall be vested in a Town Council, shall be directed by a Town Administrator, and shall consist of the various departments of the Town as established [from] time to time by the Town Council. Except as expressly authorized by this Charter, no Councilor shall participate in the conduct of the administrative affairs of the Town. 
(Amd. of 3-11-2014) 
Sec. 1.3. - Construction. 
    The powers of the municipality under this Charter are to be construed liberally in favor of the Town, and the specific mention of particular powers is not intended to limit in any way the general powers of the municipality as stated in Section 1.1. 
    Any word in this Charter, which may be construed to be either masculine or feminine gender, shall be considered gender free. 
Sec. 1.4. - Inter-governmental relations. 
    Subject only to express limitations in the construction of the New Hampshire statutes, the Town may exercise any of its powers or perform any of its functions under this Charter and may participate in the financing thereof, jointly or in cooperation, by contract or otherwise, with the State of New Hampshire or any political subdivision or agency thereof, or the United States of America or any agency thereof. 
ARTICLE 2. - ELECTIONS; ELECTION OFFICIALS; CONDUCT OF ELECTIONS 

Sec. 2.1. - Composition of Board of Election Officers. 
    The Supervisors of the Checklist, the Moderator, and the Town Clerk shall constitute the Board of Election Officers. The Moderator shall chair the Board. The Town Clerk shall serve as the Clerk of the Board. 
Sec. 2.2. - Moderator. 
    There shall be a Moderator of the Town who shall have all the powers and duties granted to him by this Charter and State law. He shall be elected on an at-large basis to a term of two (2) years at the Town election. Without limitation to the foregoing, for election purposes, the Moderator shall have the power to appoint all election officials except those, which must be elected or otherwise appointed. The Moderator shall determine whether all ballots from all polling places are to be counted in one or more locations. Vacancies in the office of Moderator shall be filled by appointment made by the Supervisors of the Checklist. 
Sec. 2.3. - Supervisors of the Checklist. 
A.  There shall be three (3) Supervisors of the Checklist who shall hold office for six (6) years (and until their successors are elected and qualified) on a staggered basis so that one Supervisor is elected every two years at the Town election. 
B.  Vacancies in the Supervisors of the Checklist shall be filled pursuant to RSA 669:64. The person so appointed shall hold office until the vacancy for the unexpired term is filled at the next Town election. 
C.  The Supervisors shall elect a chair for a term of two (2) years. 
(Amd. of 3-11-2014) 
Sec. 2.4. - Duties and sessions of the Supervisors of the Checklist. 
    The Supervisors of the Checklist shall have such powers and duties as are specified under New Hampshire law. 
Sec. 2.5. - Conduct of elections. 
A.  The election of officers, whose duty it is to conduct regular elections, shall use a non-partisan official ballot system as detailed in the election laws of the State of New Hampshire, on the second Tuesday in March to choose Councilors and such other officials as are specified by this Charter, each of whom shall be elected by the voters of the entire Town. 
B.  At all Town elections the polls shall be open during hours designated by the Town Council in consultation with the Supervisors of the Checklist and the Town Moderator. 
C.  The election laws of the State of New Hampshire shall govern voter qualifications. 
D.  The Town Council shall specify the polling places of the Town. 
(Amd. of 5-9-1995; Amd. of 12-20-2011; Amd. of 3-11-2014) 
Sec. 2.6. - Preparation of ballots. 
    The Town Clerk shall prepare ballots to be used at all local referenda and at elections at which Town officers are chosen. The ballots shall contain in appropriate sections the names of all candidates, listed in accordance with State law, without party designation. Below the list of names of the candidates of each office there shall be as many blank spaces as there are offices to be filled at the election. No titles, military, professional or otherwise, shall accompany the name of any candidate on the ballot. 
(Amd. of 3-11-2014) 
Sec. 2.7. - Preservation of ballots. 
    All the ballots cast at each election shall be preserved, maintained and sealed as required by the election laws of the State of New Hampshire. 
Sec. 2.8. - Contested elections. 
    Contested elections shall be resolved in accordance with State law. Tied elections for any elected office shall be determined by lot in a manner as decided by the Town Clerk in the presence of the tied candidates. 
Sec. 2.9. - Display of campaign materials at polling place. 
    Persons as candidates for elected office or as representing or working for a candidate for office or promoting a petition, resolution, referendum or measure on the ballot may not solicit votes, display, exhibit or distribute any campaign materials in violation of local ordinances or State statutes. The Moderator shall exercise his powers under State law relative to the conduct of elections, distribution of campaign materials and electioneering within the polling place. 
ARTICLE 3. - TOWN COUNCIL 

Sec. 3.1. - Membership; term of office. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, all of the powers of the Town shall be vested in a Town Council (hereinafter referred to as the "Council") of seven (7) Councilors. The Councilors shall be elected from the Town at-large for a three (3) year term of office. 
B.  Except as provided in Article 12 [10], all members shall take office on the first Monday following the second Tuesday in March following their election and shall hold office until their successors are duly elected and qualified. 
(Amd. of 12-20-2011) 
Sec. 3.2. - Organizational meeting. 
    Except as provided in Article 12 [10], the Councilors so chosen shall meet in their capacity as the Council on the first Monday following the second Tuesday in March next following their election for the purpose of taking their respective oaths of office, adopting rules, and for the transaction of business required by law or ordinance to be transacted at such meeting. The Town Clerk shall act as the Clerk of the Council, and the Moderator shall preside without vote at the first organizational meeting of the Council following enactment of this Charter. 
(Amd. of 12-20-2011) 
Sec. 3.3. - Selection of Chair and Vice-Chair. 
    The Council shall, by the affirmative vote of at least four (4) members, at its first regular meeting in March following each election, choose one of its members to chair the Council for a term of one (1) year. The Council shall choose one of its members to be Vice-Chair, for a term of one (1) year, who shall act in the absence or disability of the Chair. In the event of a vacancy occurring in the office of Chair, the Vice-Chair shall serve out the unexpired term. The Chair of the Council shall be the official head of the Town for all ceremonial purposes; he shall preside at all meetings of the Council and may speak and vote at such meetings. 
(Amd. of 12-20-2011) 
Sec. 3.4. - Qualifications of Councilors. 
    Only voters who at all times during their term of office are and remain residents of the Town shall be eligible to hold the office of Councilor. To be eligible for election to the office of Councilor, a candidate must be of voting age and must have been a resident of the Town for at least one hundred eighty (180) days immediately before the election. The Council is the sole judge of qualification for office. The Council shall declare a vacancy in the event that a member is convicted of committing a Federal or State crime punishable by imprisonment for more than one (1) year. A majority of the Council may after investigation and hearing declare a vacancy if a member has missed three (3) regularly scheduled meetings in sequence without leave of the Council; has missed one-third ( 1/3 ) of all meetings within a calendar year without leave of the Council; has interfered with administration, falsified records, misapplied Town funds or property, or is guilty of public conduct the result of which would bring loss of respect for the Council or the Town of Newmarket. No Councilor shall, during his term, be eligible to hold any other Town position of remuneration nor shall he transact any business with the Town except pursuant to Article 7 of this Charter. 
Sec. 3.5. - Vacancies. 
    Vacancies occurring in the office of Councilor at any time shall be filled, by appointment, until the next regular election, by the Council at its next regular meeting, by majority vote of four (4) Councilors. 
Sec. 3.6. - Salaries and compensation. 
    Councilors shall receive as salary the sum of one thousand five hundred ($1,500.00) dollars per year. The Chair shall receive an additional five hundred ($500.00) dollars per year. Councilors shall receive reimbursement for reasonable mileage and expenses incurred in the performance of Town business outside the Town limits of Newmarket according to rules of the Council. 
Sec. 3.7. - Exercise of powers; meetings; rules of procedure. 
A.  Exercise of powers. Except as otherwise prohibited by law or this Charter, the powers of the Council may be exercised in a manner determined by it. 
B.  [Quorum.] A quorum of the Council for the transaction of any business shall be four (4) of the members currently in office. However, a smaller number may adjourn the meeting to another time or date. 
C.  Meetings. All meetings of the Council shall be public as required by RSA ch. 91-A. Regular meetings shall be held on such day or days of each month at such time as the Council shall by ordinance or resolution direct. Special meetings may be called by the Chair. Special meetings also may be called at the written request of the Town Administrator or at least four (4) Councilors, and upon such request the Chair of the Council shall call such special meeting. Written notice of said meeting shall be delivered to each Councilor at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the call of the meeting. The method of delivery of notice for special meetings shall be established by Council rule. 
D.  Rules of procedure. The Council shall establish rules for its proceedings not inconsistent with this Charter. Every matter coming before the Council for action shall be put to a vote and all members shall vote "aye", "nay", or abstain and give reason for abstaining. The results of such voting shall be duly recorded. All votes shall be recorded by roll call except votes on procedural matters. 
Sec. 3.8. - Ordinances and resolutions. 
A.  An ordinance or resolution may be introduced by any member at any regular or special meeting of the Council. Upon introduction of any ordinance or resolution, the Town Administrator or his designee shall distribute a copy to each Councilor and to the Town Administrator, shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the Town Clerk and post a copy in such other public places as the Council may designate. 
B.  Every proposed ordinance of the Council shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for adoption. No ordinance shall contain more than one subject, which shall be clearly expressed in its title. Each ordinance shall be identified by a number and a short title. The enacting clause shall be "The Town of Newmarket ordains ...". Any ordinance which repeals or amends an existing ordinance shall set out in full the ordinance, sections, or subsections to be repealed or amended, and shall indicate matter to be omitted by enclosing it in brackets or by strikeout type, and shall indicate new matter by underscoring or by italics. 
C.  After passage of the ordinance's first reading, it shall be published at least once together with a notice of the time and place when and where it will be given a public hearing and be considered for final passage. The first such publication shall precede the date of said hearing by at least seven (7) calendar days. Publication for purposes of this Section shall mean the publication of a notice in any paper distributed in the Town of Newmarket as well as the posting of the notice in at least two (2) other public venues as the Town Council may designate, one of which may be the Town's website, stating the number and title of the ordinance and either the text of the ordinance in full or if the full text is not published, then a brief explanation of the purpose of the ordinance and information as to where and when any interested person may obtain a copy of the complete ordinance. Final action on said ordinance shall not be taken by the Town Council until at least seven (7) calendar days after the public hearing on it. 
D.  Every ordinance, including zoning ordinances, adopted by the Council, shall take effect upon passage and publication as ordinances required by law, or at a later date as specified in the ordinance. No ordinance shall be introduced and adopted during the same meeting. 
E.  All ordinances, including any amendments thereto, shall be recorded in full, uniformly, and permanently, by the Town Clerk, and each ordinance so recorded shall be authenticated by affixing the signatures of the Council Chair and the Town Clerk and the Town Seal, and kept on file in the office of the Town Clerk. The Town Clerk shall be responsible for the systematic indexing, printing, publication, and maintenance of the ordinances of the Town. Copies of any or all ordinances shall be available to the public, and the Town Clerk may charge a fee to defray the printing costs. 
F.  Every proposed resolution of the Council shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for adoption. No resolution shall contain more than one subject, which shall be clearly expressed in its title. Each resolution shall be identified by a number and short title. The resolution shall have a clause or clauses that explain the reason for the action, followed by the substance of the resolution. Notice, reading, and adoption requirements shall be as specified in rules adopted by the Council. 
(Amd. of 3-11-2014) 
Sec. 3.9. - Emergency ordinances. 
    Notwithstanding other provisions of this Charter, to meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or the public peace, the Council may adopt one (1) or more emergency ordinances, but such ordinances may not levy taxes, grant, renew or extend a franchise, regulate the rate charged by a public utility for its services, or authorize the borrowing the money except as provided in Section 3.10 of this Charter. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form and manner prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing it in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted with or without amendment or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but an affirmative vote of four (4) Councilors shall be required for adoption. After its adoption the ordinance shall be published and printed as prescribed for other adopted ordinances. It shall become effective upon adoption. Every emergency ordinance, except one made pursuant to Section 3.10 of this Charter, shall automatically stand repealed as of the 61st day following the date on which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this Section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by a repealing ordinance adopted in the same manner specified in this Section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
Sec. 3.10. - Emergency appropriations. 
    To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, the public peace, or to satisfy a court judgment, casualty loss, or other valid mandated expense, the Council, in accordance with RSA 32:11, and with prior approval of the Budget Committee, may make emergency appropriations as part of an emergency ordinance. To the extent that there are no available unappropriated revenues to meet such appropriations, the Council may, by such emergency ordinance, authorize the issuance of emergency notes, which may be renewed from time to time, but the emergency notes and renewals thereof occurring in any fiscal year shall be paid not later than the last day of the fiscal year next succeeding the year in which the emergency appropriation was made. 
(Amd. of 3-11-2014) 
Sec. 3.11. - Codification of ordinances. 
    The Town Council shall prepare a revision or codification of the ordinances of the Town which are appropriate for continuation as local laws of the town and at least every ten (10) years perform a comprehensive review of the codification. 
(Amd. of 5-9-1995) 
Sec. 3.12. - Existing ordinances. 
    All by-laws, ordinances, rules, restrictions, and regulations of the Town of Newmarket which are in effect as of the date of adoption of this Charter, and not inconsistent with this Charter, shall remain in effect after the adoption of this Charter until they expire by their terms or are repealed, modified, or amended by the Council. 
Sec. 3.13. - Powers and duties. 
    Except as herein otherwise provided, the Town Council shall have all the powers conferred upon and discharged all the duties imposed upon Town Councils, Town Meetings, Boards of Mayor and Aldermen, and Selectmen of Towns by law, except the adoption of a Town budget, which prerogative is vested in the Town Meeting. All offices and members of all boards, commissions, and committees, and vacancies thereto, shall be appointed by the Council from among Town residents unless otherwise provided by this Charter. 
Sec. 3.14. - Delegation of powers. 
    The Council may delegate to one (1) or more Town agencies the powers vested in the Council by this Charter and State and Federal law to grant and issue licenses and permits, and may regulate the granting and issuing of licenses and permits by any such Town agency, and may in its discretion rescind any such delegation without prejudice to any prior action which has been taken. 
Sec. 3.15. - Inquiries and investigations. 
    The Council by majority vote may require of any Town official, department head or employee, official appointed or confirmed by the Council, or member of a Town board or commission to appear before it, and give such information as it may require in relation to this office, its function, and performance. The Council shall give at least forty-eight (48) hours' written notice of the general scope of the inquiry which is to be made to any person it shall require to appear before it under this Section. The Council may make investigation into the affairs of the Town and into the conduct of any Town agency or department, and for this purpose may administer oaths and require the production of evidence. 
Sec. 3.16. - Board procedures. 
    Except as expressly prohibited by statute, the Council shall establish rules of attendance and forfeiture of office for all Town appointed boards and commissions. 
Sec. 3.17. - Authority to establish village districts. 
    The Town Council may establish one or more village districts in accordance with RSA ch. 52. 
(Amd. of 3-11-2014) 
ARTICLE 4. - ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT 

Sec. 4.1. - Town Administrator. 
    The chief administrative officer of the Town shall be the Town Administrator (hereinafter called the "Administrator"). The Council shall appoint a person especially qualified by experience and training, who receives the votes of at least four (4) members of the Council, to be Administrator. The Administrator shall serve at the pleasure of the Council which shall fix the Administrator's salary and terms of employment. 
Sec. 4.2. - Qualifications. 
    The Administrator shall be appointed solely on the basis of qualification for that office, with special reference to education, training, and previous experience in public or private office. The Administrator need not be a resident of the Town or the State at the time of appointment. The Administrator shall devote full time to the office and shall not hold any other public office, elective or appointive, except as authorized by this Charter or State law, [and shall] not engage in any other business or occupation unless with the approval of a majority of the Council. The Council may reimburse the Administrator for reasonable relocation costs in connection with his establishing residence in the Town. 
(Amd. of 3-11-2014) 
Sec. 4.3. - Annual review of Administrator. 
    One (1) year after his initial appointment, and at least annually thereafter, the Administrator shall be reviewed by the Council. As a part of an annual review, the Council and the Administrator shall mutually and in writing agree on goals and objectives for the Town and the Administrator for the coming year, review the extent to which the Administrator has succeeded in meeting the goals and objectives for the preceding year, and determine the reasons why any goals were changed or not met during the year. More frequent reviews may be conducted when, in the sole discretion of the Council, such periodic reviews are desirable. 
(Amd. of 3-11-2014) 
Sec. 4.4. - Reprimand or removal from office. 
    The Administrator may be reprimanded or removed for cause by the affirmative vote of at least four (4) members of the Council as herein provided. As used in this Section, "cause" shall include but not be limited to unjustifiable failure to meet the goals and objectives set forth in the preceding year's annual review, and/or violation of any of the provisions of Article 7 of this Charter. At least thirty (30) days before the proposed reprimand or removal of the Administrator, the Council shall adopt a resolution stating its intention to reprimand or remove him, the reasons therefor, and an effective date. A copy of the resolution shall be served forthwith on the Administrator who may, within ten (10) days, demand a public hearing, in which event the Administrator shall not be reprimanded or removed until such public hearing has been held. Upon or after passage of a resolution for removal, the Council may suspend the Administrator from duty, but his pay shall continue until removal. In case of such suspension, the Council shall, by affirmative vote, appoint an acting Administrator to serve at the pleasure of the Council for not more than one hundred twenty (120) days. The action of the Council in removing the Administrator shall be final. Notwithstanding any provision of this Charter, the Council may in its discretion decline to extend or renew the Town Administrator's employment contract. The Council's decision not to extend or renew the Town Administrator's contract shall not be deemed to constitute removal from office under this Section. 
(Amd. of 3-11-2014) 
Sec. 4.5. - Acting Town Administrator. 
    If the Administrator is determined by a vote of at least four (4) members of the Council to be temporarily incapacitated or unable to act for any cause or the Council determines that the office has become temporarily vacant, the Council shall, within thirty (30) days from such determination, appoint an acting Administrator in the same manner as Section 4.1 who shall serve for not more than ninety (90) days or such lesser time until the disability shall be relieved. The acting Administrator shall have all the powers and perform all the duties of the Administrator except to the extent that said powers and duties may be specifically restricted by Council resolution. Said acting Administrator shall be paid such salary for his services hereunder as may be prescribed by the Town Council. The acting Administrator may be reappointed for an additional term of ninety (90) days. By a vote of at least four (4) Councilors, the Council may determine from credible medical or other evidence that the Town Administrator is incapacitated and unable to perform any or all duties of his office and the office may be declared vacant. 
Sec. 4.6. - Powers and duties of Town Administrator. 
    The Administrator shall be the chief administrative officer of the Town, and shall supervise and direct the administration of all of the Town departments and personnel therein. The Administrator shall have no authority, however, to supervise Town elections. The Town Clerk is the chief elections officer. The Administrator shall be charged with the preservation of the health, safety, and welfare of persons and property, and the enforcement of the ordinances of the Town, this Charter, and the laws of the State of New Hampshire, and such other responsibilities as may be assigned by the Council by resolution. The Administrator's responsibilities shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(a)  The expenditure of appropriated funds for town purposes (RSA 37:5); 
(b)  Maintaining accounting control over the finances of the Town; 
(c)  Attending each regular meeting of the Council; 
(d)  Maintaining full and complete records of the doings of his office; 
(e)  Assuring the audit and approval of all authorized claims and vouchers against the Town before paying the same, and supervising all Town procurement as provided in Section 5.12 of this Charter; 
(f)  Keeping the Council fully informed of the needs of the Town, within the scope of his duties, and making such reports and recommendations as he may deem advisable or may be required of him; 
(g)  Examining or causing to be examined, with or without notice, the affairs of any department under his control, and for that purpose to have access to all the town books and papers; 
(h)  Having charge, control and supervision, subject to the direction of the Council and to the Town Administrative Code, of the following matters: 
1)  Management of municipal water, sewer, and drainage works and systems; 
2)  Construction, maintenance and repair of all town buildings and town roads, highways, sidewalks and bridges; 
3)  Purchase of all supplies for the town; 
4)  Police and fire departments; 
5)  Maintenance and repair of sewer and drainage systems; 
6)  Lighting of streets, highways and bridges; 
7)  Sprinkling of streets and highways, the laying of dust, and the removal of snow; 
8)  The maintenance of parks, commons and playgrounds; 
9)  The care of cemeteries; 
10)  The letting, making and performance of all contracts for work done for the town; 
11)  The poor relief of the town, either directly or through a person or persons appointed by him; 
12)  The rental and use of all Town facilities; 
13)  The maintenance and repair of all Town vehicles; and 
14)  Maintaining a full and complete inventory of all property of the Town, both real and personal. 
(i)  Convening the chairs of the administrative committees at least annually to discuss matters of common concern; 
(j)  Convening a quarterly meeting of the department heads with the Town Council to discuss matters of departmental concern; 
(k)  Working with any consultants hired by the Town or by any Town department, board, or commission; and 
(l)  Applying for grants and accepting grant funds consistent with Town purposes. 
The Administrator shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or required of him by ordinance or resolution of the Council, not inconsistent with this Charter. He shall have and perform such other powers and duties not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter as now are or hereafter may be conferred by municipal ordinance or conferred upon mayors of cities and selectmen of towns by general laws. He shall have the right to take part in the discussion of all matters coming before the Council, but not the right to vote. 
(Amd. of 5-9-1995; Amd. of 3-11-2014) 
Sec. 4.7. - Limitation of authority. 
    Nothing in this Charter shall be construed to grant to the Administrator any legislative or judicial authority, which shall rest exclusively with the Town Council; nor shall the authority of the Administrator reduce any specific statutory power or responsibility of any other Town officer. 
Sec. 4.8. - Appointment of Department Heads. 
    The Administrator shall have the authority to appoint all Town Department Heads, subject to approval by the Council, and to fix their compensation. The Administrator shall appoint Department Heads solely on the basis of qualifications, training, and experience. For purposes of Article 4, the term "Department Head" shall be as defined in the Administrative Code, as amended from time to time. The Administrative Code shall include a job description for each Department Head. 
(Amd. of 5-9-1995; Amd. of 3-11-2014) 
Sec. 4.9. - Annual review of Department Heads. 
    One (1) year after their initial appointment, and at least annually thereafter, each department head shall be reviewed by the Administrator. In preparation for such a review the Administrator shall meet with the Council in order to establish the department's goals and objectives for the coming year. Such goals and objectives shall be communicated to the department head and will be used as a basis for performance evaluation. The Administrator shall review the extent to which the department head has succeeded in meeting the goals and objectives of the preceding year and determine the reasons why any goals were changed or not met during that year. An annual report identifying the department's goals and objectives as well as the status of achieving such items shall be drafted by the department head, approved by the Administrator, and submitted to the Council to review and discuss at a meeting with the department head and the Administrator. 
(Amd. of 5-9-1995) 
Sec. 4.10. - Suspension or removal of Department Head. 
    The Administrator, for just cause, may take disciplinary action against any Department Head according to procedures specified in the Town Personnel Plan. As used in this section, "cause" shall include but not be limited to unjustifiable failure to meet the goals and objectives set forth in the preceding year's annual review, and/or violation of any of the provisions of Article 7 of this Charter. 
(Amd. of 3-11-2014) 
Sec. 4.11. - Non-interference with Town administration. 
    Except as expressly provided elsewhere in this Charter, neither the Council nor any of its members shall direct or request the appointment of any person to office or employment; or direct the removal, suspension, discipline, adjustment in pay, benefits, or working conditions of any employee by the Administrator or of any of the Town department heads. No councilor shall give orders to or interfere with the performance of the duties of any of the administrative officers or employees, publicly or privately. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the Council from meeting with the Administrator to discuss the operation or conduct of any department head or employee and to recommend an investigation and report by the Administrator of any complaint. Any violation of the provisions of this section by a Councilor shall constitute grounds for forfeiture of office pursuant to RSA 49-D:4. 
(Amd. of 5-9-1995; Amd. of 3-11-2014) 
Sec. 4.12. - Departments and Administrative Code; reorganization plans. 
A.  The Town shall have departments, divisions, boards or committees as may be established by this Charter or as the Council may establish by Ordinance. It shall be the duty of the Administrator to draft and submit to the Council within nine (9) months after assuming office, an ordinance consistent with this Charter to be titled "Administrative Code", which provides for the division of the administrative service of the Town into departments or agencies and define the functions and duties of each. 
B.  Upon recommendation of the Town Administrator, or upon the initiative of the Council, the Council may, by amendment to the Administrative Code, create, consolidate or abolish departments or agencies and define or alter their functions or duties. The head of each department or agency established by the Administrative Code shall have and exercise supervision and control of that department or agency and the employees therein, subject to the authority of the Town Administrator, and shall have the power to prescribe rules and regulations not inconsistent with general law, this Charter, the Administrative Code, and the Personnel Plan (Art. 6.2). A copy of all departmental rules and regulations shall be on file in the office of the Town Clerk and appropriate departments. 
(Amd. of 3-11-2014) 
Sec. 4.13. - Town Clerk/Tax Collector. 
    There shall be a Town Clerk/Tax Collector who shall be elected on an at-large basis at the Town election for a term of three (3) years. The Town Clerk/Tax Collector shall have the powers and duties prescribed by this Charter and State law. 
Sec. 4.14. - Town Attorney. 
    The Town Council shall engage as needed such attorneys as are deemed in the best interest of the Town to provide legal advice to the Council, Administrator, Town departments, boards, and other agencies and represent the Town in any legal proceedings. Such attorneys shall, on Council direction, perform any other duties prescribed by this Charter or by ordinance. 
Sec. 4.15. - Fiscal affairs; Treasurer; Investment Advisor; audit. 
A.  There shall be a Treasurer who shall be appointed by the Town Administrator, subject to the approval of the Council. The Town Administrator shall appoint the Treasurer solely on the basis of qualifications, education, and experience to perform the duties of the office. The Treasurer shall have the powers and duties prescribed by this Charter and State law; provided, however, that in making investments of Town funds he shall follow any written investment policy as adopted or modified by the Town Council. 
B.  The Town Council may, after inviting requests for proposals and appropriate verification of qualifications, experience and integrity, retain the services of an Investment Advisor to advise the Council on adoption of a written investment policy and to make periodic recommendations to the Council on its modification. Said policy shall contain investment goals, strategies, permissible investments under State law, criteria for depository institutions, and such other matters as are deemed appropriate and necessary to maintain the security of, liquidity of, and return on invested Town funds. 
C.  The Town Treasurer shall be responsible for the collection, accounting, deposit, and periodic reporting of all Town revenues and expenditures in a secure and business-like manner in accordance with generally accepted accounting practices. 
D.  The Town Council shall, after inviting requests for proposals and appropriate verification of qualifications, experience and integrity, select a certified public accountant or firm of same who shall perform an annual audit of all Town financial transactions after the close of each fiscal year. Said audit shall include all revenues, expenditures and accounts maintained by any officer, elected or appointed, agency, board, commission, or recipient of Town funds; may include a compliance audit to insure conformity with any State or Federal laws and regulations and Town work programs and policies; and shall include a management letter setting forth recommendations for changes and improvements in finance management systems as is deemed necessary. For purposes of cost and efficiency, an auditor may be retained for a period of years, but requests for proposals shall be sought at least once every three (3) years, and a new auditor shall be selected at least every six (6) years. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the Town Council from ordering an entire audit, partial audits, or interim audits more frequently than once per year as it may deem prudent. Summaries of annual audits, when available in a timely manner, shall be printed in the annual Town Report and complete copies shall be available for public inspection and copying in the Town office during normal business hours. If a summary of an annual audit is not available for printing in the Town Report, said summary shall be made available at the Town Meeting or as soon thereafter as practicable. 
(Amd. of 5-9-1995; Amd. of 5-13-2008; Amd. of 3-11-2014) 
Sec. 4.16. - Town Master Plan. 
    The Master Plan shall be revised no less frequently than once every 10 years. 
(Amd. of 3-11-2014) 
ARTICLE 5. - FINANCE 

Sec. 5.1. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal and budget year of the Town shall begin on the first day of July and end on the thirtieth day of June unless other dates shall be fixed by action of the Town Council. 
Sec. 5.2. - Budget procedure. 
    Preparation and adoption of the budget shall be pursuant to RSA ch. 32. At such time as may be requested by the Administrator or specified by the Administrative Code, each department head shall submit an itemized estimate of the expenditures for the next fiscal year for the departments or activities under his control to the Administrator. The Administrator shall, based on these estimates and other data, prepare a recommended budget which he shall, together with these department estimates, submit to the Council no later than October 15th. The Council shall review the budget and make such modifications and amendments as it desires, and submit the proposed budget to the Budget Committee no later than November 15th, or at such other time as designated by the Budget Committee. 
(Amd. of 5-9-1995; Amd. of 11-5-1996; Amd. of 12-20-2011; Amd. of 3-11-2014) 
Sec. 5.3. - Budget hearing. 
    The Budget Committee shall hold in a convenient place a public hearing on the budget, at least twenty-five (25) days before the first session of the annual meeting. Notice of such public hearing, together with a copy of the budget as submitted, shall be posted in two public places. A copy of the budget shall be available to the public at the office of the Town Clerk during regular business hours. In addition, notices of such public hearing and Town Meeting shall be published by the Town Clerk in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town at least one (1) week prior to said meetings. 
(Amd. of 11-5-1996) 
Sec. 5.4. - Use of the official ballot. 
A.  Notwithstanding RSA 39:3-d and RSA 40:4-e, the Town of Newmarket shall utilize the official ballot for voting on all budgetary issues before the voters. 
B.  The warrant for any annual meeting shall prescribe the place, day and hour for each of 2 separate sessions of the meeting, and notice shall be given in accordance with RSA 39:5. 
C.  The first session of the annual meeting, which shall be for the transaction of all business other than voting by official ballot shall be held between the first and second Saturdays following the last Monday in January, inclusive of those Saturdays, at a time prescribed by the Town Council. The second Tuesday in March shall be deemed the annual meeting date for purposes of all applicable statutes pertaining to hearings, notice, petitioned articles, and warrants, including, but not limited to, RSA 31:95-d, 32:5, 32:16, 33:8-a, 39:3, 39:5. 
D.  The first session of the meeting, governed by the provisions of RSA 40:4, 40:4a, 40:4b, 40:4f and 40:6-10, shall consist of explanation, discussion, and debate of each warrant article. Warrant articles may be amended, subject to the following limitations: 
1)  Warrant articles whose wording is prescribed by law shall not be amended. 
2)  Warrant articles that are amended shall be placed on the official ballot for a final vote on the main motion, as amended. 
E.  Repealed. 
F.  All budgetary warrant articles shall be placed on the official ballot for a final vote. 
G.  The second session of the annual meeting, to elect officers of the Town by official ballot, to vote on questions required by law to be inserted on said official ballot, and to vote on all warrant articles from the first session on official ballot, shall be held on the second Tuesday in March. 
H.  The Town Clerk shall prepare an official ballot, which may be separate from the official ballot used to elect officers, for all warrant articles. Wording shall be substantively the same as the main motion, as it was made or amended at the first session, with only such minor textual changes as may be required to cast the motion in the form of a question to voters. 
I.  "Operating budget" as used in this section means "budget" as defined in RSA 32:3,III, exclusive of "special warrant articles", as defined in RSA 32:3,VI. The "Operating budget" may include appropriations and anticipated revenues to funds previously established by the legislative body as defined in RSA 32:3,VI(c). 
J.  If no operating budget article is adopted, the local political subdivision either shall be deemed to have approved the same appropriations as contained in the operating budget authorized for the previous year, reduced and increased, as the case may be, by debt service, contracts, and other obligations previously incurred or mandated by law, or the Town Council may hold a special meeting to take up the issue of a revised operating budget only; provided that RSA 31:5 shall not apply to such a special meeting. If no operating budget article is adopted, the estimated revenues shall nevertheless be deemed to have been approved. 
K.  The wording of the article on the operating budget shall be as follows: 
    "Shall the Town raise and appropriate as an operating budget, not including appropriations by special warrant articles, the amounts set forth on the budget posted with the warrant, for the purposes set forth therein, totaling $_____. Should this article be defeated, the operating budget shall be $_____, which is the same as last year, with certain adjustments required by previous action of the Town meeting, or by law or the Town Council may hold one special meeting, to take up the issue of a revised operating budget only." 
L.  Voting at the second session shall conform to the procedures for the nonpartisan ballot system as set forth in RSA 669:19-669:29, including all requirements pertaining to absentee voting, polling place and polling hours. 
M.  Approval of all warrant articles shall be by simple majority except for questions which require a 2/3 vote by law, contract or written agreement. 
N.  Votes taken at the second session shall be subject to recount under RSA 669:30-669:33 and RSA 40:4-c. 
[O.]  Votes taken at the second session shall not be reconsidered except by warrant article at a subsequent annual or special meeting. 
P.  The warrant for any special meeting shall prescribe the date, place and hour for both a first and second session. The second session shall be warned for a date not fewer than 28 days or more than 60 days following the first session. The first and second sessions shall conform to the provision of this subdivision pertaining to the first and second sessions of annual meetings. Special meetings shall be subject to RSA 31:5, 39:3 provided that no more than one special meeting may be held to raise and appropriate money in any one calendar year or fiscal year, whichever applies, and further provided that any special meeting held pursuant to this section shall not be subject to RSA 31:5 and shall not be counted toward the number of special meetings which may be held in a given calendar or fiscal year. 
(Amd. of 5-9-1995; Amd. of 5-9-2000; Amd. of 12-20-2011; Amd. of 3-11-2014; Amd. of 3-10-2015) 
Editor's note- Subsection I of this section was amended March 10, 2015, to allow the inclusion of appropriation to previously established funds. 
Sec. 5.5. - Monthly budget reports and five-year forecasting. 
    At the beginning of each month during the fiscal year, and more often if required by the Council, the Administrator or his designee shall submit to the Council data showing the relation between the estimated and actual income and expenses to date, together with outstanding indebtedness and estimated future expenses. By October 1 of each year, the Town Administrator or his designee shall submit to the Town Council a five-year financial forecast consisting of at least expenses, revenues, and resulting tax impact, taking into consideration the capital expenditure forecasting provided by the Capital Improvement Plan. 
(Amd. of 3-11-2014) 
Sec. 5.6. - Transfers. 
    After the budget has been adopted, no money shall be drawn from the treasury of the Town nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred except pursuant to a budget appropriation. The head of any department, with the approval of the Administrator, may transfer any balance or any portion thereof from one fund or agency within his department to another fund or agency within his department. The Administrator, with the approval of the Council, may transfer any balance or any portion thereof from one department to another. 
Sec. 5.7. - Capital Improvement Plan. 
A.  The Capital Improvement Program Committee shall prepare and submit to the Council and Budget Committee a Capital Improvement Plan at least one (1) month prior to the final date for submission of the budget. The Capital Improvement Plan shall include: 
(1)  A clear summary of its contents. 
(2)  A list of all capital improvements including major replacements which are proposed to be undertaken during the next six (6) fiscal years, including, but not limited to, equipment, sewer and water mains or facilities, roads, school facilities, sidewalks, bicycle paths or lanes, public open spaces and recreation facilities, new police and/or fire stations, and other new public facilities and major items of equipment, with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for such improvements. 
(3)  Cost estimates, methods of financing and recommended time schedule for each such improvement. 
(4)  The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the facilities to be constructed or acquired. 
B.  The Capital Improvement Plan shall be based on a period of not less than six (6) years and shall include reference to or be influenced by, where appropriate, the Town master plan. 
C.  The above information may be revised and extended each year with regard to capital improvements still pending or in process of construction or acquisition. 
D.  At least annually, or more often as the Council may direct, the Administrator shall submit to the Council a status report on implementation of the Capital Improvement Plan for the current year and financial statements of all capital accounts. 
E.  A summary of the updated Capital Improvement Plan with estimated costs shall be included in the Town Report and such portion of the current year costs the Council deems appropriate included in the Town Budget. 
(Amd. of 5-9-1995; Amd. of 5-11-2004; Amd. of 3-11-2014) 
Sec. 5.8. - Lapse of appropriations. 
    Every appropriation, except an appropriation from dedicated funds, shall lapse at the close of the fiscal year to the extent that it has not been expended or encumbered. 
Sec. 5.9. - Depository. 
    The Council shall approve to the Treasurer the depository or depositories for Town funds and shall provide for the timely deposit of all Town monies. The Council may require such security for Town deposits as it deems necessary, except that personal surety bonds shall not be deemed proper security. 
Sec. 5.10. - Bonding of officials. 
    Any Town officer elected or appointed by authority of this Charter shall be bonded in an amount as required by State law or dictated by prudent fiscal practice for the faithful performance of the duties of his office. The Administrator and all officers receiving or disbursing Town funds shall be so bonded. All official bonds shall be corporate surety bonds, and the premiums thereon shall be paid by the Town. Such bonds shall be filed with the Town Clerk. 
Sec. 5.11. - Borrowing procedure. 
    All borrowing by the Town shall be in accordance with the Municipal Finance Act, RSA ch. 33. 
(Amd. of 3-11-2014) 
Sec. 5.12. - Purchasing procedure. 
    The Administrative Code shall establish purchasing and contract procedure, including the assignment of all responsibility for purchasing to the Administrator or his designee, and the combination purchasing of similar articles by different departments. The Council shall establish dollar limits for purchases and contracts which must be by competitive bid and shall establish the bidding procedures. No competitive bids shall be required when purchasing through the State of New Hampshire or at State of New Hampshire bid prices. Requirements for bids may be waived in specific instances by the affirmative vote of four (4) members of the Council. The Council shall establish dollar amounts for purchases and contracts, over which no purchases shall be made or contracts entered into without the affirmative vote of a majority of the Council. If the Council has voted to make a purchase or enter into a contract, the Administrator shall carry out the vote of the Council and enter into such transaction on behalf of the Town. 
Sec. 5.13. - Trust Funds. 
A.  Trustees of the Trust Funds. There shall be three (3) Trustees of the Trust Funds who shall hold office for three (3) years and until their successors are elected and qualified on a staggered basis so that one (1) Trustee is elected at each Town election. They shall have all the powers and duties granted to Trustees of Trust Funds by this Charter and State law. 
B.  Investments. Trust Funds shall be invested by the Trustees in a manner consistent with RSA 31:25-31:30. The Trustees shall seek the advice of the Council. 
C.  Vacancy. In the event of a vacancy in office, the Council shall fill such vacancy by appointment, such appointment to be effective until a successor to fill the unexpired term is elected at the next Town Election and is then qualified to serve. 
(Amd. of 5-9-1995; Amd. of 3-11-2014) 
ARTICLE 6. - PERSONNEL POLICIES 

Sec. 6.1. - Appointments. 
    Appointments and promotions to all positions in the service of the Town, other than those covered by an employee representative contract, shall be made solely on the basis of merit and only after consideration of the applicant's ability in accordance with procedures set forth in the Personnel Plan. 
Sec. 6.2. - Personnel Plan. 
    There shall be a set of rules and regulations providing for the establishment of a system of personnel administration known as the "Personnel Plan". The Plan shall include provisions with regard to classification, compensation, selection, training, promotion, grievances, discipline, vacations, retirement, and any other matters necessary to the maintenance of efficient service and proper working conditions. The Personnel Plan shall continue in force, subject to amendments submitted from time to time by the Administrator. The Council shall consider and act on said amendments within ninety (90) calendar days after the submission, failing which they are deemed to have been rejected. The Personnel Plan shall not apply to any elected officials, board and commission members, and other officers appointed solely by the Council. Each employee shall be provided with a written job description prepared by the Administrator and subject to Council review. 
(Amd. of 5-9-1995; Amd. of 3-11-2014) 
Sec. 6.3. - Compensation. 
A.  The compensation of any elected officials, board and commission members, and other officers appointed solely by the Council shall be established and modified by express resolution of the Council. 
B.  The rate of compensation of Council members may only be changed by a Charter amendment approved by the voters and shall not take effect until the first day of the next fiscal year. No vote on this matter may be taken within ninety (90) days of the Town election. 
(Amd. of 3-11-2014) 
Sec. 6.4. - Certification of payroll. 
    No compensation shall be paid without certification by the Administrator, or such others as he may direct, that the recipients are employed by the Town and that their rates of compensation have been approved by the Town Administrator. 
(Amd. of 3-11-2014) 
ARTICLE 7. - CONDUCT OF OFFICIALS 

Sec. 7.1. - Conditions for holding office. 
A.  Unless otherwise specified by State law, any person while in Town office convicted of a Class A felony in New Hampshire or its equivalent under the law of any other State or Federal law shall forfeit such office. 
B.  No full-time employee of the Town shall be eligible to serve as a Councilor. 
C.  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, no department head of the Town shall be appointed to a Town office, board membership, commission membership, or trusteeship. 
(Amd. of 3-11-2014) 
Sec. 7.2. - Conflicts of interest. 
A.  Any elected or appointed officer or employee of the Town who has a financial interest, direct or indirect, in any planned or existing contract, job, work, or service to be performed for the Town or voluntary sale to the Town of any land, materials, supplies, equipment, or other property shall make full disclosure of such interest to the Council and Administrator prior to the Town's deliberating on any such matter or transaction. 
B.  The person so financially interested in such matters or transactions shall not vote or advise on or otherwise participate in the Town's and Council's consideration of such matter or transaction. 
Sec. 7.3. - Disqualification from decision-making process. 
A.  No elected or appointed officer or employee of the Town shall take part in a decision concerning the business of the Town in which he or a member of his family, directly or indirectly, has a financial interest, aside from his salary as such officer or employee, greater than any other citizen or taxpayer. 
B.  For the purposes of this Section, the word "family" shall mean an individual's spouse, his and her spouse's lineal ascendants and lineal descendants, and his and her spouse's siblings and their offspring. 
Sec. 7.4. - Private use of Town property and personnel. 
    No elected or appointed officer or employee shall devote any Town property or labor to private use except as may be provided by authority of the Council. 
Sec. 7.5. - Acceptance of gifts and gratuities. 
    No elected or appointed officer or employee of the Town shall solicit or accept any gift or gratuity which could, in any manner, be construed to affect or influence the performance of his official duties. 
Sec. 7.6. - Disposition of fees. 
    No elected or appointed officer or employee of the Town shall collect any fees, salaries, or other payments in connection with his official duties for his own use, except as provided for by ordinance or State law. 
Sec. 7.7. - Misuse of information. 
    No elected or appointed officer or employee of the Town shall utilize or dispense information gained through said office or employment for his or another's personal profit. 
ARTICLE 8. - CITIZEN CONCERNS; INITIATIVE PETITION; REFERENDUM 

Sec. 8.1. - Citizen concerns. 
A.  Individual citizen concerns shall be directed to the Administrator to be relayed to the appropriate department(s) or individual(s) for consideration. Acknowledgment of the concern(s) shall be made to the citizen directly or in writing. 
B.  Any citizen wishing to appear before a regularly scheduled Council meeting shall request to be placed on the agenda in accordance with the rules of the Council. 
(Amd. of 5-9-1995) 
Sec. 8.2. - Initiative petitions. 
A.  The Council shall hold a public hearing and act, by taking a vote, on the merits of every initiative petition which concerns a matter in which the Town is empowered to act. The petition shall be addressed to the Council, shall contain a request for passage or repeal of a particular measure set forth in the petition, and shall be signed by not less than one hundred (100) registered voters. 
    The initiative petition shall include the personal signature and legible name and address of each petitioner and shall be filed with the Town Clerk as one instrument of endorsement. The Town Clerk shall verify the number of registered voters signing the petition and shall attach thereto a certificate showing the result of such examination. Within seven (7) days, the Town Clerk shall transmit the petition and certificate to the Town Council and shall send a copy of the certificate to the first signer of the petition. 
    The petition shall be considered valid following certification of sufficiency unless written objection regarding the number of signatures certified is made by a voter no more than seven (7) days after the certificate has been issued. The validity of any such objection shall be determined by the Council. 
B.  The Council shall hold a public hearing within thirty (30) days of the date of the certification of any measure proposed in any petition signed by one hundred (100) voters, unless a question of its legality is raised by a member of the Council. If a question of legality is raised by any Councilor, the measure shall be referred to the Town Attorney for review. If the measure proposed may be lawfully passed by the Council, the public hearing shall be scheduled within thirty (30) days of the date of the Attorney's opinion. If the measure may not be lawfully passed by the Council, it shall be returned to the petitioners with an explanation. The Town Clerk shall mail notice of the hearing to ten (10) petitioners whose names appear first on each petition at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing. Notice by publication of a summary of contents of the petition at least seven (7) days prior to all such hearings shall also be made, and shall be at public expense. 
    Hearings on two (2) or more petitions filed under this Section and addressing different substantive issues may be held at the same place and time. No hearing shall be held upon more than one (1) petition containing the same subject matter in any given twelve (12) month period. 
C.  Following the public hearing, the Council may: (1) pass said measure without alteration or with amendment, or (2) deny said measure with stated reasons. 
Sec. 8.3. - Referendum petitions. 
A.  Referendum petitions must be filed with the Town Clerk within thirty (30) days after action by the Council on any measure or any part thereof sought to be reconsidered. Referendum petitions must be signed by at least four hundred (400) registered voters of the Town. The procedures of Section 8.2.(A) shall apply to referendum petitions. 
B.  When a referendum petition is filed with the Town Clerk, the measure or part thereof sought to be reconsidered shall be suspended from taking effect. Such suspension shall terminate when (1) there is a final determination of insufficiency of the petition, (2) the filers of the petition withdraw it, or (3) the measure or part thereof is upheld by the voters. 
C.  When a referendum petition has been finally determined sufficient, the Council shall submit the referred measure or part thereof protested to the voters of the Town at a special election to be held on a date fixed by the Council. Such special election shall be held not less than thirty (30) nor more than ninety (90) days after the date of the certificate heretofore mentioned; provided that if any election is to occur within one hundred twenty (120) days after the date of said certificate, the Council may at its discretion omit the calling of a special election and submit the referred measure or part thereof to the voters at such approaching election. The ballot used when voting upon a proposed measure under this Section shall state the nature of the referred measure or part thereof protested in terms sufficient to show its substance. 
Sec. 8.4. - Submission of proposed measure to voters. 
    The Council of its own motion may submit any measure or proposition for repeal or amendment of a measure to the voters at any regular or special Town election. 
Sec. 8.5. - Measures with conflicting provisions. 
    If two (2) or more proposed measures passed at the same election contain conflicting provisions, only the one receiving the greater number of affirmative votes shall take effect. 
Sec. 8.6. - Budget process. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Charter, this Section [Article] shall not apply to Article 5 of this Charter or any actions taken pursuant thereto. 
(Amd. of 3-11-2014) 
ARTICLE 9. - TOWN REPORT; TOWN MEETING 

Sec. 9.1. - Town Report. 
    Each year the Town Administrator shall prepare a Town Report which shall include: (1) a statement of the past year's financial activities and a comparative statement of the previous and present budget, and (2) a review of all major Council actions, including a summary of ordinances enacted; and (3) Town vital statistics. There shall be a section which presents any actions which are in progress or pending before Town boards or departments and the Town Council. The effective date of the Report shall be the end of the fiscal year and the Report shall be delivered to the voters of the Town not later than seven (7) days prior to the date of the Annual Meeting. 
Sec. 9.2. - Annual Town Meeting. 
    At the first session of the annual Town Meeting, the Town Moderator shall summon the voters of the Town to receive reports of the previous year's activities and of proposals for the current year by the Town Council and the Town Administrator, with opportunity for public discussion and amendment of warrant articles. 
    With appropriate notice, the public hearing requirements of Section 8.2 through Section 8.6 for initiative petitions and referenda may be met at this Meeting. 
    At the second session of the annual town meeting, the voters shall vote whether to raise and appropriate the total sum of money for the Town Budget as amended by the first session of the Town Meeting. 
(Amd. of 11-5-1996) 
ARTICLE 10. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 10.1. - Certificate of election and appointment. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law, before performing any act under his election or appointment, each person elected shall take and subscribe to an oath to qualify him to enter upon the duties of office. A record of the taking of such oath shall be made by the Town Clerk. Any oath required by this Section may be administered by any officer authorized by law to administer oaths. 
Sec. 10.2. - Term commencement; notice of election or appointment. 
A.  Written notice of the election or appointment to any Town office or board shall be mailed to the individual involved by the Town Clerk, within three (3) business days after the appointment is made or the results of any vote are certified by the Board of Election Officers to the Council. 
B.  Unless otherwise set forth in this Charter all elected officials in the Town shall take or continue in office on the Monday following the second Tuesday in March following their election and shall hold office until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(Amd. of 12-20-2011) 
Sec. 10.3. - Vacancies. 
    In addition to other provisions of this Charter, a vacancy shall be deemed to exist in any department, office, or board whenever an officer, member, or employee dies, resigns, is removed for just cause, is permanently, physically, or mentally incapacitated to the degree that he is unable to perform his duties, is judicially declared to be mentally incompetent or, for board members where residence in the Town is required, he moves from the Town. Unless otherwise provided in this Charter, vacancies occurring under this Section shall be declared to exist by the Council for board members, the Administrator for department heads, and by the department heads for departmental personnel. 
Sec. 10.4. - Public records and meetings. 
    All records of the Town and all meetings of the Council, boards, committees, commissions, authorities, or other municipal bodies shall be open to the public, and their minutes and other records shall be available to the public in accordance with the provisions of RSA ch. 91-A. 
Sec. 10.5. - Agreements with other municipalities. 
    The Council is authorized, as provided by New Hampshire law, to enter into agreements and regional compacts with neighboring cities and towns, state agencies, or private non-profit corporations for the purpose of resolving their common problems for the mutual advantage and benefit of the Town and its neighboring cities and towns. 
Sec. 10.6. - Specific provisions to prevail. 
    To the extent that any specific provision contained in this Charter conflicts with any provision expressed in general terms, the specific provision shall prevail. 
Sec. 10.7. - Severability. 
    The Sections of this Charter and the parts thereof are separable. If any portion or Section of this Charter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the Charter shall not be affected thereby. If a clause, portion of, or Section of this Charter is so held invalid, then the applicable provisions of State law, if any, shall govern. 
Sec. 10.8. - Authentication of Charter; copies to be kept on file. 
    Upon adoption, the official Charter, duly authenticated by affixing the signatures of all members of the Charter Commission and the Board of Selectmen, the Town Clerk and affixing the Town Seal, shall be filed with the Town Clerk and remain in the Town Clerk's office as the official Charter of the Town of Newmarket. At its first meeting the Town Council shall affirm the validity of the Town Charter. All amendments to this Charter shall be authenticated by the Town Council and be filed with and remain a part of the official Charter. The Town Clerk shall be responsible for the proper maintenance of the Charter, under the direction of the Town Attorney. Copies of the Charter shall be available to the public, and the Town Clerk may charge a fee to defray the printing costs. 
Sec. 10.9. - Charter amendments. 
    Amendments to this Charter may be initiated either by the Council or by initiative petition, public hearing, and voter election pursuant to RSA 49-B:5. 
Sec. 10.10. - Violations and penalties. 
    All willful violations of provisions of this Charter, unless otherwise provided, are hereby declared to be misdemeanors, and all such misdemeanors and all violations of Town ordinances for which no other punishment is provided shall be punishable in accordance with State law. 
Sec. 10.11. - Rules and regulations. 
    A copy of all rules and regulations adopted by any Town agency, board, commission, or individual shall be filed in the Town Clerk's office and made available to review by any person who requests such information. 
Sec. 10.12. - Reorganization plans. 
    See Section 4.12. 
(Amd. of 3-11-2014) 
Sec. 10.13. - Proposed reorganization plans by the Administrator. 
    See Section 4.12. 
(Amd. of 3-11-2014) 
Sec. 10.14. - Indemnification of Town officers, board members, and employees. 
    The Town shall undertake to indemnify and save harmless all its officers, officials, volunteers, boards, commissions, and employees from personal loss and expense, including reasonable legal fees and costs, if any, arising out of any claim, demand, suit, or judgment by reason of negligent acts or omissions if the indemnified person was acting in the scope of his office or employment and in good faith, in accordance with the provisions of State law. 
Sec. 10.15. - Prohibition. 
A.  No person shall be appointed to or removed from, or in any way favored or discriminated against, with respect to, any Town position or appointed Town administrative office because of age, race, sex, political, or religious opinions or affiliations. 
B.  No person shall willfully make any false statement, certificate, mark, rating, or report in regard to any test, certification, or appointment. 
C.  No person who seeks appointment or promotion with respect to any Town position or appointed Town administrative office shall directly or indirectly give, render, or pay any money, service, or other valuable thing to any person for or in connection with his test, appointment, proposed appointment, promotion, or proposed promotion. 
D.  No person who runs for Town office shall orally, by letter, or otherwise, solicit or assist in soliciting any assessment, subscription, or contribution for any political party or political purpose whatever from any person holding any compensated appointed Town position. 
Sec. 10.16. - Procedures. 
A.  Meetings. All properly constituted authorities, boards, commissions, committees, or other municipal bodies (hereinafter called committees) of the Town, either elected or appointed or otherwise constituted, shall meet regularly at such times and public places within the Town as they may prescribe. Except in emergencies, special meetings of these committees shall be held on the call of the respective committee chair or by one-third ( 1/3 ) of the members thereof by written notice delivered to the residence or place of business of each member at least forty-eight (48) hours in advance of the time set. A copy of the said notice shall also be posted on the Town bulletin board. Except in cases of emergency otherwise authorized by the general laws, all meetings of these committees shall be open and public; however, these committees may meet in a closed or executive session as permitted by RSA [ch.] 91-A. 
B.  Committee Organization. Each committee shall determine its own rules and order of business unless otherwise provided by the Charter or by law. The agenda and minutes shall be kept as required by RSA ch. 91-A. A chairperson and secretary shall be elected annually in accordance with the committee's rules or procedure. 
C.  Quorum. A majority of the members of a committee shall constitute a quorum, but a smaller number may adjourn from time to time until a quorum is achieved. No other action taken by a number of members smaller than the quorum shall be valid or binding. 
D.  Council. The provisions of Section 10.16 shall not apply to the Council to the extent that they are inconsistent with other provisions of this Charter. 
Sec. 10.17. - Land use ordinances. 
    All land use regulations and ordinances must be adopted pursuant to State law. 
ARTICLE 11. - ADMINISTRATIVE AND JUDICIAL BOARDS 

Sec. 11.1. - Administrative committees. 
A.  Planning Board. There shall be a Planning Board consisting of six (6) elected members and one (1) appointed member. The Chair of the Town Council shall perform those duties assigned to the "Mayor" under RSA [chs.] 672-677. Six (6) of these members shall be elected for terms of three (3) years, such terms to be staggered. The Planning Board shall have all the powers granted to planning boards by state law. Three (3) alternate members shall be appointed by the Planning Board, each serving three (3) year terms staggered. 
B.  Budget Committee. There shall be a Budget Committee consisting of eleven (11) members, nine (9) of whom shall be elected for three (3) year terms, such terms to be staggered. The Council and the School Board shall each appoint one (1) of their members to serve as a representative to the Budget Committee. These representatives shall have all the rights of membership except the right to hold office. Any vacancy in the elected membership shall be filled by a majority vote of a quorum of the Budget Committee for the unexpired term. The Budget Committee shall have all the powers granted to Budget Committees by state law. 
C.  Conservation Commission. The Conservation Commission shall consist of not less than 3 or more than 7 members appointed by the Town Council. The Conservation Commission shall have all the powers granted to Conservation Commissions by State Law. 
D.  Capital Improvement Program Committee. There shall be a Capital Improvement Program committee consisting of up to six members. The Town Council shall appoint one council member and one alternate, the Budget Committee shall appoint one budget committee member and one alternate, the School Board shall be invited to appoint one member and one alternate, and the Planning Board will appoint one planning board member and one alternate, all to serve for one year terms. Two at large members shall be appointed by the Town Council for a term not to exceed three years. The CIP Committee shall appoint all ex-officio members it feels are necessary to perform their duties subject to Town Council approval. The Capital Improvement Program Committee shall have all the powers granted to them under RSA 674:5 through 674:8. 
E.  Other Administrative Committees. Other administrative boards and committees may be established or dissolved as necessary by the Town Council. These committees shall have such powers as determined by the Council or provided by State Law. 
F.  [Review of Actions.] At least annually, in February and more often if Town affairs warrant, the Town Council shall meet with the Chairs of all standing Town committees to review significant actions taken by the committees, projects currently under discussion, and anticipated activity for the coming year. 
G.  [School Board.] At least annually, the Town Council shall invite the School Board to a meeting to discuss projects currently under discussion and anticipated activity for the coming year. 
(Amd. of 2-18-1992; Amd. of 5-9-1995; Amd. of 5-13-1997; Amd. of 3-11-2014) 
Sec. 11.2. - Judicial board; zoning board of adjustment. 
    There shall be a Zoning Board of Adjustment appointed by the Council, consisting of five (5) members each serving a three (3) year term and three (3) alternates each serving a three (3) year term. Such terms shall be staggered. The Council shall fill any vacancy for the period of the unexpired term. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have all the powers granted to such boards under State law. 
Sec. 11.3. - Terms of office. 
    Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the terms of office of all members of administrative committees shall begin on the first Monday following the second Tuesday in March, and they shall end on the first Monday following the second Tuesday in March in the year that their term expires. If a member received an appointment or was elected subsequent to the second Tuesday in March of the year in which the term of office originally commenced, the term to which the person was appointed or elected will end on the first Monday following the second Tuesday in March in the year that it was scheduled to end. 
(Amd. of 12-20-2011) 
Sec. 11.4. - Vacancies in elected office. 
    Unless otherwise specified in this Charter or by State law, in the event of a vacancy in an elected office, board or commission of the Town, the Council shall fill that vacancy by appointment, such appointment to continue until the next Town election. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
    This table shows the amendements to the Charter, which Charter was originally adopted on March 13, 1990. 
Amendment 
Date Section 
in Charter 2-18-1992 11.1 5-9-1995 1.1 2.5 3.11 4.11 4.15 4.6 4.8 4.9 5.2 5.4 5.7 5.13 6.2 8.1 11.1 11-5-1996 5.2 5.3 9.2 5-13-1997 11.1 5-9-2000 5.4 5-11-2004 5.7 5-13-2008 4.15 12-20-2011 2.5 3.1 3.2 3.3 5.2 5.4 10.2 11.3 3-11-2014 1.2 2.3 2.5 2.6 3.8 3.10 3.17 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.6 4.8 4.10 4.11 4.12 4.15 4.16 5.2 5.4 5.5 5.7 5.11 5.13 6.2 6.3 6.4 7.1 8.6 10.12 10.13 11.1 3-10-2015 5.4  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    The ordinances and bylaws embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Municipal Code of the Town of Newmarket, New Hampshire," and may be so cited. 
State Law reference- Codification of ordinances, RSA 31:128. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    The following words, terms and phrases and rules of construction, when used in this Code, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Generally. When provisions conflict, the specific shall prevail over the general. All provisions shall be liberally construed so that the intent of the town council may be effectuated. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words, technical phrases and words and phrases that have acquired peculiar and appropriate meanings in law shall be construed according to such meanings. Provisions shall be interpreted and applied so as to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. In the event of conflicts between provisions, the more stringent provision controls. 
    Acts by agents. When an ordinance requires an act to be done which may, by law, as well be done by an agent as by the principal, such requisition shall be construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent. 
    Boards, committees, commissions, employees, officers and departments. References to boards, committees, commissions, employees, officers or departments, are to boards, committees, commissions, employees, officers or departments of the town. 
    Charter. The term "Charter" means the town Charter, as amended. 
    Code. The term "Code" means the Municipal Code of the Town of Newmarket, New Hampshire, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Computation of time. When a period or limit of time is to be reckoned from a day or date, that day or date shall be excluded from and the day on which an act should occur shall be included in the computation of the period or limit of time. If this Code specifies a date for filing documents or paying fees and the specified date falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the document or fee shall be deemed timely filed if it is received by the next business day. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSA 21:35. 
    Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either ... or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, except that the term "and" may be read "or" and the term "or" may be read "and" when the sense requires it: 
(1)  "And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
(2)  "Or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  "Either ... or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in combination. 
    County. The term "county" means Rockingham County, New Hampshire. 
    Delegation of authority. A provision that authorizes or requires a town officer or town employee to perform an act or make a decision authorizes such officer or employee to act or make a decision through subordinates. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine or feminine gender only shall extend and be applied to males and females and to firms, partnerships and corporations. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSA 21:3. 
    Joint authority. Words purporting to give a joint authority to three or more town officers shall give such authority to a majority of them. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSA 21:15. 
    Keeper, proprietor and owner. The terms "keeper," "proprietor" and "owner," except as regards ownership of land, mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or a servant, agent or employee. 
    May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissible. 
    May not . The term "may not" states a prohibition. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSA 21:8. 
    Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one person or thing, and a word importing the plural number may extend and be applied to a single person or thing. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSA 21:3. 
    Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSA 21:24. 
    Owner. The term "owner," when applied to a building or land, means and includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The term "person" includes a body corporate and politic as well as an individual. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSA 21:9. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" means any property other than real property. 
    Premises. The term "premises," as applied to real property, includes land and structures. 
    Property. The term "property" means real, personal or mixed property. 
    Public grounds. The term "public grounds" means the parks and all public lands owned by the town and those parts of public places which do not form traveled parts of streets, as defined in this section. 
    RSA. The abbreviation "RSA" means the latest edition or supplement of the New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated. 
    Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
    Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" means and includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. The term "state" means the State of New Hampshire. 
    Street. The term "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, causeways and all other public highways in the town, and it shall also be construed to include a sidewalk or footpath. 
    Tenant and occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," when applied to a building or land, mean and include any person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present. 
    Town. The term "town" means the Town of Newmarket, New Hampshire. 
    Town council, council. The term "town council" or "council" means the town council of the Town of Newmarket, New Hampshire. 
    Week. The term "week" means seven days; but publication in a newspaper of any notice or other matter indicated to be for a stated number of weeks shall be construed to mean one insertion in each week, unless specifically stated to be for each day of the week or for more than one day in each week. 
    Written and in writing . The terms "written" and "in writing" mean and include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSA 21:8. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes; references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and are not titles of such sections, or of any part of the section, nor unless expressly so provided shall they be so deemed when any such section, including the catchline, is amended or reenacted. 
(b)  History notes, editor's notes, Charter references, cross references and state law references that appear in this Code after sections or subsections or that otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  Unless specified otherwise, all references to chapters or sections are to chapters or sections of this Code. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  Unless specifically provided otherwise, the repeal of an ordinance does not revive any previously repealed ordinance. 
(b)  The repeal or amendment of an ordinance does not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor does such repeal or amendment affect any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the amendment or repeal. 
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of the Code and printed for inclusion in the Code. Portions of this Code repealed by subsequent ordinances may be excluded from this Code by omission from affected reprinted pages. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "Section _____ of the Municipal Code of the Town of Newmarket, New Hampshire, is hereby amended to read as follows:...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "The Municipal Code of the Town of Newmarket, New Hampshire, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _____, which said section reads as follows:...." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All provisions desired to be repealed should be repealed specifically by section, subdivision, division, article or chapter number, as appropriate, or by setting out the repealed provisions in full in the repealing ordinance. 
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by town personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the town council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been replaced shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate organizational units; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section the term "violation of this Code" means any of the following: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a town officer or town employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, any person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance: 
(1)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(2)  With respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each act constitutes a separate offense. 
(e)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent suspension or revocation of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(f)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief. 
State Law reference- Penalty for violation of ordinances, RSA 31:39,III. 
Sec. 1-8. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    If any part, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is for any reason declared to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this Code. 
Sec. 1-9. - Provisions of Code considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of the ordinances of the town included herein, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-10. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
    Nothing in this Code, or the ordinance adopting this Code, shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing, or any prosecution, suit or proceeding pending or any judgment rendered, on or before the effective date of this Code. 
Sec. 1-11. - Miscellaneous ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance or portion of an ordinance not included in the Code that is listed in this section. All such ordinances or portions of ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code: 
(1)  Establishing, extending or contracting the corporate limits of the town; 
(2)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of any bonds or any evidence of indebtedness; 
(3)  Appropriating funds, or relating to an annual budget; 
(4)  Authorizing or otherwise relating to any contract; 
(5)  Providing for bonds, salaries or other benefits for town officers or town employees or members of town boards or town commissions; 
(6)  Appropriating funds, levying or imposing taxes or relating to an annual budget; 
(7)  Granting any franchise or right; 
(8)  Authorizing, providing for or otherwise relating to any public improvement; 
(9)  Making any assessment; 
(10)  Opening, dedicating, establishing, locating, relocating, closing, altering, vacating, paving, widening, repairing or naming any street, sidewalk or alley; 
(11)  Pertaining to subdivisions or approving, dedicating, accepting or vacating any subdivision plat; 
(12)  Pertaining to zoning or rezoning specific property; 
(13)  The purposes of which have been accomplished; 
(14)  Which is temporary, although general in effect; or 
(15)  Which is special, although permanent in effect. 
Secs. 1-12-1-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATIVE CODE 

Sec. 1-41. - Purpose. 
    Pursuant to article 4 section 12 of the town Charter adopted in 1990, the purpose of this Chapter is to outline the general operations of the town government. 
(Ord. No. 3-2016/2016,  1, 5-3-2017) 
Sec. 1-42. - Separability. 
    If any provision of the administrative code is declared unconstitutional or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the validity of the remainder of the administrative code and its application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. 
(Ord. No. 3-2016/2016,  1, 5-3-2017) 
Sec. 1-43. - Administrative organization. 
(a)  Definition of department. 
(1)  A department is a functional subdivision of the town government for which specific goals and tasks may be defined. Departments may be operational or budgetary. Operational departments are departments for which the head of the department reports directly to the town administrator or a single purpose elected board. 
(2)  A "department head" is the designated official responsible for the administration, oversight, and supervision of a specific department. Except as otherwise provided: 
a.  Department heads shall be responsible for the safe and efficient operation of their department. They shall perform all duties and exercise all powers conferred upon their office by applicable laws, ordinances or resolutions. 
b.  Department heads may prescribe department rules and regulations for the internal operation of their department, conduct of their employees and the proper performance of the department's business. Said rules and regulations shall not be inconsistent with the laws of the State of New Hampshire, the Town Code, and the Town Personnel Policy. Department heads shall not prescribe department rules and regulations that are already provided for by the Town Code, the Laws of the State of New Hampshire, or the town's personnel policies. 
c.  Department heads may, upon review and approval of the town administrator and town council, establish such departmental divisions and sub-units as may be deemed desirable in the interest of economy and efficiency and in accordance with sound administrative principles and practices. 
d.  Each department head shall cause their department to maintain a close working relationship with all other departments and shall take such action necessary to facilitate cooperation amongst all other departments. 
e.  The town administrator shall request from each department head an itemized estimate of expenditures for the next fiscal year for their department for use in the preparation of the proposed budget for said year. 
f.  Each department head shall be responsible for following the provisions of the Purchasing Ordinance for their department. 
g.  Each department head shall be responsible for the coordination of divisional functions within that department. 
(b)  Reorganization of departments. 
(1)  The town administrator may propose to the town council a change to the organizational structure of the town to meet unexpected requirements of the town or to ensure the efficient operation of the government. 
(Ord. No. 3-2016/2016,  1, 5-3-2017) 
Sec. 1-44. - Table of organization. 
(a)  The following table organizes the town government by operational departments. This table of organization shall not be construed as limiting a department head from organizing or assigning responsibility within that department. 
(1)  Executive Department 
Office of the Town Administrator 
Division of Assessing 
(2)  Office of the Town Clerk - Tax Collector 
(3)  Department of Finance 
Division of Finance and Personnel Administration 
(4)  Department of General Assistance 
(5)  Department of Planning and Community Development 
Division of Planning 
Division of Zoning 
Division of Conservation 
(6)  Department of Building Safety, Health and Zoning Enforcement 
(7)  Department of Public Works 
Division of Highway and Public Infrastructure 
Division of Solid Waste 
Division of Buildings and Grounds 
Division of Cemeteries 
(8)  Department of Facilities 
(9)  Department of Environmental Services 
Division of Water Services 
Division of Wastewater Services 
(10)  Department of Recreation 
Division of Recreation Programs 
Division of Recreational Facilities 
(11)  Department of Library 
(12)  Police Department 
Division of Administration 
Division of Operations 
Division of Support Services 
(13)  Fire and Ambulance Department 
Division of Fire 
Division of Ambulance 
(14)  Department of Emergency Management 
(15)  Department of Information Technology 
Information Technology 
Channel 13/Communications 
(b)  Common duties and responsibilities. 
(1)  Each department is responsible for the execution and fulfillment of all obligations, policies, and programs as set forth in the laws of the State of New Hampshire, the town Charter, the Town Code, ordinances of the town, the annual budget, or any other duly authorized action of the town council, or duly formed independent board or commission, now in effect or as amended. 
(2)  All departments are charged with: 
a.  Conducting their operations in accordance with the laws of the State of New Hampshire, the town Charter, the Town Code, and all ordinances enacted by the town council; 
b.  Maintaining and caring for all property and equipment assigned to the department; 
c.  Generating and maintaining appropriate records of the operations of the department so as to allow the town council or the town administrator to properly review the operations of said department; and 
d.  Purchasing appropriate materials and equipment in accordance with purchasing policies of the town. 
(c)  Individual departments, divisions and offices have additional responsibilities as described below. 
(1)  Executive department. The executive department shall be responsible for the oversight of the office of the town administrator and the divisions of assessing, communications, human resources and general assistance. The executive department shall be headed by the town administrator. 
a.  Office of the town administrator. The office of the town administrator shall: 
1.  Provide support to the town administrator and the execution of his duties as outlined in section 4 of the town Charter; 
2.  Prepare, maintain and publish all actions of the town council; and 
3.  Perform all other duties as necessary and proper for the fulfillment of the statutory, regulatory, and local requirements of said office. 
b.  Division of assessing: The division of assessing shall: 
1.  Maintain a complete roll of the appraised value of property and improvements in the Town of Newmarket; 
2.  Prepare and maintain all assessment and tax rolls as required by State Law or Town Ordinance; 
3.  Perform all other duties as necessary and proper for the fulfillment of the statutory, regulatory, and local requirements of said division. 
(2)  Office of the Town Clerk - Tax Collector. The office of the town clerk is listed for record purposes and is governed by all applicable laws of the State of New Hampshire. The office of the town clerk - tax collector shall: 
a.  Be the repository of all official records of the town, its boards, and its agencies; 
b.  Collect all fees and issue all licenses as provided by the laws of the State of New Hampshire; 
c.  Arrange for and supervise all elections and town meetings, and maintain complete and accurate records associated with said elections and town meetings; 
d.  Collect all automobile registration fees and issue automobile registrations as set forth in the laws of the State of New Hampshire; 
e.  Perform all duties required of a town clerk as set forth in the Laws of the State of New Hampshire and the town Charter; 
f.  Perform the duties of the tax collector as provided by the laws of the State of New Hampshire, including, but not limited to, providing notices of taxes due, coordinating with the town treasurer for the deposit of all fees, interest, and penalties, providing notice of delinquent taxes; advertising and processing tax sales, and collecting tax liens and receivables; and 
g.  Perform all other duties as necessary and proper for the fulfillment of the statutory, regulatory, and local requirements of the office of town clerk - tax collector. 
(3)  Department of Finance. The department of administration and finance shall be responsible for the oversight of the divisions of finance and personnel administration. The department head shall be the finance director. 
a.  Division of finance and personnel administration. The division of finance and personnel administration shall: 
1.  Include the functions of the town treasury in conjunction with the town treasurer. The treasurer will receive and hold the funds of the town in accordance with the Town of Newmarket Investment Ordinance and disburse said funds in accordance with the laws of the State of New Hampshire, the town Charter, the Town Code, and the ordinances, rules, and policies enacted by the town council or town administrator; 
2.  Maintain the fiscal accounting and monetary control system of the town in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles; 
3.  Prepare reports of financial transactions of the town as directed by the town administrator; 
4.  Under the guidance of the town treasurer and in accordance with the Town of Newmarket Investment ordinance, invest idle funds of the town to obtain the maximum prudent return on such investment; 
5.  Prepare and administer the compensation of employees and maintain a record of earned time, as said earned time is accrued and used by all employees of the town; 
6.  Administer all employee benefits; 
7.  Perform all other duties as necessary and proper for the fulfillment of the statutory, regulatory, and local requirements of said division. 
(4)  Department of general assistance. The department of general assistance shall provide welfare assistance to eligible recipients as provided by state law and as approved in the town's general assistance guidelines. The head of the department shall be the welfare director. 
(5)  Department of planning and community development. The department of planning and community development shall be responsible for the divisions of planning (in coordination with the planning board); zoning (in coordination with the zoning board of adjustment); and conservation (in coordination with the conservation commission). The head of the department shall be the director of planning and community development. 
a.  Dvision of planning shall: 
1.  Provide land use and development-related services to all town departments, subdivisions, public bodies, and other municipal boards. 
2.  Recommend changes in land use and other regulations to provide for the harmonious growth and economic development of the town consistent with the town's master plan. 
3.  Review development proposals for compliance with the town's zoning, subdivision and site review requirements, coordinate the technical plan review process with town departments, and present recommendations to the planning board related to the approval, conditional approval, and denial of applications. 
4.  Write grant applications, provide oversight and grants administration, and manage special planning projects, as assigned by the town administrator. 
5.  Coordinate the town's capital improvement plan (CIP) planning process and prepare final CIP report. 
6.  Work with the planning board, consultants and the regional planning commission, as appropriate, in the preparation, coordination, updating, and adoption of the town's master plan. 
7.  Work with agencies and entities outside of the town to further the planning and development goals of the town consistent with the master plan. 
8.  Perform all other duties, as necessary and proper, for the fulfillment of statutory, regulatory, and local requirements of said office. 
b.  Division of zoning. The division of zoning shall: 
1.  Administer the town's zoning ordinance, answer questions from citizens, applicants, realtors, and developers related to zoning, and make zoning determinations related to applications and permits. 
2.  Provide research and technical assistance to the zoning board of adjustment, as requested. 
3.  Advise applicants before the board of the town's procedures, requirements for variances and special exceptions, and the appeals process. 
4.  Work with the town's legal counsel in documenting planning and zoning decisions, the application process, and certifying the record and legal documents related to cases that may be appealed through the court system. 
c.  Division of conservation: the division of conservation shall provide technical assistance to the conservation commission, on an "as-needed" basis. 
(6)  Department of building safety, health and zoning enforcement. The department of building safety shall be responsible for new and renovated building inspections, State Building Code enforcement, and health inspections. The head of the department shall be the building official. 
a.  The department of building safety shall receive applications and issue permits for the construction and renovation of structures all applicable building, electric, housing, plumbing, or such other safety codes as set forth in the laws of the State of New Hampshire, Town Code, and the rules and regulations of all state and local administrative bodies, as amended. 
b.  With the assistance of the office of planning, the department of building and safety shall interpret and enforce the town's zoning ordinance, all land use regulations, and all applicable building, electric, housing, plumbing, or such other safety codes set forth in the laws of the State of New Hampshire, Town Code, and the rules and regulations of all state and local administrative bodies, as amended. 
c.  The department of building and safety shall serve as the town's health officer in accordance with RSA Chapter 128. 
(7)  Department of public works. The department of public works shall be responsible for the divisions of highway and public infrastructure, solid waste, and cemeteries. The head of the department shall be the director of public works. 
a.  Division of highways and infrastructure. The division of highways and infrastructure shall be responsible for all the physical structures and facilities in the town not assigned to another department. The division of highway and infrastructure shall: 
1.  Repair, maintain, construct and operate the public highways, bridges, sidewalks and rights-of-ways of the town; 
2.  Repair, maintain, construct and operate the stormwater management systems for the town; 
3.  Maintain and repair all town mechanical equipment except with regard to those items for which other maintenance agreements or arrangements have been made; and 
4.  Perform all other duties as necessary and proper for the fulfillment of the statutory, regulatory, and local requirements of said division. 
b.  Division of solid waste. The division of solid waste shall be responsible for the collection, recycling and disposal of solid waste for the town. The division of solid waste shall: 
1.  Operate and maintain all transfer stations and solid waste landfills in accordance with laws of the State of New Hampshire, the Town Code, and all duly enacted ordinances of the town; and 
2.  Perform all other duties as necessary and proper for the fulfillment of the statutory, regulatory, and local requirements of said division. 
c.  Division of buildings and grounds. The division of buildings and grounds shall be responsible for the maintenance of all municipally owned buildings, grounds, parks and cemetery maintenance unless assigned to another department. 
d.  Division of cemeteries. The division of cemeteries is listed for record purposes only and is governed by the board of cemetery trustees and RSA chapter 289. The department of cemeteries shall: 
1.  Ensure the proper burial of the deceased in the Town of Newmarket's public cemeteries; 
2.  Maintain the public cemeteries in the town; and 
3.  Perform all other duties as necessary and proper for the fulfillment of the statutory, regulatory, and local requirements of said department. 
(8)  Department of facilities. The department of facilities shall be responsible for all aspects of the town facilities, including planning and supervising construction of civic projects, overseeing the coordination of bids, project management, and implementing a town wide facilities improvement plan. This head of the department shall be the director of facilities. 
(9)  Department of environmental services. The department of environmental services shall be responsible for the division of water and division of wastewater. The head of the department shall be the director of environmental services. 
a.  Division of water. The division of water shall: 
1.  Provide potable drinking water within the town; 
2.  Provide water for fire prevention and suppression; 
3.  Operate the water supply system and water distribution plants, including but not limited to all wells and treatment plants; 
4.  Operate the water fund; and 
5.  Perform all other duties as necessary and proper for the fulfillment of the statutory, regulatory, federal and local requirements of said division. 
b.  Division of wastewater. The division of wastewater shall: 
1.  Operate and maintain the Newmarket Wastewater Treatment Facility; 
2.  In coordination with Wastewater Treatment Plant Laboratory, provide laboratory services to all other town departments; 
3.  Operate the sewer fund; and 
4.  Perform all other duties as necessary and proper for the fulfillment of the statutory, regulatory, federal and local requirements of said division. 
(10)  Department of recreation. The department of recreation shall be responsible for the divisions of recreation programs and recreational facilities. The head of this department shall be the recreation director. 
a.  Division of recreation programs. The division of recreational programs shall: 
1.  Provide recreational programs for the residents of the town and others, as authorized by the town administrator or the town council; and 
2.  Perform all other duties as necessary and proper for the fulfillment of the statutory regulatory and local requirements of said division. 
b.  Division recreational facilities. The division recreational facilities shall: 
1.  Maintain recreation facilities, unless otherwise assigned to another town department or subdivision thereof; and 
2.  Perform all other duties as necessary and proper for the fulfillment of the statutory, regulatory, and local requirements of said division. 
(11)  Department of library. The department of library is listed for record purposes only and is governed by the board of library trustees and RSA chapter 202-a. The department of library shall: 
a.  Provide library services for the Town pursuant to RSA chapter 202-A; 
b.  Maintain the Newmarket Library; and 
c.  Perform all other duties as necessary and proper for the fulfillment of the statutory, regulatory, and local requirements of said department. 
(12)  Police department. The police department shall be responsible for the division of administration, division of operations and the division of support services. The police department shall: 
a.  Enforce all applicable provisions of the laws of the State of New Hampshire, including, but not limited to, the State Criminal Code and Motor Vehicle Code; 
b.  Enforce all applicable provisions of the Town Code, including, but not limited to, the penal ordinances of the Town of Newmarket; 
c.  Safeguard the persons and property of the residents and visitors of the town through activities designed to deter criminal actions and to apprehend persons who have committed crimes of whatever nature within the jurisdictional limits of the town; 
d.  Promote community awareness of safety and the causes of crime and its prevention; and 
e.  The police department shall consist of the following divisions: 
f.  Division of administration. The division of administration shall: 
1.  Be responsible for handling the day-to-day operations of the department. 
2.  Setting department policy and procedures. 
3.  Overseeing personnel and training. 
4.  Managing the department fleet, upgrading and maintaining equipment, and budgeting issues. 
5.  Perform all other duties as necessary and proper for the fulfillment of the statutory, regulatory, and local requirements of said division. 
g.  Division of operations. The division of operations shall: 
1.  Be responsible for patrols and uniformed services. 
2.  Crime prevention. 
3.  K-9 services. 
4.  Perform all other duties as necessary and proper for the fulfillment of the statutory, regulatory, and local requirements of said department. 
h.  Division of support services. The division of support services shall be responsible for the following: 
1.  Investigations. 
2.  Prosecution. 
3.  Dispatch police, fire, EMS, public works, water department. 
4.  Evidence. 
5.  School resource officer. 
6.  Perform all other duties as necessary and proper for the fulfillment of the statutory, regulatory, and local requirements of said department. 
7.  Youth services and juvenile prosecution. 
(13)  Fire department. The fire department shall be responsible for the divisions of fire and ambulance. The head of this department shall be the fire chief. 
a.  Division of fire. The division of fire shall: 
1.  Protect the lives and property of residents and visitors through the suppression of all unwanted or unsafe fires, or where suppression is not possible, prevent the spread of fire to adjacent buildings and land; 
2.  Promote the prevention of unwanted fires by enforcement of state and local fire prevention codes and fire prevention education; 
3.  Through the office of the town forest fire warden, appoint deputy forest fire wardens, provide permits for planned fires that meet all statutory and regulatory requirements for the issuance thereof, and suppress all fires that are not so permitted; and 
4.  Perform all other duties as necessary and proper for the fulfillment of the statutory, regulatory, and local requirements of said division 
b.  Division of ambulance. The division of ambulance shall: 
1.  Provide emergency medical services by responding to calls for assistance for medical aid; 
2.  Maintain a mutual aid network; and 
3.  Perform all other duties as necessary and proper for the fulfillment of the statutory, regulatory, and local requirements of said division. 
(14)  Department of emergency management. The head of the emergency management department is the emergency management director. The department of emergency management shall: 
a.  In accordance with the Town of Newmarket Emergency Management Plan, insure the complete and efficient utilization of the town's emergency response resources; 
b.  Develop and maintain an effective communication system to work with all town departments and state and federal communication networks in accordance of RSA chapter 21-P; 
c.  Maintain the town's emergency management plan in accordance with the rules and regulations of the New Hampshire Bureau of Emergency Management; and 
d.  Perform all other duties as necessary and proper for the fulfillment of the statutory, regulatory, and local requirements of said division. 
(15)  Department of information technology. The department of information technology shall be responsible for the divisions of information technology and division of government access television. The head of the department of information technology shall be the information technology director. 
a.  Division of information technology: 
1.  Maintain close coordination with department heads to establish information technology requirements. 
2.  Establish information technology procedures. 
3.  Provide advice on feasibility of desired information technology products. 
4.  Perform system analysis and design, establish and monitor information networks, write computer software, test and debug computer software and complete system documentation. 
5.  Provide training to employees on equipment and software. 
6.  Maintain the town website. 
7.  Maintain the technical reference library. 
b.  Division of community access television: 
1.  Manage all functions of the community access television system. 
2.  Ensure proper operation of studio equipment. 
(Ord. No. 3-2016/2016,  1, 5-3-2017) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Towns generally, RSA 31. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Access to public records and meetings. 
    The town administrator is the records access officer within the meaning of RSA 91-A. 
(Prior Code,  1.2; Ord. No. 2001-10, 8-1-2001) 
Secs. 2-2-2-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TOWN COUNCIL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Open meetings requirements, RSA 91-A. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-21-2-43. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ORDINANCES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Ordinances and bylaws, RSA 31:39 et seq. 

Sec. 2-44. - Ordinances. 
    All bylaws passed by the town council shall be called ordinances. 
(Prior Code,  1.1.1; Ord. No. 2000-08, 11-1-2000) 
Sec. 2-45. - First reading (introduction). 
(a)  All ordinances shall be introduced at any regular or special meeting of the town council. An ordinance when first presented shall be read in its entirety, except as general revision or by unanimous vote of the town council. 
(b)  Upon introduction of any ordinance, the town clerk shall keep on file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the town clerk, and post a copy in such other public places as the town council may designate. 
(Prior Code,  1.1.3; Ord. No. 2000-08, 11-1-2000) 
Sec. 2-46. - Public hearing and notice thereof. 
    After passage of the ordinance's first reading, a public hearing shall be held. A notice of the public hearing shall be published in a general circulation newspaper that states the time and place of the public hearing and the information required to be published by section 3.8(C) of the town Charter. 
(Prior Code,  1.1.4; Ord. No. 2000-08, 11-1-2000) 
Sec. 2-47. - Amendments to a proposed ordinance. 
    An ordinance may be revised or amended after its first reading until its final passage by the town council. 
(Prior Code,  1.1.5; Ord. No. 2000-08, 11-1-2000) 
Sec. 2-48. - Second reading. 
    Before the passage of any ordinance, the ordinance must be read a second time, but may be read by title only. 
(Prior Code,  1.1.6; Ord. No. 2000-08, 11-1-2000) 
Sec. 2-49. - Passage. 
(a)  Upon a majority vote of the town council the ordinance is passed. 
(b)  Each ordinance, upon passage, will be authenticated by affixing the signatures of the council chairman and the town clerk and the town seal, and be kept on file in the office of the town clerk. 
(Prior Code,  1.1.7; Ord. No. 2000-08, 11-1-2000) 
Sec. 2-50. - Recording of ordinance. 
    All ordinances passed by the town council shall be published in the appropriate annual town report. 
(Prior Code,  1.1.10; Ord. No. 2000-08, 11-1-2000) 
Secs. 2-51-2-73. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRUSTS, BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND AUTHORITIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-74. - Preamble. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided for by ordinance or statute, this article shall establish rules of attendance and/or forfeiture of office for all town boards and commissions pursuant to section 3.16 of the town Charter and RSA 673:13. 
(b)  Any word in this article that may be construed to be either masculine or feminine gender shall be considered gender free. 
(Prior Code,  1.3.1; Ord. No. 2001-11, 8-1-2001) 
Sec. 2-75. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Board, commission, or committee member means an elected or appointed individual, but shall not refer to the town council (which is included within the town Charter) or to any full-time or part-time employees of the town and its departments, whose discipline and dismissal are covered by the town personnel regulations and/or the town Charter. The term "board, commission, or committee member" shall refer to any board, commission, or committee of the town which includes, but is not limited to, the advisory heritage commission, budget committee, conservation commission, highway safety committee, Lamprey Riverwalk committee, planning board, zoning board of adjustment, downtown TIF advisory committee and the Black Bear TIF advisory committee. 
    Harm means any disadvantage or injury, pecuniary or otherwise, including disadvantage or injury to any other person or entity in whose welfare the public servant, party official, or voter is interested. 
    Pecuniary benefit means any advantage in the form of money, property, commercial interest or anything else, the primary significance of which is economic gain; it does not include economic advantage applicable to the public generally, such as tax reduction or increased prosperity generally. 
    Public servant means any board, commission, or committee member performing a function on behalf of the town. A person is considered a public servant upon his election, appointment or other designation as such, although he may not yet officially occupy that position. 
(Prior Code,  1.3.2; Ord. No. 2001-11, 8-1-2001) 
Sec. 2-76. - Cause for removal. 
    Any board, commission, or committee member may be removed from office after a public hearing and upon written findings of inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office. Said inefficiency, neglect or duty, or malfeasance in office include, but are not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  If the board, commission, or committee member is found, after a public hearing and upon written findings, to have violated any section of RSA 640 entitled "Corrupt Practices" or RSA 643 entitled "Abuse of Office." If the board, commission or committee member is convicted of violating any cited section, said member shall be removed. 
(2)  If the board, commission, or committee member commits any felony offense while in the course of conducting his duties as a municipal official. If the board, commission or committee member, while in the course of conducting his duties as a board, is convicted of a felony offense, said board, commission or committee member shall be removed. 
(3)  The board, commission, or committee member, while in the course of conducting his duties as a municipal official, engages in any conduct, which can be reasonably construed to be corrupt or unethical, or otherwise engages in gross malfeasance of office. 
(4)  If the board, commission, or committee member knowingly violates any provision of RSA 91-A. 
(5)  If the board, commission, or committee member solicits, accepts or agrees to accept any pecuniary benefit in return for having given a decision, opinion, recommendation, nomination, vote or other exercise of discretion in the performance of his duties. 
(6)  If the board, commission, or committee member solicits, accepts or agrees to accept any pecuniary benefit in return for advice or other assistance in preparing or promoting a bill, contract, claim or other transaction or proposal as to which he knows that he has or is likely to have an official discretion to exercise. 
(7)  If the board, commission, or committee member solicits, accepts or agrees to accept for himself, another person, or a political party, money or any other pecuniary benefit as compensation for his endorsement, nomination, appointment, approval or disapproval of any person for a position as a public servant or for the advancement of any public servant. 
(8)  If the board, commission, or committee member, with a purpose to benefit himself or another or to harm another, knowingly commits an unauthorized act which purports to be an act of his office; or knowingly refrains from performing a duty imposed on him by law or clearly inherent in the nature of his office. 
(9)  If the board, commission, or committee member, knowing that official action is contemplated or in reliance on information which he has acquired by virtue of his office or from another public servant, he acquires or divests himself of a pecuniary interest in any property, transaction or enterprise which may be affected by such action or information, speculates or wagers on the basis of such action or information, or knowingly aids another to do any of the foregoing. 
(10)  If the board, commission, or committee member is unfit or incapacitated to serve and has violated subsection (11) of this section. 
(11)  If the board, commission, or committee member is absent for more than one-third of the scheduled meetings or gatherings within any given year of the member's appointment of office unless the majority grants a special excuse due to extenuating circumstances. 
(Prior Code,  1.3.3; Ord. No. 2001-11, 8-1-2001) 
Sec. 2-77. - Motion for removal of board, commission or committee members. 
(a)  Removal of a board, commission or committee member shall be for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office as provided in section 2-76 and by majority vote of the town council. Any member of the town council may move the removal or suspension of a board, commission or committee member. 
(b)  Upon a motion for removal being seconded, the town council shall take no other action except to schedule a public hearing with regard to said motion. 
(Prior Code,  1.3.4; Ord. No. 2001-11, 8-1-2001) 
Sec. 2-78. - Public hearing. 
    Unless otherwise provided in RSA 91-A:3,II(c), the hearing scheduled pursuant to section 2-77 shall be public. The public hearing may be recessed as justice or convenience may require. 
(Prior Code,  1.3.5; Ord. No. 2001-11, 8-1-2001) 
Sec. 2-79. - Final vote on the removal of a board, commission or committee member. 
    Upon the conclusion of the public hearing pursuant to section 2-78, the town council shall vote in regard to the motion for removal, and make written findings as to inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office of the municipal official subject to such hearing. 
(Prior Code,  1.3.6; Ord. No. 2001-11, 8-1-2001) 
Secs. 2-80-2-101. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - VETERANS MEMORIAL TRUST[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Trust funds, RSA 31:19 et seq. 

Sec. 2-102. - Name. 
    The town council resolves that there shall be established a trust fund to be known as the "Newmarket Veterans Memorial Trust." 
(Prior Code,  2.9.1; Ord. No. 2008-02, 3-19-2008) 
Sec. 2-103. - Mission. 
(a)  The purpose of the veterans memorial trust shall be to oversee the establishment, maintenance, care, and improvement of veterans memorials in the town. 
(b)  The town shall accept public and private donations, whether monetary, in kind, or otherwise, for purposes consistent with the mission of the trust. 
(Prior Code,  2.9.2; Ord. No. 2008-02, 3-19-2008) 
Sec. 2-104. - Duration. 
    The veterans memorial trust shall be indefinite in duration. 
(Prior Code,  2.9.3; Ord. No. 2008-02, 3-19-2008) 
Sec. 2-105. - Board of trustees. 
(a)  The veterans memorial trust shall be governed by a board of trustees. All trustees will be appointed by the town council. All trustees shall be residents of the town. 
(b)  There shall be five trustees. 
(c)  Each trustee will be appointed for a term of three years. 
(d)  Vacancies on the board of trustees will be filled by members appointed by the town council. 
(e)  If any trustee misses three consecutive regular meetings of the board of trustees, without having been excused by the board, the chairman of the board shall declare the seat vacant and shall request that the town council appoint a trustee to fill the remainder of the vacant term. 
(f)  If any trustee is convicted of any criminal offense (aside from a traffic violation), or is found by the board to have engaged in any gross misconduct, the chairman of the board shall declare that seat vacant and shall forthwith request that the town council appoint a member to fill the term of the vacated seat. No finding of gross misconduct shall be made against any trustee unless the trustee is given at least 72 hours' written notice of the allegations against him, and is afforded an opportunity to address the board. 
(g)  The board of trustees may in its discretion designate subcommittees for purposes consistent with the trust's overall mission. 
(h)  The trustees shall receive no compensation for their service on the board. The trustees may be reimbursed from trust funds for their reasonable expenses incurred in the course of the trust's business according to the reimbursement policies established by the town. 
(Prior Code,  2.9.4; Ord. No. 2008-02, 3-19-2008) 
State Law reference- Trustees, RSA 31:22. 
Sec. 2-106. - Organizational meeting and election of officers. 
(a)  The board of trustees for the veterans memorial trust shall include three officers: a chairman, vice-chairman, and a secretary. 
(b)  The officers shall be elected by majority vote of a quorum of the board of trustees. 
(c)  The board may promulgate and utilize such rules of procedure, not inconsistent with its mission, as it may see fit. 
(d)  The chairman of the board shall conduct all meetings of the board, set the agenda for board meetings, and oversee all of its activities. 
(e)  The vice-chairman of the board shall conduct all meetings in the absence of the chairman, shall serve as the board's parliamentarian, and shall otherwise assist the chairman. 
(f)  The secretary of the board shall be responsible for publishing notices of meetings, taking and publishing the minutes of each meeting, maintaining all board records, receiving and writing correspondence, and otherwise performing or overseeing the performance of the board's administrative tasks. 
(Prior Code,  2.9.5; Ord. No. 2008-02, 3-19-2008) 
Sec. 2-107. - Meetings of the board of trustees. 
(a)  The board of trustees for the veterans memorial trust shall meet periodically, but no less than quarterly. 
(b)  All meetings of the board shall be public as required by RSA 91-A. Regular meetings shall be held on such days at such time as the board shall direct. Special meetings may be called by the chairman. Special meetings also may be called at the written request of at least four trustees, and upon such request the chairman of the board shall call such special meetings. Written notice of said meeting shall be delivered to each trustee at least 24 hours prior to the call of the meeting. 
(c)  The board of trustees shall designate a portion of each of its regular meetings for receiving public input and comment on its activities. The board may schedule additional public hearings as it deems necessary and appropriate to accomplish its mission. 
(d)  Except in cases of emergency otherwise authorized by the general laws, all meetings of the trust shall be open and public; however, the trust may meet in a closed or executive session as permitted by RSA 91-A. 
(e)  Notices of meetings of the board of trustees shall be published in the same manner as meetings of the town council. Expenses for the board's hearing notices shall be defrayed by the trust's funds. 
(f)  The board of trustees shall maintain minutes of their proceedings. All records of the board shall be open to the public, and its minutes and other records shall be available to the public in accordance with the provisions of RSA 91-A. The board's meeting minutes shall be provided to the town council. 
(Prior Code,  2.9.6; Ord. No. 2008-02, 3-19-2008) 
Sec. 2-108. - Powers of the trust. 
(a)  The board of trustees for the veterans memorial trust shall establish an inventory of each existing veterans memorial in town, including, without limitation, its location; its current condition; the adequacy of its current location; and recommendations for maintenance and/or restoration. 
(b)  The board shall consider the potential establishment of additional war memorials, or additions, improvements, or upgrades to existing memorials. 
(c)  The board of trustees is empowered to enter into contracts with contractors, tradesmen, architects, designers, artists, engineers, or any other similarly qualified person, for advice and/or services reasonably necessary to accomplish the purposes set forth in section 2-103, or for any other purpose consistent with its mission. All such contracts shall be made part of the board's public records. 
(d)  The board of trustees shall be empowered to accept public and private donations, whether monetary, in kind, or otherwise, for purposes consistent with its mission. 
(e)  The board of trustees shall not accept any donation whatsoever, under terms or conditions inconsistent with the trust's mission, or in conflict with local, state, or federal law. 
(f)  The board of trustees shall not enter into any contract, nor expend any funds, in an amount exceeding $2,500.00 without prior express approval of the town council. The town council will only grant such approval at a public meeting of the council. 
(g)  The board of trustees may request of the town council and town administrator that town resources and facilities be made available to the trust for purposes consistent with the trust's mission. 
(Prior Code,  2.9.7; Ord. No. 2008-02, 3-19-2008) 
Sec. 2-109. - Administration of trust funds. 
(a)  Trust funds shall be maintained and administered by the town administrator. Pursuant to RSA 31:19, public and private donations shall be maintained in separate accounts. 
(b)  The town administrator shall not disburse any trust funds in an amount less than $100.00 without the prior express permission of the board of trustees. 
(c)  The town administrator shall not disburse any trust funds in an amount greater than $2,500.00 without the prior express permission of the board of trustees and the town council. 
(d)  On or before August 1 of each year, the board of trustees shall forward to the town administrator a report of the trust's activities over the preceding year. The report shall include an accounting for all monies received and disbursed by the trust. The board's report shall be published in the town report each year. 
(Prior Code,  2.9.8; Ord. No. 2008-02, 3-19-2008) 
Sec. 2-110. - Conflict of interest transactions. 
    The board of trustees shall be subject to the provisions of article 7 of the town Charter. 
(Prior Code,  2.9.9; Ord. No. 2008-02, 3-19-2008) 
Secs. 2-111-2-133. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BOARD OF CEMETERY TRUSTEES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Cemetery trustees, RSA 289:6 et seq. 

Sec. 2-134. - Membership. 
(a)  The board of cemetery trustees shall consist of five trustees appointed by the town council. Appointment will be made at the May organizational meeting unless otherwise deemed necessary. 
(b)  The term of each trustee shall be three years, pursuant to RSA 289:6,I. 
(Prior Code,  2.11.1; Ord. No. 2005-05, 8-4-2004; Ord. No. 2005-07, 8-3-2005) 
Sec. 2-135. - Meetings. 
    The board of cemetery trustees shall meet as necessary to elect a chairman and other officers as deemed necessary, and to set their agenda, as appropriate. 
(Prior Code,  2.11.5; Ord. No. 2005-05, 8-4-2004) 
Sec. 2-136. - Posting meetings. 
    All meetings of the board of cemetery trustees are to be posted by the town administrator's office and subject to RSA 91-A. 
(Prior Code,  2.11.6; Ord. No. 2005-05, 8-4-2004) 
Sec. 2-137. - Minutes of meetings. 
    Minutes of approved meetings shall be provided to the town administrator's office in a suitable electronic format so they can be posted on the town's website. 
(Prior Code,  2.11.7; Ord. No. 2005-05, 8-4-2004) 
Sec. 2-138. - Mission. 
    The mission of the board of cemetery trustees is to operate and administer any municipal cemetery within the town. 
(Prior Code,  2.11.1; Ord. No. 2005-05, 8-4-2004) 
Sec. 2-139. - Powers and duties. 
    The board of cemetery trustees shall have all powers and duties as prescribed in RSA 289:5 et seq. as amended. 
(Prior Code,  2.11.2; Ord. No. 2005-05, 8-4-2004) 
Sec. 2-140. - Municipal cemeteries. 
    The municipal cemeteries of the town are as follows: 
(1)  Riverside Cemetery, located on Elm Street and Packers Falls Road. 
(2)  The Old Newmarket Graveyard, located on Gordon Avenue behind the police station. 
(Prior Code,  2.11.3; Ord. No. 2005-05, 8-4-2004) 
Secs. 2-141-2-163. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE (RESERVED)[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal finance generally, RSA 33; municipal budgets, RSA 32. 

Secs. 2-164-2-194. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PURCHASING 

Sec. 2-195. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Best knowledge procurement. Purchases of small quantities of inexpensive materials or services may be made based on the department's knowledge of the best sources for such purchases when other forms of competitive procurement are not cost effective. 
    Competitive procurement means any process for acquiring goods or services in which more than one individual is solicited to propose price and delivery terms in such a manner as to encourage competition between prospective suppliers. 
    Formal procurement is characterized by written requests for prices and terms with written responses. The most formal procurement includes advertisement in appropriate publications, requirements for submission of sealed bids and public bids openings. 
    Informal procurement means the process in which verbal quotations, proposals or bids are solicited for relatively small purchases. A written record shall be kept of such procurements consisting, as a minimum, of the names, dates and prices received as well as any other information required to document the competitive aspects of the purchase. 
    Negotiated procurement means a process for acquiring goods and services in which the purchaser and seller negotiate any and all parts of the price and delivery terms. Negotiations may be a part of the procurement process along with bidding. 
    Sealed bid means a form of competitive procurement in which sealed proposals are solicited which are opened and read at a specific time and place and in which the purchaser has no knowledge of the specific price and delivery proposal in the bid until the opening. 
    Solicitation means the process by which vendors are requested to propose terms and conditions for an item or service which is proposed to be purchased. 
    Specification means a description of the goods and services to be procured. For purposes of this article, a specification shall be as general as possible and shall describe the performance of the good or service as much as possible. Where a specification contains a reference to a specific product or firm, it shall be interpreted as being functionally equivalent to that firm or product unless explicitly stated otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2012/2013-03,  2, 4-3-2013) 
Sec. 2-196. - Purpose. 
    Pursuant to section 5.12 of the town Charter, the purpose of this article is: 
(1)  To procure materials, supplies, equipment and services best suited to the job which operating units are to perform. 
(2)  To procure the correct quantities of items required. 
(3)  To ensure goods and services are in the hands of operating units when and where needed. 
(4)  To obtain goods, services and equipment at the lowest total price. 
(5)  To obtain critical materials when required to meet emergencies. 
(6)  To dispose of unneeded real property. 
(Ord. No. 2012/2013-03,  1, 4-3-2013) 
Sec. 2-197. - General procedure. 
(a)  Specifications required. Specifications will be prepared for all purchases whenever possible and in all cases where any single item in the purchase is estimated to have a cost in excess of $10,000.00. Specifications shall be in writing for formally advertised bids. 
(b)  Advertisement. Solicitations shall be given the widest advertisement appropriate for the proposed purchase. Due consideration shall be given to the nature of the item or service and the media which probable vendors might be expected to read or be exposed to. Advertisement over bidding or buying networks is encouraged. Advertisements shall contain a succinct summary of the item or service, the location of detailed specifications, if any, and the requirements for bid submittal. 
(c)  Bid opening and tabulation. Bids shall be opened at the time and place designated in the solicitation and the bids shall become public record. Whenever advantageous to the town, summaries of bids shall be prepared and circulated to the bidders. All bids shall be public record unless specified otherwise prior to the bid opening. 
(d)  Sole source. If the procedure for procuring more than one potential bidder for an item does not exist, the town administrator shall document the sole source procurement, specifying the vendor's name, amount and type of contract, list of supplies or services procured, and a determination that the vendor is the only practicable source for the required supply or service. 
(Ord. No. 2012/2013-03,  3, 4-3-2013) 
Sec. 2-198. - Award. 
    All purchases for which bids have been taken shall be formally awarded by the appropriate individual or governing body. In all cases the town shall reserve the right to award contracts to vendors whose combination of price, product and performance history are determined to be in the best interests of the town. The town may reject all bids at any time for any reason. 
(Ord. No. 2012/2013-03,  4, 4-3-2013) 
Sec. 2-199. - Bid and performance bonds. 
    When specified in the solicitation, the successful vendor shall produce an acceptable bid bond at the time of bid opening. If a performance bond or surety is required, it shall be presented prior to execution of any contract. 
(Ord. No. 2012/2013-03,  5, 4-3-2013) 
Sec. 2-200. - Requirements for competitive procurement. 
(a)  Cost thresholds. Competitive procure is required for all purchases whenever practical. The following table contains the minimum requirements for complying with the various complexities of the procurement process: 
Amount Involved Min. Competition Approval By To $250.00 Best knowledge department $250.00 to $1,000.00 Informal department $1,001.00 to $2,500.00 Informal Town Administrator/Finance Director $2,501.00 to $10,000.00 Formal Town Administrator/Finance Director Over $10,000.00 Formal Town Council  
(b)  Emergency buying. An emergency purchase is a purchase which is essential to prevent delays in work which might affect the safety, health or convenience of the community. Permission for emergency purchasing shall be obtained from the town administrator or his designee, if possible, and a written report of such action filed with the town administrator within five days of such action. 
(c)  Absence of second bid. No purchase will be made where there is no competition unless a determination can be made that the terms of the purchase are fair, reasonable and in the best interests of the town. Approval for such purchase must be obtained from the next higher level of approval found in the table in subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  Professional services. Professional services, including engineering, architectural, auditing, and other services commonly considered professional, may be secured through negotiation. Professional service agreements should be on a fixed price basis for a clearly defined scope of work whenever possible. 
(e)  Cooperative purchasing. Where prices on goods or services have been determined by competitive procurement by an agency of the state or any other entity through which the town purchases cooperatively, that price shall be considered sufficiently competitive for the purchase of authorized items if obtained as outlined in this section. This specifically includes equipment and supplies available through bidding of the state department of transportation and similar agencies for trucks, cars and related equipment. 
(Ord. No. 2012/2013-03,  6, 4-3-2013) 
Secs. 2-201-211. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TOWN SEAL[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015/2016-01,  2, adopted July 15, 2015, set out provisions intended for use as Art. III. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated, the provisions have been redesignated as art. VI, at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 2-212. - Purpose. 
    Pursuant to RSA 31:93, the Town of Newmarket by vote of the town council does hereby designate the following as the rules and design of the town seal. 
(Ord. No. 2015/2016-01,  2, 7-15-2015) 
Sec. 2-213. - Keeper of the seal. 
    The town clerk shall be the ex-officio keeper of the town seal, but shall permit the chair of the town council, town administrator or any officer to affix the same to any document to which the town seal is required to be affixed. 
(Ord. No. 2015/2016-01,  2, 7-15-2015) 
Sec. 2-214. - Use of the seal. 
    All deeds and other legal instruments made, or special contract entered into by the town, requiring a seal, shall be sealed with the town seal and be signed and acknowledged on behalf of the town by the town administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2015/2016-01,  2, 7-15-2015) 
Sec. 2-215. - Design. 
    The design shall consist of a disc of the size of 2.25 inches in diameter, with a smaller circle within which shall create a space of 0.25 inch between the circles, where on shall be engraved "Town of Newmarket, NH" and "Est. Dec. 15, 1727." Inside the inner circle shall be a scene of the Town of Newmarket, including a ship along the Lamprey River. 
(Ord. No. 2015/2016-01,  2, 7-15-2015) 
Sec. 2-216. - Depiction of the town seal. 

(Ord. No. 2015/2016-01,  2, 7-15-2015) 
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Animals, RSA 466-470. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 4-1-4-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Dogs and cats, RSA 466. 

Sec. 4-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    At large means off the premises or property of the owner while not on a fixed leash of eight feet or less or a retractable leash of 15 feet or less, not under the physical control of a responsible person, and/or not confined within a vehicle. 
    Dog includes both male and female of the canine species. The term "dog" shall also mean any animal, which is considered to be a wolf-hybrid as defined in RSA 466-A. 
    Enclosure means any structure, fenced or otherwise, which is secure on all sides so as to prevent the exiting of the dog or entrance of young children. Said enclosure shall be of a proper size as regulated by state law. 
    Enforcement official means any animal control officer, police officer, or other individual authorized to enforce the provisions of this article and such state statutes pertaining to animals. 
    Owner means any person, group, association or organization responsible for maintaining, keeping, caring for, harboring or owning a dog. 
    Threatening means an indication of a dog's imminent attack, usually accompanied by the baring of teeth and the fur on its back standing up. (Guttural threatening sounds made by an angry animal; low guttural menacing sound of a dog; a deep, angry, throaty noise as of a dog.) 
    Vicious dog. 
(1)  The term "vicious dog" means any dog which snaps at, bites or chases any person while on foot or on any propelled vehicle. It shall also include any dog which has attacked any animal, as domestic or wild. 
(2)  Dogs would only be considered vicious if they attacked an animal causing injury or death. This article is to supplement RSA 466:36, which authorizes the killing of dogs found in active pursuit. In most cases, the dog leaves the scene without being killed and, therefore, needs to be designated a future danger to the public and other animals. 
(Prior Code,  17.1.2; Ord. No. 96-02, 4-3-1996; Ord. No. 2004-08, 8-28-2004; Ord. No. 2005-06, 7-6-2005) 
Sec. 4-20. - Purpose. 
    This article is designed to regulate the licensing and conduct of dogs. 
(Prior Code,  17.1.1; Ord. No. 96-02, 4-3-1996; Ord. No. 2004-08, 8-28-2004; Ord. No. 2005-06, 7-6-2005) 
Sec. 4-21. - Violations; fines. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of section 4-23 or 4-28 shall be guilty of a violation; provided that if such person chooses to pay the civil forfeiture specified in subsection (b) of this section, the person shall be deemed to have waived the right to have the case heard in district or municipal court and shall not be prosecuted or found guilty of a violation of section 4-23 or 4-28. Any person who does not pay the civil forfeiture specified in subsection (b) of this section shall have the case disposed of in district or municipal court. 
(b)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of sections 4-23 and 4-28 shall be liable for a civil forfeiture, which shall be paid to the town clerk within 96 hours of the date and time any law enforcement officer gives notice to the owner or keeper of a dog in violation of sections 4-23 and 4-28. If the forfeiture is paid, said payment shall be in full satisfaction of the assessed penalty. The forfeiture shall be in the amount as specified for the following violations: 
(1)  $50.00 for the first at-large or nuisance offense under sections 4-23 and 4-28(a)(1) through (4); $100.00 for the second at-large or nuisance offense. 
(2)  $50.00 for the first menace offense under section 4-28(a)(5) or (6); $100.00 for the second or subsequent menace offense committed within 12 months of the first menace offense under section 4-28(a)(5) or (6). 
(3)  $200.00 for the first vicious offense under section 4-28(a)(7); $400.00 for the second vicious offense. 
Any person who pays a civil forfeiture specified in this subsection (b) two times in any 12-month period according to the records of the town clerk, may not pay a civil forfeiture for subsequent violations of section 4-28 in that 12-month period, but shall have those case disposed of in district or municipal court. In the case of a vicious dog, as described by section 4-32, where its behavior presents a threat to public safety, immediate district court or municipal court proceedings may be initiated in lieu of the civil forfeiture. 
(Prior Code,  17.1.16; Ord. No. 96-02, 4-3-1996; Ord. No. 2004-08, 8-28-2004; Ord. No. 2005-06, 7-6-2005) 
Sec. 4-22. - Penalties. 
(a)  A person, firm or corporation who violates any provisions of this article (excluding section 4-23 or 4-28) shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00 for each offense. 
(b)  All sections except section 4-26 shall not be applicable to service dogs. 
(Prior Code,  17.1.17; Ord. No. 96-02, 4-3-1996; Ord. No. 2004-08, 8-28-2004; Ord. No. 2005-06, 7-6-2005) 
Sec. 4-23. - Being at large prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of a dog to permit a dog so owned or kept, to run at large, except for the following: 
(1)  When the dog is upon the owner's property; 
(2)  When the dog is accompanied by owner or custodian and being used for hunting, herding, supervised competition and exhibition; 
(3)  When in actual training for hunting, herding or competition and exhibition; 
(4)  On the premises of the person under whose control the dog is supervised; 
(5)  On the premises of another person as long as that person has given permission for the dog to be at large; or 
(6)  When the dog is in a designated off-leash dog area managed and regulated by the town. 
(Prior Code,  17.1.3; Ord. No. 96-02, 4-3-1996; Ord. No. 2004-08, 8-28-2004; Ord. No. 2005-06, 7-6-2005) 
Sec. 4-24. - Impounding of dogs. 
    Any dog found at large and not on the premises or property of the owner and within the town may be restrained and impounded by the police department. A dog so impounded may be confined in a suitable animal shelter for not more than seven days and may be humanely disposed of in accordance with state law by the police department. The owner must be noticed within 24 hours of impoundment if the dog is licensed. 
(Prior Code,  17.1.4; Ord. No. 96-02, 4-3-1996; Ord. No. 2004-08, 8-28-2004; Ord. No. 2005-06, 7-6-2005) 
Sec. 4-25. - Claiming impounded dogs. 
    An owner or individual claiming a dog impounded by the police department shall pay to the town a fee of $20.00 for the dog. In the event an animal shelter is used other than a town-owned facility, the owner or individual claiming the dog shall pay shelter fees established by the outside shelter and approved by the town administrator. 
(Prior Code,  17.1.5; Ord. No. 96-02, 4-3-1996; Ord. No. 2004-08, 8-28-2004; Ord. No. 2005-06, 7-6-2005) 
Sec. 4-26. - License and registration. 
    The owner of a dog kept, harbored or maintained in the town shall license and register the dog as specified in RSA 466. 
(Prior Code,  17.1.6; Ord. No. 96-02, 4-3-1996; Ord. No. 2004-08, 8-28-2004; Ord. No. 2005-06, 7-6-2005) 
Sec. 4-27. - Killing dogs. 
    Any dog that is located without proper identification and that is suffering serious injury; or other apparent serious illness may be disposed of forthwith at the discretion of the police department. 
(Prior Code,  17.1.7; Ord. No. 96-02, 4-3-1996; Ord. No. 2004-08, 8-28-2004; Ord. No. 2005-06, 7-6-2005) 
Sec. 4-28. - Dogs a menace, nuisance or vicious. 
(a)  It shall be prohibited to allow any dog to be a menace or a nuisance, or vicious to persons or to property under any or all, but not limited to, the following conditions: 
(1)  If a dog is "at large," which means it is off the premises of the owner or keeper and not under the control of any person by means of personal presence and attention as will reasonably control the conduct of such dog, unless accompanied by the owner or custodian. This subsection shall not include a dog which is being used for hunting, supervised competition, exhibition, or training for such activities if accompanied by the owner or custodian, or a dog which is guarding, working, or herding livestock, as defined in RSA 21:34-a, II(a)(4), meaning that the owner or custodian must be able to see or hear the dog, or have reasonable knowledge of where the dog is hunting or herding, or where training is being conducted or where trials are being held, provided that such dog does not have to be within sight at all time. 
(2)  If it barks for sustained periods of more than one-half hour, or during the night hours so as to disturb the peace and quiet of a neighborhood or area, not including a dog which is guarding, working, or herding livestock, as defined in RSA 21:34-a, II(a)(4). 
(3)  If it digs, scratches, or excretes, or causes waste or garbage to be scattered on property other than its owner's. 
(4)  If any female dog in season (heat) is permitted to run at large or be off the premises of the owner or keeper during this period except when being exercised on a leash by a responsible adult. At all other times such dog shall be confined within a building or enclosure in such manner that she will not come in contact (except for intentional breeding purposes) with a male dog. A female dog in heat shall not be used for hunting. 
(5)  If it growls, snaps at, runs after or chases any person not on the premises of the owner or keeper. 
(6)  If it runs after or chases bicycles, motor vehicles, motorcycles or other vehicles being driven, pulled or pushed on the streets, highways or public ways. 
(7)  If whether alone or in a pack with other dogs, it bites, attacks domestic animals or preys on game animals, fowl or human beings. 
(b)  If the skin of a person has been punctured by a dog and the incident was reported, including the identity of the dog and its owner, to the animal control officer or police officer, such officer shall, within 24 hours, notify the injured person or, in the case of a minor, the minor's parent or guardian, whether, according to town records, the dog has been appropriately immunized against rabies. 
(c)  Any person who fails, by appropriate action including but not limited to restraining an animal from running at large, or otherwise effectively abating a nuisance found such under the provisions of this section, or who fails to comply with any other provisions of this section after being so ordered, shall have the person's dog taken into custody by the police department and such disposition made of the dog as the court may order. Notwithstanding RSA 466:31-a, if a law enforcement officer does not witness the nuisance behavior, the name of the complainant shall be released as public information before any fine under RSA 466:31-a shall be levied. 
(Prior Code,  17.1.8; Ord. No. 96-02, 4-3-1996; Ord. No. 2004-08, 8-28-2004; Ord. No. 2005-06, 7-6-2005) 
Sec. 4-29. - Removal of animal excrement required. 
    Any person who owns or is responsible for an animal shall, if the animal defecates upon public property or private property, promptly clean up and dispose of the excrement. The excrement shall be disposed of in a lawful and sanitary manner. 
(Prior Code,  17.1.9; Ord. No. 96-02, 4-3-1996; Ord. No. 2004-08, 8-28-2004; Ord. No. 2005-06, 7-6-2005) 
Sec. 4-30. - Prohibition in parks and commons. 
    No person, firm or corporation shall allow any dog to be present in town property, conservation parks, or other parklands except for public roads and sidewalks and the following locations: 
(1)  Dogs are permitted on a leash: 
R2 11-25 Between Dame Rd and Bay Rd R2 11-26 Between Dame Rd and Bay Rd R2 119 Heron Point U1 88 Mastin Dr/Follet's Brook Env. Educ. Area U1 96 Trotter Park/Carolyn Dr U1 97 Carolyn Dr U2 114 Cedar St U2 115 Cedar St U2 124 Piscassic St Boat Launch  
(2)  Dogs are permitted off a leash: 
R3 30-1 Lita Lane Vacant Land R3 30-19 Lita Lane Vacant Land R3 30-2 Lita Lane Vacant Land R3 30-21 Lita Lane Vacant Land R3 30-22 Lita Lane Vacant Land R3 30-23 Lita Lane Vacant Land R3 30-24 Lita Lane Vacant Land R3 30-25 Lita Lane Vacant Land R3 30-26 Lita Lane Vacant Land R3 30-27 Lita Lane Vacant Land R3 30-28 Lita Lane Vacant Land R3 30-29 Lita Lane Vacant Land R3 30-3 Lita Lane Vacant Land R3 30-31 Lita Lane Vacant Land R3 30-32 Lita Lane Vacant Land R3 30-33 Lita Lane Vacant Land R3 30-34 Lita Lane Vacant Land R3 30-35 Lita Lane Vacant Land R3 30-36 Lita Lane Vacant Land R3 30-47 Pembroke Drive R5 91-2 Route 152/Piscassic River R6 38 Wadleigh Falls Rd (Route 152 Parcel) R6 39 Wadleigh Falls Rd (Route 152 Parcel) R6 4 Off Wadleigh Falls Rd (Route 152 Parcel) R6 21A Grape Vine Hill (also called "Fisk Parcel") Grant Road R6 21B Grape Vine Hill (also called "Fisk Parcel") Grant Road R6 21 Grape Vine Hill (also called "Fisk Parcel") Grant Road U1 1-1A Access to Piscassic U1 1-4-P Riverbend Rd Educ. Area, Piscassic River Natural Area U1 1-1-P Park Area U3 48 Young's Lane U3 49 Young's Lane U3 5 Off of Young's Lane  
(3)  No person shall allow any dog to be in any area in any park in which the recreation department holds scheduled programs or park/conservation area except as listed in subsections (1) and (2) of this section. 
(Prior Code,  17.1.10; Ord. No. 96-02, 4-3-1996; Ord. No. 2004-08, 8-28-2004; Ord. No. 2005-06, 7-6-2005) 
Sec. 4-31. - Enforcement procedure. 
(a)  The enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the police department. The police department may issue complaints alleging violations of this article. 
(b)  Any person who hinders, interferes with, obstructs or uses abusive or profane language against any enforcement official when in the course of their duties shall be in violation of this article and subject to a penalty of $100.00. 
(Prior Code,  17.1.11; Ord. No. 96-02, 4-3-1996; Ord. No. 2004-08, 8-28-2004; Ord. No. 2005-06, 7-6-2005) 
Sec. 4-32. - Vicious dogs. 
    No persons owning a vicious dog shall keep such dog on private property unless said dog is in a secure six-sided enclosure on the residence of the owner. Vicious dogs shall not be allowed on public property except when on a leash of three feet or less and it shall also be muzzled while on public property. Vicious dogs so restrained shall be under the control of an adult able to restrain the dog while off the owner's premises. 
(Prior Code,  17.1.12; Ord. No. 96-02, 4-3-1996; Ord. No. 2004-08, 8-28-2004; Ord. No. 2005-06, 7-6-2005) 
Sec. 4-33. - Enclosures. 
    Any person keeping a vicious dog in an enclosure outside of their residence shall post said enclosure with a sign stating: "Beware of Dog" on any side where access to the dog is possible. Said sign shall have letters of no less than two inches in height. The said enclosure shall be six-sided and secure. 
(Prior Code,  17.1.13; Ord. No. 96-02, 4-3-1996; Ord. No. 2004-08, 8-28-2004; Ord. No. 2005-06, 7-6-2005) 
Sec. 4-34. - Bodily injury. 
    Any vicious dog which has caused serious bodily injury, or which has not been restrained as set forth in this article, shall be impounded by the town and held until the court rules a disposition. 
(Prior Code,  17.1.14; Ord. No. 96-02, 4-3-1996; Ord. No. 2004-08, 8-28-2004; Ord. No. 2005-06, 7-6-2005) 
Sec. 4-35. - Insurance. 
    Any owner having been convicted of keeping a vicious dog which has caused serious bodily injury shall show proof of $100,000.00 liability insurance for bodily injury or death to the town, as in the licensing of guard dogs under RSA 466:50. 
(Prior Code,  17.1.15; Ord. No. 96-02, 4-3-1996; Ord. No. 2004-08, 8-28-2004; Ord. No. 2005-06, 7-6-2005) 
ARTICLE III. - FEEDING OF DUCKS AND WILD ANIMALS 

Sec. 4-36. - Purpose: Unlawful acts. 
    The following regulations are adopted for the protection and the purity of water and other public property of the Town of Newmarket, such being undertaken pursuant to the powers vested in the town. No person or persons shall on any public property feed any aquatic bird (including but not limited to ducks, geese, sea gulls or swans) or wild animals. 
(Ord. No. 2014/2015-03,  2, 5-6-2015) 
Sec. 4-37. - Posting of provisions. 
    The Town of Newmarket shall have the right to post a notice of this article on property that is open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 2014/2015-03,  2, 5-6-2015) 
Sec. 4-38. - Violations and penalties. 
    Any law enforcement officer, health officer, or any employee of the town designated by the town administrator may issue a notice of violation. Such notice shall impose upon the person a forfeiture of $50.00 which must be paid to the Town of Newmarket within 30 business days of the date and time the notice is given, in full satisfaction of assessed penalty. In the event such penalty is not paid to the Town of Newmarket within the time limitations specified, a summons shall be issued in district court and any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a violation and shall be fined not more than $1,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 2014/2015-03,  2, 5-6-2015) 
Chapter 6 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- New Hampshire Building Code, RSA 155-A; local powers relative to building codes, RSA 674:51 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1-6-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE 

Sec. 6-19. - Enforcement of the state building code. 
    The state building code or any other regulation made under authority thereof may be enforced by the town by and its designated official, through injunctive proceedings under RSA 676:15, as amended, by imposition of a criminal penalty and/or civil fine pursuant to RSA 676:17, as amended, and by such other process as may be provided for in state or federal law. 
(Prior Code,  4.1.4; Ord. No. 2000-07, 11-1-2000) 
Sec. 6-20. - Building code board of appeals. 
    The town zoning board of adjustment shall act as the building code board of appeals pursuant to RSA 673:1,V. 
Sec. 6-21. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2014/2015-05, adopted May 20, 2015, repealed  6-21, which pertained to building fees and derived from Prior Code,  4.1.5; Ord. No. 2000-07, 11-1-2000. 
Chapter 8 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal economic development land revitalization districts, RSA 162-K; community development finance authority, RSA 162-L; economic revitalization zone tax credits, RSA 162-N. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 8-1-8-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAX INCREMENT FINANCING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal economic development land revitalization districts, RSA 162-K. 

Sec. 8-19. - Authority. 
    Pursuant to RSA 162-K:1, the town adopts RSA 162-K, as amended on July 2, 1991, and further amended on May 29, 1998, July 16, 1999, and August 20, 2000, with all the authority, powers, duties and responsibilities set forth in this article. 
(Prior Code,  2.5.1; Ord. No. 1998-02, 5-6-1998; Ord. No. 2005-09, 8-17-2005) 
Sec. 8-20. - Purpose. 
    The town, upon adopting the ordinance from which this article is derived, shall be authorized to establish one or more economic development districts in accordance with and in compliance with the provisions of RSA 162-K. 
(Prior Code,  2.5.2; Ord. No. 1998-02, 5-6-1998; Ord. No. 2005-09, 8-17-2005) 
Chapter 10 - ELECTIONS 

Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Ballot clerks means those persons responsible for verifying voter information, handing out ballots, directing voters to the booths, and any other duties deemed necessary by the town moderator. 
    Candidate means any person for whom votes are sought in an election. 
    Election means any general biennial, state primary, town, school or special election. 
    Election assistants means those persons who perform duties such as ballot checker, assisting voters with questions, assist in counting ballots and any other duties as directed by the town moderator. 
    Supervisor of the checklist means that person responsible for maintaining up-to-date voter checklist information and registering individuals to vote. 
    Town moderator means that person responsible for overseeing the election process at the polling place, ensuring that all applicable laws and procedures are carried out and followed by all participants at the polling place. 
(Prior Code,  20.1.1; Ord. No. 2013/2014-02,  1, 5-7-2014) 
Sec. 10-2. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person or group found in violation of section 10-5(b) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural person or a felony if any other person. 
(b)  Pursuant to RSA 659:45, any person or group found in violation of section 10-5(c) may be subject to a fine up to $1,000.00. 
(Prior Code,  20.1.5; Ord. No. 2013/2014-02,  5, 5-7-2014) 
Sec. 10-3. - Other laws. 
    This chapter should be read in conjunction with RSA 659 and 664, article 2 of the town Charter, and the New Hampshire Election Procedure Manual. 
(Prior Code,  20.1.2; Ord. No. 2013/2014-02,  2, 5-7-2014) 
Sec. 10-4. - Candidates. 
    All candidates for municipal office shall be provided with copies of RSA 659:3-659:45, 664:14-664:17-a and copies of the relevant section of the town Charter and this Code pertaining to the conduct of elections, political advertising and contributions. 
(Prior Code,  20.1.3; Ord. No. 2013/2014-02,  3, 5-7-2014) 
Sec. 10-5. - Conduct at polls. 
(a)  Corridor. A ten-foot-wide corridor shall be constructed at any polling place in the town. The corridor shall be constructed by use of a continuous non-breakable material to prevent access to voters who are entering the polls. A ten-foot-wide corridor shall be maintained to allow voter access to the polls. The town moderator shall determine the length of the corridor. 
(b)  Interference with voters. No person shall interfere or attempt to interfere with any voter when such voter is in the space within the corridor, as provided in subsection (a) of this section, or endeavor to induce any voter before voting to show how he marks or has marked his ballot. 
(c)  Distributing campaign materials at polling place. Pursuant to RSA 659:43: 
(1)  No person who is a candidate for office or who is representing or working for a candidate shall distribute or post at a polling place any campaign material in the form of a poster, card, handbill, placard, picture or circular which is intended to influence the action of the voter within the building where the election is being held. 
(2)  No person who is a candidate for office or who is representing or working for a candidate shall distribute any campaign materials or perform any electioneering activities or any activity which affects the safety, welfare and rights of voters within a corridor of ten feet in width and extending a distance from the entrance door of the building as determined by the town moderator where the election is being held. 
(3)  No person allowed to remain in the building (observers, poll workers, etc.) shall wear any clothing, shirt, hat, sticker, or button that indicates support of or opposition to any candidate, question, or political. However, this does not apply to a voter going to vote in his paraphernalia or carrying campaign literature if the voter leaves the zone promptly after voting. 
(d)  Monitors. The town clerk-tax collector and the town moderator may appoint monitors, if necessary, to oversee outside activities and give directions to voters. Such monitors shall have clearly marked town authorization displayed on their outer clothing. 
(Prior Code,  20.1.4; Ord. No. 2013/2014-02,  4, 5-7-2014) 
Chapter 12 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Homeland security and emergency management, RSA 21-P:34 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 12-1-12-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Homeland security and emergency management, RSA 21-P:34 et seq. 

Sec. 12-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Coordinator means the coordinator of the town office of emergency management as prescribed in this article. 
    Disaster includes, but is not limited to, an act or condition leading to the occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage, injury, or loss of life or property resulting from any natural or human cause, including but not limited to fire, flood, earthquake, windstorm, wave actions, technological incidents, oil or chemical spill, or water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, terrorist act, or riot. 
    Emergency management means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency functions, including but not limited to emergency response and training functions, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury or damage resulting from the occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage, injury, or loss of life or property resulting from any natural or human cause, including but not limited to fire, flood, earthquake, windstorm, wave actions, technological incidents, oil or chemical spill, or water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, terrorist act, or riot. 
    Emergency response resources means the employees, equipment, telecommunications facilities, and physical plant facilities of all town departments, boards, institutions, and commissions; in addition, it shall include all volunteer personnel, equipment, and facilities contributed by, or obtained from, volunteer persons or agencies. 
    Emergency volunteer means any person duly registered, identified and appointed by the coordinator of the office of emergency management and assigned to participate in the emergency management activity. 
    Regulations includes plans, programs and other emergency procedures deemed essential to emergency management. 
    Volunteer means contributing a service, equipment or facilities to the emergency management organization without remuneration. 
(Prior Code,  2.4.2; Ord. No. 2005-09, 8-17-2005) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSA 21-P:35. 
Sec. 12-20. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article, or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, shall be guilty of an offense and punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(Prior Code,  2.4.8; Ord. No. 2005-09, 8-17-2005) 
Sec. 12-21. - Intent and purpose. 
(a)  This article shall be known and may be cited and referred to as "Emergency Management of the Town of Newmarket, County of Rockingham, State of New Hampshire." The following citations are listed for reference: 
(1)  New Hampshire Emergency Operations Plan, Office of Emergency Management. 
(2)  Federal Emergency Management Agency, State and Local Guide (SLG), Guide for All-Hazard Emergency Operations Planning, September 1996. 
(3)  Federal Emergency Management Agency, CPG 1-8A, A Guide for the Review of State and Local Emergency Operations Plans, October 1992. 
(4)  Federal Response Plan, April 1999. 
(5)  Local Emergency Operations Plans in NH, as amended. 
(6)  Federal Emergency Management Agency, CPG 1-10, Guide for the Development of a State and Local Continuity of Government Capability. 
(7)  Federal Emergency Management Agency, CPG 1-20, Guide for EOC Operations. 
(8)  New Hampshire State Coordinating Officer Handbook. 
(9)  New Hampshire Impact Assessment Team (IAT) Handbook. 
(10)  New Hampshire Emergency Alert System Operational Plan. 
(11)  New Hampshire Operations Center Standard Operating Guideline (SOG). 
(12)  Current federal legislation under consideration regarding emergency communications facilities. 
(13)  H.R. 1869-Strategic Communications Act of 2005. 
(14)  H.R. 1251-Connecting the Operations of National Networks of Emergency Communications Technologies for First Responders Act of 2005. 
(15)  S. 1274-Improve Interoperable Communications for First Responders Act of 2005. 
(b)  It is the intent and purpose of this article to establish an office and implementation strategy, in accordance with the town emergency management plan that will ensure the complete and efficient utilization of all town emergency response resources. Recent events and the unique character of the town, with respect to location in the region, requires a constantly monitored and updated approach to emergency management situations. The following elements of the town's unique character and location require coordinated and efficient preparedness and response: 
(1)  Geographical location concerns: 
a.  Within 20 miles of Seabrook nuclear power plant. 
b.  Within 15 miles of Pease Air Force Base. 
c.  Within 20 miles of Portsmouth Naval Ship Yard. 
d.  Within 15 miles of a significant density of power plants and fuel storage facilities in Newington. 
e.  The presence of only two major roadways (Routes 152 and 108) through and out of town, each with only two lanes. 
(2)  Necessary technological advancements and communications requirements: 
a.  The town must maintain an updated, redundant, and functional two-way communication for effective deployment of threat response to coordinate multiple agency and multiple jurisdiction efforts. 
b.  Current technology infrastructure requires upgraded communication facilities that provide data, voice, and video transmission between emergency personnel, fallout and evacuation centers, and all governmental facilities. 
(c)  Emergency management is adopted in order to fulfill the following purposes: 
(1)  Develop, maintain, and have available an efficient and effective response plan for all emergency management situations. 
(2)  Develop and maintain an effective communications system to work in conjunction with all town departments and state and federal communications networks in furtherance of RSA 21-P:38. 
(3)  Maintain these facilities and responses in accordance with the document entitled "Advisory Security Actions for State and Critical Facilities, Local Government and the Public During Terrorist Alerts," New Hampshire Department of Safety, Division of Fire Safety and Emergency Management, Office of Emergency Management. 
(d)  The town office of emergency management will be the coordinating agency for all activity in connection with emergency planning; it will be the instrument through which the community officials may exercise the authority and discharge the responsibilities vested in them in RSA 21-P:39, as amended, and this Code. 
(e)  This article will not relieve a town department of the moral responsibilities or authority given to it in the town Charter or by local ordinance, nor will it adversely affect the work of any volunteer agency organized for relief in disaster emergencies. 
(Prior Code,  2.4.1; Ord. No. 2005-09, 8-17-2005) 
Sec. 12-22. - Organizations and appointments. 
(a)  The town administrator is hereby authorized and directed to create an organization for emergency management utilizing to the fullest extent the existing agencies within the community. The town administrator, as executive head of the municipal government, shall be responsible for the organization, administration and operation of emergency forces. 
(b)  The organization shall consist of the following: 
(1)  An office of emergency management within the executive department of the town government and under the direction of the town administrator. There shall be an executive head of the office of emergency management who shall be known as the coordinator of the office of emergency management, and such assistants and other employees as are deemed necessary for the proper functioning of the organization; 
(2)  The employees, telecommunications facilities, equipment, and physical plant of all town departments, boards, institutions and commissions will participate in the emergency management activity. Duties assigned to a town department shall be the same or similar to the normal duties of the department as far as possible; 
(3)  Volunteer persons and agencies offering services to, and accepted by, the town. 
(c)  The town council shall appoint a coordinator of the town office of emergency management who shall be a person well-versed and trained in planning operations involving the activities of many different agencies which will operate to protect the public health, safety and welfare in the event of danger from disaster or enemy action. 
(Prior Code,  2.4.3; Ord. No. 2005-09, 8-17-2005) 
State Law reference- Local emergency management organizations, RSA 21-P:39. 
Sec. 12-23. - Emergency powers and duties. 
(a)  The town administrator. 
(1)  The town administrator may exercise the emergency power and authority necessary to fulfill his general powers and duties as defined in article 4 of the town Charter. The judgment of the town administrator shall be the sole criteria necessary to invoke emergency powers provided in the town Charter, this Code and other appropriate authorities. 
(2)  During any period when disaster threatens or when the town has been struck by disaster, within the definition of this article, the town administrator may promulgate such regulations as he deems necessary to protect life and property and preserve critical resources. Such regulations may include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
a.  Regulations prohibiting or restricting the movement of vehicles in order to facilitate the work of emergency management forces, or to facilitate the mass movement of persons from critical areas within or without the town; 
b.  Regulations pertaining to the movement of persons from areas deemed to be hazardous or vulnerable to disaster; 
c.  Such other regulations necessary to preserve public peace, health and safety. 
Regulations promulgated in accordance with the authority described in this section will be given widespread circulation by proclamations published and uttered by newspaper and/or radio and/or other telecommunications facilities operated by the town. These regulations will have the force of an ordinance when duly filed with the town clerk, and violations will be subject to the penalties provided by law. 
(3)  The town administrator shall order emergency management forces to the aid of other communities when required in accordance with the statutes of the state, and he may request the state, or a political subdivision of the state, to send aid to the town in case of disaster when conditions in the town are beyond the control of the local emergency management forces. 
(4)  The town administrator may obtain vital supplies, equipment and other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of health, life and safety of the people and bind the town for the fair value thereof. 
(5)  The town administrator may require emergency services of any town officer or employee. If regular town forces are determined inadequate, the town administrator may require the services of such other personnel as he can obtain that are available, including citizen volunteers. All duly authorized persons rendering emergency services shall be entitled to the privileges and immunities as are provided by state law, the town Charter and ordinances for regular town employees and other registered and identified emergency management and disaster workers and, upon demand, may receive appropriate compensation for their emergency employment. 
(6)  The town administrator will cause to be prepared the emergency management plan herein referred to and to exercise his ordinary powers as town administrator, all of the special powers conferred upon him by any statute, or any other lawful authority. 
(b)  Coordinator of the office of emergency management. The coordinator of the office of emergency management shall be responsible to the town administrator in regard to all phases of the emergency management activity. Under the supervision of the town administrator, he shall be responsible for the planning, coordination and operation of the emergency management activity in the town; he shall maintain liaison with the state and federal authorities and the authorities of other nearby political subdivisions as to ensure the most effective operation of the emergency management plan. His duties shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Coordinating the recruitment of volunteer personnel and agencies to augment the personnel and facilities of the town for emergency management; 
(2)  Development and coordination of plans for the immediate use of all of the facilities, telecommunications facilities, equipment, manpower and other resources of the town; 
(3)  Negotiating and concluding agreement with owners or persons in control of buildings or other property for the use of such buildings or other property for emergency management purposes and designating suitable buildings as public shelters; 
(4)  Through public informational programs, educating the civilian population as to actions necessary and required for the protection of their persons and property in case of disaster or enemy attack, as defined herein, either impending or present; 
(5)  Conducting public practice exercises to ensure the efficient operation of the emergency management forces and to familiarize residents with emergency management regulations, procedures and operations; 
(6)  Coordinating the activity of all other public and private agencies engaged in any emergency management activity; and 
(7)  Assuming such authority and conducting such activity as the town administrator may direct to promote and execute the emergency management plan. 
(Prior Code,  2.4.4; Ord. No. 2005-09, 8-17-2005) 
Sec. 12-24. - Emergency management plan. 
(a)  A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be adopted and maintained by resolution of the town council upon the recommendation of the town administrator. In the preparation of this plan as it pertains to the town's organization, it is the intent that the services, equipment, facilities and personnel of all existing departments and agencies shall be utilized to the fullest extent. When approved, it shall be the duty of all municipal departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The emergency management plan shall be considered supplementary to this article and have the effect of law whenever a disaster has been proclaimed. 
(b)  The town administrator shall prescribe in the emergency management plan those positions within the disaster organization, in addition to his own, for which lines of succession are necessary. In each instance, the responsible person will designate and keep on file with the town administrator a current list of three persons as successors to his position. The list will be in order of succession and will as nearly as possible designate persons best capable of carrying out all assigned duties and functions. 
(c)  Each service chief and department head assigned responsibility in the emergency management plan shall be responsible for carrying out all duties and functions assigned therein. Duties will include the organization and training of assigned employees and volunteers. Each chief shall formulate the operational plan for his service which, when approved, shall be an annex to and a part of the emergency management plan. 
(d)  Amendments to the emergency management plan shall be submitted to the town administrator. If approved, such amendments shall take effect 30 days from the date of approval. In the event an amendment is pending at the time that a disaster is proclaimed under provisions of this article, the amendment will be considered approved immediately and will remain effective unless specifically revoked. 
(e)  When a required competency or skill for a disaster function is not available within the town government, the town administrator is authorized to seek assistance from persons outside of government. The assignment of duties, when of a supervisory nature, shall also grant authority for the persons so assigned to carry out such duties prior to, during and after the occurrence of a disaster. The town on a volunteer basis may accept such services from persons outside of government. Such citizens shall be enrolled as emergency volunteers in cooperation with the heads of town departments affected. 
(f)  Some of the duties ascribed to the town administrator in this article will ordinarily be handled as a manner of routine by the emergency management coordinator, but the responsibility and authority stem from and remain with the town administrator. 
(Prior Code,  2.4.5; Ord. No. 2005-09, 8-17-2005) 
Sec. 12-25. - Violation of regulations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any persons to violate any of the provisions of this article or of the regulations or plans issued pursuant to the authority contained herein, or to willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of the provisions of this article or any regulation or plan issued thereunder. 
(Prior Code,  2.4.7; Ord. No. 2005-09, 8-17-2005) 
Sec. 12-26. - Conflicting ordinances, orders, rules and regulations suspended. 
    At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article shall be in effect, they shall supersede all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(Prior Code,  2.4.10; Ord. No. 2005-09, 8-17-2005) 
Chapter 14 - ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1-14-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Water management, RSA 488; water pollution and waste disposal, RSA 485-A; groundwater protection, RSA 485-C. 

Sec. 14-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Water supply shortage means that situation when insufficient water is available to meet the present or anticipated needs of the municipality/village district, as set forth in section 14-26. 
(Prior Code,  8.1.3; Ord. No. 2002-05, 8-21-2002) 
Sec. 14-20. - Water management program. 
(a)  The town's surface water plant is not able to treat water with a high color. After a substantial rain event, the town is forced to shut down the water treatment plant and rely on the wells. The wells are dependent on the aquifer, which has been depleted over the years, but is slowly recovering with the operation of the water plant. The wells are not able to keep up with the demand on hot summer days and storage capacity suffers. The storage tank must be three-fourths full (45 feet) in order to ensure adequate pressure and fire protection. 
(b)  If the amount in the storage tank goes below 45 feet and cannot be replenished during non-watering times, more restrictive hours must be established in order to replenish the storage tank. 
(c)  Each day the following will be reviewed to determine what level the town should be enforcing: 
(1)  Ability to maintain levels in the storage tank above 45 feet. 
(2)  Consumer water demand peaks at 500,000 gallons. 
(3)  Aquifer levels: ten feet above low water cutoffs at wellhead when wells are operating. 
(4)  Inability to operate the water treatment plant and treat raw water because of color, turbidity and organic matter. 
(5)  State drought warnings: statewide drought warnings mandates a ban. 
(Prior Code,  8.1.5; Ord. No. 2002-05, 8-21-2002) 
Sec. 14-21. - Preamble and general statement. 
(a)  The municipal water department seeks ways to improve its water quality and quantity. The town is fortunate to have two sources of supply: groundwater and surface water. 
(b)  The town's surface water plant is not able to treat water with a high color, so after a substantial rain event the town is forced to shut down the water treatment plant and rely on the wells. The wells are dependent on the aquifer, which has been depleted over the years, but is slowly recovering with the operation of the water plant. The wells are not able to keep up with the demand on hot summer days, and storage capacity suffers. 
(c)  A good water management program is essential to keep the level of water at a constant level. Keeping the water at an adequate level ensures adequate pressure and fire protection (the storage tank must be three-fourths full (45 feet)). 
(d)  The purpose of this article is to ensure the use of the public water supply is regulated in a manner the town council deems to be in the best interest of the town. The town council may use reasonable means to protect, preserve and maintain the public health, safety and welfare whenever they have determined there exists a water supply shortage. 
(Prior Code,  8.1.1; Ord. No. 2002-05, 8-21-2002) 
Sec. 14-22. - Penalties. 
    Any person failing to comply with the restrictions imposed pursuant to this article shall be subject to a fine as set forth in this section and/or be subject to imposition of civil penalties pursuant to RSA 38:26,II not to exceed $10,000.00 per day of such violation. Recovered penalties shall inure to the town for the sole benefit of the water department enterprise fund. In addition to the foregoing penalties, the town water department is authorized to discontinue the furnishing of water where orders and restrictions have been violated. Such discontinuance shall be made pursuant to RSA 38:31 and Env-Ws 360.06(b)4 and may be continued so long as there is evidence that the violations will continue. The penalties for violating all stages of mandatory restrictions are as follows: 
(1)  First violation: warning. 
(2)  Second violation: $100.00 fine. 
(3)  Third and additional violations: $250.00 to $10,000.00 fine and discontinuance of water service. A reactivation fee of $75.00 will be charged before water service is restored. 
(Prior Code,  8.1.15; Ord. No. 2002-05, 8-21-2002) 
Sec. 14-23. - Enforcement. 
    Any sworn officer of the police department is hereby granted the authority to initiate any enforcement action against any violation of the provisions of this article. 
(Prior Code,  8.1.14; Ord. No. 2002-05, 8-21-2002) 
Sec. 14-24. - Exceptions to restrictions. 
    Notwithstanding the authority granted by this article, any order imposing restriction in the use of water shall not apply to any person obtaining water from sources other than the public water supply, unless it can be clearly shown that the use of such water directly affects the public water supply. Written notice restricting the use of such water shall be given to the person in control of the same, and may be effective forthwith. 
(Prior Code,  8.1.13; Ord. No. 2002-05, 8-21-2002) 
Sec. 14-25. - Year-round voluntary water-saving program. 
    All year-long local residents should check the following to save water: 
(1)  Check the toilet for leaks. 
(2)  Install water-saving showerhead or flow restrictors. 
(3)  Check faucets and pipes for leaks. 
(4)  Use the automatic dishwasher only for full loads. 
(5)  Keep a bottle of drinking water in the refrigerator. 
(6)  Water the lawn only when it needs it. 
(7)  Water during cool parts of the day. 
(8)  Don't water the gutter. 
(9)  Plant drought-resistant trees and plants. 
(10)  Put a layer of mulch around trees and plants. 
(11)  Cover swimming pools to reduce evaporation. 
(Prior Code,  8.1.4; Ord. No. 2002-05, 8-21-2002) 
Sec. 14-26. - Declaration of a water supply shortage. 
    Upon evaluation of information in section 14-20, and declaration of a water supply shortage or other water emergency by the town administrator, the water department shall be authorized and empowered to impose such restrictions necessary to conserve and maintain adequate reserves of the public water supply, including the following stages: 
Stage Name Criteria 1 Voluntary water conservation None 2 Mandatory odd/even outside water use Peak demand over 500,000 gallons. 3 Mandatory two-day lawn watering by 
address  Peak demand over 500,000 gallons, and  Inability to maintain 45 feet in storage tank. 4 Mandatory outside water ban  Peak demand over 500,000 gallons, and  Inability to maintain 45 feet in storage tank, and  Aquifer level drops below 10 feet above low water cut offs at wellheads, or  NH statewide drought warnings.  
(Prior Code,  8.1.6; Ord. No. 2002-05, 8-21-2002) 
Sec. 14-27. - Stage 1, voluntary water conservation policy. 
    During Stage 1 conditions, the public is requested to refrain voluntarily from watering lawns and encouraged to conserve water in all other practical ways. 
(Prior Code,  8.1.7; Ord. No. 2002-05, 8-21-2002) 
Sec. 14-28. - Stage 2, mandatory odd/even outside water use policy. 
    During Stage 2 conditions, the public is required to restrict lawn watering to every other day based on address and calendar date. 
(Prior Code,  8.1.8; Ord. No. 2002-05, 8-21-2002) 
Sec. 14-29. - Stage 3, mandatory two-day restrictions on lawn watering by address policy. 
(a)  During Stage 3 conditions, each address is to restrict lawn watering to two days per week between the hours of 5:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. on the following schedule: 
Allowed Days Street Address Monday, Wednesday Odd number Tuesday, Thursday Even number  
(b)  No lawn watering is allowed on Friday, Saturdays, and Sundays. Hand-held hoses may be used for flower and vegetable gardens without hour and day restrictions. 
(c)  No washing or cleaning streets, driveways, sidewalks or other impervious areas is prohibited. Washing of cars and boats, except at a commercial facility, shall be prohibited. 
(Prior Code,  8.1.9; Ord. No. 2002-05, 8-21-2002) 
Sec. 14-30. - Stage 4, mandatory outside water ban policy. 
(a)  During Stage 4 conditions, the public is required to restrict the following: 
(1)  Landscape irrigation shall be prohibited except for irrigation, by hand-held hoses, of crops for use as food by residents at a primary residence. 
(2)  All outdoor water use is prohibited. 
(3)  The filling of swimming pools is prohibited. 
(4)  Use of automated landscape sprinkler systems is prohibited. 
(5)  Washing or cleaning streets, driveways, sidewalks or other impervious areas is prohibited. 
(6)  Washing of cars and boats, except at a commercial facility, shall be prohibited. 
(b)  The use of water for firefighting, health, sanitation, medical purposes and other essential uses shall not be restricted. However, domestic water use conservation practices should be implemented wherever possible. 
(Prior Code,  8.1.10; Ord. No. 2002-05, 8-21-2002) 
Sec. 14-31. - Public notification of a water supply shortage. 
    Notification of any intent to restrict water use by the water department as a part of a water supply shortage shall be posted at locations entering the town and published in a newspaper of general circulation with the town or by such other means reasonably calculated to reach and inform all water users. Residents are specifically requested to take notice of the marquees in front of the town hall and the Newmarket Jr./Sr. High School. 
(Prior Code,  8.1.11; Ord. No. 2002-05, 8-21-2002) 
Sec. 14-32. - Termination of a notice of a water supply shortage. 
    The town administrator, upon a determination that the water supply shortage no longer exists, may terminate a state of water supply shortage. Public notification of the termination of a state of water supply shortage shall be given in accordance with section 14-31. 
(Prior Code,  8.1.12; Ord. No. 2002-05, 8-21-2002) 
ARTICLE III. - SEWER USE ORDINANCE[2] 
Footnotes: 

DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 14-40. - Purpose and policy. 
    This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) of the Town of Newmarket and enables the Town of Newmarket to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, specifically the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code  1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 Code of Federal Regulations Part 403). Recognizing that significant opportunities exist to reduce or prevent pollution at its source through cost effective practices, and that such practices can offer savings through reduced purchases of materials and resources, a decreased need for pollution control technologies, and lower liability costs, as well as assisting to protect the environment, the Town of Newmarket establishes the following objectives of this article: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will interfere with the POTW's operation; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will pass through the POTW, without adequate treatment, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW; 
(3)  To protect both POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public; 
(4)  To promote the reuse of sludge from the POTW; and 
(5)  To enable the Town of Newmarket to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination system permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state law or regulation to which the POTW is subject. 
This article shall apply to all users of the POTW. The article authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; and requires user reporting. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2(Exh. A), 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-41. - Administration. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, the superintendent or his designee shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted to, or duties imposed upon, the superintendent may be delegated by the superintendent to any other Town of Newmarket personnel (designee). 
(1)  To defray the costs of operating and maintaining the sewer system, payment of any principal or interest on bonds, or other indebtness, a schedule of charges shall be set established by the Town of Newmarket for all classes of service and defined in the sewer user charge system. Changes to the schedule of charges shall be approved by town council resolution after public notice and discussion at town council meeting. 
(2)  The town shall, as necessary, make such changes or revisions in assessments, charges, and/or fees as may be required to raise necessary revenue to pay for all operation and maintenance charges, any principal and interest on bonds, or other indebtedness. 
(3)  To defray the cost of major repairs to the sewage collection, transmission or treatment facilities, the town may create a sinking fund account for the purpose of such major repairs or repaying a debt incurred for the purpose of said major repairs. 
(4)  All sewer connection charges and all collected ad valorem tax assessments designated for the sewerage sinking fund account shall be deposited in the sinking fund account. 
(5)  The town council shall authorize withdrawals from the sinking fund account for repair or replacement work as shall be judged to be appropriate by the superintendent. 
(6)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this ordinance shall be served by the town with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a 30-day period for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall permanently cease all violations within the period of time as stated in said notice. 
(7)  Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the period of time provided in the notice shall be subject to fines and prosecution. 
(8)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be liable to the town for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the town by reason of such violation. 
(9)  All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
(10)  The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence, or provision of this ordinance shall not affect the validity of any other part of this ordinance which can be given effect without such invalid part or parts. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2(Exh. A), 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-42. - Abbreviations. 
    The following abbreviations, when used in this article, shall have the following designated meanings: 
BOD - Biochemical Oxygen Demand (Five Day) CFR - Code of Federal Regulations COD - Chemical Oxygen Demand EPA - United States Environmental Protection Agency gpd - Gallons per day IDP - Industrial Discharge Permit mg/L - Milligrams per Liter DES - New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System POTW - Publicly Owned Treatment Works RCRA - Resource Conservation and Recovery Act RSA - New Hampshire Revised Statute Annotated SIC - Standard Industrial Classification TDS - Total Dissolved Solids TSS - Total Suspended Solids USC - United States Code  
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2(Exh. A), 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-43. - Definitions. 
    Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated. 
    Act or the Act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C.  1251 et seq. 
    Approval authority. The regional administrator of the EPA or his duly appointed agent. 
    Authorized representative of the user. 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities, provided, the manager is authorized to make management decisions which govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for control mechanism requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(3)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or the proprietor, respectively. 
(4)  If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a director or the highest official appointed, elected, or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility. 
(5)  The individuals described in paragraphs (a) through (c), above, may designate another authorized representative if: (a) the authorization is in writing; (b) the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or the person having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company; (c) and the written authorization is submitted to the Town of Newmarket. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand or BOD. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five days at 20 centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/L). 
    Building drain. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system that receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called house connection. 
    Bypass. The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a wastewater treatment facility. 
    Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limitations promulgated by EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C.  1317) that applies to a specific category of users and that appears in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471. 
    Town. The Town of Newmarket, New Hampshire. 
    Combined sewer. A sewer intended to receive both wastewater and storm or surface water. 
    Commercial use. Premises used for financial gain, such as business or industrial use, but excluding residential uses and related accessory uses. 
    Commissioner. The commissioner of the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services or the commissioner's duly appointed agent. 
    Compatible pollutant. Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH, and fecal coliform bacteria. 
    Control authority. The term control authority as used in this Ordinance, refers to the regional administrator of the EPA. 
    Dental practice. A business established for the purpose of practicing dentistry, as defined by RSA 317-A:20. 
    DES or NHDES. The New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services. 
    Domestic wastewater or sewage. Normal water-carried household and toilet wastes or waste from sanitary conveniences of residences, commercial buildings, and industrial plants that contains no industrial waste, excluding ground, surface, or stormwater. (See also: industrial wastes.) 
    Easement. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
    Environmental protection agency or EPA. The United States Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the EPA Regional Water Management Division Director, or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
    Existing source. Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307 of the Act. 
    Floatable oil. Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system. 
    Force main. A line without access from individual properties, providing a connection from a pump station to a pump station, trunk, or sanitary sewer main. 
    Garbage. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and serving of foods. 
    Grab sample. A sample that is taken from a waste stream without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes. 
    Grease. The material removed from a grease interceptor (trap) serving a restaurant or other facility requiring such grease interceptors. Grease shall also mean volatile and non-volatile residual fats, fatty acids, soaps, waxes and other similar materials. 
    Hauler. Those persons, firms, or corporations, who pump, haul, transport, or dispose of septage and who are licensed by the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services pursuant to RSA 485-A:4,XVI-a and rules adopted to implement said section. 
    Human excrement and other putrescible material. The liquid or solid matter discharged from the intestinal canal of a human, or other liquid or solid waste materials that are likely to undergo bacterial decomposition; These terms shall not include refuse as defined in RSA 145-M. 
    Incompatible pollutant. Any pollutant that is not a compatible pollutant. 
    Industrial discharge permit or IDP. The written permit between the Town of Newmarket and an industrial user that outlines the conditions under which discharge by the industrial user to the POTW will be accepted. 
    Industrial user. A person who discharges industrial wastes to the POTW of the Town of Newmarket. 
    Industrial wastes or non-domestic wastewater. The wastewater and waterborne wastes from any liquid, gaseous, or solid waste substance resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing trade, or business or from development of any natural resources as distinct from domestic wastewater, sewage or unpolluted water. 
    Indirect discharge or discharge. The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any non-domestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act. 
    Instantaneous discharge limit. The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composite sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
    Interference. A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore is a cause of a violation of the Town of Newmarket's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as RCRA; any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act; 40 CFR Part 503 Standards for Sewage Sludge Use and Disposal and RSA 485-A:4, XVI-a. 
    Local limits. Numerical limitations on the discharge of pollutants established by the Town of Newmarket, as distinct from state or federal limitations for non-domestic wastewater discharged to the POTW. 
    May. Means permissive (see "shall"). 
    Medical/infectious waste. Medical/infectious waste" as defined by RSA 125-N:2, VIII. 
    National pollutant discharge elimination system permit or NPDES Permit. A permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1342). 
    Natural outlet. Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body or surface water or groundwater. 
    Normal domestic wastewater. Wastewater generated by residential users containing not more than 253 mg/L BOD and not more than 271 mg/L suspended solids. 
    New source. 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced subsequent to the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act that will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater-generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, will be considered. 
(2)  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program: 
1.  any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.  significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities that is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment that are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts that can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
(3)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)(b) or (1)(3) above, but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
    Non-Contact Cooling Water. Water used for cooling that does not directly contact any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
    Pass Through. A discharge that exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations that, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the Town of Newmarket's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
    Person. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, State, and local governmental entities. 
    pH. A logarithmic measure devised to express the hydrogen ion concentration of a solution, expressed in Standard Units. Solutions with pH values greater than seven are basic (or alkaline); solutions with pH values less than seven are acidic. 
    Pharmaceutical waste. A prescription drug, as defined by RSA 318:1, XVII, or a nonprescription or proprietary medicine, as defined by RSA 318:1, XVIII, that is no longer suitable for its intended purpose or is otherwise being discarded. 
    Pollutant. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and substances with characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor). 
    Pollution prevention. The use of materials, processes, or practices that reduce or eliminate the creation of pollutants or wastes at the source, or minimize their release to the environment prior to recycling, treatment or disposal. It includes practices that reduce the use of hazardous materials, energy, water or other resources. It also includes practices that protect natural resources and human health through conservation, more efficient use, or effective release minimization. 
    Pretreatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
    Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
    Pretreatment standards or standards. Pretreatment standards shall mean prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards 40 CFR 403, and local limits. 
    Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges. Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances as identified in section 14-46 of this article. 
    Properly shredded garbage. Wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be transported freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2-inch in any dimension. 
    Public sewer. A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater, stormwater, groundwater, subsurface water, or unpolluted water from any source, which is controlled by a governmental agency or public utility. 
    Publicly owned treatment works or POTW. A "treatment works," as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C.  1292) that is owned by the Town of Newmarket. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes sewers, pipes, and other conveyances if said structures convey wastewater to a POTW wastewater treatment facility. The term also means the municipality that has jurisdiction over discharges to and from such a treatment plant, and any sewer that conveys wastewater to the POTW from persons outside the Town of Newmarket who are, by contract or agreement with the Town of Newmarket, users of the Town of Newmarket's POTW. 
    Radiological waste. Radioactive waste as regulated by RSA 125-F. 
    Recreational vehicle or "RV". A mobile vehicle or trailer used for temporary living e.g. a camper or wholly self-contained transport and living unit. 
    Sanitary Sewer. A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, together with minor quantities of ground, storm, and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally. 
    Screening level. That concentration of a pollutant that under baseline conditions would cause a threat to personnel exposed to the pollutant, or would adversely impact structures of the POTW. To be administered as local limits applicable to a particular discharge, the screening levels must be adjusted to account for conditions at the point of discharge that differ from baseline conditions. 
    Semi-public use. Premises of private, non-profit organizations such as schools, hospitals, and religious institutions. 
    Septage or septic tank waste. Any liquid, solid, or sludge pumped from chemical toilets, vaults, septic tanks, or cesspools or other holding tanks, that have received only domestic wastewater. 
    Septage tank truck. Any watertight vehicle that is used for the collection and hauling of septage as described above and that complies with the rules of the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services. 
    Sewage. Human excrement and gray water, including but not limited to household showers, dishwashing operations, etc. 
    Sewer. A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater, stormwater, groundwater, subsurface water, or unpolluted water from any source. 
    Shall. Means mandatory (see "may"). 
    Significant indirect discharger. An indirect discharger that meets one or more of the following state criteria: 
(1)  Is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR 403.6 as amended; 
(2)  Discharges an average of 10,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater; 
(3)  Discharges a process wastewater which contributes five percent or more of the hydraulic or organic loading to the wastewater treatment plant; 
(4)  Discharges medical/infectious waste, pharmaceutical waste, or radiological waste; or 
(5)  Is designated as such by the municipality as having a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or performance or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
    Significant industrial user. An indirect discharger that meets one or more of the following federal criteria: 
(1)  A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6; or 
(2)  A user that: 
a.  Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW, excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater; 
b.  Contributes a process waste stream that comprises five (5) percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
c.  Is designated as such by the Town of Newmarket on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(3)  Upon determining that a user meeting the criteria in Subsection (2)(a) or (2)(b) has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the Town of Newmarket may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
    Significant noncompliance or SNC. An industrial user is in significant noncompliance if its violation meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Chronic violations. A pattern of violating the same pretreatment standard daily maximum or average limit (any magnitude of exceedance) 66 percent or more of the time in a six-month period; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC violations). Thirty-three percent or more of the measurements exceed the same pretreatment standard daily maximum limit or average limit by more than the TRC factor in a six-month period. The TRC factor is 1.4 for biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), total suspended solids (TSS), oil & grease and 1.2 for all other pollutants; 
(3)  Any other discharge violation that the superintendent believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the superintendent's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any required reports, including, industrial discharge permit applications, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation(s) that the superintendent determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
    Slug load or slug. Means: 
(1)  Any discharge of water, wastewater, sewage, or industrial sewage which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flow during normal operation; 
(2)  Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration that could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section 14-46 of this article; or 
(3)  Any discharge that may adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the POTW. 
    Source reduction. Any practice that: 
(1)  Reduces the amount of any hazardous substance, pollutant, or contaminant entering any waste stream or otherwise released into the environment (including fugitive emissions) prior to recycling, treatment, or disposal; and 
(2)  Reduces the hazards to public health and the environment associated with the release of such substances, pollutants, or contaminants. 
(3)  The term includes equipment or technology modifications; process or procedure modifications; reformulation or redesign of products; substitution of raw materials; and improvements in housekeeping, maintenance, training, or inventory control. The term "source reduction" does not include any practice that alters the physical, chemical, or biological characteristics or the volume of a hazardous substance, pollutant, or contaminant through a process or activity that itself is not integral to and necessary for the production of a product or the providing of a service. 
    Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code. A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United States Office of Management and Budget. 
    State. The State of New Hampshire. 
    Storm drain or storm sewer. A drain or sewer for conveying stormwater, groundwater, subsurface water, or unpolluted water from any source. 
    Stormwater. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including but not limited to rainfall and snowmelt. 
    Superintendent. The person designated by the Town of Newmarket to supervise the operation of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this Ordinance, or a duly authorized representative. 
    Suspended solids or TSS. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and that is removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Treatment plant, treatment works, or treatment facility. Any device or system used in the storage, treatment, equalization, recycling or reclamation of wastewater and/or wastewater sludge as defined herein. 
    Unpolluted water. Water of quality equal to or better than the State-Water Quality Standards (Part Env-Wq 1703) or water that would not cause a violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the POTW. 
    User or industrial user. A source of pollutants introduced into the POTW from any non-domestic source regulated under Section 307 (b), (c), or (d) of the Act. 
    Wastewater. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and/or sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW. 
    Watercourse. A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2(Exh. A), 6-21-2017) 
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 14-44. - Use of public sewers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the Town of Newmarket or in any area under the jurisdiction of said town, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or objectionable waste. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Town of Newmarket, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said Town of Newmarket, any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article and with state and federal laws and regulations. 
(c)  Sewers for intended uses only. No person shall discharge into any public sewer of the Town of Newmarket, or into any fixture that thereafter discharges into any public sewer, any waste or substance other than for which the particular sewer is intended, designed or provided. 
(d)  Applicable permits required. No person shall discharge into any public sewer of the Town of Newmarket, or into any fixture that thereafter discharges into any public sewer, any waste or substance until all applicable federal, state and local permits have been obtained. 
(e)  Use of sanitary sewers. Except as specifically provided with reference to a particular sewer, sanitary sewers shall be used only for the conveyance and disposal of domestic wastewater, and for industrial wastes that are not objectionable as hereinafter provided. No sanitary sewer shall be used to receive and convey or dispose of any storm or surface water, subsoil drainage, or unpolluted water. 
(f)  Use of storm sewers. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designed as storm sewers, or a natural outlet approved by the director of public works. An NPDES permit is required prior to discharging industrial cooling water, process waters, or stormwater runoff generated in areas of industrial activity (as defined in 40 CFR Part 122) to a storm sewer or natural outlet. 
(g)  Use designation. If the intended or designated use of any particular sewer or drain and allowable discharge thereto is unclear, the superintendent will consider the pertinent facts and make a determination as to the sewer or drain's designated use. Said determination will be final and binding. 
(h)  Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater in any area where a public sewer is available, as described in paragraph (i) below. 
(i)  The owner(s) of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the Town of Newmarket and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the Town of Newmarket, is hereby required at the owner(s)' expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within 45 days subsequent to the date of official notice to do so, provided that said gravity public sewer is within 100 feet of the property line of said premises. This requirement for connection may be waived when permitted by the superintendent if the household is already connected to a properly functioning, state-approved septic system approved after 1985. 
(j)  Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of paragraph (i) above, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of RSA 485-A:29-44 and all rules promulgated thereto. The owner(s) shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times and at no expense to the Town of Newmarket. At no time shall any quantity of industrial waste be discharged into a private, domestic wastewater disposal facility. 
(k)  Holding tank contents and the sludge from private disposal systems shall be removed only by licensed operators. If disposal is made within the town, then holding tank contents and septic tank sludge shall be disposed of at the wastewater treatment facilities or at the site(s) designated by the town council. (See section 14-64) 
(l)  At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property serviced by a private wastewater disposal system, the owner shall connect to the public sewer, as provided in paragraph (i) above. Any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean mineral soils, and their use shall be discontinued. 
(m)  No statement contained in the preceding paragraphs of this Section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the superintendent. 
(n)  No person(s) shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment that is part of the POTW. Violators shall be required to make financial restitution to repair any damage and shall be subject to fines. Any actor who violates this paragraph maliciously or willfully shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural person and a felony if an unnatural person. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2(Exh. A), 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-45. - Building sewers and connections. 
(a)  No person(s) shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining written permission from the superintendent or authorized designee of the superintendent. Any person proposing a new discharge into the system or any change in the volume or character of pollutants that are being discharged into the system shall obtain prior approval of the superintendent. 
(b)  There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: (a) for residential and commercial service producing only domestic wastewater, and (b) for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. For residential and commercial services, the owner(s) or his agent shall make application to the Town of Newmarket at least 30 days prior to said service connection (Appendix B). For an establishment discharging industrial wastes, the owner(s) or his agent shall make application to the Town of Newmarket at least 60 days prior to said service connection (Appendix C). The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information (including pollution prevention studies) considered pertinent in the judgment of the superintendent. A permit and inspection fee in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance (Appendix A) shall be paid to the Town of Newmarket at the time any application for permit is filed. 
(c)  All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner(s). The owner(s) shall indemnify the Town of Newmarket from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(d)  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except where approved by special exception by the superintendent, but the Town of Newmarket does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection. 
(e)  Existing building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the superintendent to meet all requirements of this article. 
(f)  The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the Town of Newmarket and DES Env-Wq 700. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) and Water Environment Federation (WEF) Manual of Practice No. FD-5 shall apply. In the event that discrepancies arise between town and state requirements, the town requirements which are uniformly equal to or more stringent than the state requirements shall take precedence. 
(g)  During construction of a new sanitary sewer, the Town of Newmarket may construct the service connections for existing buildings to the curb or the property line or the edge of a right-of-way. Construction of the building sewer, including connection to the structures served, shall be the responsibility of the owner of the improved property to be connected, and such owner shall indemnify and save harmless the Town of Newmarket, its officers, and agents from all loss or damage that may result, directly or indirectly, due to the construction of a building sewer on his premises or its connection to the service connection. The owner shall thereafter be obligated to pay all costs and expenses of operation, repair and maintenance, and of reconstruction, if needed of the building sewer and service connection. 
(h)  Whenever possible, sewer mains will be constructed at an elevation to accommodate existing building drains. However, in all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sewage conveyed by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer at the owner's expense. 
(i)  No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, interior or exterior foundation drains, area-way drains, or other sources of surface run-off or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain that in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(j)  No person shall obstruct the free flow of air through any drain or soil pipe. 
(k)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the Town of Newmarket, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WEF Manual of Practice No. FD-5. All such connections shall be made gas-tight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the superintendent before installation. 
(l)  The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. Such notice shall be provided not less than 48 hours in advance of the time any connection is to be made to any public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the superintendent or his representative. This requirement shall also apply to repairs or alterations to building connections, drains or pipes thereto. 
(m)  Suitable provisions shall be made at the point of connection for testing, which responsibility shall rest with the holder of the sewer connection permit. 
(n)  No building sewer shall be covered until it has been inspected and approved by the superintendent. If any part of building sewer is covered before being inspected and approved, it shall be uncovered for inspection at the cost and expense of the owner of the improved property to be connected to the public sewer. 
(o)  The superintendent shall maintain a record of all connections made to public sewers and drains under this article and all repairs and alterations made to building connections or drains connected to or discharging into public sewers and drains of the Town of Newmarket or intended to so discharge. All persons concerned shall assist the superintendent in securing the data needed for such records. 
(p)  All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Town of Newmarket at the expense of the owner. The requirements imposed under this paragraph shall not preclude the town from requiring additional safeguards as the circumstances necessitate. 
(q)  Any person proposing to construct or modify any of the following or any combination of the following shall submit an application for a sewer connection permit to the DES in accordance with DES Env-Wq 700: 
(1)  Any extension of a collector or interceptor, whether public or private, regardless of flow; 
(2)  Any wastewater connection or other discharge in excess of 5,000 gpd; 
(3)  Any wastewater connection or other discharge to a WWTP operating in excess of 80 percent design flow capacity or design loading capacity based on actual average flow or loadings for three consecutive months; 
(4)  Any industrial wastewater connection or change in existing discharge of industrial wastewater, regardless of quality or quantity; 
(5)  Any sewage pumping station greater than 50 gpm or serving more than one building; or 
(6)  Any proposed sewer that serves more than one building or that requires a manhole at the connection. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2(Exh. A), 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-46. - Prohibited discharge standards. 
    Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be accidentally discharged to the POTW. 
(1)  General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater that causes pass-through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(2)  Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater: 
a.  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, gas, solid, or any substance that may generate or form any flammable, combustible or explosive substance, fluid, gas, vapor or liquid when combined with air, water or other substances present in sewers, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140F (60C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; 
b.  Wastewater having a pH less than 6.5 or greater than 8.5, as measured at the point of connection to the sanitary sewer or other available monitoring location, or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage or hazard to the POTW equipment, or personnel, or with alkalinity in such quantities that the pH of the influent to the POTW is caused to exceed 8.0; 
c.  Solid or viscous substances capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to, ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastic, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch, manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc. either whole or ground by garbage grinders. Also including water or wastes containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, or containing substances that may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (0-65 degrees C), in amounts that will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference; 
d.  Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, COD, etc.), or chlorine demand requirements released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration that, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, exceed any national categorical pretreatment standard or cause pass through; 
e.  Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150F (65C), or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater that causes the temperature at the introduction into the POTW treatment plant to exceed 104F (40C); 
f.  Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through; 
g.  Pollutants that result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; 
h.  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the superintendent in accordance with section 14-64 of this article; 
i.  Any medical/infectious wastes, pharmaceutical waste, or radiological waste except as specifically authorized in a discharge permit; 
j.  Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent or sludge to fail a toxicity test; 
k.  Household hazardous wastes including but not limited to paints, stains, thinners, pesticides, herbicides, anti-freeze, transmission and brake fluids, motor oil and battery acid. 
l.  Any hazardous waste listed or designated by DES under Env-Hw 400. 
m.  Wastewater that imparts color that may not be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently may impart color to the treatment facility's effluent, thereby violating the Town of Newmarket's NPDES permit; 
n.  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater that, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to health and safety, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair; 
o.  Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
p.  Stormwater, surface water, foundation drains, basement sump pump discharges, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, non-contact cooling water, or otherwise unpolluted wastewater; 
q.  Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes unless specifically authorized by the superintendent in a wastewater discharge permit; 
r.  Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances that may cause excessive foaming in the POTW; 
s.  Wastewater causing a reading on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the POTW, of more than ten percent of the lower explosive limit of the meter; 
t.  Garbage that has not been properly shredded (garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens); 
u.  Any quantities of flow, concentrations, or both that constitute a "slug" as defined in section 14-43 of this article; 
v.  Waters or wastes that, by interaction with other water or wastes in the POTW, release dangerous or noxious gases, form suspended solids that affect the operation of the collection system, or create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes; or 
w.  Any materials that exert or cause unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fullers earth, lime, slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate). 
x.  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances to such a degree that any such material received in the composite waste water treatment works exceeds the limits established by the appropriate regulatory authority. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2(Exh. A), 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-47. - Federal categorical pretreatment standards. 
    The categorical pretreatment standards are found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471. 
    EPA shall be the control authority for industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards. As the control authority, industrial users are responsible to the EPA for compliance with categorical pretreatment standards and the requirements of 40 CFR Part 403. Categorical industrial users shall provide the Town of Newmarket with copies of any reports to, or correspondence with, the EPA relative to compliance with the categorical pretreatment standards. 
    The industrial user is responsible for determining the applicability of categorical pretreatment standards. The user may request that the EPA provide written certification on whether the user is subject to the requirements of a particular category. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2(Exh. A), 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-48. - Local discharge restrictions. 
    All persons discharging industrial process wastes into public or private sewers connected to the Town of Newmarket's POTW shall comply with applicable federal and state requirements and standards for pretreatment of wastes as they may be amended from time to time in addition to the requirements of this article. 
    The town reserves the right to establish local numerical discharge limitations on a case-by-case basis using a methodology determined by the town and, all state pretreatment standards and federal categorical pretreatment standards shall apply. In the event of a conflict between a state, federal, or town pretreatment standard, the more stringent standard shall apply. 
    If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the POTW that exceed the standards or restrictions established in sections 14-46-14-48 of this article, which in the judgment of the superintendent may have a deleterious effect upon the POTW, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or that otherwise create a hazard to worker or public safety or health, or constitute a public nuisance, the superintendent may: 
 Reject or prevent any discharge to the POTW after notice has been served to the discharger and the discharger has had reasonable opportunity to respond; 
 Require pretreatment prior to discharge to the POTW (division 3); 
 Require control (e.g., equalization) over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 
 Require payment to cover additional cost of handling and treating the wastes. 
If the superintendent allows the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the systems and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent and NHDES. (see division 3). 
(1)  Screening levels. Pollutants shall not be discharged to the POTW exceeding concentrations listed in Appendix D (Source: EPA's Pretreatment manual) without approval of the superintendent. Screening levels are numerical values above which actions are initiated to evaluate, prevent or reduce adverse impacts due to flammability, chemical reactivity, organic/solids loadings, or worker health and safety. 
If any of the screening levels are exceeded, repeat analysis must be performed to verify compliance or noncompliance with that screening level. If noncompliance is confirmed, then the industrial user may be required, at the discretion of the superintendent, to conduct an appropriate engineering evaluation to determine the potential impact of the discharge of this pollutant to the Town of Newmarket's POTW or alternatively, to develop a pollution prevention plan specifically addressing the pollutant that exceeds the screening level. This study or plan must be conducted under the supervision and approval of the Town of Newmarket. Should the evaluation indicate the impact to be unsatisfactory, the industrial user shall reduce the pollutant concentration to a satisfactory level. If the evaluation supports development of an alternate site-specific limitation, then the screening level shall be adjusted and administered as a limit for the specific discharge. 
(2)  Special agreements. No statement contained in this section except for paragraphs 14-46(1), and 14-47 shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the Town of Newmarket and any industrial user whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the Town of Newmarket for treatment provided that (1) said agreements do not contravene any requirements of existing federal or state laws, and/or regulations promulgated thereunder, (2) are compatible with any user charge system in effect, and (3) do not waive applicable federal categorical pretreatment standards. Special agreement requests shall require submittal of a pollution prevention plan that specifically addresses the discharge for which a special agreement is requested. For pollutants with numerical local limits, the Town of Newmarket has allocated a percentage of its allowable industrial loadings for such special agreements. Requests for special agreements that exceed this allocation will not be approved. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2(Exh. A), 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-49. - Town of Newmarket's right of revision. 
    The discharge standards and requirements set forth in sections 14-46-14-48 are established for the purpose of preventing discharges to the POTW that would harm the sewers, wastewater treatment process, or equipment; would have an adverse effect on the receiving stream; or would otherwise endanger lives, limb, health, safety, public property, or constitute a nuisance. 
    To meet these objectives, the superintendent may, from time to time, review and set more stringent standards or requirements than those established in sections 14-46-14-48 if, in the superintendent's opinion, more stringent standards or requirements are necessary. In forming this opinion, the superintendent may give consideration to such factors as the quantity of waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, the wastewater treatment process employed, capacity of the wastewater treatment facility, degree of treatability at the wastewater treatment facility, pollution prevention activities, and any other pertinent factor(s). The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer shall not be exceeded without the approval of the superintendent. 
    The superintendent shall allow affected industrial users reasonable time to comply with any changes to the local limits. The conditions and schedule for compliance shall accompany the written notification of amended local limits. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2(Exh. A), 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-50. - Dilution. 
    No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The superintendent may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. The superintendent may impose mass limitations on users in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2(Exh. A), 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-51. - Mass-based limitations. 
    Users implementing process changes may request that compliance be determined based on mass limitations in lieu of concentration limitations. Such mass-based limitations will be calculated from the permitted concentration-based limitations and flows, and shall be equivalent to or less than the mass discharge in effect at the time of the request. The intent of a mass-based limit is to encourage and allow pollution prevention and/or water conservation measures that might cause a facility to increase pollutant concentrations in its discharge even though the total mass of the pollutant discharged does not increase, and may in fact decrease. Decisions on granting requests for mass-based compliance limitations will be based on user-specific information and current operating conditions of the POTW, and will be authorized at the discretion of the superintendent. Implementation of mass-based limitations may not contravene any requirements of federal or state laws and/or regulations implemented thereunder, and may not waive applicable categorical pretreatment standards. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2(Exh. A), 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-52. - Private sewer systems. 
    Private sewer systems that discharge to the Newmarket POTW are responsible for all collection system mapping and must perform all collection system operation and maintenance activities that are required by the Town of Newmarket's NPDES permit. Operation and maintenance activities and documentation of said activities shall be performed at the owner's expense and documentation/records of this work shall be provided to the superintendent within 30 days of performing the work or from the request of the superintendent that the work be performed. 
    The town reserves the right to require that private systems eliminate extraneous infiltration and inflow greater than 1,500 gallons per day per inch diameter mile or the current town standard from the private system, and the owner shall bear the cost for performing all remedial work, study and documentation as approved by the superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2(Exh. A), 6-21-2017) 
DIVISION 3. - PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER 

Sec. 14-53. - Pretreatment facilities. 
    Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all limits, prohibitions, and requirements set out in sections 14-46-14-48 of this article within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state, or the superintendent, whichever is more stringent. All facilities required to achieve and maintain compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the superintendent for review and shall be acceptable to the superintendent and the DES before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the Town of Newmarket under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2(Exh. A), 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-54. - Additional pretreatment measures. 
(a)  Whenever deemed necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this article, the superintendent may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams, or any other condition(s) as deemed necessary in the discretion of the superintendent to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The superintendent may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. An industrial discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
(c)  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided at the owner's expense when, in the discretion of the superintendent, these devices are necessary for the preliminary treatment of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand, except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of a type and capacity approved by the superintendent and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, in accordance with state and local codes, by the user at his expense. The owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured materials and shall maintain records of the dates and means of disposal, which shall be submitted to the superintendent on a yearly basis and subject to review. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials shall be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms. 
(d)  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter and alarm. 
(e)  Where pretreatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided or required for any waters or wastes, these devices shall be maintained continuously to ensure satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(f)  A dental practice which applies, alters, maintains or removes mercury-containing dental amalgam shall install, operate and maintain an amalgam separator(s) in accordance with DES Env-Wq 306. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2(Exh. A), 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-55. - Accidental discharge/slug control plans. 
    At least once every two years, the superintendent shall evaluate whether each significant indirect discharger needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The superintendent may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the superintendent may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the superintendent of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by section 14-75 of this article; and 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including but not limited to solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2(Exh. A), 6-21-2017) 
Division 4. - INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION 

Sec. 14-56. - Wastewater characterization. 
    When requested by the superintendent, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 60 days of the request. The superintendent is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2(Exh. A), 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-57. - Industrial discharge permit requirement. 
(a)  No significant indirect discharger shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining an industrial discharge permit from the superintendent, except that a significant indirect discharger that has filed a timely and complete application pursuant to section 14-59 of this article may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein. 
(b)  The superintendent may require other users to obtain industrial discharge permits, or submit an application for an industrial discharge permit, as necessary to execute the purposes of this article. 
(c)  Any violation of the terms and conditions of an industrial discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this article and shall subject the industrial discharge permittee to the enforcement actions set out in divisions 9 through 12 of this article. Obtaining an industrial discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal, state, or local pretreatment standards and requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and local law. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2(Exh. A), 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-58. - DES industrial wastewater indirect discharge request (IDR) requirement. 
    All significant indirect dischargers must receive DES approval for any new industrial discharge, or any alteration in either flow or waste characteristics, in accordance with the Town of Newmarket's NPDES permit. Upon receipt of a complete industrial discharge permit application by the Town of Newmarket in accordance with section 14-62 of this article, an industrial wastewater indirect discharge request will be submitted by the Town of Newmarket to DES on behalf of the user. All applicable DES review fees shall be provided by the user. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2(Exh. A), 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-59. - Industrial discharge permitting: existing connections. 
    Any user required to obtain an industrial discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this article, and is not currently covered by a valid industrial discharge permit, and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within 60 days after said date, apply to the superintendent for an industrial discharge permit in accordance with section 14-62 of this article, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 120 days of the effective date of this article except in accordance with an industrial discharge permit issued by the superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2(Exh. A), 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-60. - Industrial discharge permitting: new connections. 
    Any user required to obtain an industrial discharge permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW shall obtain an industrial discharge permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this industrial discharge permit, in accordance with section 14-62 of this article, shall be filed at least 90 days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2(Exh. A), 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-61. - Industrial discharge permitting: categorical standards. 
    Within 120 days subsequent to the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, an industrial user subject to such standards shall submit an application for an industrial discharge permit amendment. The application shall contain the information noted under section 14-62. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2(Exh. A), 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-62. - Industrial discharge permit application contents. 
    All users required to obtain an industrial discharge permit, and other users subject to these rules, as required by the superintendent, shall submit a permit application. The superintendent shall require all users to submit as part of an application the following information where applicable, as a minimum: 
(1)  The name, street address, and mailing address of the indirect discharger; 
(2)  The name, position, and daytime telephone number of a responsible individual at the indirect discharger, such as a plant manager, plant engineer, president, or vice president of the company, who has certified the permit application in accordance with Env-Wq 305.13(b); 
(3)  The "SIC" code and the North American Industry Classification System ("NAICS") code of the indirect discharger, if available; 
(4)  Whether the indirect discharger is subject to National Categorical Standards, and if so, which standards; 
(5)  The estimated average, minimum, maximum and total daily flow for domestic discharges and each process discharge and the time and duration of those discharges; 
(6)  A schematic of the proposed treatment process; 
(7)  If applicable, plans, specifications, and operation and maintenance procedures for new or modified treatment facilities at the indirect discharger, stamped by a chemical, civil, sanitary, or environmental engineer registered in New Hampshire; 
(8)  A schematic diagram showing the production process, including the origin of each waste stream; 
(9)  A list of pollutants expected to be present in the discharge and the anticipated quantity of each, based on: 
a.  Analyses of the waste stream(s) to be discharged, in which case test results shall be submitted with the discharge permit request; or 
b.  Knowledge of the process which produces the wastewater; 
(10)  Information on the toxicity and treatability of the pollutants proposed to be discharged, as available from manufacturer's testing, safety, and data publications; 
(11)  A map showing the location within the municipality of the indirect discharger with respect to the POTW; 
(12)  A listing of all chemicals used at the indirect discharger that will be or could be discharged, such as production chemicals, degreasers, and cleaning solvents; 
(13)  A description and location diagram of all sampling locations at the indirect discharger; 
(14)  A brief narrative describing those measures taken or planned to reduce water usage and implement pollution prevention techniques, if any, such as: 
a.  Flow restrictors; 
b.  Countercurrent rinses; 
c.  Recycling of non-contact cooling water; 
d.  Chemical substitutions; and 
e.  Pollutant source reduction; and 
(15)  A list of all environmental permits held by or for the indirect discharger. 
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2(Exh. A), 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-63. - Signatories and certification. 
    All industrial discharge permit applications and user reports shall be signed by an authorized representative of the user and shall contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2(Exh. A), 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-64. - Hauled wastewater permits. 
(a)  Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated by the superintendent, and at such times as are established by the superintendent. Transport and discharge of such waste shall comply with section 14-112 of this article. 
(b)  The superintendent shall require generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain industrial discharge permits. The superintendent may require haulers of industrial waste to obtain industrial discharge permits. The superintendent may also prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. All other requirements of this article apply to the discharge of hauled industrial waste. 
(c)  Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated by the superintendent. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the superintendent. The superintendent may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The superintendent may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. 
(d)  Industrial waste haulers shall provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and a certification that the wastes are not hazardous wastes. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2(Exh. A), 6-21-2017) 
DIVISION 5. - INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE PROCESS 

Sec. 14-65. - Industrial discharge permit decisions. 
    The superintendent will evaluate the data provided by the industrial user and may require additional information. Upon approval of the application by the superintendent, if required, an industrial wastewater indirect discharge request will be submitted by the town to DES on behalf of the user. All applicable DES review fees shall be provided by the user. Within 30 days of receipt of a complete industrial discharge permit application, or 90 days in the case of an application for a new or modified discharge requiring review and approval by DES, the superintendent will determine whether or not to issue an industrial discharge permit. The superintendent may deny any application for an industrial discharge permit with just cause. An industrial discharge permit approval shall be based on and apply only to the subject application and all associated plans and supporting information as submitted. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2(Exh. A), 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-66. - Industrial discharge permit duration. 
    An industrial discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit, except that the industrial discharge permit may be issued for three years from the effective date of the permit in the case of a significant indirect discharger. An industrial discharge permit may be issued for a period less than these intervals at the discretion of the superintendent. Each industrial discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. An industrial discharge permit is void if the discharge approved does not begin within one year from date of approval. 
    Industrial discharge permits shall be terminated upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership, unless notification of such transfer is provided in accordance with section 14-70 of this article. All industrial discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new industrial discharge permit to that user. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2(Exh. A), 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-67. - Industrial discharge permit contents. 
    An industrial discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the superintendent to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment facility's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW. 
(1)  Industrial discharge permits for significant industrial dischargers shall contain: 
a.  The indirect discharger's name, street address, mailing address, and daytime telephone number; 
b.  Dates of issuance and expiration; 
c.  The general and specific prohibitions from this Ordinance which apply to the discharge; 
d.  A list of pollutants, allowable parameters, and discharge limits; 
e.  Identification of applicable EPA categorical standards; 
f.  A list of the pollutant(s) to be monitored and the monitoring requirements applicable thereto; 
g.  Sampling frequency, techniques, and locations; 
h.  Reporting requirements; 
i.  Inspection requirements; 
j.  Notification requirements, including for: 
1.  Slug loading; 
2.  Spills, bypasses, and upsets; 
3.  Changes in volume or characteristics of the discharge for which a permit revision is not required; and 
4.  Permit violations. 
k.  Record keeping requirements; 
l.  Applicable definitions and special conditions from this Ordinance; 
m.  Applicable civil and criminal penalties for violations; 
n.  Notification requirements prior to any new or modified discharge; 
o.  A requirement to submit a complete new application at a specified frequency, which shall be not less than once every five years; and a statement that indicates the industrial discharge permit's duration, which in no event shall exceed five (5) years; 
p.  A statement that the industrial discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the Town of Newmarket in accordance with section 14-70 of this article, and provisions for providing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing industrial discharge permit; 
q.  For users with reporting requirements, such reports at a minimum shall require: 
1.  Periodic monitoring results indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge from the regulated processes governed by pretreatment requirements and the average and maximum daily flow for these process units; 
2.  A statement as to whether the applicable pretreatment standards and requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, the additional operation and maintenance practices and/or pretreatment systems that are necessary; 
3.  Submittal of any monitoring results performed in addition to the requirements of the industrial discharge permit using procedures prescribed in the permit. 
4.  A description of identified pollution prevention opportunities at the facility. 
5.  A statement that compliance with the industrial discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those that become effective after the submission of the permit application and during the term of the industrial discharge permit. 
6.  A statement that the industrial user shall fully comply with the Town of Newmarket Sewer Use Ordinance. 
7.  A statement that the industrial user shall not dilute its effluent as a substitute for proper pretreatment. 
8.  A statement that the industrial discharge permit is based on and shall apply only to the subject discharge request and the associated plans and supporting information as submitted in the completed industrial permit application. 
(2)  Industrial discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions: 
a.  Limitations on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
b.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices that are designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW; 
c.  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine discharges; 
d.  Development and implementation of pollution prevention plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW; 
e.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW; 
f.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; and 
g.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the superintendent to ensure compliance with this article, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2(Exh. A), 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-68. - Industrial discharge permit appeals. 
    Any person, including the user, may petition the superintendent to reconsider the terms of an industrial discharge permit within 30 days of its issuance. 
(1)  Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal. 
(2)  In its petition, the appellant user must indicate the industrial discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the industrial discharge permit. 
(3)  The effectiveness of the industrial discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal. 
(4)  If the superintendent fails to act within 30 days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. 
(5)  Aggrieved parties may appeal the conditions of the industrial discharge permit in accordance with section 14-66 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2(Exh. A), 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-69. - Industrial discharge permit modification. 
    The superintendent may modify an industrial discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of industrial discharge permit issuance; 
(3)  To address a change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(4)  Upon receipt of information, from any source, indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the Town of Newmarket's POTW, Town of Newmarket personnel, or the water quality in the receiving waters; 
(5)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the industrial discharge permit; 
(6)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the industrial discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(7)  To correct typographical or other errors in the industrial discharge permit; or 
(8)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator. 
The superintendent shall ordinarily provide the user with five days' notice and an opportunity to be heard prior to any proposed modification and the grounds supporting said modification unless public health, safety, or welfare requires a more immediate modification. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2(Exh. A), 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-70. - Industrial discharge permit transfer. 
    Industrial discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee provides at least 60 days advance notice to the superintendent, and the superintendent approves the industrial discharge permit transfer. The notice to the superintendent shall include a written certification by the new owner or operator that: 
(1)  States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes that generate wastewater to be discharged to the POTW; 
(2)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and 
(3)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing industrial discharge permit. 
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer shall render the industrial discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2(Exh. A), 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-71. - Industrial discharge permit reissuance. 
    A user with an expiring industrial discharge permit shall apply for reissuance of the industrial discharge permit by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with section 14-62 of this article, a minimum of 60 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing industrial discharge permit. Under no circumstances shall the permittee continue to discharge without an effective permit. An expired permit will continue to be effective and enforceable until the permit is reissued if: 
 The industrial user has submitted a complete permit application at least 60 days prior to the expiration date of the user's existing permit; and 
 The failure to reissue the permit, prior to expiration of the previous permit, is not due to any act or failure to act on the part of the industrial user. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2(Exh. A), 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-72. - Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions. 
(a)  If another municipality, or user located within another municipality, contributes wastewater to the POTW, the Town of Newmarket shall enter into an Intermunicipal agreement with the contributing municipality. 
(b)  Prior to entering into an agreement required by paragraph (a), above, the superintendent shall request the following information from the contributing municipality: 
(1)  A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to the POTW by the contributing municipality; 
(2)  An inventory of all users located within the contributing municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and 
(3)  Such other information as the superintendent may deem necessary. 
(c)  An intermunicipal agreement, as required by paragraph (a), above, shall contain the following conditions: 
(1)  A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer use ordinance that is at least as stringent as this Ordinance and local limits that ensure that the pollutant loadings allocated to the contributing municipality are not exceeded. The requirement shall specify that such Ordinance and local limits shall be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the Town of Newmarket's Ordinance or revisions to the loadings allocated to the contributing municipality; 
(2)  A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised user inventory on at least an annual basis; 
(3)  A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation activities, including industrial discharge permit issuance, inspection and sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by the contributing municipality; which of these activities will be conducted by the superintendent; and which of these activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing municipality and the superintendent; 
(4)  A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the superintendent with access to all information that the contributing municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities; 
(5)  Limitations on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW; 
(6)  Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's discharge; 
(7)  A provision ensuring that the superintendent will have access to the facilities of users located within the contributing municipality's jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by the superintendent; and 
(8)  A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms contained within the agreement. 
(d)  Intermunicipal agreements shall be subject to approval by DES and the New Hampshire State Attorney General. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2(Exh. A), 6-21-2017) 
DIVISION 6. - REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 14-73. - Periodic compliance reports. 
(a)  All significant indirect dischargers shall, at a frequency determined by the superintendent but in no case less than twice per year (in June and December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge that are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports shall be signed and certified in accordance with section 14-63 of this article. 
(b)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to maintain its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(c)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the superintendent, using the procedures prescribed in sections 14-73 and 14-74 of this article, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2(Exh. A), 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-74. - Reports of changed conditions. 
    Each industrial user shall notify the superintendent of any planned changes to the user's operations or system that might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 90 days before the change. 
(1)  The superintendent may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submittal of an industrial discharge permit application under section 14-62 of this article. 
(2)  Upon approval of the application by the Town of Newmarket, an industrial wastewater indirect discharge request may be submitted by the Town of Newmarket to DES on behalf of the user. All applicable DES review fees shall be provided by the user. 
(3)  Upon approval of the industrial discharge request by DES, the superintendent may issue an industrial discharge permit or modify an existing industrial discharge permit under division 5 of this article in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(4)  A NHDES "sewer connection permit" request in accordance with section 14-45 of this article may be required for changes. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2(Exh. A), 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-75. - Reports of slug/potentially adverse discharges. 
(a)  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause adverse impacts to the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the superintendent of the incident. This notification shall include identifying the location of the discharge, the type of waste, the concentration and volume of the waste, if known, and corrective actions conducted by the user. 
(b)  Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the superintendent, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be conducted by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability that may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability that may be imposed pursuant to this article. 
(c)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's employee bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of a discharge described in paragraph (a), above. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause such a discharge to occur or who may be present when a discharge occurs are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2(Exh. A), 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-76. - Reports from unpermitted users. 
    All users not required to obtain an industrial discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the superintendent as the superintendent may require. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2(Exh. A), 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-77. - Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. 
    If the results of sampling performed by a user indicate a violation, the user shall notify the superintendent within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the superintendent within 30 days subsequent to becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the superintendent monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the superintendent samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2(Exh. A), 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-78. - Analytical requirements. 
    All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed in accordance with procedures approved by the Town of Newmarket. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2(Exh. A), 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-79. - Sample collection. 
(a)  Except as indicated in paragraph (b), below, the user shall collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the superintendent may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to demonstrate compliance with instantaneous discharge limitations (e.g., screening levels established to protect worker health and safety). A single grab sample may also be used in place of a composite sample with approval of the superintendent when: 
(1)  The effluent is not discharged on a continuous basis (i.e., batch discharges of short duration), and only when the batch exhibits homogeneous characteristics (i.e., completely mixed) and the pollutant can be safely assumed to be uniformly dispersed; 
(2)  Sampling a facility where a statistical relationship can be established between previous grab samples and composite data; and 
(3)  The waste conditions are relatively constant (i.e., are completely mixed and homogeneous) over the period of the discharge. 
(b)  Samples for temperature, pH, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds shall be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2, 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-80. - Timing. 
    Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports that are not mailed, the date of receipt of the report by the person designated in the industrial discharge permit shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2, 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-81. - Record keeping. 
    Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this article and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact location, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) obtaining the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least five years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the Town of Newmarket, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the superintendent. Before destroying the records, the industrial user shall request and receive permission from the Town of Newmarket. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2, 6-21-2017) 
DIVISION 7. - POWERS AND AUTHORITIES OF INSPECTORS 

Sec. 14-82. - Compliance monitoring. 
    The Town of Newmarket shall investigate instances of noncompliance with the industrial pretreatment standards and requirements, as well as compliance with all applicable state, federal or local laws or regulations. 
    The Town of Newmarket shall, as necessary, sample and analyze the wastewater discharges of contributing users and conduct surveillance and inspection activities to identify, independently of information supplied by such users, occasional and continuing noncompliance with industrial pretreatment standards or state, federal, or local laws and regulations. Each industrial user will be billed directly for costs incurred for analysis of its wastewater. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2, 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-83. - Right of entry: inspection and sampling. 
    All users discharging to the Town of Newmarket's POTW shall allow unrestricted access by Town of Newmarket, state and EPA personnel ("inspector(s)") for the purpose of determining whether the user is complying with all requirements of this article, and/or any industrial discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the inspector(s) ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. 
(1)  If a user has security measures in force that require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the inspector(s) will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(2)  The inspector(s) shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. 
(3)  The inspector(s) may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated at least annually to ensure accuracy. 
(4)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the inspector(s) and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user. 
(5)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the inspector(s) access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this article. 
(6)  The inspector(s) is authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes that have a bearing on the kind or source of discharge to the public sewer. The industrial user may request that the information in question not be disclosed to the public in accordance with division 8 of this article. The information in question shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this article, the NPDES permit, or the pretreatment program. The burden of proof that information should be held confidential rests with the user. However, information regarding wastewater discharge by the user (flow, constituents, concentrations, and characteristics) shall be available to the public without restriction. 
(7)  While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in this section, the inspector(s) shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the user. The user shall be held harmless for injury or death to the inspector(s), and the Town of Newmarket shall indemnify the user against loss or damage to its property by Town of Newmarket employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the user and growing out of the monitoring activities, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the user to maintain safe conditions. 
(8)  The inspector(s) shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the Town of Newmarket holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the POTW lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2, 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-84. - Search warrants. 
    If the superintendent has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the Town of Newmarket designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the superintendent may seek issuance of a search warrant from the Rockingham Circuit Court- District Division. In the event a search warrant is granted by the Rockingham Circuit Court-District Division, the user who refused said access shall be responsible for any and all fees and expenses incurred by the Town of Newmarket in obtaining said warrant. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2, 6-21-2017) 
DIVISION 8. - CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION/PUBLIC PARTICIPATION 

Sec. 14-85. - Confidential information. 
    Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, industrial discharge permit applications, industrial discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the superintendent's inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the superintendent, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report that might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person providing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2, 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-86. - Public participation. 
    The Town of Newmarket shall comply with the public participation requirements of 40 CFR Part 25 in the enforcement of industrial pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2, 6-21-2017) 
DIVISION 9. - ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES 

Sec. 14-87. - Notification of violation. 
    When the superintendent determines that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, an industrial discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the superintendent may serve a verbal or written notice of violation to the user. Within the time period specified in the violation notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the superintendent. Submittal of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or subsequent to receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the superintendent to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without initially issuing a notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2, 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-88. - Compliance schedule development. 
    The superintendent may require any user that has violated or continues to violate any provision of this article, an industrial discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to develop a compliance schedule. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section shall comply with the following conditions: 
(1)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards including, but not limited to, retaining an engineer, completing preliminary and final design plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation; 
(2)  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months; 
(3)  The user shall submit a progress report to the superintendent no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance which identifies, at a minimum, whether the user complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the action being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
(4)  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2, 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-89. - Pollution prevention plan development. 
    The superintendent may require any user that has violated or continues to violate any provision of this article, an industrial discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to develop a pollution prevention plan. The pollution prevention plan must specifically address violation(s) for which this action was undertaken. The pollution prevention plan shall be developed using good engineering judgment and shall be submitted to the superintendent no later than 60 days after the user was notified of this requirement. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2, 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-90. - Publication of users in significant noncompliance. 
    The superintendent may publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper circulated in the Town of Newmarket, a list of the users that, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2, 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-91. - Show cause orders. 
    The superintendent may order a user that has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, an industrial discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the superintendent and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, executing any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2, 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-92. - Cease and desist orders. 
    When the superintendent determines that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, an industrial discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the superintendent may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
(1)  Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
(2)  Implement such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2, 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-93. - Consent orders. 
    The superintendent is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such orders shall include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. Orders may also contain such other requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the noncompliance, including the installation of pretreatment systems, additional self-monitoring, and management practices. Such orders shall have the same force and effect as administrative orders issued pursuant to sections 14-91 and 14-92 of this article and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2, 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-94. - Industrial discharge permit termination. 
    Any industrial user who violates the following conditions of this article or a wastewater discharge permit or order, or any applicable state or federal law, is subject to permit termination: 
(1)  Violation of permit conditions; 
(2)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
(3)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics; or 
(4)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling. 
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under section 14-91 of this article why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the superintendent shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2, 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-95. - Termination of discharge. 
    In addition to the provisions in section 14-94 of this article, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination: 
(1)  Violation of industrial discharge permit conditions; 
(2)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
(3)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge; 
(4)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or 
(5)  Violation of the pretreatment standards in division 2 of this article. 
(6)  Refusal or failure to adequately respond to any notice of violation issued by the superintendent per section 14-87 of this article. 
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under section 14-91 of this article why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the superintendent shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2, 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-96. - Emergency suspensions. 
    The superintendent may immediately suspend a user's discharge, subsequent to informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to terminate an actual or threatened discharge that reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of POTW personnel or the public. The superintendent may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or that presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. 
(1)  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately terminate or eliminate its wastewater discharge. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply with the suspension order, the superintendent may implement such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The superintendent may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the superintendent that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in section 14-94 or 14-95 of this article are initiated against the user. 
(2)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures implemented to prevent any future occurrence, to the superintendent prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under sections 14-91, 14-94 or 14-95 of this article. 
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2, 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-97. - Recovery of expenses. 
    Any person or industrial user violating any of the provisions of this article shall be liable to the Town of Newmarket for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the Town of Newmarket by reason of such violation. If the superintendent or town council shall have caused the disconnection of a building sewer from a public sewer, the Town of Newmarket may collect the expenses associated with completing the disconnection from any person or user responsible for, or willfully concerned in, or who profited by such violation. The Town of Newmarket may thereafter refuse to permit the restoration of the former connection or of any new connection to the property concerned in the violation until the claim of the Town of Newmarket for the cost of completing such disconnection shall have been paid in full plus interest and the reasonable cost of any legal expenses incurred by the Town of Newmarket in connection therewith. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2, 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-98. - Harm to Town of Newmarket property. 
    No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment that is part of the public sewerage system. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct pursuant to the local ordinances, and shall also be subject to penalties under state and federal statutes. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2, 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-99. - Liens and collection of sewer charges. 
    Liens: Under provision of New Hampshire RSA 149-I:11 and RSA 38:22, all charges for sewer services shall constitute a lien in favor of the Town of Newmarket upon real estate where services were furnished. Interest on overdue charges shall be assessed in accordance with RSA 76:13. Town records shall be sufficient notice to maintain suite upon the lien against subsequent purchases or attaching creditors or real estate. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2, 6-21-2017) 
DIVISION 10. - JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES 

Sec. 14-100. - Injunctive relief. 
    When the Town of Newmarket determines that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, an industrial discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Town of Newmarket may petition the Rockingham County Superior Court through the Town of Newmarket's attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, that restrains or compels the specific performance of the industrial discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this Ordinance on activities of the user. The Town of Newmarket may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, implementing any other action against a user. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2, 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-101. - Civil penalties. 
(a)  A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, an industrial discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the Town of Newmarket for a maximum civil penalty of $10,000.00 per violation, per day, plus actual damages incurred by the POTW. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. 
(b)  The Town of Newmarket Council may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the Town of Newmarket. The town council shall petition the court to impose, assess, and recover such sums. 
(c)  In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall consider all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(d)  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, implementing any other action against a user. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2, 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-102. - Criminal prosecution. 
    Any person or industrial user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this article or any orders or permits issued hereunder shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a violation, punishable by a fine not to exceed $10,000.00 for each violation. Every separate provision violated shall constitute a separate violation. Every day that a violation occurs shall be deemed a separate violation. Ref. RSA 47:17, I, RSA 149-I:6, RSA 31:39, III. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2, 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-103. - Nonexclusive remedies. 
    The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The Town of Newmarket may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a non-compliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the Town of Newmarket's enforcement response plan; however, the Town of Newmarket may pursue any other action against any user without limitation, including ex parte temporary judicial relief to prevent a violation of this article. Further, the Town of Newmarket is empowered to pursue more than one enforcement action against any non-compliant user. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2, 6-21-2017) 
DIVISION 11. - SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION 

Sec. 14-104. - Performance bonds. 
    The superintendent may decline to issue or reissue an industrial discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this article, a previous industrial discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the Town of Newmarket, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the superintendent to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2, 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-105. - Liability insurance. 
    The superintendent may decline to issue or reissue an industrial discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this article, a previous industrial discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2, 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-106. - Water supply severance. 
    Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this article, an industrial discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, subsequent to satisfactory demonstration of its ability to comply. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2, 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-107. - Public nuisances. 
    A violation of any provision of this article, an industrial discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the superintendent. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the penalty provisions of state law or the Town Code, as applicable, governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the Town of Newmarket for any costs incurred in removing, abating, remedying, or enforcing compliance to cease said nuisance, including the town's legal fees and expenses. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2, 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-108. - Contractor listing. 
    Users that have not achieved compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements are not eligible to receive a contractual award for the sale of goods or services to the Town of Newmarket. Existing contracts for the sale of goods or services to the Town of Newmarket held by a user found to be in significant noncompliance with pretreatment standards or requirements may be terminated at the discretion of the superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2, 6-21-2017) 
DIVISION 12. - AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 14-109. - Upset. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with pretreatment standards due to factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(b)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with pretreatment standards if the requirements of paragraph (c), below, are met. 
(c)  A user who intends to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
(1)  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; 
(2)  At the time being of the upset, the facility was operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and 
(3)  The user has submitted the following information to the superintendent within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days): 
a.  A description of the discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
b.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the amount of time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
c.  Action being implemented and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(d)  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(e)  Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with pretreatment standards. 
(f)  Users shall control all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2, 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-110. - Prohibited discharge standards. 
    A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in section 14-46(a) of this article or the specific prohibitions in sections 14-46(b) of this article if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: 
(1)  A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference; or 
(2)  No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the Town of Newmarket was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2, 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-111. - Bypass. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, 
(1)  "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
(2)  "Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities that causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources that can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(b)  A user may allow any bypass to occur that does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section. 
(c)  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the superintendent, at least ten days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
A user shall submit oral notice to the superintendent of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the amount of time it is expected to continue; and steps implemented or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The superintendent may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
(d)  Bypass is prohibited, and the superintendent may initiate enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
(1)  Bypass was required to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
(2)  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass that occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
(3)  The user submitted notices as required under paragraph (c) of this section. 
(e)  The superintendent may approve an anticipated bypass, subsequent to considering its adverse effects, if the superintendent determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in paragraph (d)(1) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2, 6-21-2017) 
DIVISION 13. - SEPTAGE DISPOSAL 

Sec. 14-112. - Septage disposal. 
    No person shall discharge hauled septage at the Town of Newmarket's wastewater POTW who does not hold a septage hauler permit issued pursuant to RSA 485-A:4, XVI-a. 
    A copy of such permit shall be filed by the permit holder with the Town of Newmarket. Upon renewal or revocation of such permit, the hauler shall be responsible for notification of such renewal or revocation to the Town of Newmarket. 
    The superintendent may limit the quantities of septage that can be received or refuse to receive septage to ensure proper operation of the treatment facility pursuant to RSA 486:13. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2, 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-113. - Septage hauler requirements. 
(a)  A permitted hauler may discharge septage to the facilities provided at the Town of Newmarket's wastewater treatment facility only after paying the charges as set forth in Appendix A of this article. 
(b)  Those persons, firms, corporations, municipal subdivisions or institutions that conform to state definition of "RVs" shall dispose of such septage as human excrement or other putrescible materials at the dates, times, and locations designated by the superintendent. 
(c)  No person, firm, corporation, municipal subdivision or institution shall discharge any toxic, poisonous, radioactive solids, liquids or gases, or the contents of grease, gas, oil and/or sand interceptors into the Town of Newmarket's wastewater treatment facility without specific authorization of the superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2, 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-114. - Temporary septage permits. 
    The superintendent may issue a temporary permit to allow the discharge of septage at a point of discharge other than the wastewater treatment facility in a situation where such temporary discharge point is necessary to protect the health and welfare of the Town of Newmarket. The superintendent shall issue such permit upon such terms and conditions as the superintendent deems to be in the best interests of the Town of Newmarket. The temporary permit shall not be valid for a period exceeding 12 months. The superintendent shall have the right to revoke or suspend the temporary permit in the event that the terms and conditions are not met. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2, 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-115. - Septage permits. 
(a)  Any septage hauler who intends to dispose of septage within the limits of the Town of Newmarket shall first obtain a permit therefor from the Town of Newmarket. 
(b)  Such permit as issued by the Town of Newmarket shall identify: 
(1)  The motor vehicle; 
(2)  The capacity of the tank; 
(3)  The DES Permit Number; and 
(4)  Any other details of compliance with DES rules. 
(c)  The following conditions shall constitute conditions precedent to the issuance of each permit by the Town of Newmarket: 
(1)  Each septic tank truck shall be equipped with either a sight level by which the quantity of the contents of each tank may be ascertained by sight or an access port through which the quantity of the contents of each truck may be ascertained by depth measurements. 
(2)  Prior to discharging the load, the hauler shall record the following information in a log at the POTW: 
a.  The hauler's name; 
b.  Date; 
c.  Time of disposal; 
d.  Volume disposed; 
e.  Origin of load (property owner's name, address, and telephone number); and 
f.  Nature of the waste (i.e., grease or septage) being disposed. 
(3)  Such log as described in section 14-115(c)(2) shall be located in the office of the superintendent. 
(4)  Owners of "RVs" who intend to discharger the contents of holding tanks are exempt from the permitting process. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2, 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-116. - Septage disposal charge. 
    There shall be a septage disposal charge as established by this article for the receipt of septage into the Town of Newmarket's POTW for treatment. In the event that the permittee has either a defective sight level, no sight level attached to the track, and/or no access to the contents of the truck for depth measurement, the permittee shall be charged according to the full tank capacity at the time of discharge or by other method determined by the superintendent. Septage fees shall be established by town council and are included in Appendix A. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2, 6-21-2017) 
DIVISION 14. - ABATEMENTS 

Sec. 14-117. - Abatements. 
(a)  A written request for abatement will be reviewed by the superintendent according to the following: 
(1)  Errors in meter readings, 
(2)  Meter malfunctions, 
(3)  Water that did not enter the sewer system 
(4)  Errors in billing. 
(b)  Abatements will only be retroactive for one billing period. 
(c)  Abatement requests that are denied by the superintendent may be appealed by the owner to the town administrator. An appeal to the town administrator must be submitted in writing. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2, 6-21-2017) 
DIVISION 15. - VALIDITY 

Sec. 14-118. - Validity. 
(a)  All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
(b)  The validity of any section, clause, sentence, or provision of this article shall not affect the validity of any other part of this article that can be given effect without such invalid part or parts. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2, 6-21-2017) 
DIVISION 16. - INTERPRETATION OF REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 14-119. - Interpretation. 
    The provisions of this article with respect to the meaning of technical terms and phrases, the classification of different types of sewers, the regulations with respect to making connections to sewers or drains, and other technical matters shall be interpreted and administered by the superintendent acting in and for the Town of Newmarket, New Hampshire through the town council. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2, 6-21-2017) 
Sec. 14-120. - Appeals. 
    Any party aggrieved by any decision, regulation or provision under this article, as amended, from time to time, shall have the right of appeal within 30 calendar days of said decision to the superintendent, who shall issue a decision within 30 calendar days. If said appeal is denied by the superintendent, then the aggrieved party shall have the right to appeal to the Rockingham County Superior Court for equitable relief, provided that said appeal is entered within 30 calendar days from the issuance of the decision of the superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2, 6-21-2017) 
DIVISION 17. - USER FEES 

Sec. 14-121. - Fees. 
    To defray the costs of operating and maintaining the sewer system, payment of any principal or interest on bonds, or other indebtness, a schedule of charges shall be set established by the Town of Newmarket for all classes of service and defined in the sewer user charge system. 
    Changes to the schedule of charges shall be approved by town council resolution after public notice and discussion at a town council workshop meeting. Appendix A includes the schedule of charges, rates, fees, fines and penalties that have been established by the town council. 
(Ord. No. 4-2016/2017,  2, 6-21-2017) 
Chapter 16 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Fire departments, RSA 155-A; fireworks, RSA 160-C. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Key lock box system. 
(a)  The following structures shall be equipped with a key lock box at or near the main entrance or such other location required by the fire chief: 
(1)  All structures, other than one- and two-family residential structures, protected by an automatic alarm system or automatic suppression system or such structures that are secured in a manner that restricts access during an emergency; 
(2)  Multifamily residential structures; 
(3)  Governmental structures and nursing care facilities. 
(b)  All newly constructed structures subject to this section shall have the key lock box installed and operational before the issuance of a certificate of occupancy permit. All structures in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived and subject to this section shall have one year from the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived to have a key lock box installed and operational. 
(c)  The fire chief shall designate the type of key lock box system to be implemented within the town and shall have the authority to require all structures to use the designated system. 
(d)  The owner or operator of a structure required to have a key lock box shall, at all times, keep keys in the lock box that will allow for access to the structure, utility rooms and fire alarm panel. 
(e)  The fire chief shall be authorized to implement rules and regulations for the use of the lock box system. 
(f)  Any person who owns or operates a structure in violation of this section shall be subject to a minimum fine of $300.00. 
(Ord. No. 2009/2010-06,  1, 12-16-2009) 
Secs. 16-2-16-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUTUAL AID 

Sec. 16-21. - Authority. 
    Pursuant to RSA 154:24, the town hereby authorizes the town fire department to provide mutual aid as provided herein. 
(Prior Code,  5.7.1; Ord. No. 2004-14, 5-5-2004) 
Sec. 16-22. - Outside mutual aid. 
(a)  The town fire department will go to the aid of another city, town, village or fire district within or without the state, for the purpose of extinguishing a fire, rendering other emergency assistance, or performing any detail as requested by said municipality. 
(b)  The town fire department can also request aid from another city, town, village or fire district within or without the state, for the purpose of extinguishing a fire, rendering other emergency assistance, or performing any detail as requested. 
(Prior Code,  5.7.2; Ord. No. 2004-14, 5-5-2004) 
Sec. 16-23. - Loss or damage. 
    If the fire chief deems necessary, expenses incurred in rendering aid outside the limits of the town's jurisdiction as provided under this article, including loss or damage to equipment, may be charged to the city, town, village or fire district whose officials requested such aid (RSA 154:26). 
(Prior Code,  5.7.4; Ord. No. 2004-14, 5-5-2004) 
Sec. 16-24. - Donation of services. 
    Other than those losses or damages in section 16-23, the town will donate equipment and services and assume the damage or loss to their equipment (RSA 154:27). 
(Prior Code,  5.7.5; Ord. No. 2004-14, 5-5-2004) 
Sec. 16-25. - Formation of a district fire mutual aid system. 
    If the fire chief deems necessary, a request and/or petition shall be completed to the state fire marshal's office, to form a district fire mutual aid system, which shall be a public municipal corporation (RSA 154:30-a). 
(Prior Code,  5.7.7; Ord. No. 2004-14, 5-5-2004) 
Chapter 18 - LICENSES, PERMITS AND MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1-18-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-19. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the town, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the town. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(b)  Findings. Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult uses on the community presented in hearings and in reports made available to the town council, and on findings incorporated in the cases of City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976), and Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), and on studies in other communities including, but not limited to, Phoenix, Arizona; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Houston, Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California; Los Angeles, California; Whittier, California; Austin, Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Cleveland, Ohio; and Beaumont, Texas; and also on findings from the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses, (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), the town council finds: 
(1)  Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled by the operators of the establishments. Further, there is presently no mechanism to make the owners of these establishments responsible for the activities that occur on their premises. 
(2)  Certain employees of sexually oriented businesses defined in this article as adult theatres and cabarets engage in higher incidence of certain types of illicit sexual behavior than employees of other establishments. 
(3)  Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur at sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or semi-private booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos, or live sex shows. 
(4)  Offering and providing such space encourages such activities, which creates unhealthy conditions. 
(5)  Persons frequent certain adult theatres, adult arcades, and other sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex within the premises of such sexually oriented businesses. 
(6)  At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV-AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B, non A, non B amebiasis, salmonella infections and shigella infections. 
(7)  Since 1981 and to the present, there have been an increasing cumulative number of reported cases of AIDS caused by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in the United States: 600 in 1982; 2,200 in 1983; 4,600 in 1984; 8,555 in 1985; and 253,448 through December 31, 1992. 
(8)  The following data are summarized from the CDC semiannual HIV/AIDS Surveillance Report. Numbers are based on AIDS cases reported to CDC through December 31, 1999. The cumulative number of AIDS cases reported to CDC is 733,374. Adult and adolescent AIDS cases total 724,656 with 604,843 cases in males and 119,810 cases in females. Through the same time period, 8,718 AIDS cases were reported in children under age 13. 
(9)  Since 1981 and to the present, there have been an increasing cumulative number of persons testing positive for the HIV antibody test in the United States. 
(10)  The number of cases of early (less than one year) syphilis in the United States reported annually has risen, with 33,613 cases reported in 1982 and 45,200 through November of 1990. 
(11)  The number of cases of gonorrhea in the United States reported annually remains at a high level, with over 500,000 cases being reported in 1990. 
(12)  The surgeon general of the United States in his report of October 22, 1986, has advised the American public that AIDS and HIV infection may be transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug abuse, exposure to infected blood and blood components, and from an infected mother to her newborn. 
(13)  According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts. 
(14)  Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, and, in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of the owners and the operators of the facilities to self-regulate those activities and maintain those facilities. 
(15)  Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found in the areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons view adult oriented films. 
(16)  The findings noted in subsections (1) through (15) of this section raise substantial governmental concerns. 
(17)  Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics that should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial governmental concerns. 
(18)  A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators of the sexually oriented businesses. Further, such a licensing procedure will place a heretofore nonexistent incentive on the operators to see that the sexually oriented business is run in a manner consistent with the health, safety and welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the town. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual operator of the sexually oriented business, fully in possession and control of the premises and activities occurring therein. 
(19)  Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting on premises with adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in adult theatres. 
(20)  Requiring licensees of sexually oriented businesses to keep information regarding current employees and certain past employees will help reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects and by preventing minors from working in such establishments. 
(21)  The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the sexually oriented business, where such information is substantially related to the significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases. 
(22)  The fact that an applicant for an adult use license has been convicted of a sexually related crime leads to the rational assumption that the applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention of this article. 
(23)  The barring of such individuals from the management of adult uses for a period of years serves as a deterrent to and prevents conduct which leads to the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases. 
(24)  The general welfare, health, morals and safety of the citizens of the town will be promoted by the enactment of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Prior Code,  18.7.1; Ord. No. 2001-05, 4-4-2001) 
Sec. 18-20. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated, slug-operated, or for any form of consideration, or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, video or laser disc players, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store means a commercial establishment which, as one of its principal purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(2)  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and still be categorized as adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified materials which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features: 
(1)  Persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nude; 
(2)  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or 
(3)  Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions, which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: 
(1)  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; 
(2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or 
(3)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours. 
    Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nude, or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities. 
    Employee means a person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time or contract basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent or otherwise and whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of said business. The term "employee" does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises. 
    Escort means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. 
    Escort agency means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration. 
    Establishment means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, in whole or in part, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; 
(3)  The additions of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or 
(4)  The relocation of any sexually oriented business. 
    Licensee means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license; and in the case of an employee, a person in whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment in a sexually oriented business. 
    Nude model studio means any place where a person who appears semi-nude, in a state of nudity, or who displays specified anatomical areas and is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. The term "nude model studio" shall not include a proprietary school licensed by the state or a college, junior college or university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in a structure: 
(1)  That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude or semi-nude person is available for viewing; 
(2)  Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and 
(3)  Where no more than one nude or semi-nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
    Nudity or state of nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
    Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
    Semi-nude or in a semi-nude condition means the showing of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part. 
    Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: 
(1)  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or 
(2)  Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude. 
    Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center. 
    Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)  The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or 
(2)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
    Specified criminal activity means any of the following offenses, which have not been annulled by a court pursuant to RSA 651:5,X(c): 
(1)  Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity; sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual performance by a child; possession or distribution of child pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child; engaging in organized criminal activity; sexual assault; molestation of a child; bestiality; gambling; or distribution of a controlled substance; or any similar offenses to those described in this subsection under the criminal or penal code of other states or countries; 
(2)  For which: 
a.  Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
b.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or 
c.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period. 
The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or a person residing with the applicant. 
    Specified sexual activities means any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, bestiality or sodomy; or 
(3)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (1) and (2) of this definition. 
    Substantial enlargement, of a sexually oriented business, means the increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than 25 percent, as the floor areas exist on the date the ordinance from which this article is derived takes effect. 
    Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
(Prior Code,  18.7.2; Ord. No. 2001-05, 4-4-2001) 
Sec. 18-21. - Classification. 
    Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows: 
(1)  Adult arcades; 
(2)  Adult bookstores, adult novelty stores, or adult video stores; 
(3)  Adult cabarets; 
(4)  Adult motels; 
(5)  Adult motion picture theaters; 
(6)  Adult theaters; 
(7)  Escort agencies; 
(8)  Nude model studios; and 
(9)  Sexual encounter centers. 
(Prior Code,  18.7.3; Ord. No. 2001-05, 4-4-2001) 
Sec. 18-22. - Exemptions. 
    It is a defense to prosecution under section 18-26 that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
(1)  By a proprietary school, licensed by the state; a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(2)  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
(3)  In a structure: 
a.  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; 
b.  Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and 
c.  Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
(Prior Code,  18.7.20; Ord. No. 2001-05, 4-4-2001) 
Sec. 18-23. - Additional regulations for adult motels. 
(a)  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or a similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this article. 
(b)  A person commits a violation if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented license, he rents or subrents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten hours from the time the room is rented, he rents or subrents the same sleeping room again. 
(c)  For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the term "rent" or "subrent" means the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
(Prior Code,  18.7.13; Ord. No. 2001-05, 4-4-2001) 
Sec. 18-24. - Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films, videos, or live entertainment in viewing rooms. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, videocassette, live entertainment, or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The town may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. 
(3)  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the town. 
(4)  It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that at least one licensed employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
(5)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (a)(5) of this section remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials and, at all times, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(7)  No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any time. 
(8)  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than 5.0 footcandles as measured at the floor level. 
(9)  It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the illumination described in subsection (a)(8) of this section is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
(10)  No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between viewing rooms or booths. 
(11)  No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind between viewing booths or rooms. 
(12)  The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly inspect the walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or holes exist. 
(13)  The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting. 
(14)  The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by, nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board or other porous material shall be used within 48 inches of the floor. 
(b)  A person having a duty under subsections (a)(1) through (14) of this section commits a violation if he knowingly fails to fulfill that duty. 
(Prior Code,  18.7.14; Ord. No. 2001-05, 4-4-2001) 
Sec. 18-25. - Additional regulations for escort agencies. 
(a)  An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person acts as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years. 
(Prior Code,  18.7.15; Ord. No. 2001-05, 4-4-2001) 
Sec. 18-26. - Additional regulations for nude model studios. 
(a)  A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years. 
(b)  A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if the person appears semi-nude or in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the person under 18 years was in a restroom not open to public view or visible to any other person. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if the person appears in a state of nudity, or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises, which can be viewed from the public right-of-way. 
(d)  A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public. 
(Prior Code,  18.7.16; Ord. No. 2001-05, 4-4-2001) 
Sec. 18-27. - Additional regulations concerning public nudity. 
(a)  It shall be a violation for a person to knowingly and intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a state of nudity or depict specified sexual activities. 
(b)  It shall be a violation for a person to knowingly or intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a semi-nude condition unless the person is an employee who, while semi-nude, shall be at least ten feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at least two feet from the floor. 
(c)  It shall be a violation for an employee, while semi-nude in a sexually oriented business, to solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron or customer or for any patron or customer to pay or give any gratuity to any employee, while said employee is semi-nude in a sexually oriented business. 
(d)  It shall be a violation for an employee, while semi-nude, to touch a customer or the clothing of a customer. 
(Prior Code,  18.7.17; Ord. No. 2001-05, 4-4-2001) 
Sec. 18-28. - Prohibition against children in a sexually oriented business. 
    A person commits a violation if the person knowingly allows a person under the age of 18 years on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
(Prior Code,  18.7.18; Ord. No. 2001-05, 4-4-2001) 
Sec. 18-29. - Hours of operation. 
    No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain open at any time between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 1:00 p.m. 
(Prior Code,  18.7.19; Ord. No. 2001-05, 4-4-2001) 
Secs. 18-30-18-46. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 18-47. - Required; application. 
(a)  It is a violation of this article for any person to operate a sexually oriented business without a valid sexually oriented business license issued by the town pursuant to this article. 
(b)  An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the town. 
(c)  All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this article. The application may request and the applicant shall provide such information (including fingerprints) as to enable the town to determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in this article. 
(d)  If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, the person must sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a 20 percent or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under this article and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
(e)  The completed application for a sexually oriented business license shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the following documents: 
(1)  If the applicant is: 
a.  An individual, the individual shall state his legal name and any aliases and submit proof that he is 18 years of age; 
b.  A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name, and the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement, if any; 
c.  A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of its state of incorporation, the names and capacity of all officers, directors and principal stockholders, and the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service of process. 
(2)  If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant, he must: 
a.  State the sexually oriented business's fictitious name; and 
b.  Submit the required registration documents. 
(3)  Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has been convicted of a specified criminal activity, and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved, the date, place, and jurisdiction of each. 
(4)  Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has had a previous license under this article or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another municipality or governmental agency denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is licensed under this article whose license has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation. 
(5)  Whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant holds any other licenses under this article or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another town or county and, if so, the names and locations of such other licensed businesses. 
(6)  The single classification of license for which the applicant is filing. 
(7)  The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a legal description of the property, street address, and telephone number, if any. 
(8)  The applicant's mailing address and residential address. 
(9)  A recent photograph of the applicant. 
(10)  The applicant's driver's license number, Social Security number, and/or his state or federally issued tax identification number. 
(11)  A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. 
(12)  A current certified plot plan prepared within 30 days prior to application by a registered land surveyor depicting the property lines and the structures containing any existing sexually oriented businesses within 750 feet of the property to be certified; the property lines of any established religious institution/synagogue, school, or public park or recreation area within 750 feet of the property to be certified. For purposes of this subsection, a use shall be considered existing or established if it is in existence at the time an application is submitted. Applications made to the town planning board and/or zoning board of adjustment may satisfy this requirement. For further requirements, see chapter 32. 
(13)  If an applicant wishes to operate a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which shall exhibit on the premises, in a viewing room or booth of less than 150 square feet of floor space, films, videocassettes, other video reproductions, or live entertainment which depict specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, then the applicant shall comply with the application requirements set forth in section 18-24. 
(Prior Code,  18.7.4; Ord. No. 2001-05, 4-4-2001) 
Sec. 18-48. - Issuance. 
(a)  A license granted pursuant to this division shall be subject to annual renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by the town that the applicant has not been convicted of any specified criminal activity or committed any act during the existence of the previous license which would be grounds to deny the initial license application. The renewal of the license shall be subject to the payment of the fee as set forth in section 18-49. 
(b)  Within 65 days after receipt of a completed sexually oriented business application, the town shall approve or deny the issuance of a license to an applicant. The town shall approve the issuance of a license to an applicant unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that one or more of the following findings is true: 
(1)  An applicant is under 18 years of age. 
(2)  An applicant or a person with whom applicant is residing is overdue in payment to the town of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon him in relation to any business. 
(3)  An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(4)  An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has been denied a license by the town to operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding 12 months or whose license to operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding 12 months. 
(5)  An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has been convicted of a specified criminal activity. 
(6)  The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not been approved by the planning and zoning boards, health department, fire department, and the building official as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. 
(7)  The license fee required by this division has not been paid. 
(8)  An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this article. 
(c)  The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address of the sexually oriented business and the classification for which the license is issued pursuant to section 18-21. All licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that they may be easily read at any time. 
(d)  The health officer, fire department, and the building inspector shall complete their certification that the premises is in compliance or not in compliance within 30 days of receipt of the application by the town. 
(e)  A sexually oriented business license shall issue for only one classification as found in section 18-21. 
(Prior Code,  18.7.5; Ord. No. 2001-05, 4-4-2001) 
Sec. 18-49. - Fees. 
(a)  Every application for a sexually oriented business license (whether for a new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be accompanied by a $1,000.00 nonrefundable application and investigation fee to cover costs incurred by the town. 
(b)  In addition to the application and investigation fee required in subsection (a) of this section, every sexually oriented business that is granted a license (new or renewal) shall pay to the town an annual nonrefundable license fee of $250.00 within 30 days of license issuance or renewal. 
(c)  All license applications and fees shall be submitted to the town administrator. 
(Prior Code,  18.7.6; Ord. No. 2001-05, 4-4-2001) 
Sec. 18-50. - Inspection. 
(a)  An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the police department, health department, fire department, zoning and code enforcement department, or other town departments or agencies to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(b)  A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or employee commits a violation if he refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is open for business. 
(Prior Code,  18.7.27; Ord. No. 2001-05, 4-4-2001) 
Sec. 18-51. - Expiration. 
(a)  Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 18-47. Application for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration date, and when made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected. 
(b)  When the town denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the town finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the denial became final. 
(Prior Code,  18.7.8; Ord. No. 2001-05, 4-4-2001) 
Sec. 18-52. - Suspension. 
    The town shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 days if it determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has: 
(1)  Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this article; 
(2)  Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this article. 
(Prior Code,  18.7.9; Ord. No. 2001-05, 4-4-2001) 
Sec. 18-53. - Revocation. 
(a)  The town shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in section 18-52 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12 months. 
(b)  The town shall revoke a license if it determines that: 
(1)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process; 
(2)  A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises; 
(3)  A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises; 
(4)  A licensee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended; 
(5)  Except in the case of an adult motel, a licensee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sex act to occur in or on the licensed premises; or 
(6)  A licensee is delinquent in payment to the town or state for any taxes or fees past due. 
(c)  When the town revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year, and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one year from the date the revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the town finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. 
(d)  After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an application, or suspension or revocation of any license, the applicant or licensee may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action in any court of competent jurisdiction. The administrative action shall be promptly reviewed by the court. 
(Prior Code,  18.7.10; Ord. No. 2001-05, 4-4-2001) 
Sec. 18-54. - Transfer. 
    A licensee shall not transfer his license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application. 
(Prior Code,  18.7.11; Ord. No. 2001-05, 4-4-2001) 
Secs. 18-55-18-81. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - JUNKYARDS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Junk and scrap metal dealers, RSA 322; motor vehicle salvage facilities and crushers, RSA 149-M:59 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-82. - General operating requirements. 
    The following general operating requirements shall apply to all dealers in junk or materials to be salvaged or recycled licensed in accordance with the provisions of this article: 
(1)  The license issued pursuant to this article shall be plainly displayed on the business premises. 
(2)  The junkyard, salvage yard or recycling center, together with things kept therein, shall at all times be maintained in a sanitary condition. 
(3)  No space not covered by the license shall be used in the licensed business. The space shall be indicated by granite monuments. 
(4)  No water shall be allowed to stand in any place on the premises in such a manner as to afford a breeding place for mosquitoes. 
(5)  Junk or materials to be salvaged or recycled shall not be stored closer to the high-water mark of any body or watercourse than is permitted by the zoning regulations of chapter 32, which shall be no closer than 250 feet of the high-water mark. 
(6)  No garbage or other waste liable to give off a foul odor or attract vermin shall be kept on the premises, nor shall any refuse of any kind be kept on the premises, unless such refuse is junk or materials to be salvaged or recycled and is in use in the licensed business. 
(7)  No junk or materials to be salvaged or recycled shall be allowed to rest upon or protrude over any public street, walkway, or curb or become scattered or blown off the business premises. 
(8)  Junk or materials to be salvaged or recycled shall be stored in such a manner as to comply with all provisions of this article. 
(9)  No combustible materials of any kind not necessary or beneficial to the licensed business shall be kept on the premises nor shall the premises be allowed to become a fire hazard. 
(10)  Gasoline, oils and other toxic or hazardous fluids shall be immediately removed from any scrapped engines or vehicles on the premises. 
(11)  No junk or other materials shall be burned on the premises. 
(12)  Except when and where permitted otherwise by the zoning board of adjustment and the licensing board, all areas on the premises where junk or materials to be salvaged or recycled are kept (other than indoors) shall be enclosed, excluding at entrances and exits, with a solid, vertical wall or fence of a minimum height of eight feet measured from ground level. Entrances and exits shall not be wider or more numerous than reasonably necessary for the conduct of the licensed business. 
(13)  The licensee shall permit inspection of the business premises by any member or representative of the licensing board at any reasonable time, to include the zoning administrator. 
(14)  A junkyard, salvage yard or recycling center shall not be allowed to become a nuisance, nor shall any junkyard, salvage yard or recycling center be operated in such a manner as to become injurious to the health, safety, or welfare of the community or of any residents close by. 
(15)  All licensees shall participate and comply with the New Hampshire Green Yards Environmental Guidance Manual for Motor Vehicle Recycling Yards. 
(16)  All licensees shall participate and comply with the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services Motor Vehicle Salvage Yard Environmental Compliance Manual and Self Audit Checklist. 
(17)  All license applications shall be submitted with a compliance certification statement. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05,  8.01, 6-20-2007) 
Secs. 18-83-18-107. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 18-108. - Required. 
    A person shall not, without a license, be a dealer in junk or materials to be salvaged or recycled, as defined by RSA 236 and RSA 322, or keep a shop for the purchase, sale or barter thereof; nor shall a person without a license store, accumulate, salvage, recycle or handle junk or materials, as defined by RSA 236 and RSA 322, for the purpose of sale or barter, or as a bailee for others; nor shall a person having a license carry on the business or store, accumulate, salvage, recycle or handle junk or materials, as defined in RSA 236 and RSA 322, at any other place than at the approved location specified in his license, nor shall any person, after notice that his license has been revoked, carry on such business. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05,  8.01, 6-20-2007) 
Sec. 18-109. - Application. 
    Application for a license and for a certificate of approved location shall be made in writing to the licensing board upon forms available at the office of building safety and shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the individual or organization applying for the license and certificate; 
(2)  If the applicant is not an individual, the name and address of the individual having general charge of the proposed junkyard, salvage yard or recycling center; 
(3)  A description of the land included with the junkyard, salvage yard or recycling center by reference to so-called permanent boundary markers; 
(4)  A letter certifying that the zoning board of adjustment has granted a special exception or other approval allowing the operation of a junkyard, salvage yard or recycling center at the proposed location; 
(5)  A certificate signed by the applicant attesting that all provisions of state law have been or will be complied with before the location is used as a junkyard, salvage yard or recycling center; 
(6)  Proof of legal ownership or right to use the property for the license period. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05,  8.01, 6-20-2007) 
Sec. 18-110. - Hearing; issuance. 
(a)  A hearing on the application shall be held not less than two weeks nor more than four weeks from the date of the receipt of the application. Notice of the hearing shall be given to the applicant by mail, postage prepaid, to the address given in the application and the notice shall be published once in a newspaper having a circulation within the town, which publication shall be not less than seven days before the date of the hearing 
(b)  At the time and place set forth for the hearing, the licensing board shall hear the applicant and all other persons wishing to be heard on the application for a license to operate, establish or maintain a junkyard, salvage yard or recycling center. In passing upon the application, the licensing board shall take into account the applicant's ability to comply with the fencing requirement or other reasonable regulations concerning the proposed junkyard, salvage yard or recycling center, to any record of convictions of any type of larceny or receiving of stolen goods, and to any other matter within the purpose of this article. 
(c)  At the time and place set for the hearing, the licensing board shall hear the applicant and all other persons wishing to be heard on the application for certificate of approval for the location of the junkyard, salvage yard or recycling center. In passing upon the application, the licensing board shall take into account the nature and development of surrounding property (such as the proximity of churches, schools, hospitals, public buildings, and other places of public gathering), and whether or not the use of the proposed location can be reasonably prevented from affecting the public health, safety, or morals by reason of offensive or unhealthy odors, or of other causes. No land shall be used in a manner that is disorderly, unsightly, noxious, offensive, or detrimental to the public or the owners or occupants of adjacent property, or prejudicial to the general welfare of the community. 
(d)  At the hearing regarding the location of the junkyard, salvage yard or recycling center, the licensing board may also take into account the clean, wholesome and attractive environment which has been declared to be of vital importance to the continued stability in development of the tourist and recreation industry of the state and the general welfare of its citizens by considering whether or not the use of this location can be reasonably prevented from having an unfavorable effect thereon. In this connection, the licensing board may consider collectively the type of road serving the junkyard, salvage yard or recycling center or from which the junkyard, salvage yard or recycling center may be seen, the natural or artificial barriers protecting the junkyard, salvage yard or recycling center from view, the proximity of the proposed junkyard, salvage yard or recycling center to established tourist and recreation areas or main access routes thereto, as well as the reasonable availability of other suitable sites for the junkyard, salvage yard or recycling center. Any building and/or structure damaged by fire, wind or other causes shall be repaired or completely removed within one year. Any removal shall include removal of all debris, and the filling of all excavations to ground level. 
(e)  No more than one disabled or unregistered motor vehicle shall be visible from any side of the property, exclusive of junkyards and auto repair facilities. Said disabled or unregistered vehicles shall be repaired or properly stored away from public view within 12 months. All buildings, structures and uses shall comply in all respects with state law including the regulations of the state departments of safety, health and human services, and environmental services. Any nonconforming use that is discontinued or abandoned for a period of one year or more cannot be resumed. 
(f)  After the hearing, the licensing board shall, within two weeks, make a finding as to whether or not the application shall be granted, giving notice of their finding to the applicant by mail, postage prepaid to the address given on the application. If approved, the license, including the certificate of approved location, shall be forthwith issued to remain in effect until the following April 1. Approval is personal to the applicant and is not assignable. Licenses shall be renewed thereafter upon payment of the annual license fee without a hearing if all provisions of this article are complied with during the license period, if the junkyard, salvage yard or recycling center does not become a public nuisance under the common law, and if the applicant is not convicted of any type of larceny or of receiving stolen goods. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05,  8.01, 6-20-2007) 
Sec. 18-111. - Fee. 
    The license fee shall be $250.00, payable yearly on July 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05,  8.01, 6-20-2007) 
Sec. 18-112. - Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by an order of the licensing board granting, denying, renewing or revoking a license for a proposed or existing junkyard, salvage yard or recycling center may, within ten days after issuance of such order, file a written request for hearing before the town council. The town council shall give notice of and hold a public hearing on this request not less than 45 days after the service of the notice requesting the hearing. The town council shall also give notice of the hearing to other persons directly interested in the order in question. At such hearing, the town council shall determine whether the granting, denial, renewal, or revocation of the license was in accordance with the provisions of the article, and shall issue a written finding of fact, conclusion of law, and an order to carry out its finding and conclusions. These findings of fact, conclusions of law, and order shall be filed with the town clerk and served by the town council upon all parties appearing or represented at said hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2007-05,  8.01, 6-20-2007) 
Secs. 18-113-18-121. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RAFFLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2014/2015-01,  2, adopted May 20, 2015, set out provisions intended for use as Art. III. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated, the provisions have been redesignated as Art. IV, at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 18-122. - Purpose: Unlawful acts. 
    Pursuant to the terms of RSA 287-A, the purpose of this chapter is to enact provisions for the permitting and regulations of raffles. 
(Ord. No. 2014/2015-04,  2, 5-20-2015) 
Sec. 18-123. - Permits required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person conducting a raffle within the Town of Newmarket without first obtaining a permit. 
(Ord. No. 2014/2015-04,  2, 5-20-2015) 
Sec. 18-124. - Definitions. 
    Raffle means a lottery in which each participant buys a ticket for an article or articles put up as a prize with the winner being determined by a random drawing. 
    Charitable organization means: 
(1)  Any person or entity that is that is determined by the Internal Revenue Service to be a tax exempt organization pursuant to section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, as that section now exists or may hereafter be amended; or 
(2)  Any other person or entity that is or holds itself out to be established, in whole or in part, for any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, educational, humane, scientific, public health, environmental conservation, civic, social, sporting, recreational, or other charitable purpose which has been in existence for at least two years, or political committee or political party which has been in existence for at least two years, or any person who in any manner employs a charitable appeal as the basis of any solicitation or an appeal that suggests that there is a charitable purpose to any solicitation. "Charitable organization" is not limited to those organizations to which contributions are tax deductible under section 170 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
    50/50 raffle means a raffle conducted by a charitable organization whereby moneys collected by sale of raffle tickets are split evenly between the prize winner or winners and the charitable organization after the raffle drawing. 
(Ord. No. 2014/2015-04,  2, 5-20-2015) 
Sec. 18-125. - Application. 
    The application for a raffle permit shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name of the organization and contact information of a representative of the organization applying for the permit including name, daytime telephone, address, and electronic mail address. 
(2)  The beginning and end date(s) of the sale of tickets. 
(3)  The date(s) and place of the drawing. 
(3)  The prize(s) to be awarded. 
(4)  Cost of ticket. 
(5)  Other information deemed necessary by either the town administrator or chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 2014/2015-04,  2, 5-20-2015) 
Sec. 18-126. - Approval of permit. 
(a)  The town administrator (or their designee) and the chief of police (or their designee) must approve any permit prior to the sale of tickets. 
(b)  A copy of the permit will be presented to the applicant, placed on file with the police department and the town clerk-tax collector. 
(c)  If the charitable organization wishes to conduct more than one raffle, the permit may be extended for no more than one year expiring on June 30. 
(d)  Permits are non-transferable. 
(Ord. No. 2014/2015-04,  2, 5-20-2015) 
Sec. 18-127. - Conduct of raffle. 
(a)  Raffle tickets shall be sold only to persons 16 years of age or over. 
(b)  Only members of the organization or an individual authorized by the organization shall sell tickets. 
(c)  No one shall receive financial remuneration from the sale tickets. 
(d)  All raffle tickets shall comply with the provisions of RSA 287-A:3, and shall be printed with the name of the charitable organization, the date and place of the drawing, the prize or prizes to be awarded and the amount of the donation (price of ticket.) 
(1)  This is not required of 50/50 raffle tickets. 
(Ord. No. 2014/2015-04,  2, 5-20-2015) 
Sec. 18-128. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  The town may revoke a permit issued pursuant to this chapter at any time due to a violation of this ordinance or state law if it is discovered that any false information was knowingly submitted as part of the application process. 
(b)  Any person, firm or organization violating any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation and be subject of a fine of up to $1,000.00 and criminal prosecution. 
(Ord. No. 2014/2015-04,  2, 5-20-2015) 
Chapter 20 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 20-1. - Police attendance at public meetings or functions. 
(a)  Application. Any person desiring to conduct a public dance, circus or carnival shall make application for police attendance at that function. 
(b)  Review of applications. The police chief shall examine applications for police attendance at public dances, circuses and carnivals and determine if such attendance is necessary. If the chief of police decides police attendance is necessary, he shall detail one or more police officers to attend the event, whose services shall be paid for by the applicant. 
(c)  Criteria for police detail. The police chief shall have the authority to assign police details to attend any public meetings or functions which he determines may potentially: 
(1)  Involve traffic-related problems; 
(2)  Lead to a public disturbance or public nuisance; or 
(3)  Endanger public health, safety or welfare. 
(d)  Charges for services. The applicant or sponsor of any public meeting or function shall be charged for the services of any police officers that may be detailed or assigned to that meeting or function. 
(e)  Abatement of charges for services. The police chief may recommend to the town administrator that the charges authorized by this section for the services of a police officer be abated when in his judgment such authorization does not conflict with an existing local ordinance or policy. 
(Prior Code,  17.6.1-17.6.5; Ord. No. 2004-10, 4-28-2004) 
Sec. 20-2. - Public peace. 
    No person shall knowingly create a condition which is physically offensive or hazardous to that person or another in a public place by any act which serves no legitimate purpose. Physically offensive conduct specifically includes the following: 
(1)  Urinating or defecating in a public place. 
(2)  A male exposing his genitals or buttocks or a female exposing her breasts, buttocks or genitals in a public place. 
(Prior Code,  14.6.1; Ord. No. 2003-13, 8-20-2003) 
Sec. 20-3. - Benches. 
(a)  Unlawful act. No person shall sit or stand upon the back or stand upon the seat of any municipally-owned bench located on any sidewalk or within a public park. 
(b)  Violations and penalties. Any person found in violation of this section may be ordered removed by any police officer. Refusal to comply with an order by a police officer under these provisions shall be considered a violation of this section. 
(Prior Code,  14.7.1, 14.7.2; Ord. No. 2003-14, 8-20-2003) 
Sec. 20-4. - Truancy. 
(a)  Criteria for consideration. Students required to attend school and who are scheduled for school that are absent without parent/guardian permission and who fail to provide the school administration with an acceptable excuse for such absence shall be considered truant. 
(b)  Students. Any child between the ages of 12 and 16 years, who is not officially excused from school attendance by a parent or guardian and who fails to attend his designated school as required by law during regular school hours, has committed a violation. Prior to being charged with a violation under this section, the police department shall provide a written warning/notice to the child and to the parent or guardian of said child. 
(c)  Parents/guardians. Any parent or guardian who knowingly fails to have his child between the ages of 12 and 16 years attend his designated school as required by law during regular school hours has committed a violation. This section shall not apply to any parent or guardian who has officially excused his child due to illness or other legitimate reason. Prior to being charged with a violation under this section, the police department shall provide a written warning/notice to said parent or guardian. 
(d)  Penalties. Any person found violating any provisions of this section shall, upon conviction by a court of jurisdiction, be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  First offense. Pay a fine no greater than $500.00, all of which shall be suspended except for $25.00 upon completion of 60 consecutive truancy-free days. 
(2)  Second offense. Pay a fine no greater than $1,000.00, all of which shall be suspended except for $100.00 upon completion of 60 consecutive truancy-free days. As used in this section, the term "second offense" means a second violation committed within the same school year. 
(3)  Subsequent offense. Pay a fine no greater than $1,000.00 and be sentenced to whatever action the court deems necessary. As used in this section, the term "subsequent offense" means three or more violations committed within the same school year. 
(e)  Enforcement. The police department is authorized to take appropriate enforcement action consistent with state law and shall deliver any truant to his designated school. A police officer who finds probable cause that any violation of this section has been committed may issue a summons to any person found in violation in lieu of arrest. 
(Prior Code,  17.4.1-17.4.5; Ord. No. 2000-06, 11-1-2000) 
State Law reference- School attendance, RSA 193. 
Sec. 20-5. - Loitering in public ways and buildings; riding skateboards. 
(a)  No person shall sit or stand and loiter in or about any street, sidewalk, municipal land, or building or any other public place in the town, except the owners or tenants thereof, after having been requested by any owner, tenant or custodian thereof or by any police officer to depart therefrom. This shall not apply to persons who have a legitimate purpose for sitting or standing in such public places; or persons who are attending an approved public function; or persons who have authorization to use public property from the town council, town administrator or other designated town official. 
(b)  No person shall block or cause to be blocked any public sidewalk, street, or other public way nor shall any group of persons assemble in such a manner as to impede or block the orderly progress of pedestrian or vehicle traffic within the town. 
(c)  No person shall sit, stand or loiter in or about any public park within the town when such person is requested by any police officer to depart therefrom. Persons under the age of 17 years may be required to be accompanied by a parent or guardian if deemed necessary by a police officer. 
(d)  No person shall sit, stand or loiter in or about any municipally-owned or municipally-maintained land, park, building or parking lot between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. unless authorized by the town council, town administrator or other designated town official to do so. This section does not supersede other more restrictive hours which may be posted by proper authority; or allow any person to loiter about any municipally-owned property or building when said property or building is closed or prohibits access by other means. 
(e)  No person shall sit, stand or loiter in or about the town police station, otherwise known as the John Andrew Gordon Memorial Building, so as to interfere with any emergency operations or essential functions of police personnel. Any person found to be disrupting or obstructing any police personnel engaged in official duties shall be in violation of this section. 
(f)  No person shall ride or use any skateboard on any sidewalk or within any municipally-owned land, park, building or parking lot within the town so as to interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic on such land, park, building or parking lot. No person shall ride or use any skateboard on any parking lot which is private property when such property is generally maintained for commercial and public use unless such person has the expressed approval from the owner or authorized person of such property to use the parking lot for skateboarding purposes. Any person who rides or uses any skateboard on any sidewalk or within any municipally-owned land, park, building or parking lot within the town shall yield a reasonable amount of space to any pedestrian or vehicular traffic and shall terminate skateboarding, if necessary, in order for pedestrian or vehicular traffic to pass. 
(g)  Any person found violating this section shall be guilty of a violation and may be fined up to $500.00 if an adult. A minor found violating any provision of this section may be processed in accordance with state juvenile laws. Any skateboard used in violation of subsection (f) of this section may be confiscated by the police department and held until returned to its lawful owner, or returned to a parent or guardian if the violation is committed by a minor. 
(Ord. No. 97-02,  1.0-7.0, 7-2-1997) 
Sec. 20-6. - Noise. 
(a)  Declaration. 
(1)  It is found and declared that the allowing, making or creation of loud, unnecessary, unreasonable or unusual noises within the limits of the town are a detriment to the public comfort, repose, health, peace, safety, convenience, welfare and prosperity of the residents of the town; and 
(2)  The necessity and public interest for the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted is a matter of legislative determination and public policy, and it is further declared that the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted are in pursuance of and for the purpose of comfort, repose, health, peace, safety, convenience, welfare and prosperity of the inhabitants within the town. 
(b)  Unlawful activities. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make, create, cause, allow or continue to be made any loud, unnecessary, unreasonable or unusual noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, safety, convenience, welfare or prosperity of any reasonable person within the town. 
(c)  Misuse of power. Loud, unnecessary, unreasonable and unusual noises shall include but not be limited to any noise caused by any one or more of the following actions of the operator of a motor vehicle operated within the limits of the town: 
(1)  Misuse of power exceeding tire traction limits in acceleration, sometimes referred to as "laying down rubber" or "peeling rubber." 
(2)  Misuse of braking power exceeding tire traction limits in deceleration where there is no emergency. 
(3)  Rapid acceleration by means of quick upshifting of transmission gears with either a clutch and manual transmission or automatic transmission. 
(4)  Rapid deceleration by means of quick downshifting of transmission gears with either a clutch and manual transmission or automatic transmission. 
(5)  Racing of an engine by manipulation of the accelerator, gas pedal, carburetor or gear selection whether the vehicle is in motion or stationary. 
(6)  The blowing of any horn except as a warning signal or other legitimate purpose whether the vehicle is in motion or stationary. 
(7)  The amplification of any vehicle radio, cassette player, CD player or similar music generating device in which pedestrian or vehicle traffic may be disturbed or distracted; or any amplification of any vehicle radio, cassette player, CD player or similar music generating device in which the driver or occupant to any vehicle may be disturbed or distracted from the obedience to emergency warning signals or other rules of the road as established by the state motor vehicle code. This shall include any factory installed or modified radio or accessory thereof, any portable radios or accessory thereof, any other type of music device or accessory thereof and any vehicle speaker or portable speaker generally utilized for listening to music sounds. 
(8)  Any noise generated by the unlawful modification of motor vehicle equipment; or any noise generated by the unlawful defect of motor vehicle equipment as defined by the state motor vehicle code. 
(d)  Loud parties or gatherings. Any person who is the owner, or a tenant, or a resident, or otherwise in control of any house, apartment, condominium unit, structure or other property located within the town, shall be responsible and liable for any loud, unnecessary, unreasonable or unusual noises made by, created by or caused by one or more persons gathered on said property which annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the public comfort, repose, health, peace, safety, convenience, welfare or prosperity of any reasonable person within the town. Further, any person who is the owner, tenant, resident or otherwise in control of any house, apartment, condominium unit, structure or other property located within the town is responsible for any loud, unnecessary, unreasonable or unusual noises if he allows any gathering of one or more persons to continue to make loud, unnecessary, unreasonable or unusual noises upon such property after having been advised of the disturbing affects such noise is having on any person within the town and the said noise then continues to disturb the public comfort, repose, health, peace, safety, convenience, welfare or prosperity of any person within the town. This subsection shall also apply to any person attending such party or gathering who violates any other provision of this section or who refuses to terminate the loud, unnecessary, unreasonable or unusual noise upon a request by a police officer to do so; or any person attending such party or gathering who refuses to disperse from a public place upon a request by a police officer to do so. 
(e)  Disturbance of peace. It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb the public comfort, repose, health, peace, safety, convenience, welfare or prosperity of any reasonable person within the town by making, creating, causing, allowing or continuing any loud, unnecessary, unreasonable or unusual noises. This shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The operation of any electronic or battery-powered device such as a radio, television, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, or any other machine or device that may be used for the purpose of producing or reproducing sound-amplifying noises. 
(2)  Noises caused by yelling, screaming, shouting or hollering when there is no legitimate purpose for such noises. 
(f)  Operation of equipment or machinery. It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb the public comfort, repose, health, peace, safety, convenience, welfare or prosperity of any reasonable person within the town by making, creating, causing, allowing or continuing any loud, unnecessary, unreasonable or unusual noises by operating or causing the operation of equipment or machinery during certain time periods. 
(1)  Power tools. No person shall operate or cause the operation of any mechanically-powered saw, sander, grinder, drill, lawnmower or similar device, with the exception of snow-clearing equipment, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. if such noise generated by the use of such equipment or machinery is likely to annoy, disturb, injure or endanger the comfort, repose, health, peace, safety, convenience, welfare or prosperity of any other person. 
(2)  Construction equipment. No person shall operate or cause the operation of any type of construction vehicle and leave it running and stationary within the town between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. if such noise generated by the use of such equipment is likely to annoy, disturb, injure or endanger the comfort, repose, health, peace, safety, convenience, welfare or prosperity of any person. This subsection shall also apply to construction activities such as hammering, earth-moving and the moving of construction vehicles at project sites during said time periods. 
(3)  Loading and unloading. No person shall load or unload or cause the loading or unloading of boxes, crates, containers, building materials, trash cans, dumpsters or similar objects between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. if the noise generated by such activity is likely to annoy, disturb, injure or endanger the comfort, repose, health, peace, safety, convenience, welfare or prosperity of any person. 
(4)  Compressors. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any compressor or mobile refrigeration unit or similar type of equipment or machinery between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. if the noise generated by such equipment or machinery is likely to annoy, disturb, injure or endanger the comfort, repose, health, peace, safety, convenience, welfare or prosperity of any person. This subsection shall apply to any stationary tractor-trailer unit that is required to operate due to its load or cargo. 
(g)  Exceptions. The provisions of subsections (e) and (f) of this section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Any person who is making, creating, causing, allowing or continuing any noise generated by any equipment, machinery or amplifying device when such person is engaged in a parade, carnival, circus, festival, fireworks display or similar public function approved by the town council or town administrator. 
(2)  Noises resulting from activities of a temporary duration permitted by law and for which a license or permit therefor has been granted by the town, if required. 
(3)  Any warning signals or devices intended to inform other persons of an emergency; or critical status of a building or facility provided such signal or device is reasonably terminated after it has accomplished its purpose. 
(4)  Any person operating an emergency vehicle while responding to an emergency call or while actively engaged in an emergency situation. 
(5)  Noises resulting from emergency work or required maintenance work performed by authorized personnel employed by or requested by the town. 
(6)  Bells or chimes while being used for religious purposes or in conjunction with religious services and those bells and chimes used for a similar legitimate purpose. However, if such bells or chimes are used for an extended and unreasonable period of time between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., such exception does not apply. 
(7)  Snow-clearing equipment, including, but not limited to, snowblowers and snowplowing equipment. 
(Ord. No. 99-04,  1.0-7.0, 12-1-1999) 
Sec. 20-7. - Sale of rolling papers to minors. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Minor means any person who is under the age of 18 years. 
    Rolling papers means any paper product that is designed to encase or wrap tobacco or similar products and marketed for the purpose of smoking or manufacturing hand-rolled cigarettes. 
(b)  Sales and possession. 
(1)  No person or place of business shall sell, give or furnish rolling papers to minors. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any minor to possess or attempt to purchase rolling papers. 
(Prior Code,  14.3.1, 14.3.2; Ord. No. 2003-10, 8-20-2003) 
Sec. 20-8. - Curbside pickup of domestic or household waste and recyclables. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  Purpose and intent. The proper management of waste is in the public welfare of the community. Poorly managed trash, rubbish and waste can attract rodents, diminish aesthetic qualities, become a public nuisance, and adversely affect the public, health, safety, and welfare. 
(2)  Limitations. The town shall only pick-up and dispose of those household and domestic solid waste materials and recyclables generated within the geographic boundaries of the town. Disposal of such waste shall be at a site designated and authorized by the town council. 
(3)  Authority to establish rules and regulations. The town council shall be solely authorized and responsible for establishing, amending, and revising such rules, regulations and procedures as are necessary for the implementation and execution of the purpose and intent of this section and the effective operation of the curbside pickup and recyclables program, unless said authority has otherwise been delegated to an agent of the town council. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Domestic or household waste. Solid waste comprised of garbage and rubbish normally associated with residential household use and originating in residential households. 
(2)  Commercial waste. All solid waste emanating from business establishments including, but not limited to, solid waste originating in stores, markets, office buildings, industrial complexes, restaurants, theaters, landscapes, automotive service centers, service businesses, and shopping centers. 
(3)  Waste. All domestic, household, and commercial waste, as those terms are defined herein. 
(4)  Recyclables. Materials to be collected as part of the town's recycling program shall be defined by the health officer and approved by the town council. 
(5)  Official plastic bags. Specially marked trash bags as made available by the town for purchase by Newmarket residents. Only such bags shall be utilized to dispose of all permitted waste (excluding recyclables) at curbside. 
(6)  Blue box. Receptacles provided by the town residents to be used for the placement of recyclables within the public right-of-way. The town shall provide one blue box to each residence. If additional blue boxes are requested, they may be purchased from the town at cost. Blue boxes shall constitute the property of the town. 
(c)  Prohibited collection materials. 
    The following materials shall not be placed in the official plastic bags, nor will such materials be picked up as recyclables: 
Acids and alkalis Animal carcasses, manure and meats Container with liquid contents Tires Flammable liquids Mercury vapor lamps Pesticides Paints Solvents, oils and thinners Asbestos materials Mercury thermostats and switches Ammunition and explosives Medical/dental wastes Septage Textile waste Wood Nuclear related waste Roofing cement Hazardous waste as defined by state and federal agencies Chlorine cleaners, swimming pool disinfectants Bulky items, such as furniture, televisions, bicycles, bedsprings, washers, etc., as determined by the public works director Lawn cuttings, trees and shrub limbs, garden waste Any waste deemed to be inappropriate by the public works director  
(d)  General provisions. 
(1)  No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited any refuse or waste, upon the rights-of-way of accepted roadways within the town, except that refuse or waste which may be deposited for collection under this ordinance within the town right-of-way and confined within a closed official plastic bag or town issued blue box. 
(2)  Official plastic bags and town issued blue boxes shall be placed on the outside of the sidewalk and/or near as practicable to the street edge, no more than 12 hours prior to collection day. Persons placing official plastic bags and town issued blue boxes at the curbside more than 12 hours prior to collection day may be issued a summons for littering pursuant to RSA chapter 163-B. Empty blue boxes shall be removed from the public right-of-way no later than 6:00 p.m. on the day of collection. Waste, official plastic bags, town issued blue boxes, and other waste containers and recycling materials shall be screened from public view until no more than 12 hours prior to collection day. Screening shall be complete with no portion of the waste, official plastic bags, town issued blue boxes, and other waste containers and recycling materials visible from a public way. 
(3)  The town shall pickup no more than three, 33-gallon official plastic bags per address per pick-up. Residents shall only place household waste in official plastic bags. The town shall only pick up household waste contained in official plastic bags. All bags must be closed and tied. No bag shall have a gross weight of more than 30 pounds. Official plastic bags can be purchased at the town hall or at the local retail stores. The price of each official plastic bag will be set by the town council based upon collection and disposal costs. 
(4)  Recyclables. The town council, with the suggestion of the health officer, shall determine the household waste that shall constitute recyclables suitable for pick up by the town. The town shall inform residents of household waste that constitute recyclables and that will be accepted by the town. Recyclables will be picked up on the regular household waste pick-up days for each residential unit. If unauthorized materials are found in the blue boxes, either the entire contents of the blue box or the unauthorized material, at the contractor's option, may be left at curbside. 
(5)  All recyclables may be placed in a blue box at curbside next to any official plastic bag on the day of collection, for collection. 
(6)  Regular collections start at 7:00 a.m. each day, in each collection zone. 
(7)  There will be no return trips for pick-up service. 
(8)  Upon placement at the curbside of town issued blue boxes, all materials placed and contained in such blue boxes shall become town property and shall not be removed by any person, except by persons authorized by the town or the person(s) responsible for placing the recyclables in the blue box. 
(e)  Dumpster users. For those multi-family and commercial properties which have private trash removal, recyclables may be placed in a blue box container at the curbside. 
(f)  Commercial waste disposal permit. Pursuant to RSA 149-M:17, II(a), the town council hereby authorized the town administrator to establish bylaws for the registration of haulers of commercial waste who haul solid commercial waste generated and collected within the geographic boundaries of the town. Said registration shall be evidenced by a commercial waste disposal permit issued by the town. 
(g)  Penalty. 
(1)  The town, or its agent, reserves the right to refuse to collect garbage, rubbish, recyclables or other refuse which does not comply with the requirements of this section. 
(2)  Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of a violation and shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000.00 pursuant to RSA 147:1, RSA 625:9, V-a, and RSA 651:2, IV. Each day that a violation of this section exists shall constitute a separate violation. 
(3)  The health officer, chief of police and/or the director of public works, or their designees, are hereby authorized to order the removal of any materials deposited in violation of this ordinance, and any person who shall fail to comply with such order shall be responsible for reimbursing the town for any and all costs associated with said removal and subject to a fine as specified herein. 
(h)  Improper waste disposal; enforcement; penalty. 
(1)  Notwithstanding any provision of this ordinance to the contrary, waste not enclosed by an official plastic bag or deposited in a blue box shall be subjected to the following penalty/corrective action: 
a.  For an initial violation, the owner or resident shall be notified in writing of the violation and the town may, in its sole discretion, refuse to accept the waste. In the event that the town refused the waste, the owner or resident shall take corrective action(s), which shall include, but not limited to, removal of said waste from the rights-of-way or curb within six hours of receipt of said notice. 
b.  For a second violation, the town shall refuse to collect the waste and the owner or resident shall be notified that all the material not in the official plastic bag shall be removed within six hours or receipt of said notice. The owner or resident may place appropriate household waste in an official plastic bag and put said official plastic bag out for collection on the next scheduled collection day in full compliance with this section. 
c.  For the third and subsequent violations within a 12 month period, the owner or resident shall be notified of the violation, and the town shall assess an administrative penalty of $150.00 to the property owner or resident. The director of public works, who is hereby authorized by the town council, may inform the owner or resident that collection service shall be discontinued until such time as corrective actions are taken and until such time as the owner or resident pays said penalty assessment to the town. 
(Ord. No. 2015/2016-2, 1-20-2016) 
Chapter 22 - PARKS, RECREATION AND CONSERVATION AREAS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Public recreation and parks, RSA 35-B. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Leo Landroche Field rules. 
(a)  The Leo Landroche Field shall be closed to all individuals when there are no scheduled events at dusk. Town-sponsored events will be exempt from this curfew time. 
(b)  Should there be a scheduled event at the Leo Landroche Field and Park amenities, all participants shall vacate the property within one-half hour of the conclusion of such activity. 
(c)  The police department shall monitor the field and have the power to make an arrest of any individual who violates the regulations of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2008/09-01, 7-16-2008) 
Sec. 22-2. - Prohibited and allowed activities for the use of Pocket Park. 
    The following rules apply to the use of the town Pocket Park: 
(1)  No pets in the gardens; 
(2)  Do not leave children unattended; 
(3)  No smoking; 
(4)  No vandalism; 
(5)  Put recyclables in bins; 
(6)  No littering; 
(7)  Clean up after pets; 
(8)  Do not touch the electrical box; 
(9)  Do not climb on the rocks, trees, or tables; 
(10)  No disruptive noises; 
(11)  No riding bikes; 
(12)  Be respectful towards others; 
(13)  Do not leave personal possessions behind; 
(14)  Please leave the flowers for everyone to enjoy; 
(15)  Pick up after yourself. 
(Ord. No. 2009/2010-08, 6-16-2010) 
Secs. 22-3-22-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSERVATION PROPERTY 

Sec. 22-23. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to ensure that all conservation property owned by the town is maintained as a healthful and attractive outdoor environment for the public benefit. This article does not supersede article III of this chapter regarding rules and regulations governing the use of the Heron Point Sanctuary. 
(Prior Code,  12.2.1; Ord. No. 99-05, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 2004-07, 7-4-2004) 
Sec. 22-24. - Prohibited and allowed activities. 
(a)  Except for parking in designated areas, there shall be no parking or vehicular traffic, bicycles or skateboards on the properties, which shall be restricted to foot traffic only. 
(b)  There shall be no camping, campfires or overnight use of the property unless allowed by the conservation commission, as a whole, for civic groups (i.e., Boy Scouts and Girl Scouts). 
(c)  No removal, filling or other disturbances of the soil surface, nor changes in topography, surface or subsurface water systems, wetlands, or natural habit shall be allowed unless such activities: 
(1)  Are commonly necessary in the accomplishment of the forestry, conservation, or habitat management and are authorized by the conservation commission; 
(2)  Do not harm state or federally recognized rare or endangered species, such determination of harm to be based upon information from the state natural heritage inventory or the agency then recognized by the state as having responsibility for identification and/or conservation of such species; and 
(3)  Are not detrimental to the purpose of this article. 
(d)  There shall be no mining, quarrying, excavation or extraction of rocks, minerals, gravel, sand, topsoil or other similar materials on the property. No such rocks, minerals, gravel, sand, topsoil, or other similar materials shall be removed from the property. 
(e)  There shall be no dumping, injection, or burial of materials then known to be environmentally hazardous, including vehicle bodies or parts. 
(f)  There shall be hunting or trapping on the properties wherein hunting and trapping is allowed as prescribed per state fish and game regulations. 
(g)  No person shall engage in any disorderly conduct or disruptive behavior which creates a breach of the peace through unreasonable noises, derisive or offensive words, fighting or violent behavior, or other conduct which is likely to cause alarm or annoyance to another person of average sensibilities or legitimate concern to any duly authorized police officer. Any person found within a town-owned conservation area engaged in any type of disorderly or disruptive behavior may be ordered to leave by any duly authorized police officer. Any person found trespassing or engaging in any unlawful conduct is subject to arrest. 
(h)  No person shall litter within or cause any damage within any portion of town-owned conservation areas. In addition, no person shall be found smoking any kind of tobacco products or found to possess any quantity of alcoholic beverage within any town-owned conservation area. The responsible party must remove material of any type or quantity brought onto any town conservation area unless prior written permission by the conservation commission duly authorizes the items remaining. 
(i)  No person shall violate chapter 4, article II, regarding the regulation of dogs. This shall include but not be limited to section 4-29 (Removal of animal excrement required), which states: 
    Any person who owns or is responsible for an animal shall, if the animal defecates upon public property or private property, promptly clean up and dispose of the excrement. The excrement shall be disposed of in a lawful and sanitary manner. 
(j)  No person shall trespass within any town-owned conservation property from dusk to dawn unless authorized by the town council to do so. 
(Prior Code,  12.2.2; Ord. No. 99-05, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 2004-07, 7-4-2004; Ord. No. 2006-07, 11-1-2006) 
Sec. 22-25. - Activities by permit. 
(a)  Civic groups whose membership consists primarily of town residents may apply to the conservation commission for a permit to camp overnight on conservation land. The conservation commission is authorized to develop appropriate regulations and guidelines on the use of conservation land for overnight camping. 
(b)  A permit request for an overnight stay must be obtained from the town administrator's office and submitted to the conservation commission prior to the date requested and in time for the conservation commission's monthly meeting. The conservation commission meets the fourth Thursday of every month. 
(Prior Code,  12.2.3; Ord. No. 99-05, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 2004-07, 7-4-2004) 
Sec. 22-26. - Penalty. 
    Any person found violating section 22-24 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior Code,  12.2.4; Ord. No. 99-05, 1-5-2000; Ord. No. 2004-07, 7-4-2004) 
Secs. 22-27-22-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HERON POINT SANCTUARY 

Sec. 22-56. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to ensure that Heron Point Sanctuary is maintained as a healthful and attractive outdoor environment for the public's benefit. 
(Ord. No. 97-3,  1, 10-1-1997) 
Sec. 22-57. - Prohibited activities. 
(a)  Except for parking in designated areas, there shall be no parking or vehicular traffic, bicycles or skateboards on the property which shall be restricted to foot traffic only. 
(b)  There shall be no camping, campfires or overnight use of the property. 
(c)  No removal, filling or other disturbances of the soil surface, nor any changes in topography, surface or subsurface water systems, wetlands, or natural habitat shall be allowed unless such activities: 
(1)  Are commonly necessary in the accomplishment of the forestry, conservation, or habitat management uses of the property; 
(2)  Do not harm state or federally recognized rare or endangered species, such determination of harm to be based upon information from the state natural heritage inventory or the agency then recognized by the state as having responsibility for identification and/or conservation of such species; and 
(3)  Are not detrimental to the purposes of this article. 
(d)  There shall be no mining, quarrying, excavation or extraction of rocks, minerals, gravel, sand, top soil or other similar materials on the property. No such rocks, minerals, gravel, sand, topsoil, or other similar materials shall be removed from the property. 
(e)  There shall be no dumping, injection, or burial of materials then known to be environmentally hazardous, including vehicle bodies or parts. 
(f)  There shall be no hunting or trapping on the property. 
(g)  No person shall engage in any disorderly conduct or disruptive behavior which creates a breach of the peace through unreasonable noises, derisive or offensive words, fighting or violent behavior, or other conduct which is likely to cause alarm or annoyance to another person of average sensibilities or legitimate concern to any duly authorized police officer. Any person found within the area designated as the Heron Point Sanctuary engaged in any type of disorderly conduct or disruptive behavior may be ordered to leave by any duly authorized police officer. 
(h)  No person shall litter within or cause any damage within any portion of the area designated as the Heron Point Sanctuary. In addition, no person shall be found smoking any type of tobacco products or found to be possessing any quantity of alcoholic beverages within the area designated as the Heron Point Sanctuary. 
(i)  No person shall violate any section of chapter 4, article II, regarding the regulation of dogs. This shall include but not be limited to section 4-29 (Removal of animal excrement required) which states: 
    Any person who owns or is responsible for an animal shall, if the animal defecates upon public property or private property, promptly clean up and dispose of the excrement. The excrement shall be disposed of in a lawful and sanitary manner. 
(j)  No person shall trespass within the Heron Point Sanctuary from dusk to dawn unless authorized by the town council to do so. 
(Ord. No. 97-3,  2, 10-1-1997) 
Sec. 22-58. - Penalty. 
    Any person found violating section 22-57 shall be guilty of violation and may be fined up to $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 97-3,  3, 10-1-1997) 
Chapter 24 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Planning and zoning, RSA 672-678. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Zoning ordinance amendment procedures. 
    All amendments to the zoning ordinance shall be made in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  Submission to planning board . Other than changes to the zoning ordinance proposed by the planning board, all requests for amendments to the zoning ordinance, which shall be presented to the town council, shall be referred to the planning board for its consideration. The planning board shall submit its recommendations concerning such requests to the council within 90 days after the referral has been made by the town council. 
(2)  Planning board hearing. The planning board, in its sole discretion, may hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment before making its recommendation to the town council. 
(3)  Planning board initiative . The planning board may, upon its own initiative, from time to time, consider amendments to the zoning ordinance and submit recommendations thereon to the town council. 
(4)  Ordinance form . The recommendations of the planning board made pursuant to subsection (1) of this section, or any amendment proposed by the planning board, shall be submitted to the town administrator who shall be responsible for putting the amendment into proper ordinance form beginning with the words "The Town of Newmarket Ordains ...." Whenever possible, the town administrator shall set out in full the ordinance, sections or subsections to be repealed or amended, and shall indicate the matter to be omitted by enclosing it in brackets or by strike-out type, and shall indicate new matter by underscoring it or by italics. 
(5)  Agenda . The ordinance shall be placed on the agenda of the town council for first reading. 
(6)  First reading. If the town council votes to pass the language of the ordinance at first reading, it shall be scheduled for a public hearing before the council. If the council votes not to pass at first reading, the proposed amendments die. 
(7)  Notice. Notice shall be given for the time and place of the public hearing at least ten days before the hearing. The notice required under this section shall not include the day the notice is posted or published, or the day of the public hearing. Notice of each public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the town and shall be posted in at least two public places. 
(8)  Text of ordinance . The full text of the proposed amendment to the zoning ordinance need not be included in the notice if an adequate statement describing the proposal and designating a place where the proposal is on file for public inspection in stated in the notice. 
(9)  Revisions. After the public hearing, the town council may make editorial revisions and textual modifications resulting from the proceedings of that hearing, so long as the proposed amendment remains substantially the same as that which was advertised for the public hearing. 
(10)  Additional public hearing after revisions. An additional public hearing shall be held if the proposal is substantively altered by the town council after the public hearing. Subsequent public hearings shall be held at least 14 days after the prior public hearing and with ten days' notice which shall not include the date of posting and the date of the hearing. 
(11)  Recording of amendment. If passed by the town council, the ordinance amendment shall be recorded, authenticated, indexed, printed, and published in accordance with the provisions of the town Charter. 
(Ord. No. 2009/2010-03, 10-7-2009) 
Secs. 24-2-24-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Capital improvements program, RSA 674:5 et seq. 

Sec. 24-21. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide input to the town council pursuant to section 5.7(A) of the town Charter, by providing for the preparation a proposed capital improvements program. This input shall encompass major projects being currently undertaken or future projects to be undertaken with federal, state, county and other public funds along with all other project needs of department/division heads and other boards. The sole purpose and effect of the capital improvements program shall be to aid the town council and the budget committee in their consideration of the annual budget. 
(Prior Code,  2.10.1; Ord. No. 2004-06, 5-4-2004) 
Sec. 24-22. - Financial policies for management of debt and capital improvements. 
(a)  Borrowing funds. 
(1)  Long-term bonds or notes shall not be used to fund current maintenance and operational expenditures (RSA 33:3). 
(2)  Debt repayment plans, including lease-purchase agreements, will not exceed the expected useful life of the improvement financed. 
(3)  Tax and revenue anticipation notes will not be issued to fund the capital improvement plan. 
(4)  Bond anticipation notes, pursuant to RSA 33:7-a, will mature each year and shall be repaid completely within five years. 
(5)  Net indebtedness at any one time shall not exceed three percent of the assessed valuation of the town pursuant to RSA 33:4-a. The issuance of bonds to install a sewerage system, sewage treatment works and water works that was ordered by the division of water and supply and pollution control is not considered in the net of the town for the purpose of ascertaining its borrowing capacity (RSA 33:4-a, 33:5, 33-5a). 
(b)  Current operational expenses and revenues. 
(1)  The department heads, the town administrator and the town council, on a yearly basis, shall review current capital expenditures. 
(2)  The water and sewer rates shall be annually reviewed by the town council to ensure the revenues are sufficient to fund the debt service requirements. 
(c)  Use of other funds. 
(1)  Capital reserves shall be utilized to fund capital expenditures. This form of financing shall be used to help fund vehicles and major building improvements even when a vehicle will not be acquired for a number of years past the six years incorporated within the CIP program. 
(2)  Unless restricted by the grant, grant funds from state and federal sources will be utilized to the fullest extent to fund capital improvements. 
(3)  Pursuant to RSA 674:21,V(c) impact fees will be used solely for the capital improvements for which they were collected or to recoup the cost of capital improvements made in anticipation of the needs which the fee was collected to meet. 
(Prior Code,  2.10.2; Ord. No. 2004-06, 5-4-2004) 
Sec. 24-23. - Capital improvement plan criteria. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 5.7 of the town Charter, the capital improvement plan shall include: 
(1)  A clear summary of its contents. 
(2)  A list of all capital improvements including major replacements which are proposed to be undertaken during the next six fiscal years, including, but not limited to, equipment, sewer and water mains or facilities, roads, sidewalks, bicycle paths or lanes, public open spaces and recreation facilities, new police and/or fire stations, and other new public facilities and major items of equipment. 
(3)  A clarification of projects, according to the urgency and need for realization. 
(4)  Cost estimates, methods of financing and recommended time schedule for each such improvement. 
(5)  The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the facilities to be constructed or acquired. 
(6)  A continuation of the long-term financial planning projections already provided in the current capital improvements program to avoid unexpected increases in the municipal property tax rate. 
(7)  All studies that pertain to capital improvements done for the town in order to preserve that data for the future. This data can be revised from time to time as warranted. 
(b)  The capital improvement plan shall be based on a period of not less than six years and shall include reference to or be influenced by, where appropriate, the town master plan. 
(c)  The information in this section may be revised and extended each year with regard to capital improvements still pending or in process of construction or acquisition. 
(Prior Code,  2.10.3; Ord. No. 2004-06, 5-4-2004) 
Sec. 24-24. - Committee. 
(a)  The capital improvements plan committee shall consist of five members and two alternates appointed by the town council as follows: 
(1)  Regular members. 
a.  One town councilmember. 
b.  One planning board member. 
c.  One budget committee member. 
d.  Finance director. 
e.  Planner. 
(2)  Alternates. 
a.  One planning board member. 
b.  One budget committee member. 
(b)  The town council will ratify all appointments of each board. The appointments will be done on an annual basis. 
(c)  Meetings. The committee shall meet as necessary to elect a chairman and other officers as deemed necessary, and to set their agenda, as appropriate. 
(d)  Posting meetings. All meetings are to be posted by the town administrator's office and subject to RSA 91-A. 
(e)  Minutes of meetings. Minutes of approved meetings shall be given to the town administrator's office on a disk in Word format so it can be posted on the town's website. 
(Prior Code,  2.10.4-2.10.7; Ord. No. 2004-06, 5-4-2004) 
Sec. 24-25. - Submittal. 
    The capital improvement plan will be submitted to the town council by November 15. 
(Prior Code,  2.10.8; Ord. No. 2004-06, 5-4-2004) 
Chapter 26 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Weight limits over town roads. 
(a)  Posted roads. Unless specifically permitted by the written directive of the public works director, it shall be unlawful for any person, partnership or corporation to haul, transport or cause to be transported by vehicles with gross weight over six tons any material over Class V roads in the town from 12:01 a.m., March 5 of each year through 11:59 p.m., April 30 of each year, or as determined necessary by the public works director. The dates as determined by the public works director shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation and posted in at least two public places in the town. 
(b)  Applicability. This restriction shall not apply to emergency vehicles, fuel tankers delivering on the regulated roads, refuse collection vehicles collecting from regulated roads, public utility vehicles involved in emergency repair operations, town public works vehicles, or school buses operated by the school district. 
(Prior Code,  10.2.1, 10.2.2; Ord. No. 2001-02, 2-21-2001) 
Sec. 26-2. - Penalty. 
    In addition to the penalties set forth in section 1-7, any person, corporation or user who violates this chapter shall be liable to the town for all damages incurred to said highway caused by such violation. 
(Prior Code,  10.2.3; Ord. No. 2001-02, 2-21-2001) 
Secs. 26-3-26-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS, OBSTRUCTIONS AND CURBS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate use of highways, RSA 41:11. 

Sec. 26-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) means a set of national guidelines published under the auspices of the U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration. The purpose of the MUTCD is to provide uniform and systematic treatment of highway conditions, including construction zones, on a nationwide basis. 
    Temporary traffic control plan describes measures to be used for facilitating road users through a work zone. 
    Temporary traffic control signal means any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and permitted to proceed. 
    Temporary traffic control zones means an area of a highway where road user conditions are changed because of a work zone through the use of temporary traffic control devices, uniformed law enforcement officers, certified flaggers or other authorized personnel. 
    Traffic means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars, and other conveyances either singly or together while using any way for purposes of travel. 
(Prior Code,  10:3.1; Ord. No. 2004-11, 5-5-2004) 
Sec. 26-22. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person found violating any section of this article, except section 26-31(b), shall be guilty of a violation and may be fined according to the provisions of section 1-7. 
(b)  Pursuant to RSA 265:3-b, any person found violating section 26-31(b) shall be guilty of a violation and may be fined not more than $100.00 for the first offense and not more than $250.00 for any subsequent offense committed during any calendar year. 
(Prior Code,  10:3.11; Ord. No. 2004-11, 5-5-2004) 
Sec. 26-23. - Enforcement. 
    The police department is authorized to take appropriate enforcement action of this article consistent with state law. A police officer who finds probable cause that any violation of this article has been committed may issue a summons to any person found in violation in lieu of arrest. 
(Prior Code,  10:3.12; Ord. No. 2004-11, 5-5-2004) 
Sec. 26-24. - Scope. 
    This article shall not apply to any work, obstruction, and/or encumbrance upon any state highway classified as a Class I, II or III involving the state or its subcontractors with respect to any work, obstruction or encumbrance caused for the benefit of the state. 
(Prior Code,  10:3.1; Ord. No. 2004-11, 5-5-2004) 
Sec. 26-25. - Excavations and obstructions; license required. 
(a)  No person, firm or corporation or agent or servant thereof shall excavate, obstruct or in any way encumber, including working within manholes and catchbasins, any street, sidewalk or other town-owned property or right-of-way in the town without first having obtained a written license to do so from the public works director or his designee of said town, except where such licensing power is particularly vested in the town council. 
(b)  Each and every such licensee shall coordinate each request to excavate, obstruct or encumber with the public works director, planner, code enforcement officer, police department, water/wastewater departments as required by the director of public works and as specified on a form issued by the public works department. 
(c)  Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this section shall be considered guilty of a violation. 
(Prior Code,  10:3.3; Ord. No. 2004-11, 5-5-2004) 
Sec. 26-26. - Scheduling of work. 
    The public works director shall specify the time and date for the work, which work may be required at nighttime, Saturdays, Sundays or holidays. Scheduling will be such as to not unreasonably interfere with traffic. 
(Prior Code,  10:3.4; Ord. No. 2004-11, 5-5-2004) 
Sec. 26-27. - Winter scheduling of construction work. 
    Except for emergencies as may be deemed essential by the director of public works, no person, firm or corporation, or any agent or servant thereof, shall excavate any street or sidewalk in the town between November 15 and April 15. 
(Prior Code,  10:3.5; Ord. No. 2004-11, 5-5-2004) 
Sec. 26-28. - Construction requirements. 
(a)  Traffic control plan. The public works director shall require a temporary traffic control plan from the licensee. 
(b)  The licensee shall provide proof of insurance for workers compensation, employer's liability and property liability for vehicles. Both the employer's liability and the property liability (vehicle) insurance shall be for the amount of $1,000,000.00 each. 
(c)  The licensee shall erect and maintain suitable barricades with flashers or lanterns so long as public safety and convenience requires. 
(d)  The licensee must provide a safe and convenient pedestrian way to the satisfaction of the public works director. 
(e)  The licensee is required to use materials, do the work, backfill and replace pavement in accordance with town standards as specified by the public works director. 
(f)  The repair of sidewalks shall be accomplished using the same material as the rest of the sidewalk, and no ragged joints will be allowed. 
(g)  The licensee is required to keep the work in good repair for a period of one year. 
(h)  The licensee, failing so to do after written notice from the public works director, shall be liable for the cost of any required repairs. 
(Prior Code,  10:3.6; Ord. No. 2004-11, 5-5-2004) 
Sec. 26-29. - Inspections. 
(a)  The public works director or his designee shall inspect the site prior to the commencement of backfill, during the backfill operation, prior to the commencement of paving and during the paving operation. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to arrange for these inspections and the licensee shall provide a 48-hour notice. 
(Prior Code,  10:3.7; Ord. No. 2004-11, 5-5-2004) 
Sec. 26-30. - Traffic control plans. 
    The public works director shall require and approve, approve with conditions, or deny a temporary traffic control plan, which conforms to the latest edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) Part 6, Temporary Traffic Control. The temporary traffic control plan shall be developed to provide safety for motorists, bicyclists, pedestrians, workers, enforcement/emergency officials, and equipment, with the following factors being considered: 
(1)  The basic safety principles governing the design of permanent roadways and roadsides should also govern the design of the temporary traffic control plan zones. The goal should be to route road users through such zones using roadway geometrics, roadside features, and temporary traffic control devices as nearly as possible comparable to those for normal highway situations. 
(2)  A temporary traffic control plan, in detail appropriate to the complexity of the work project, should be prepared and understood by all responsible parties before the site is occupied. The public works director should approve any changes in the temporary traffic control plan. 
(3)  In the temporary traffic control plan, a provision will be set forth to allow police officers, flag persons (certifications need to be included), or a combination of both to provide temporary traffic control signals. 
(Prior Code,  10:3.8; Ord. No. 2004-11, 5-5-2004) 
Sec. 26-31. - Other requirements related to temporary traffic control zones. 
(a)  Obedience to any required traffic control devices. Pursuant to RSA 265:9, the driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any temporary traffic control devices applicable thereto as provided by law, unless otherwise directed by a traffic or police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in RSA 265. 
(b)  Obedience to flag persons. Pursuant to RSA 265:3-b, the driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any flag person in the act of directing, controlling, or regulating traffic within any construction, maintenance, or utility work area indicated by official traffic control devices. If the flag person is displaying a signal to stop, the driver of a vehicle upon a way shall stop the vehicle at least 25 feet before reaching such flag person. The driver shall not proceed until the flag person indicates that traffic may proceed and until the driver may do so safely. 
(c)  Display of unauthorized signs, signals or markings. Pursuant to RSA 265:14, no person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any way any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device or railroad sign or signal, which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic control device. No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any way any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. This subsection shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to ways of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs. If an unauthorized sign, signal or marking is found then every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the authority having jurisdiction over the way is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice. 
(Prior Code,  10:3.9; Ord. No. 2004-11, 5-5-2004) 
Sec. 26-32. - Deposit required; bonding. 
    Whenever the public works director shall grant any person, firm or corporation permission to excavate in any street, sidewalk or other town-owned property, in granting such permission, the public works director shall require the requesting party to furnish a bond to be held by the town for ten percent of the construction project cost or whatever is deemed prudent by the public works director. This bond will be retained for one year after the project is completed. This bond enables the town to complete construction of any project granted by this license if the licensee fails to complete the project. 
(Prior Code,  10:3.10; Ord. No. 2004-11, 5-5-2004) 
Secs. 26-33-26-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SIDEWALK CAFES 

Sec. 26-53. - Permit standards. 
    A sidewalk cafe is permitted as an extension of any permitted restaurant after demonstration of compliance with the following standards: 
(1)  A detailed plan of the proposed seating arrangement and layout of pedestrian corridors; pedestrian corridors for sidewalk use and restaurant access shall be maintained in a manner that does not disrupt pedestrian traffic flow and have an unobstructed travel way that is a minimum of 36 inches in width; 
(2)  Seats and tables shall be structurally sound; 
(3)  Placement of a sidewalk cafe or outdoor seating shall be limited to the area of sidewalk directly in front of the restaurant establishment; 
(4)  Provide proof of a $1,000,000.00 liability insurance policy, which names the town as a co-insured entity; 
(5)  Location of the seats and tables will not jeopardize the health, safety, license and welfare of the general public and tables and chairs shall be placed not closer than two feet to the sidewalk curb; 
(6)  Tables, chairs, and benches shall be allowed year-round; however, tables, chairs and benches shall be removed from the sidewalk nightly and stored inside the restaurant establishment; and 
(7)  Permittees shall be responsible to maintain the orderly placement and cleanliness of the area in front of their establishment. Permittees shall ensure that paper, dishware, flatware, cigarettes, etc., are removed from tables and the surrounding sidewalk so as to ensure the aesthetics of the area and downtown are maintained. 
(Ord. No. 2011/2012-01,  1, 4-18-2012) 
Sec. 26-54. - Duration. 
    Each sidewalk cafe area shall be permitted on a yearly basis. Request for renewals shall be evaluated at the time of permit payment and based on the previous year's compliance with the standards cited in section 26-53 and all other applicable local regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2011/2012-01,  2, 4-18-2012) 
Sec. 26-55. - Licensing process. 
(a)  License applications shall be made to the code enforcement officer, on forms prescribed by the town administrator. The application shall be reviewed based on the standards noted in section 26-53. 
(b)  The license application shall be acted upon within 30 days of submittal. If not acted on within that timeframe, the application will be considered approved. 
(c)  If the application is denied, the applicant shall be notified, in writing, within seven days of the denial. Such written notification will include an explanation of the reasons for denial. 
(d)  Each license granted under this article is granted on the condition that all provisions of this article shall be complied with. Any violation of any term of this article constitutes a violation of the conditional granting of the license itself. 
(e)  If the town believes that such a violation has occurred, the code enforcement officer shall notify the holder of the license in writing of the nature of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 2011/2012-01,  3, 4-18-2012) 
Sec. 26-56. - Licensing fees. 
    The license fees shall be $50.00, or as amended from time to time by action of the town council, and shall be paid by April 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 2011/2012-01,  4, 4-18-2012) 
Sec. 26-57. - Appeals. 
    Applicants may appeal the denial of an application to the town council. 
(Ord. No. 2011/2012-01,  5, 4-18-2012) 
Sec. 26-58. - Damage to obstructions. 
    Any damage by any cause whatsoever will be at the sole expense of the obstruction owner. 
(Ord. No. 2011/2012-01,  6, 4-18-2012) 
Sec. 26-59. - Hold harmless. 
    Every person or other entity which places or maintains an obstruction on a public sidewalk in the town shall file a written statement with the town clerk satisfactory to the town attorney, whereby he or it agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the town, its officers, councilmembers and employees, for bodily or personal injury, and for property damage sustained by any person as a result of the installation, use or maintenance of such obstruction. 
(Ord. No. 2011/2012-01,  7, 4-18-2012) 
Sec. 26-60. - Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall be fined $100.00 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 2011/2012-01,  10, 4-18-2012) 
Secs. 26-61-26-78. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SIDEWALK STANDS 

Sec. 26-79. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Stand means any push-cart, wagon or any other wheeled vehicle or device which may be moved without the assistance of a motor and which is not required to be licensed and registered by the department of motor vehicles, used for the displaying, storing on transporting of articles offered for sale by a vendor. 
    Vendor means a peddler who on public property sells food, beverages or merchandise from a stand or his person. 
(Ord. No. 2011/2012-02,  1, 5-2-2012) 
Sec. 26-80. - Application. 
(a)  License applications shall be made to the code enforcement officer on forms prescribed by the town administrator. The application shall include the following: 
(1)  The name, home and business address of the applicant, and the name and address of the owner, if other than the applicant of the business and of any stand to be used in the operation of the business. 
(2)  A description of the type of food, beverage or merchandise to be sold. 
(3)  A description and photograph of any stand to be used in the operation of the business. 
(4)  A certificate of insurance issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state, protecting the licensee and the town from all claims for damages to property and bodily injury, including death, which may arise from operations under or in connection with the license. 
(b)  The insurance policy shall not be terminated or cancelled prior to the expiration date except with 30 days' advance written notice to the town. The policy shall provide combined single limit coverage in the amount of $1,000,000.00 for personal injury and property damage. The town shall be named as additional insured. 
(Ord. No. 2011/2012-02,  2, 5-2-2012) 
Sec. 26-81. - Licensing process. 
(a)  License applications shall be made to the code enforcement officer, on forms prescribed by the town administrator. The application shall be reviewed based on the standards noted in this article. 
(b)  The code enforcement officer shall provide a written report to the town council. 
(c)  The license application shall be presented to the council at their next regular meeting for review and disposition. 
(d)  The town council shall review the application and the report of the code enforcement officer at their next regularly scheduled meeting and either approve or deny the application at that time. If not acted on within that timeframe, the application will be considered approved. 
(e)  If the application is denied, the applicant shall be notified, in writing, within seven days of the denial. Such written notification will include an explanation of the reasons for denial. 
(f)  Each license granted under this article is granted on the condition that all provisions of this article shall be complied with. Any violation of any term of this article constitutes a violation of the conditional granting of the license itself. 
(g)  If the town believes that such a violation has occurred, the code enforcement officer shall notify the holder of the license in writing of the nature of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 2011/2012-02,  3, 5-2-2012) 
Sec. 26-82. - Licensing fee. 
    The license fee shall be $50.00, or as amended from time to time by action of the town council. 
(Ord. No. 2011/2012-02,  4, 5-2-2012) 
Sec. 26-83. - Duration. 
    Each vendor stand shall be permitted on a year-round basis. Request for renewals shall be evaluated based on the previous year's compliance with the standards cited in this article and all other applicable local regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2011/2012-02,  5, 5-2-2012) 
Sec. 26-84. - Hours of operation. 
    The hours of operation for each vendor stand shall be between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 2011/2012-02,  6, 5-2-2012) 
Sec. 26-85. - Prohibited conduct. 
(a)  A vendor shall not: 
(1)  Leave any stand unattended. 
(2)  Store, park, or leave any stand overnight on any street or sidewalk in conformance with town parking regulations. 
(3)  Sell food or beverages for immediate consumption unless he has available for public use his own litter receptacle which is available for his patrons' use. 
(4)  Leave any location without first picking up, removing and disposing all trash or refuse remaining from sales made by him. 
(5)  Allow any items relating to the operation of the vending business to be placed anywhere other than in, or under the stand, except as expressly indicated in the application for a license. 
(6)  Set up, maintain or permit the use of any table, crate, carton, rack, sign, or any other device to increase the selling or display capacity of his stand, where such items have not been described in his application. 
(7)  Solicit or conduct business with persons in motor vehicles. 
(8)  Sell anything other than that which he is licensed to vend. 
(9)  Sound or permit the sounding of any device which produces a loud and raucous noise, or use or operate any loudspeaker, public address system, radio sound amplifier or similar device to attract the attention of the public. 
(10)  Vend without a fire extinguisher of a type approved by the fire chief or his designee if the vendor utilizes heat generation equipment. 
(11)  Vend at any location where the unobstructed sidewalk area after deducting the area occupied by the stand is less than three feet in width. 
(12)  Vend within ten feet of any driveway. 
(13)  Allow the stand or any other item relating to the operation of the vending business to lean against or hang from any building or other structure lawfully placed on public property, without the owner's written permission. 
(b)  Vendors may petition the town council for specific relief from subsections (a)(3) through (14) of this section. The town council may undertake a site visit to the vendor's approved location to view the site as it would be operated. The town council will then vote to approve or disapprove the request at their next regular meeting. 
(Ord. No. 2011/2012-02,  7, 5-2-2012) 
Sec. 26-86. - Prohibited locations. 
    No stand shall be permitted in front of or on either side of the Veteran's Memorial Bandstand. This area shall be defined as the area between the north side pedestrian walkway to Rivermoor Landing to the south side pedestrian walkway to Rivermoor Landing. No stand shall be permitted in Schanda Park. No stand shall be permitted unless expressly permitted by the town council. 
(Ord. No. 2011/2012-02,  8, 5-2-2012) 
Sec. 26-87. - Appeals. 
    An applicant may appeal the denial of an application to the town council. 
(Ord. No. 2011/2012-02,  9, 5-2-2012) 
Sec. 26-88. - Damage or obstructions. 
    Any damage by any cause whatsoever will be at the sole expense of the obstruction owner. 
(Ord. No. 2011/2012-02,  10, 5-2-2012) 
Sec. 26-89. - Hold harmless. 
    Every person or other entity which places or maintains an obstruction on a public sidewalk in the town shall file a written statement with the town clerk satisfactory to the town attorney, whereby he or it agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the town, its officers, councilmembers and employees, for bodily or personal injury and for property damage sustained by any person as a result of the installation, use or maintenance of such obstruction. 
(Ord. No. 2011/2012-02,  11, 5-2-2012) 
Sec. 26-90. - Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall be fined $100.00 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 2011/2012-02,  14, 5-2-2012) 
Chapter 28 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Taxation, RSA 71-90. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - Prepayment of taxes. 
    Prepayment of taxes is authorized in accordance with the provisions of RSA 80:52-a. 
(Prior Code,  2.14; Ord. No. 2006-08, 11-1-2006) 
Secs. 28-2-28-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS 

Sec. 28-21. - Adoption of real property tax exemptions. 
    Pursuant to RSA 72:27-a, the town has adopted the following real property tax exemptions: 
(1)  Wood heating energy systems exemption; 
(2)  Solar energy systems exemption; and 
(3)  Wind-powered energy systems exemption. 
Sec. 28-22. - Wood heating energy systems exemptions. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Wood heating energy system means a wood-burning appliance designed to operate as a central heating system to heat the interior of a building. The appliance may burn wood solely or burn wood in combination with another fuel. A central heating system shall include a central appliance to distribute heat by a series of pipes, ducts or similar distribution system throughout a single building or group of buildings. A wood-burning appliance shall not include a fireplace, meaning a hearth, fire chamber or similarly prepared place with a chimney intended to be usable in an open configuration whether or not it may also be closed and operated closed; or a wood stove meaning a wood-burning appliance designed for space heating purposes which does not operate as a central heating system or as a sole source of heat. 
(b)  Criteria for exemption. The exemption will be given if it follows the prescribed definition of the wood heating energy system as described in subsection (a) of this section and all necessary applications and information has been received from the applicant. 
(c)  Amount of exemption. The exemption shall equal 100 percent of the cost of the system and its installation cost. 
(Prior Code,  2.11.1, 2.11.6, 2.11.7; Ord. No. 2006-02, 4-1-2006) 
State Law reference- Wood heating energy systems tax exemptions, RSA 72:69 et seq. 
Sec. 28-23. - Solar energy systems exemptions. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Solar energy system means a system which utilizes solar energy to heat or cool the interior of a building or to heat water for use in a building and which includes one or more collectors and a storage container. The term "solar energy system" also means a system which provides electricity for a building by the use of photovoltaic panels. 
(b)  Criteria for exemption. The exemption will be given if it follows the prescribed definition of the solar energy system as described in subsection (a) of this section and all necessary applications and information have been received from the applicant. 
(c)  Amount of exemption. The exemption shall equal 100 percent of the cost of the system and its installation cost. 
(Prior Code,  2.12.1, 2.12.6, 2.12.7; Ord. No. 2006-03, 4-1-2006) 
State Law reference- Solar energy systems tax exemptions, RSA 72:61 et seq. 
Sec. 28-24. - Wind-powered energy systems exemptions. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Wind-powered energy system means any wind-powered devices, which supplement or replace electrical power supplied to households or businesses at the immediate site. 
(b)  Criteria for exemption. The exemption will be given if it follows the prescribed definition of the wind-powered energy system as described in subsection (a) of this section and all necessary applications and information have been received from the applicant. 
(c)  Amount of exemption. The exemption shall equal 100 percent of the cost of the system and its installation cost. 
(Prior Code,  2.13.1, 2.13.6, 2.13.7; Ord. No. 2006-04, 4-1-2006) 
State Law reference- Wind-powered energy systems tax exemptions, RSA 72:65 et seq. 
Chapter 30 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, RSA 259-269. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Authority. 
    In accordance with the authority granted by RSA 41:11, 47:17 and 31:40, as amended, and any other applicable law, the ordinance from which this chapter is derived was enacted by the town council, or, when allowed by statute, by the town. 
(Prior Code,  11.2.1; Ord. No. 2000-02, 11-1-2000) 
Sec. 30-2. - Enforcement. 
    The chief of police, and his duly appointed agents, are hereby authorized to summons or arrest any person found in violation of this chapter. 
(Prior Code,  11.2.16; Ord. No. 2000-02, 11-1-2000) 
Sec. 30-3. - One-way traffic. 
    No person operating any motor vehicle on any public way within the town shall drive in a direction contrary to posted signs prohibiting such direction. The state department of transportation or the town department of public works may erect such signs. Such signs shall meet the specifications as determined by the state department of transportation and laws of the state. The following local public ways are designated for one-way traffic: 
(1)  Central Street (easterly from Spring Street to Main Street). 
(2)  Creighton Street (easterly from Main Street to Prescott Street). 
(3)  Short Street (westerly from Prescott Street to Exeter Street). 
(4)  Ham Street (easterly from Bay Road to Lamprey Street). 
(5)  Church Street (from the curve in the street at approximately 5 Church Street in a westerly direction to the intersection with Granite Street). 
(6)  Cedar Street (from the intersection of Elm Street to the intersection of Cedar Street in a northerly direction). 
(7)  Beech Street (from the intersection of Elm Street to the intersection of Cedar Street in a northerly direction). 
(8)  Salmon Street (from the intersection of Beech Street to the intersection of Piscassic Street in a westerly direction). 
(9)  Piscassic Street (from the intersection of Salmon Street to the intersection of Cedar Street in an easterly direction). 
(Prior Code,  11.2.2; Ord. No. 2000-02, 11-1-2000; Ord. No. 5-2017-2018,  2, 6-20-2018) 
Sec. 30-4. - Speed limits. 
(a)  The prima facie speed limit on all public ways within the town shall be 25 miles per hour except for the following: 
(1)  Route 108 otherwise known as "North Main Street, Main Street, Exeter Street and Exeter Road" shall be designated by the state department of transportation. Such speed limits shall be 30 miles per hour, 35 miles per hour or 40 miles per hour as posted. 
(2)  Route 152 otherwise known as "South Main Street or Wadleigh Falls Road" shall be designated by the state department of transportation. Such speed limits shall be 20 miles per hour within a school zone, 30 miles per hour, 35 miles per hour or 40 miles per hour as posted. 
(3)  The entire length of Packers Falls Road shall be 30 miles per hour or as designated by the state department of transportation and as posted. 
(4)  Grant Road from the intersection of South Main Street to the intersection of Schanda Drive shall be 35 miles per hour or as designated by the state department of transportation and as posted. 
(5)  Grant Road from the intersection of Schanda Drive to the Epping Town line shall be 30 miles per hour. 
(6)  The entire length of Ash Swamp Road shall be 30 miles per hour. 
(b)  No person shall drive a vehicle on a way at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing. In every event speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle, or other conveyance on or entering the way in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care. 
(c)  The penalties for any speeding violation shall be determined by the court of jurisdiction, which may impose a fine up to $1,000.00. 
(Prior Code,  11.2.15; Ord. No. 2000-02, 11-1-2000) 
State Law reference- Speed limits, RSA 265:50 et seq. 
Sec. 30-5. - Stop signs. 
    All persons operating any motor vehicle on any public way within the town shall stop at any posted stop sign erected by the state department of transportation or the town department of public works. Such signs shall meet the specifications as determined by the state department of transportation and laws of the state. The location of local signs on town-controlled ways shall be determined by the highway safety committee for the town and the town council shall be notified upon the erection of any such sign and may vote to repeal the said posting by majority vote (RSA 265:31). 
(Prior Code,  11.2.9; Ord. No. 2000-02, 11-1-2000) 
Sec. 30-6. - Yield signs. 
    All persons operating any motor vehicle on any public way within the town shall yield the right-of-way to any traffic at any posted "yield sign" erected by the state department of transportation or the town department of public works. Such signs shall meet the specifications as determined by the state department of transportation and laws of the state. The location of local signs on town-controlled ways shall be determined by the highway safety committee for the town and the town council shall be notified upon the erection of any such sign and may vote to repeal the said posting by majority vote (RSA 265:31). 
(Prior Code,  11.2.10; Ord. No. 2000-02, 11-1-2000) 
Sec. 30-7. - Alcohol prohibited in motor vehicles. 
(a)  Transportation and possession by driver and passenger. 
(1)  The words "liquor" and "beverage," as used in this subsection (a), shall have the same meanings as defined in RSA 175:1. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (a)(5) of this section, no driver shall transport, carry, possess, or have any liquor or beverage within the passenger area of any motor vehicle upon any way except in the original container and with the seal unbroken. Securely capped partially filled containers of liquor or beverages shall be stored and transported in the trunk of the motor vehicle. If the motor vehicle does not have a trunk, such containers shall be stored and transported in that compartment or area of the vehicle which is the least accessible to the driver. 
(3)  Except as provided in subsection (a)(5) of this section, no passenger shall carry, possess, or have any liquor or beverage within any passenger area of any motor vehicle upon any way or in an area principally used for public parking except in the original container and with the seal unbroken. Securely capped partially filled containers of liquor or beverages may be stored and transported in that compartment or area of the vehicle which is the least accessible to the driver. 
(4)  A person who violates this subsection (a) shall be guilty of a violation and shall be subject to a fine of $150.00. In addition, a person who violates subsection (a)(2) of this section may have his drivers' license, if a resident, or driving privilege, if a nonresident, suspended 60 days for a first offense and up to one year for a second or subsequent offense. 
(5)  This subsection (a) shall not apply to persons transporting, carrying, possessing, or having any liquor or beverage in a chartered bus, in a taxi, or in a limousine for hire; provided, however, that the driver of any of said vehicles is prohibited from having any liquor or beverage in or about the driver's area. 
(6)  For the purposes of this subsection (a) only: 
    Passenger area of any motor vehicle shall not include any section of a motor vehicle which has been designed or modified for the overnight accommodation of persons or as living quarters. 
    Way shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of any public highway, street, avenue, road, alley, park, or parkway, or any private way laid out under authority of statute, or any such way provided and maintained by a public institution to which state funds are appropriated for public use or any such way which has been used for public travel for 20 years. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcohol beverages or to possess an open container of alcoholic beverages while on any town-owned property within the limits of the town, unless specific authorization has been granted by the town administrator or town council. 
(Prior Code,  11.2.11; Ord. No. 2000-02, 11-1-2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, RSA 265-A:44. 
Sec. 30-8. - Sidewalks. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bicycle means a vehicle with two tandem wheels, handlebars for steering, a saddle seat and pedals by which it is propelled. 
    Scooter means a vehicle consisting of a long footboard between two end wheels, controlled by an upright steering handle attached to the front wheel. 
    Sidewalk means that portion of a public highway between the curb and the adjacent property lines generally limited to pedestrian traffic. 
    Skateboard means a short, narrow board having one set of two or more wheels mounted under it. 
    Skates means any boot with wheels in pairs, or in a single file (roller blades), attached to the bottom of the boot. 
(b)  Established area. This section shall apply only to the entire length of Main Street and South Main Street within the town as herein described: from the intersection of Main Street and Elm Streets in a southerly direction (along route 108 to Route 152), to the intersection of South Main Street and Beech Street Extension inclusive of said intersections. This section shall include Chapel Street from the intersection of Main Street to the intersection of Granite Street. It shall further include Church Street from the intersection of Main Street to the intersection of Rock Street. 
(c)  Operation of bicycles, scooter, skateboard or skates. It shall be unlawful for any person having custody or control of any bicycle, scooter, skateboard or skates to ride or operate the said bicycle, scooter, skateboard or skates on any sidewalk within the established area. This shall not apply to persons with wheelchairs due to physical disability. 
(d)  Penalty. Any person having custody, control or ownership of any bicycle, skateboard or similar scooter within the established area; or any person found to be obstructing a sidewalk in a gathering of three or more people within the established area is guilty of a violation. Such person may be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000.00 pursuant to RSA 47:17 and as determined by any court. In addition, a person found violating this section may have a bicycle, skateboard or scooter impounded up to two days for the first violation and up to seven days for any subsequent violation. 
(Prior Code,  11.2.7, 11.2.8; Ord. No. 2000-02, 11-1-2000; Ord. No. 2009/2010-04, 12-16-2009) 
Sec. 30-9. - Road closing. 
    The town council authorizes the use of snow traveling vehicles only, on the town road known as Hersey Lane, emergency vehicles excepted, from December 1 to March 31 of every year. Said road shall be closed to all conventional motor vehicle traffic within these dates. Said road shall be closed from a point on the northerly end where the paved surface ends, traveling in a southerly direction to a point where the paved surface begins on the southerly end. 
(Prior Code,  11.2.14; Ord. No. 2000-02, 11-1-2000) 
Secs. 30-10-30-38. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Stopping, standing and parking, RSA 265:68 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-39. - Parking regulations. 
    Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device, no person, except a person driving an emergency vehicle, shall: 
(1)  Stop, stand or park a vehicle: 
a.  Beyond the posted time limits within a designated zone; 
b.  Within the posted and prohibited time periods within a designated zone; 
c.  Within a posted properly designated loading zone; 
d.  Within a posted and restricted parking zone which designates specific requirements or where official signs have been erected by town officials prohibiting such parking due to existing conditions; 
e.  Within a posted no parking zone; 
f.  Next to other parked vehicles so as to interfere with the egress of said vehicles or the normal flow of traffic; 
g.  In the wrong direction so that the tires of said vehicle are at the edge of a roadway or against the curb of a roadway in the opposite lane of travel; 
h.  Beyond painted lines, which are visible for a designated parking space; 
i.  Obstructing an alleyway; 
j.  On a sidewalk or crosswalk; 
k.  Within an intersection; 
l.  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of the safety zone; 
m.  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a way or within a highway tunnel; 
n.  Obstructing town officials engaged in any emergency operation; 
o.  Obstructing public works officials engaged in snow removal operations, street-cleaning operations, construction maintenance, road maintenance or other required functions. 
(2)  Stop, stand or park a vehicle on any public way within the town: 
a.  Upon any travel portion of any roadway so as to interfere with the normal flow of traffic; 
b.  Within a posted zone designated for fire apparatus; 
c.  Alongside or opposite any street excavation when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic; 
d.  On any railroad tracks; 
e.  At any place where official signs prohibit stopping; 
f.  In any parking place, whether on public or private property, specially designated for a person with a walking disability by means of a sign as required by RSA 265:73-a stating that the space is reserved for a person with a walking disability or displaying the international accessibility symbol, unless that person has a special plate or placard issued or recognized pursuant to RSA 261:86 or RSA 261:88, and the person who qualifies for the plate or placard is being transported to or from the parking place. A person who violates the provisions of this subsection shall be fined a minimum of $250.00; 
g.  In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including crossovers; 
h.  In or overlapping into any access aisle. A person who violates the provisions of this subsection (2)h shall be fined a minimum of $50.00 for a first offense and a minimum of $100.00 for each subsequent offense. 
(3)  Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device, no person, except a person driving an emergency vehicle, shall: 
a.  Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers: 
1.  In front of a public or private driveway; 
2.  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant; 
3.  Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection; 
4.  Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway; 
5.  Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of said entrance when properly signposted; 
6.  At any place where official signs prohibit standing. 
b.  Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers: 
1.  Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing; 
2.  At any place where official signs prohibit parking. 
No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such a distance as is unlawful. 
(4)  Any person found violating any provisions as set forth in this section may, within seven days of a parking ticket being issued, pay a civil forfeiture in the following amount to the town in lieu of a court appearance for the said violation. All civil forfeiture payments shall be paid through the police department and forwarded to the town clerk's office. The amounts shall be as follows: 
a.  $20.00 for any violation in subsection (1) of this section. 
b.  $30.00 for a violation in subsection (2) of this section. 
(5)  Any person who fails to pay the civil forfeiture as prescribed in subsection (4) of this section within seven days of the ticket being issued and 30 days after being sent a notice of violation by mail to his last known address, according to the division of motor vehicles, shall be guilty of a violation if convicted by the court of jurisdiction of violating any provision set forth within this chapter and may be fined up to $1,000.00 and shall be fined not less or pay not less in civil forfeiture the following: 
a.  $30.00 for any violation in subsection (1) of this section. 
b.  $40.00 for any violation in subsection (2) of this section. 
(6)  Any person who believes that a parking ticket has been unlawfully issued may contest the said ticket at the police station before the chief of police or his designee within seven days of issuance. If it is determined that the ticket shall not be voided, a person may request an appearance before the court of jurisdiction. If requested, the person shall be provided with a summons for a court appearance. 
(7)  It shall be prima facie evidence and presumed that the registered owner, according to records of the motor vehicle division, shall be considered the person in violation of any provision within this section if his vehicle is found in violation of any said provisions. As used in this section, a public way shall mean any way for public use or any town-owned or town-maintained parking lot. 
(Prior Code,  11.2.3; Ord. No. 2000-02, 11-1-2000; Ord. No. 2-2016/2017,  2, 4-19-2017) 
State Law reference- Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specific places, RSA 265:69. 
Sec. 30-40. - Water Street parking lot. 
    The municipal parking lot on Water Street will restrict parking from the hours of 1:00 a.m. to 5:00 a.m. all year round so as to accommodate public access to the Lamprey River for recreational purposes. Vehicles are prohibited from parking in the spaces that are designated for boat trailers only. 
(Prior Code,  11.2.1; Ord. No. 2000-02, 11-1-2000; Ord. No. 2006-01, 5-3-2006) 
Sec. 30-41. - Temporary no parking and traffic hazard signs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person having the custody, control or ownership of any vehicle to park or cause the same to be parked within the following areas of the town when designated by No Parking signs: 
(1)  Within 20 feet of any temporary No Parking sign authorized by an agent by the town. 
(2)  Within 20 feet of any warning device designating a traffic hazard or a danger to the public erected upon the authorization of the chief of police. 
(Prior Code,  11.2.5; Ord. No. 2000-02, 11-1-2000) 
Sec. 30-42. - Main Street/South Main Street parking. 
(a)  Established area. This section shall only apply to the entire length of Main Street and South Main Street within the town as herein described: From the intersection of Main Street and Elm Street in a southerly direction (along Route 108 to Route 152) to the intersection of South Main Street and Beech Street Extension, inclusive of said intersections. In addition, two parking spaces on Chapel Street at the intersection of Main Street will also be controlled by this chapter. This shall be considered the "established area" as outlined in this section. 
(b)  Two-hour parking. It shall be unlawful for any person having custody, control or ownership of any vehicle to park or cause to be parked on any public way within the established area for a period of time longer than two consecutive hours from 5:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Erected signs shall display such time periods where appropriate. Two-hour parking regulations on South Main Street from 5:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. daily may be exempt or waived when granted by the police department for a special function or event. 
(c)  Fifteen-minute parking. It shall be unlawful for any person having custody, control or ownership of any vehicle to park or cause to be parked any vehicle on Chapel Street between Main Street and Granite Street in designated areas limiting parking to no longer than 15 consecutive minutes. Such time limits shall be in effect daily from 5:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. Erected signs shall display such time periods where appropriate for a maximum of two parking spaces. 
(d)  Winter parking. Refer to subsection (g) of this section. 
(e)  Emergency restrictions. It shall be unlawful for any person having custody, control or ownership of any vehicle to park or cause to be parked any vehicle on any public way within the established area which interferes with snow removal operations or emergency street maintenance. The same restriction shall apply to conditions in cases of a natural disaster or emergency situation. Emergency signs or enforcement action may be invoked as deemed necessary by the town administrator, police chief or director of public works. 
(f)  Loading zone. It shall be unlawful for any person having custody, control or ownership of any vehicle to park or cause to be parked any vehicle on any public way within a designated area for the purposes of commercial loading or unloading. Such restrictions shall only apply during posted time limits. Erected signs shall display such designated areas and restrictions where appropriate. There shall be at least one and no more than two designated commercial loading and unloading zones within the said established area. 
(g)  Overnight parking. It shall be unlawful for any person having custody, control or ownership of any vehicle to park or cause to be parked any vehicle on any public way within the established area from the hours of 1:00 a.m. to 5:00 a.m. all year long. 
(h)  Handicapped zone. It shall be unlawful for any person having custody, control or ownership of any vehicle to park or cause to be parked any vehicle on any public way within the established area. There shall be at least one designated handicapped zone within the established area. A second handicapped zone in front of the Community Church on Main Street may be established on Sundays from 5:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon. 
(i)  Other restrictions. It shall be unlawful for any person having custody, control or ownership of any vehicle to park or cause to be parked any vehicle on any public way within the established area which violates any other provisions of town ordinances or state law. 
(j)  No parking zones. Unless specifically designated by road markings and painted lines, there shall be no parking within the established area and vehicles must be parked within such designated spaces identified by white road markings or painted lines. This shall also apply to restricted areas posted or identified by yellow road markings or painted lines. 
(Prior Code,  11.2.6; Ord. No. 2000-02, 11-1-2000; Ord. No. 2006-01, 5-3-2006) 
Sec. 30-43. - Night parking and snow removal. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person having custody, control or ownership of any vehicle to park or cause the same to be parked at any time between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on any public street or highway or any area maintained and owned by the town so that said vehicle interferes or would interfere with snowplowing and/or snow removal operations of the town highway department between the dates of November 15 and March 31 of the following year, without a permit issued by the town. 
(Prior Code,  11.2.13; Ord. No. 2000-02, 11-1-2000; Ord. No. 2006-01, 5-3-2006; Ord. No. 2-2016/2017,  2, 4-19-2017) 
Secs. 30-44-30-74. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MISCELLANEOUS RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 30-75. - Penalties. 
    When a vehicle is found in violation of any provisions of this division, the owner of said vehicle is subject to civil penalties through parking tickets and criminal penalties through fines in a court of competent jurisdiction. The owner of said vehicle is subject to a $20.00 civil fine through a parking ticket. Enhanced penalties may be assessed pursuant to RSA 231:132-a if the fine is not paid in a timely manner. A person found in violation of these provisions in criminal court may be fined a maximum of $1,000.00 if found guilty of such violation. In addition, any vehicle found violating these provisions might be towed at the owner's expense from the municipal parking lots. 
(Prior Code,  11.7.6; Ord. No. 2002-08, 1-15-2003; Ord. No. 2005-11, 12-7-2005) 
Sec. 30-76. - Library parking. 
    The municipal parking lot behind the town library shall have ten designated parking spaces allocated for the town library. Any person who owns or is in control of any vehicle that parks within a designated parking space for the use of the town library shall be employed by the library or attending the library. Any vehicle found in violation of this provision may be issued a parking ticket and is subject to being towed at the owner's expense. 
(Prior Code,  11.7.1; Ord. No. 2002-08, 1-15-2003; Ord. No. 2005-11, 12-7-2005) 
Sec. 30-77. - Free parking. 
    The municipal parking lots shall have designated parking spaces allocated for free parking during the daily hours of 6:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight. Local business owners, employees and patrons of the downtown business district may use such parking spaces, if available. Vehicles within the municipal parking lots may only park in designated free parking spaces and during specific time periods unless authorized to park in designated library spaces outlined in section 30-76 or unless authorized to park in designated permit spaces outlined in section 30-78. Any vehicle found in violation of this provision may be issued a parking ticket and is subject to being towed at the owner's expense. The following list of parking lots has the number of designated free parking spaces as listed below: 
(1)  Elm and Spring Street (behind the town library): 20 spaces. 
(2)  Railroad Street: six spaces. 
(Prior Code,  11.7.2; Ord. No. 2002-08, 1-15-2003; Ord. No. 2005-11, 12-7-2005) 
Sec. 30-78. - Permit parking. 
(a)  Designated lots and spaces. The municipal parking lots shall allow for permitted parking. These permits will allow any owner of a vehicle or person in control of any vehicle parked in a designated area between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. that requires a permit shall display the said permit in a manner established by the police department. Any vehicle found in violation of this provision may be issued a parking ticket and is subject to being towed at the owner's expense. Permits do not guarantee a parking space for a vehicle except during those hours. The following list of parking lots has the number of designated permitted spaces as listed below: 
(1)  Elm and Spring Street (behind the town library): 10 spaces. 
(2)  Railroad Street: seven spaces. 
(3)  Water Street Parking Lot: five spaces. 
(4)  Bay Road Lot: All spaces. 
(5)  29 Beech Street extension. 
(b)  Obtaining permit. The owner of a vehicle or the person in control of a vehicle who desires to park in designated permit parking spaces at the municipal parking lots must obtain a valid parking permit from the police department. An employee of the police department shall instruct the said owner or person in control of said vehicle as to how to display or affix such permit to his vehicle in order for it to be properly identified. Each parking permit shall be numbered and correspond to records maintained at the police department. Permits shall be issued to a specific person and not a particular vehicle. Any person found possessing or manufacturing a false town parking permit may be found guilty of a violation and is subject to penalties as prescribed in section 30-75. Any person found violating parking requirements established by the police department consistent with this section might have their permit revoked for just cause. Under such circumstances, the owner or person in control of said vehicle will not receive any reimbursement for any paid fees. Any parking requirements established by the police department shall be provided to the owner or person in control of such vehicle at the time the permit is issued. 
(c)  Permit duration. Permits shall be issued by the police department for the duration of six months commencing on January 1 and July 1 of each year. The said parking permits shall expire on June 30 and December 31 of each year unless otherwise renewed. 
(d)  Parking fee. 
(1)  Established; increases. Any person who desires to obtain a valid parking permit outlined in this section shall be required to pay a fee of $200.00 for each six-month period. Subsequent increases shall be effective only in January or July of each year and approved at the discretion of the town council. Parking spaces allotted are subject to revision at the discretion of the town council. However, permits issued shall not exceed the number of allotted spaces for permit parking. 
(2)  Overnight parking fee. The owner of a vehicle or the person in control of a vehicle may obtain an overnight parking permit which shall be valid from 12:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. for a designated day. An overnight parking permit shall be $5.00 per day. Overnight parking permits shall be valid in the "free parking" zone and shall be color-coded to distinguish it from the other permits. Overnight parking permits shall be obtained and validated in the same manner as six-month permits. 
(3)  Monthly fee. The owner of a vehicle or the person in control of a vehicle may obtain a parking permit on a monthly basis instead of a six-month basis. Such monthly parking permits shall be $40.00 per month and shall only be valid from the first day to the last day of a given month. Monthly parking permits shall be obtained and validated in the same manner as six-month permits. 
(e)  Transferring permit. The owner or person in control of a vehicle who obtains a parking permit may transfer the said permit to another person prior to the expiration date of the permit provided he changes the required information with the police department and pays a $25.00 transfer fee. Said fee is subject to increases at the approval and discretion of the town council. 
(f)  Parking revenues. All received parking revenues as a result of this section shall be accounted for by the police department and delivered to the finance office. Such revenue shall be subject to town audit reports. 
(Prior Code,  11.7.3; Ord. No. 2002-08, 1-15-2003; Ord. No. 2005-11, 12-7-2005; Ord. No. 2-2016/2017,  2, 4-19-2017; Ord. No. 2-2017/2018,  2, 1-17-2018) 
Sec. 30-79. - Snow removal operations and emergency conditions. 
    Nothing within this division prevents the department of public works, fire and rescue or the police department from further regulating parking conditions within the municipal parking lots during snow removal operations or emergency conditions. As used in this section, the term "snow removal operations" means the time period from when three inches of snow accumulates and until the department of public works has completed the snow removal process. As used in this section, the term "emergency condition" shall be a bona fide emergency declared by the town administrator, police chief, fire chief or director of public works. Reasonable efforts shall be made to notify owners of parked vehicles within the municipal parking lots under such circumstances. 
(Prior Code,  11.7.4; Ord. No. 2002-08, 1-15-2003; Ord. No. 2005-11, 12-7-2005) 
Sec. 30-80. - Special events and other conditions. 
(a)  Special events. The municipal parking lots may be cleared in order to accommodate special events such as parades or other functions provided the town administrator or town council authorizes it. This shall not disrupt permit parking for greater than three days within a six-month period or parking fees shall be reimbursed on a prorated basis. 
(b)  Parking lot maintenance. The municipal parking lots may be cleared in order to accommodate maintenance required by the department of public works. 
(c)  Temporary restrictions. When temporary restrictions are invoked as a result of subsections (a) or (b) of this section, temporary signs will be erected at each entrance of the municipal parking lots affected, providing at least 24-hour notice of the pending restrictions. After such posting, any vehicle found in violation of such restrictions may be issued a parking ticket and towed at the owner's expense. Every reasonable measure will be taken to prevent any undue hardship on persons with parking permits. 
(d)  General restrictions. Any vehicle parked within the municipal parking lot shall be properly parked in designated parking spaces consistent with the regulations of this section. Any vehicle found clearly outside of the designated spaces marked by visible white painted lines or any vehicle creating an obstruction or hazard may be issued a parking ticket and towed at the owner's expense. 
(Prior Code,  11.7.5; Ord. No. 2002-08, 1-15-2003; Ord. No. 2005-11, 12-7-2005) 
Secs. 30-81-30-103. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS AND SCOOTERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Bicycles and mopeds, RSA 265:143 et seq.; bicycle ordinances, RSA 265:149. 

Sec. 30-104. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Scooter means a vehicle consisting of a long footboard between two end wheels, controlled by an upright steering handle attached to the front wheel. 
    Sidewalk means that portion of a public highway between the curb and the adjacent property lines generally limited to pedestrian traffic. 
    Skateboard means a short, narrow board having one set of two or more wheels mounted under it. 
    Way means any road, street, avenue, boulevard, court, parking lot or way legally accepted for maintenance and dedicated public use by the legislative authority of the state or by the town council. 
(Prior Code,  14.9.1; Ord. No. 2003-16, 8-20-2003) 
Sec. 30-105. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any person 16 years of age or older found in violation of this article may be charged. 
(b)  In addition, any bicycle, skateboard or scooter involved in such violation may be impounded by the police department for a period not to exceed 30 days unless it is considered evidence. 
(1)  The owner of any bicycle, skateboard or scooter that have been impounded may request a hearing on the merits of the impoundment before the chief of police or his designee. 
(2)  A hearing will be conducted within two days following a request, weekends and holidays excluded. Emergency conditions may also result in the hearing date being extended. 
(3)  The person holding the hearing may uphold, overturn or modify the term of impoundment. 
(4)  Following the hearing, the chief of police or his designee shall render a decision and notify the owner by letter within two days unless the item has been returned to the owner. 
(c)  A civil forfeiture may be imposed for violating this article as follows: 
(1)  $15.00 for a first offense. 
(2)  $25.00 for a second offense. 
(3)  $35.00 for a third offense. 
(4)  $50.00 for any subsequent offenses. 
(d)  A civil forfeiture of up to $50.00 may be imposed against any person who neglects to pick up a bicycle, skateboard or scooter after 14 days from the time he is eligible for the item's return. 
(Prior Code,  14.9.5; Ord. No. 2003-16, 8-20-2003) 
Sec. 30-106. - Bicycle registration; non-transferability. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or operate any bicycle upon any way or upon any sidewalk within the town without first having registered the same with the police department. This shall not apply to nonresidents of the town. Any owner or person having custody and control of any bicycle must attach or affix a designated registration sticker to the said bicycle and display it in a conspicuous place. Registration fees and periods of registration shall be established by the chief of police. 
(b)  In order to be registered, a bicycle shall: 
(1)  Be in good, safe mechanical condition; 
(2)  Be equipped with an audible signaling device and adequate brakes; and 
(3)  Have a distinctive identification marker or serial number. 
(Prior Code,  14.9.2; Ord. No. 2003-16, 8-20-2003) 
Sec. 30-107. - Operation of bicycles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or operate any bicycle upon any way or upon any sidewalk within the town one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise without a visible light and without adequate reflective equipment or adequate reflective gear. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or operate any bicycle upon any way or sidewalk within the town and carry any passengers unless the said bicycle is equipped with a seat for said passenger. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or operate any bicycle upon any way or sidewalk within the town unless said bicycle or operator is equipped with an audible signaling device and adequate brakes. The bicycle must be in good and safe mechanical condition and possess a distinctive identification number or serial number. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or operate any bicycle upon any way or sidewalk within the town in violation of all applicable and pertinent chapters of state law. 
(Prior Code,  14.9.3; Ord. No. 2003-16, 8-20-2003) 
Sec. 30-108. - Operation of skateboards and scooters. 
(a)  The operation of skateboards and scooters shall be permitted within the town except on sidewalks within the downtown vicinity (on Main Street from the intersection of Elm Street to the intersection of Beech Street Extension). 
(b)  All skateboards and scooters shall be ridden or operated with due care with regard for rules governing pedestrian traffic and safety. 
(c)  The operation of skateboards and scooters shall not be permitted to interfere with the normal flow of vehicular traffic. 
(d)  Any person riding or operating a skateboard or scooter one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise shall be required to have reflective material visible in order not to impose a hazard to the motoring public. 
(Prior Code,  14.9.4; Ord. No. 2003-16, 8-20-2003) 
CHAPTER 31 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Exh. A of Ord. No. 2014/2015-01, adopted Dec. 17, 2014, added provisions to the Code, but did not specify manner of inclusion. Therefore, at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been included as  31-21-31-31, 31-41, 31-51-31-53. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 31-1-31-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RULES AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 31-21. - Water use and payment. 
(a)  The following regulations shall be considered a part of the contract with every person who uses water, and every such person taking water shall be considered to express the assent to be bound thereby. 
(b)  In case of violation by a customer of any regulation established by the Newmarket Town Council, or on non-payment of rates or accounts due, his supply shall be cut off pursuant to the procedure set forth in these regulations. The water will not be turned on again until all cause and complaints are removed and dues paid. 
(Ord. No. 2014/2015-01, Exh.(Ch. 2,  1), 12-17-2014) 
Sec. 31-22. - Water services. 
(a)  A separate service and connection to the water distribution main shall be required for any new property which is to be used as a dwelling or a place of business. 
(b)  No water permit shall be issued for additional units to any building which does not have its own individual water service from curb to meter, 
(c)  No customer shall install or use water consumption apparatus which will affect the pressure or operation conditions so as to interfere with the service of another customer. 
(d)  Every free-standing building used for residential purposes requiring water shall have a separate water service line from the curb stop to the meter and shall have a separate curb stop located outside the building and accessible to the water division at all times. No building shall be fed water through another building unless both buildings shall be owned by the same party and the outbuilding being serviced contains no residential units. 
(e)  Unless approved by the superintendent of the water division, in a building containing more than one residential or commercial unit, and where each of these units may have a different owner, every unit shall have its own water meter, its own water service line from the curb to the meter and its own curb stop located outside the building and accessible by the water division at all times. 
(Ord. No. 2014/2015-01, Exh.(Ch. 2,  2), 12-17-2014) 
Sec. 31-23. - Ownership of services. 
    All new service pipe and fittings will be laid from the main to the meter at the water-takers expenses. Said service piping will be inspected by the superintendent of water or his authorized representative before any back filling is accomplished. That portion of the water service between the curb stop and the meter will be maintained by the user, except the meter which is installed and owned by the water division. Replacement of the water service from the main to the curb shall be the responsibility of the water division. 
(Ord. No. 2014/2015-01, Exh.(Ch. 2,  3), 12-17-2014) 
Sec. 31-24. - Fire protection devices and fountain use. 
(a)  Private fire protection service request shall be submitted to the public works department, or his designees, for approval and must be accompanied by a plan of the proposing piping system, together with a statement telling for what other purposes the system might be used. 
(b)  The water division does not promise to furnish proper quantities of water through any public or private fire service, nor does it promise to undertake any activity relative to that service. 
(Ord. No. 2014/2015-01, Exh.(Ch. 2,  5), 12-17-2014) 
Sec. 31-25. - Water meters. 
(a)  When the customer fails or neglects to furnish a suitable location for a meter inside the building, or when, for other reasons, it is necessary or expedient to locate the meter in an underground box or vault, the customer will bear the expense of all costs associated with the installation of said meter. 
(b)  For services up to 3/4 in size, meter repairs or replacements necessitated by ordinary wear will be paid for by the water division. Those repairs necessitated by freezing, hot water, willful damage, or fault of the customer will be charged by the customer. 
(c)  Access to meters. The customer, upon connection of service, shall be deemed to have granted permission for the reading, inspection, and installation of meters, including the installation of remote readers for meters. 
(d)  When water passing through a single meter is used to serve more than one dwelling, the owner of the premises of which the meter is located, irrespective of under leases or individual consumers, shall be held to pay the full rate or any balance of the rate thereof for the entire amount of water passing through said meter (called the "master meter") per the schedule below; 
(1)  Any individual dwelling meter shall first be read, recorded and billed to the dwelling; and paid for by the dwelling. 
(2)  Any master meter shall be read, recorded and compared to the sum of the individual dwelling meters. Any positive discrepancy between the individual meter and master meter shall be billed and paid for by the premise owner; as indicated above. 
(e)  Seasonal meters. Meters will be removed, stored and reinstalled when the customer requires such because of the nature of the business or the likelihood of freezing. Such installations will be subject to normal turn-on/turn-off fees. 
(f)  Deduct meters are only authorized for use in monitoring outside water usage for purposes of establishing credits on sewer bills. 
(1)  Deduct meters shall be of a standard type as specified by the water department. 
(2)  Deduct meters are to be installed with a backflow preventer and isolation valves. The customer shall be responsible for the purchase, maintenance and installation by a licensed plumber. 
(3)  As a courtesy, the deduct meters will be read at the same time as the domestic water meters. The deduct meter readings will be relayed to the finance office with the domestic water meter readings. 
(Ord. No. 2014/2015-01, Exh.(Ch. 2,  6), 12-17-2014) 
Sec. 31-26. - Billing and payment. 
(a)  Customers shall be charged for services and water consumption in accordance with the prevailing rates established by the town council and published in the Town of Newmarket Fee and Charges Schedule. 
(b)  The town shall assess a delinquency charge sufficient to cover the cost of collecting the delinquent bill, which is in arrears for one full quarter or more. In no event shall the town assess a charge less than the amount shown in the fee and charges schedule. 
(c)  The town shall accept partial payments of no less than one-third of unpaid arrears as a precondition to restoring discontinued services. In such event, the delinquent customer shall satisfy the entire balance within ten working days. In the event, the delinquent customer does not satisfy the entire balance within working days the town may immediately discontinue service. 
(Ord. No. 2014/2015-01, Exh.(Ch. 2,  7), 12-17-2014) 
Sec. 31-27. - Procedures in non-payment. 
(a)  Liens. Under the provision of New Hampshire RSA 38:22 (c), all charges for water services shall constitute a lien in favor of the Town of Newmarket upon the real estate where the services were furnished and the lien shall continue for 18 months date of the last paid bill, unless the town records in the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds a notice of lien, in which case the lien shall continue for six years from the date of the last unpaid bill. The lien may be enforced in a suit by the town against the owner of such real estate. In such a suit, the town shall have the right to a judgment per year charges, entered at a rate of 12 percent, and subject to change, from the date of the last unpaid bill to date of judgment, and costs. The records in the water and sewer division shall be sufficient notice to maintain suit upon the lien against subsequent purchases or attaching creditors or real estate. 
(b)  The execution and recording of a lien pursuant to this section shall in addition to, and shall not be exclusive of, other remedies available to the town at law or equity, including but not limited to, discontinuation of service pursuant to section 31-28. The town shall have the sole discretion to determine which procedure to utilize in the event that an owner or customer fails to pay claims for service or charges. 
(Ord. No. 2014/2015-01, Exh.(Ch. 2,  8), 12-17-2014) 
Sec. 31-28. - Violation and enforcement. 
(a)  Any violations of the provisions of these rules and regulations, or failure on the part of any customer utilizing the water to promptly and pay all claims for service or other charges of the water division, shall be sufficient cause for shutting off the water supply of such customer and such supply shall not be turned on again until all such cause of complaint have been removed, including any additional work costs incurred for turning on and off the water. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any regulation to the contrary, the town shall not discontinue service without notice to a customer if any part of the service provided benefits one or more parties known to the town to be a residential tenant. In such instance, the town shall provide notice compliant with RSA 38:31, as amended, unless (1) the discontinuance of service is ordered by the chief of police, fire chief, building inspector, or other public health officer and (2) the discontinuance of service is necessary to avoid damage or injury to life or property. 
The discontinuation of service pursuant to this section shall be in addition to, and shall not be exclusive of, other remedies available to the town at law or equity, including but not limited to, the execution and recording of a lien pursuant to section 31-27 for failure to pay all claims for service or other changes. The town shall have the sole discretion to determine which procedure to utilize in the event of a violation of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2014/2015-01, Exh.(Ch. 2,  9), 12-17-2014) 
Sec. 31-29. - Damage and liability. 
(a)  Notice of shutoff will be given when practicable, however, nothing in this rule shall be construed as requiring the water division to provide such notice. 
(b)  All customers having direct pressure hot water tanks or appliances must place proper automatic vacuum and relief valves in the pipe system to prevent any damage to such tanks or appliances in the event that the town shuts off water to the street main(s) or service pipe(s). Water service will be provided to such direct pressure installations only at the customers risk and in no case shall the water division be liable for any damage occasioned thereby. 
(Ord. No. 2014/2015-01, Exh.(Ch. 2,  10), 12-17-2014) 
Sec. 31-30. - Repeal of inconsistent charter. 
    All provisions, rules, regulations and rates inconsistent herein, are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 2014/2015-01, Exh.(Ch. 2,  14), 12-17-2014) 
Sec. 31-31. - Additions and amendments. 
    The foregoing rules and regulations are subject to amendment at a duly convened public meeting of the town council in accordance with RSA chapter 91-A. 
(Ord. No. 2014/2015-01, Exh.(Ch. 2,  15), 12-17-2014) 
Secs. 31-32-31-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROVISIONS FOR MAIN PIPE EXTENSION 

Sec. 31-41. - Review and approval process for developers and contractors. 
(a)  Plans must be submitted to the public works department a minimum of 30 days prior to the date of approval. 
(1)  Plans shall be drafted on 24" X 34" plan and profile sheets with a horizontal scale of 1" = 20" or 1" = 40'. Detail sheets need not be on plan - profile sheets. 
(2)  Specifications shall be type written on standard 8 1/2" x 11" sheets. 
(b)  Water mains in new subdivisions to be served by the Town of Newmarket shall be installed by the developer or contractor at his expense according to specifications established by the Town of Newmarket and the supervision of the water division. The developer, contractor, or other party will be responsible for defects in materials and workmanship in any water system for one year after the acceptance of that water system improvements by the Town of Newmarket. 
(c)  The developer or contractor shall, as a condition of any approval, save and hold the town harmless against any and all claims arising out of the extension or construction of the water main. 
(d)  Upon completion of the water system or parts thereof, the developers or contractors shall obtain a written certification from the superintendent of the water division that said system has been constructed strictly to these regulations. Said certification shall be required prior to the acceptance of said water system, or parts thereof, by the Town of Newmarket. A letter of approval signed by the public works director, delivered to the developer, contractor or other party, shall be sufficient evidence that the Town of Newmarket has in fact accepted the water system or parts thereof. 
(e)  Whenever a developer, contractor or other party is found in violation of any of these regulations, the superintendent of the water division may cause any and all installation or construction activity to cease until such violations have ceased and have been corrected. Any decision to stop the installation of a water system, or parts thereof, by the superintendent of the water division may be appealed to the town administrator in writing. 
(f)  If a developer or contractor or other party is found to be in violation of the provisions of article IV of those regulations, the superintendent of the water division may appoint a representative to inspect the work on a full-time basis. The salary or salaries paid for said representative(s) shall be borne by the developer or contractor, until such time as the superintendent is reasonably satisfied that the contractor, developer, or other party shall follow these regulations. Such decisions may be appealed to the town administrator pursuant to section 31-41(d) of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2014/2015-01, Exh.(Ch. 3,  2), 12-17-2014) 
Secs. 31-42-31-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REQUIREMENTS FOR WATER MAIN AND SERVICES 

Sec. 31-51. - Construction materials. 
(a)  Water mains. Pipe shall be a minimum of inches in diameter or as determined by the water division, and shall conform to ANSI Standards for ductile iron pipe, in all categories, including but not limited to, lining, protective coatings and laying length. The minimum pipe thickness shall be class 52. 
(1)  Ductile iron pipe shall have push-on joints with rubber gaskets, except where pipe is to be joined with special fittings or valves, in which case pipe shall be furnished with mechanical joints. 
(2)  Marking pipe. Each ductile iron pipe shall have conspicuously painted on the exterior the pressure, class, and weight of the pipe. 
(3)  Linings and coatings. The outside surface of all pipes shall be factory coated with bituminous, coating of either coal tar or asphalt base approximately one millimeter thick. The inside surface of all pipe shall be a double cement mortar lining and bituminous seal coat in strict accordance with ANSI Standard A2.4/AWWA C104-LR for "cement-mortar lining for cast-iron pipe with fittings for water". 
(4)  Manufacturer's affidavit of factory inspection and testing. Upon request, the developer shall supply a sworn affidavit of compliance that all hydrostatic and physical properties tests have been made and that the results of the same comply with the American Standard's Association (ASA) requirements. 
(5)  Developers responsibility for material. The developer is responsible for all materials during all stages of development, including but not limited to, the procurement of materials, handling and storage of said materials, and installation. The interior of the pipe shall be kept free of dirt and foreign matter at all times. The developer shall exercise due care over said material, and the developer shall not use materials that have been dropped, bumped, or whose structural integrity or effectiveness has otherwise been called into question due to damage. Detrimental abrasions to coatings shall be repaired by the contractor or be cause for pipe replacement. 
(6)  Ductile iron pipe fittings. Fittings for ductile iron water pipe shall be ductile or cast iron and meet the requirements of AWWA C110. The outside surface of all fittings shall be coated by hot coal tar dip method before lining. Inside cement lining shall be in accordance with AWWA C104. The minimum pressure rating for all fittings shall be 250 pounds per square inch (psi) unless a higher pressure class is required for the specific installation. Unless otherwise required for joint restraint, joints on fittings shall be mechanical in accordance to AWWA C111. 
(b)  Gate Valves. Gate valves should be iron body bronze mounted, resilient seat, mechanical joint, with stainless steel nuts and bolts for underground use, wrench operated, non-rising stem, and "O-ring" seal in accordance with AWWA C509. All valves shall be "OPEN LEFT", and shall have the makers' initials, pressure rating, and year of manufacturer cast on the body. Valves 12 inches and smaller shall be suitable and designed by the manufacturer for water working pressure of 200 psi and valves larger than 12 inches shall have a working pressure of 150 psi. Gate valves shall have a two inch square nut for wrench operation and the operating nut shall have an arrow cast in metal indicating the direction of opening. Gate valves shall be Mueller 2360 series or approved equal. 
(c)  Valve boxes. Valve boxes shall be heavy pattern cast or ductile iron, cast in two or three telescoping sections of sliding construction and at such lengths as will provide, without full extension, the required cover. The lower section shall be 5 1/4" inch inside diameter and shall be valve and domed at the bottom to fit over the valve nut. The upper section shall fit over the lower section, unless otherwise infeasible. Covers shall: 
(1)  Be at least six inches in diameter; 
(2)  Fit flush with the top surface; 
(3)  Shall be slotted for easy removal; and 
(4)  Have the words "water" and "open" and a direction arrow plainly cast in relief on the top surface. 
Valve boxes shall be free of defects in material and workmanship, and shall be coated with coal tar pitch enamel or other approved coatings. 
(d)  Hydrants. 
(1)  All hydrants shall be post fire hydrants shall have a minimum five and one-half inch opening, six inch hub inlet, two two-and-one-half inch hoses, and one four-and-one-half inch pumper nozzles with National Standard Threads. 
(2)  The opening nut shall open by turning to the LEFT. Said nut shall be five sided, one-and-one-half point to flat. 
(3)  Hydrant shall conform to the latest revision of AWWA Standard for Fire Hydrants for Ordinary Water Works Service, serial designation C502-LR. Hydrants shall be fitted with stainless steel nuts and bolts. Hydrants shall be Mueller Super Centurion 250 or approved equal. 
(4)  In areas of installation where the ground water table is higher than that of dry barrel hydrant drains, the drains shall be plugged. Information pertaining to the location of plugged hydrants shall be sent to the Newmarket Fire Department. 
(e)  Corporate stops. Corporation stops shall be three-quarters of an inch, unless otherwise required, and shall be ball type compression. INLET: AWWA taper CC thread; OUTLET: Conductive compression connection for copper tubing sizing (C.T.S) outside diameter (O.D.) Corporation stops shall be Mueller 300 series, Ford F Series or approved equal. 
(f)  Copper water tube. Copper water tube shall be three-quarters (3/4) of an inch, unless otherwise required, and shall be soft temper, type "K," and conform to ASTM B-88. No splices will be allowed from the corporation stop to the curb box stop. 
(g)  Curb stops. Curb stops shall be three-quarters of an inch, unless otherwise required, and shall be ball type compression with conductive compression connections for copper tubing sizing (C.T.S) and outside diameter (O.D.) on both ends. Curb stops shall be Mueller 300 series, Ford Z series or approved equal. 
(h)  Curb boxes. Curb boxes shall conform to the specification for valve boxes. Curb stops need not conform to the specifications for valve boxes when for curb stops two inches and smaller, which in such case shall have a one-piece cast or ductile iron arch base, a steel pipe extension upper section, cast iron lid, and thread bronze plug with pentagon hex nut (rope thread). A stationary five-eights inch minimum diameter by 24 to 30 inches minimum stainless steel long rod shall be installed at the curb box. Curb boxes shall be set plumb and flush with final grade. In addition, no obstruction shall be placed to obstruct use of shut-off valve wrench within a four foot circumference from the center of the curb box. 
(i)  Backfill. 
(1)  Common fill mineral soil substantially free from organic materials, loam, wood, trash, and other objectionable materials which may be compressible or which cannot be properly compacted. Common fill should contain no stones larger than 6 inches in diameter. Common fill shall have properties such that it can be readily spread and compacted. Snow, ice, and frozen material shall not be permitted. 
(2)  Screened gravel shall be well graded in size from one-quarter inch to three-quarter inch and shall consist of clean, hard, and durable particles or fragments. Screen gravel shall be free from dirt, vegetable, or other objectionable matter, and shall not be comprised of an excess of soft, thin elongated, laminated, or disintegrated pieces. The grading should conform to the following requirements: 
Square Opening 1-inch 3/4-inch 3/8 -inch No. 4 No. 8 % Passing by Weight 100 96-100 20-55 0-10 0-5  
(3)  Granular fill consist of hard, durable stone and course sand, free from frost, frozen lumps loam and clay, well graded, and containing no stones having and dimension greater than one inch. The grading of the sizes and material shall be such that the gravel may be thoroughly consolidated. The grading shall conform to the following requirements: 
Square Opening 3/4-inch No. 4 No. 40 No. 200 % Passing by Weight 100 96-100 20-55 0-10  
(j)  Pavement. Provide all materials in accordance with the applicable sections of the latest edition of the Standard Specification for Highways and Bridges of the New Hampshire Department of Transportation (NHDOT). 
(Ord. No. 2014/2015-01, Exh.(Ch. 4,  2), 12-17-2014) 
Sec. 31-52. - Construction methods. 
(a)  Trench excavation. the contractor shall be responsible to excavate trench/trenches in a manner consistent with all safety requirements provided by State, federal, and local law and regulations for the soil types involved. The contractor is required to do all dewatering of the trench which may be necessary to insure the trench bottom is firm and dry. If, in the opinion of the water division, unsatisfactory soil conditions exist at the required trench grade, the contractor may be required to excavate below normal trench grade until suitable foundation material is encountered. The excavation shall then be backfilled with screened gravel in six in layers. Each layer shall be properly tamped and compacted until normal trench grade is obtained. The contractor shall make such additional excavations as may be necessary to provide for proper placement of concrete thrust blocks, valves, hydrants, services and other appurtenances as shown on plans or as required by the water division. 
(b)  Cover. All water main trenches shall be such that a minimum cover of five to six feet is provided over the pipe, where possible, except at gate valves whereupon a minimum of three feet of cover shall be provided at the top of the valve bonnet. The maximum depth of cover shall be seven feet unless otherwise approved by the Water Division. 
(c)  Bedding the pipe and fittings. All pipe and fittings shall be placed on a layer of bedding material consisting of compacted screened gravel or granular fill. The depth of bedding shall be six inches minimum or equal to one half the diameter of the pipe, whichever is greater. Any voids under the pipe shall be filled and thoroughly tamped. 
(d)  Laying the pipe and fittings. The pipe shall be placed in the trench in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations or by an approved method in such a manner so as to insure that the pipe is not damaged. All pipes shall be thoroughly sound, dry and clean before laying, and the utmost care shall be taken to insure that the pipes condition are not altered when placed on the bed. Water tight plugs shall be installed once the pipes are in place to keep out water and dirt. All work associated with laying the pipes shall conform to AWWA Standard Specification C600 wherever said specifications are applicable and not in conflict with the provisions contained in these regulations. When the pipe is in place, screened gravel or granular fill, whichever is suitable under the circumstances, shall be placed in the trench and thoroughly compacted in six inch lifts to 12 inches above the top of the pipe. 
(1)  Valves. Gate valves shall be installed to permit isolation of sections of the water mains for the purposes of flushing and to facilitate future repairs on the water mains. The location of gate valves shall be approved by the water division. Valves shall be installed as close as possible to plumb and in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. Valve boxes shall be installed at every valve location. Valve boxes shall be adjusted to the proper finish grade and shall be set plumb and centered over the operating nut of the valve. After installation is completed, all valves shall be operated and then left in the closed position. Valves and tee's shall be roded together. 
(2)  Tapping sleeves and valves. Tapping sleeves and valves shall be installed with the outlet flange set vertically and the sleeve squarely centered on the main. Concrete or granite blocking shall be placed beneath the sleeve and valve to provide support. Concrete thrust blocking shall be placed behind and under the sleeve and valve after the tap is completed. The valve shall be flushed after completion of the taps to ensure that the valve seat is clean. Bituminous coating shall be applied to the nuts and bolts holding the sleeve together. 
(3)  Hydrants. Hydrants will be installed along all mains at a maximum separation of one thousand (1,000') feet. Notwithstanding this provision, hydrants will be installed no further than six-hundred (600) feet from any structure. The Town of Newmarket Fire Department may, in its discretion, require shorter distances based on required fire flow. The hydrant shall be set plumb and at the proper elevation with respect to the final finished grade. The breakaway flange shall be set two inches above finish grade. The hydrant base shall be set on fine material. The hydrant branch valve shall be adequately anchored together by mechanical means (anchor tee or threaded rod) and by concrete thrust blocks. The final location of hydrants shall be approved by the water division. Prior to any hydrant being tested under pressure, all hydrants, laterals, and mains shall be flushed to remove dirt, rocks, and foreign matter. Each nozzle and pumper outlet shall be at least 18 inches above grade on the installed hydrant. All steamer connection shall face the travel way. Each hydrant shall be provided with an approved gate valve located three feet from the hydrant, but not located within the travel way. The hydrant and tee shall be roded together. Hydrants shall be painted to meet the Newmarket Water Division requirements for color. 
(e)  Thrust restraint. Concrete thrust blocks and joint restraints shall be installed at all bends, fittings, dead ends and hydrants as directed by the Water Division. Thrust blocks shall be pre-cast. Trench formed thrust blocks will not be acceptable. The bearing area of the thrust blocks shall be determined for each installation based on soil type and system design pressure. In the event that local conditions prohibit the use of thrust blocks, the contractor shall furnish and install additional mechanical thrust resisting devices, upon the approval of such devices by the water division. 
(f)  Service connections. Service shall be constructed in accordance with the most recent revision of the BOCA, CABO, and International Plumbing Codes. Service pipe connections will be made only from the street where is the legal address of the premises served is located. 
(1)  Corporation stops. The contractor shall furnish and install all corporation stops at locations as directed by the water division. A tapping machine shall be used which will permit tapping of water mains under pressure. The tapping machine shall be rigidly fastened to the pipe and the tap shall be made in the upper one-half of the pipe. The length of travel of the tap shall be so established that when the stop is inserted and tightened with a 14 inch wrench, not more than one to three threads will be exposed on the outside. Taps shall be at least 18 inches apart at a minimum. 
(2)  Copper tubing. The contractor shall furnish and install copper tubing at locations as directed by the water division. Excavation for services shall be to a minimum depth of five feet, and the contractor shall exercise special care to insure that the bottom is free from sharp rocks or ledge outcroppings. In placing the service in the trench, the contractor shall ensure that the copper tubing has no kinks or sharp bends and that the screened gravel (or granular fill) is placed to the depth of six inches over. The contractor shall also ensure that the area around the service is free from large or sharp stones which may come in contact with the service. 
(3)  Temporary service connection. Temporary service connections shall be at the customer's expense and shall include, but shall not be limited to, connections to buildings or trailers mounted on foundations, gardens, or any other connections made for a temporary use. 
(Ord. No. 2014/2015-01, Exh.(Ch. 4,  3), 12-17-2014) 
Sec. 31-53. - Electrical power and telephone lines. 
(a)  Underground electric and telephone lines, cables, or conduit shall not be installed in the same trench as the water main. 
(b)  Wherever possible, the electric and telephone lines shall be installed on the opposite side of the street from the water main. However, if it is necessary to install underground power and telephone lines on the same side of the street as the water main, the approval of the superintendent of the water division shall be required. 
(c)  Wherever the electric or telephone lines must cross either mains or service branches, the installation shall be in conduit encased in concrete. The concrete shall extend laterally for a minimum distance of five feet from each side of the water installation. 
(d)  If the lines are laid parallel to mains or service branches, including those between the street shut-off and the house service, there must be a minimum of six (6) feet of lateral separation. 
(e)  There shall be no installation of any electric or telephone line within ten (10) feet of a hydrant or house service street shut-off. 
(1)  Warning Tape. All water, electric, cable, and telephone lines must be marked with underground warning tape located a minimum of one foot to six inches above the utility or as otherwise required by state or federal law or regulation. 
Private Fire Protection. There shall be a separate pipe, gated on Municipal property, for private fire protection. In no case shall the fire service pipe be used for anything other than fire protection. 
(Ord. No. 2014/2015-01, Exh.(Ch. 4,  4), 12-17-2014) 
Chapter 32 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of 06-21-2017, amended chapter 32 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 32,  32-1-32-13, 32-45-32-56, 32-84-32-89, 32-102-32-127, 32-153-32-161, 32-191-32-204, 32-232-32-239, pertained to similar subject mater, and derived from Ord. of 2-14-1996,  1.01-1.13, 2.01-2.11, 3.01-3.05, 4.01-4.08, 5.01-5.07, 5.09(A), (B), (I), (M), 6.01-6.14, 7.01-7.08; Ord. of 5-7-1997; Ord. of 5-6-1998; Ord. of 8-2-2000; Ord. of 2-7-2001; Ord. No. 2002-04, 3-6-2002; Ord. of 5-7-2003; Ord. of 6-18-2003; Ord. of 2-4-2004); Ord. of 3-3-2004; Ord. of 9-1-2004; Ord. No. 2007-08, 10-17-2007; Ord. of 12-5-2007; Ord. of 11-19-2008); Ord. No. 2008/09-3, 4-15-2009; Ord. No. 2009/10-01, 7-29-2009; Ord. No. 2009/2010-05, 11-4-2009; Ord. of 8-4-2010; Ord. No. 2010/2011-011, 8-4-2010; Ord. No. 2016/2017-01, 3-1-2017; Ord. No. 5-2016/2017,  1-6, 6-21-2017. 
State Law reference- Zoning, RSA 674:16 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 32-1. - Guidance for the layperson. 
(a)  Read the chapter. To gain an understanding of this community code, it is important to read this chapter. Statements of purpose are included for the chapter as a whole and for many of the sections to help readers understand the intent of the chapter. 
(b)  Organization and cross references. To fully understand this Code, it is important for the reader to understand how the town has organized its land use codes, and how this chapter specifically is organized and cross referenced. 
(1)  Municipal Codes. The town has organized all its ordinances and regulations into a single system. See the table of contents for this Code. 
(2)  Organization of the chapter. 
a.  Articles. This chapter is divided into seven articles. Each article is simply a grouping of related issues or requirements, and readers should identify the article in which an answer is likely to be found. Information about setbacks is found in article III of this chapter (Dimensional Requirements); information about sign height restrictions is found in article IV of this chapter (Signs); and so on. 
b.  Sections. Each article is divided into sections, each of which may be further divided as needed. It is easiest to use the section analysis to locate the first order of sections. 
(3)  Cross referencing system. Within this chapter there are many references to other sections of this chapter. These cross references are provided to help the reader find needed information, and to inform the reader of related provisions. This subsection explains the method of cross referencing to help the unfamiliar reader. The reference for this subsection would be written as follows: 
 32-1(b)(3) 
The symbol "" means section. In all cases, the information following the "" starts with the section, then the subsections in descending order. Additional levels of hierarchy would be shown as follows: 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  1.01; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-2. - Purpose. 
    The general purpose of this chapter is to guide the character of growth, development and change in order to provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare. Throughout this chapter, the town seeks to balance the process of growth, development and change with the need to preserve and enhance those qualities, which make Newmarket a safe and desirable place to live, work and visit. In keeping with this general purpose, the following are specific objectives: 
(1)  Lessen vehicle congestion in the streets; 
(2)  Secure safety from fires, panic and other dangers; 
(3)  Provide adequate sunlight and air circulation; 
(4)  Prevent overcrowding of land and avoid undue concentration of population; 
(5)  Facilitate adequate provision of public facilities, utilities and services; 
(6)  Provide for adequate child day care; 
(7)  Assure proper use of natural resources; and 
(8)  Implement the policies of the Newmarket Master Plan, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Enhance the built environment and aesthetic qualities of the town; 
b.  Enhance the downtown village area by providing an appropriate mix of uses, improving its appearance, maintaining its traditional New England character, enhancing its pedestrian orientation, and promoting mixed-use mill re-development; 
c.  Promote commercial development, including opportunity for home-based work, to broaden the tax base and employ residents; 
d.  Enhance the quality of life and foster tourism by enhancing the town's natural beauty, ecological integrity, and natural recreational amenities such as the downtown waterfront, Great Bay and the Lamprey River; 
e.  Provide for a variety of quality living arrangements, with emphasis on quality neighborhoods; and 
f.  Protect the sense of community and friendly small-town atmosphere. 
(9)  To advance aesthetic values through design and architecture, because the preservation or enhancement of the visual environment may promote prosperity and the general welfare. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  1.02; Ord. No. 5-2016/2017,  1, 6-21-2017; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-3. - Authority. 
(a)  Authority. Authority to adopt the zoning ordinance from which this chapter is derived is granted by the state to the local legislative body by RSA 674:16, and is conditioned by RSA 674:18, which requires that the planning board adopt objectives and land use sections of the Master Plan prior to adoption of said zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Resolution. Pursuant to the grant of authority, and finding that the planning board adopted objectives and a land use section of the Newmarket Master Plan on November 1, 1994, the town council hereby repeals the previous zoning ordinance and adopts the new zoning ordinance, as proposed by the planning board and as set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  1.03; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-4. - Zoning maps. 
    There shall be a zoning map for the Town of Newmarket, which sets forth the base zoning district boundaries. The zoning map shall be available for public inspection at the Newmarket town offices in the planning board office. This map shall be used for all interpretations of base zoning district boundaries. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  1.04; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-5. - Nonconformity. 
    This section specifies those rights to which nonconforming uses, structures and lots are entitled. 
(1)  Nonconforming use. The following control nonconforming uses: 
a.  Any non-conforming use may be continued, except that if any such non-conforming use is abandoned, desisted, either voluntarily or by legal action, or caused to be discontinued, for a period of two (2) years, then any subsequent use of the building, other structures or use of the land shall be required to be in conformity with the provision of these regulations. 
b.  Certain districts prohibit single-family residential use, and in such districts, the pre-existing single-family use is nonconforming. To prevent this chapter from being unduly burdensome on a nonconforming single-family residential use, such single-family houses shall be permitted to be physically expanded, and accessory structures added or expanded. All other requirements of this chapter shall apply. There shall be no increase in the number of residential units on the lot, and accessory apartments shall be prohibited. 
c.  Certain districts prohibit specific business/civic uses (see definition of business/civic), and in such districts these pre-existing uses are nonconforming. To prevent this chapter from being unduly burdensome on these pre-existing, nonconforming uses, the planning board may grant a special use permit for the expansion of these uses under the following conditions: 
1.  The expansion shall not be greater than 30 percent of the floor area dedicated to the use at the time the use became nonconforming; 
2.  The lot on which the use exists shall conform to all dimensional requirements of this chapter in existence at the time of application for the special use permit; 
3.  All expansions of these nonconforming uses shall require site plan review, regardless of the size of the expansion. If the expansion is too small to otherwise qualify for site plan review, the requirements of minor site plan review shall apply. 
(2)  Nonconforming structure. The following control nonconforming structures: 
a.  Where an existing structure violates the setback requirements, horizontal expansion of the structure within the setback may be allowed if granted a special exception by the zoning board of adjustment. The zoning board of adjustment shall grant the special exception only if the following conditions are met: 
1.  The expanded structure is no closer to the lot line than the existing structure. 
2.  The expansion is not in the 100-year floodplain. 
3.  The owner demonstrates that no other expansion, which reasonably fulfills the intended purpose, can be achieved in conformance with this chapter. 
4.  Sanitary sewage disposal and water supply are provided if needed. 
5.  The expansion shall not render the lot proportionally less adequate. 
6.  The expansion does not adversely affect abutting properties, public health, safety or general welfare. 
b.  Portions of structures within a setback may be enclosed or expanded upwards if granted a special exception by the zoning board of adjustment. The zoning board of adjustment shall grant the special exception only if the following conditions are met: 
1.  If an upward expansion, it shall not have any adverse impact on any neighboring property, including but not limited to blocking of views and/or sunlight. 
2.  If an upward expansion, it shall not exceed the maximum height limitations specified in this chapter. 
3.  No part of the structure is located within the 100-year floodplain. 
4.  The expansion shall not render the lot proportionally less adequate. 
(3)  Nonconforming lot. The following control nonconforming lots: 
a.  No action shall be permitted to change the boundary of the lot unless it brings the lot closer to conformance with this chapter and it makes no other aspect of the lot and/or all structures thereon more nonconforming. 
b.  If the water body setbacks of section 32-154 cannot be achieved on an undeveloped pre-existing lot because the lot does not have sufficient depth from the water body, a new structure shall be permitted if granted a special exception by the zoning board of adjustment. The zoning board of adjustment shall grant the special exception only if the following conditions are met: 
1.  Sanitary water supply and sewage disposal are provided, and if on site, the sewage disposal is located as far from the water body as is feasible or necessary; 
2.  Non-water body setbacks shall be reduced by up to 75 percent before the water body setback is reduced, ensuring maximum protection of the water body and shoreline; 
3.  The structure shall not be located within the 100-year floodplain. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  1.05; Ord. of 5-7-1997; Ord. No. 2016/2017-01, 3-1-2017; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-6. - Compliance with other codes. 
    As specified in RSA 676:14, whenever the requirements of this chapter differ from the requirements of another existing local code, the provision, which imposes the greater restriction, or higher standard shall be controlling. This same principal shall also apply where local codes differ from state or federal codes. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  1.06; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-7. - Saving clause. 
    If any portion of this chapter is found invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, this finding shall not invalidate the remainder of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  1.07; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-8. - Interpretation, administration and enforcement. 
    The code enforcement officer shall have sole authority to interpret, administer and enforce this chapter. The code enforcement officer shall have at his disposal all legally available means to fulfill these responsibilities. Decisions of the code enforcement officer are appealable to the zoning board of adjustment. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  1.08; Ord. of 5-7-1997; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-9. - Special use permits. 
(a)  Pursuant to RSA 674:21,I(i), a provision which permits flexible and discretionary zoning among other innovative land use controls, the town offers certain discretionary authority to the planning board in limited cases where generally stated standards appear inappropriate. Special use permits are provided in the following sections: section 32-45(b)(2) for optional uses in the mills; section 32-45(b)(2)(A) for multifamily residential uses as part of a mixed-use mill redevelopment; section 32-46-A(b)(1) for mixed-use development with three or greater residential units; section 32-45(b)(2)a for self-storage facilities within existing buildings in the mills; section 32-48(b)(2) for optional uses related to the golf course or outdoor recreation; section 32-159(b)(3) for siting telecommunications facilities; and section 32-232(2) for permitting large home-based businesses. 
(b)  Multi-family Housing in the M-2A District pursuant to section 32.46-A(b)(2)(A)-(B)2.03(B)(2)(a) & (b). A Special Use Permit shall be granted only if the Planning Board determines that the proposal conforms to all of the following Special Use criteria: 
(1)  Site suitability. 
(A)  Site shall have appropriate utilities (water, sewer, stormwater) available to service the project and shall not have a negative impact on environmental resources (wetlands, flood plain). 
(B)  Adequate off-street parking and loading is provided and ingress/egress is so designed as to cause minimum interference with traffic on abutting streets. 
(2)  External Impacts. The proposed project shall not impact adjacent properties (traffic, noise, odors, vibrations, lighting, hours of operation); shall not have an adverse impact on the appropriate and orderly development of the surrounding properties; and buildings (new or existing to be modified) shall be compatible with the established character of surrounding properties; and will not cause a significant decline in property values of adjacent properties. 
(3)  Fiscal Impacts. The proposed project will not have a negative fiscal impact or market impact on the Town as shown in the Fiscal Impact and Market Studies required to be completed as described in 32-46-A(b)(2)(A) & (B). 
(c)  Process. As required by RSA 676:4,I, the Planning Board shall process requests for Special Use Permits using the procedures of the Subdivision Regulations. The Board shall grant the Special Use Permit upon finding that the proposal is consistent with the purposes of this Ordinance. Specific criteria may be specified in the text of this Ordinance. In addition to these, if specified, the Board shall review the general purpose of the Ordinance as well as the purpose of the specific section of the Ordinance to make its decision. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  1.09; Ord. of 8-2-2000; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-10. - Zoning board of adjustment. 
    This chapter provides for the establishment of the zoning board of adjustment (ZBA) as required per RSA 673:1(IV). With respect to this chapter, the ZBA shall review and decide on appeals from administrative decisions, applications for the special exceptions, applications for variances, and applications for an equitable waiver of dimensional requirements. The town council shall appoint five members and up to five alternate members to the ZBA. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  1.10; Ord. of 5-7-1998; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-11. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory means a structure or use subordinate and customarily incidental to a primary structure or use on the same lot. 
    Accessory Dwelling Unit means a residential living unit that is within or attached to a single-family dwelling, and that provides independent living facilities for one or more persons, including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel of land as the principal dwelling it accompanies. Its use is subordinate to the principal dwelling and can be either a studio, a one or two bedroom apartment. 
    Accessory shed means a small one-story structure made of metal, wood, plastic or other synthetic material for the storage of items in conjunction with a residential use, which is subordinate and customarily incidental to the primary residential use, and is located on the same lot as the primary use. For purposes of section 32-239, a temporary self-storage facility or trailer, a tent or canvas enclosure, a portable garage, or construction container, is not considered an accessory shed. 
    Alternative tower structure means the use of alternative structures such as man-made trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles, water towers, and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers and their appurtenances. 
    Animal husbandry means agricultural activity which involves animals which produce manure or other wastes which would or could be considered objectionable to the surrounding neighborhood. 
    Antenna means any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, television, personal communications service (PCS), pager network, repeater, or any other communications through the sending and/or receiving or electromagnetic waves of any bandwidth. 
    Artist live/work space units means single enclosed private units of at least 900 square feet, which provide affordable living/work spaces for artists, writers, musicians, or craft people, in which a minimum of 40 percent of the space is devoted to studio space for creation, display, exhibit and sale of art, with the remainder used for living purposes. 
    Automotive repair means a building, premises, or land in which or upon which a business, service, or industry involving the maintenance, servicing, repair, or painting of vehicles is conducted. The dispensing of fluids, including fuels, oil, and antifreeze shall be included in this use. 
    Bed and breakfast means a use in which an occupied single-family residence also offers for public hire up to three rooms for overnight accommodation, and offers meals prepared in the kitchen of the residence. This use shall be subordinate to the residential use of the structure and lot. 
    Board means the planning board. 
    Building official means the officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of the building code, or a duly authorized representative. 
    Business/civic means all uses, except single-family residential, including manufactured housing; single-family residential, excluding manufactured housing; duplex residential; multifamily residential; and student housing. 
    Campground means a plot of ground upon which two or more campsites are located, established, or maintained for occupancy by camping units as temporary living quarters for recreation, education, or vacation purposes. 
    Child day care means the care and supervision of a child (any person under 18 years of age) away from the child's home and apart from the child's parents. (Also see Child day care, family, and Child day care, family group, and RSA 170-E:2.) 
    Child day care, family, means a use equivalent to the state definition of "family day care home." This is a use in an occupied residence in which child day care is provided for less than 24 hours per day, except in emergencies, for up to six children from one or more unrelated families. The six children shall include any foster children residing in the home and all children who are related to the caregiver except children who are ten years of age or older. In addition to the six children, up to three children attending a full day school program may also be cared for up to five hours per day on school days and all day during school holidays. 
    Child day care, family group, means a use equivalent to the state definition of "family group day care home." This is a use in an occupied residence in which child day care is provided for less than 24 hours per day, except in emergencies, for seven to twelve children from one or more unrelated families. The twelve children shall include all children related to the caregiver and any foster children residing in the home, except children who are ten years of age or older. In addition to the twelve children, up to five children attending a full-day school program may also be cared for up to five hours per day on school days and all day during school holidays. 
    Civic use means land areas and/or structures, publicly or privately owned, which are intended for the use, enjoyment and benefit of the community. Examples include, but are not limited to, the town offices, the post office, the community center, and churches. 
    Commercial amusement means an establishment engaged in providing amusement or entertainment for a fee or admission charge, and in which the patron is engaged on the premises as an active participant rather than a spectator. 
    Commercial excavation means a land area, which is used, or has been used, for the commercial taking of earth, including all slopes. (See also RSA 155-E:1) 
    Conference center means a facility used for conferences and seminars, which may include accommodations for sleeping, food preparation and eating, recreation, entertainment, resource facilities, and meeting rooms. If sleeping accommodations are a part of the facility, only 25 percent of the accommodations may be rented by transients at any point in time. 
    Country club means land and structures customarily associated with a golf course, comprising a club house, recreational facilities, and other accessory uses, and open to members and their guests or open to the public. 
    Cultural use means establishments that document the social and religious structures and intellectual and artistic manifestations that characterize a society and include museums, art galleries, and botanical and zoological gardens of a natural, historic, educational, or cultural interest. 
    Education facility means a building or part thereof, which is designed, constructed, or used for education or instruction in any branch of knowledge. The facility may be publicly or privately owned. 
    FAA is an acronym meaning Federal Aviation Administration. 
    FCC is an acronym meaning Federal Communications Commission. 
    Forestry and agriculture means establishments primarily engaged in the operation of timber tracts, tree farms, forest nurseries, the gathering of forest products, performing forest services; or the production, keeping, or maintenance for sale, lease, or personal use of plants and/or animals useful to humans, including, but not limited to: forages and sod crops, grains and seed crops, livestock, bees and apiary products, fruits of all kinds, nuts, berries, and/or flowers. 
    Frontage means that portion of the property boundary shared with a road right-of-way meeting the criteria listed in section 32-84(2). 
    Golf course means a tract of land laid out for at least nine holes for playing the game of golf and improved with trees, greens, fairways, and/or hazards. This shall not include miniature golf or other such commercial amusements. 
    Height, when referring to a tower or other structure, means the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the tower or other structure or appurtenance, even if said highest point is an antenna or other appurtenance. 
    Historic district means the Newmarket Historic District established under the authority granted to the town council by RSA 674:46. 
    Hotel means a facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the general public, with access to rooms through a main lobby and/or common hallways. Such use may provide accessory services such as restaurants, meeting rooms, entertainment, and recreational facilities. 
    Housing, age-restricted (elderly) , means housing designed for and rented, leased or sold specifically to the elderly, specifically housing that qualifies as elderly housing under the Federal Fair Housing Act. 
    Housing, student , means dormitory-style housing in which a structure has been divided in a number of separately rented bedrooms with a common bathroom. Other common rooms may include a kitchen, living room, recreation room, etc. 
    Indoor recreation means an establishment that provides facilities for aerobic and anaerobic exercise, swimming, playing courts, shooting ranges, or similar indoor activities and facilities. 
    Lounge means an establishment where alcoholic drinks may be purchased for on-site consumption. This may include brewpubs which brew beer and other such beverages for sale and consumption on-site only. 
    Manufactured housing means any structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width and 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is 320 square feet or more, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to required utilities, which include plumbing, heating and electrical heating systems contained therein. This shall not include pre-site built housing as defined in RSA 674:31-a. 
    Manufacturing means an establishment engaged in the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new products, including the assembling of component parts, the creation of products, and the blending of materials, such as lubricating oils, plastics, resins or liquors, but which does not fit the definition of light manufacturing. 
    Manufacturing, light , means the fabrication, processing, finishing, assembly, packing or treatment of articles or merchandise conducted solely within a totally enclosed structure, and operated in a manner which is not offensive, noxious, detrimental or dangerous to surrounding areas by reason of dust, smoke, fumes, odor, noise, light, or other adverse environmental effect. 
    Marina means a facility for the storing, servicing, fueling, berthing, and securing of boats, and may also include eating, sleeping and retail facilities for owners, crews and guests. 
    Medical care facility means a structure not exceeding 7,500 square feet in gross floor area that houses health services providers. 
    Mixed-use mill redevelopment means a lot, tract, or parcel of land in the M-1 district to be redeveloped as a single entity through the rehabilitation of existing mill buildings and the possible construction of compatible new building for a combination of residential and nonresidential uses as set forth in a master site development plan. 
    Nonconforming lot means a lot which does not comply with the dimensional requirements of this chapter. 
    Nonconforming structure means that portion of a structure that does not comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
    Nonconforming use means a use that is not permitted in the base zoning district or overlay district in which it is located. 
    Nonconformity means a use, structure, lot or site improvement, which was lawfully in existence prior to the enactment of the zoning requirement, which would otherwise have prohibited it. 
    Nursing home means an institution or a distinct part of an institution that is licensed or approved to provide health care under medical supervision for 24 or more consecutive hours to two or more patients who are not related to the governing body by marriage, blood, or adoption. Generally, these are homes for the infirmed elderly. 
    Nursing home means an institution or a distinct part of an institution that is licensed or approved to provide health care under medical supervision for 24 or more consecutive hours to two or more patients who are not related to the governing body by marriage, blood, or adoption. Generally, these are homes for the infirmed elderly. 
    Office means a room or group of rooms used for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service, industry, or government and generally furnished with desks, tables, files, computers, and communications equipment. This may include areas for customers to be served, such as the lobby at a bank. 
    Outdoor recreational facility means a facility that is the primary use of a property and is designed for outdoor recreational activities, but specifically excluding racetracks for motorized vehicles. Examples of outdoor recreational facilities include, but are not limited to, playing fields, tennis courts, running tracks, playgrounds, and swimming pools. 
    Out-of-home adult day care means a use similar to child day care, but provided for adults in need of assistance. The care and supervision of an adult (any person 18 years of age or older) in need of assistance while away from that person's home and apart from the person's caregivers. 
    Place of assembly means a facility which accommodates a gathering of people who are jointly engaged in a singular activity. This shall include, but not be limited to, a church, meeting hall, gymnasium, sports stadium, and auditorium. The facility may be publicly or privately owned. 
    Pre-existing towers and antennas means any tower or antenna lawfully constructed or permitted prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. Additionally, any tower or antenna lawfully constructed in accordance with this chapter that predates an application currently before the board. 
    Principal Dwelling Unit means the primary or pre-dominant residential use of a dwelling unit to which a property is or may be devoted and to which all other uses on the premises are subordinate or accessory. 
    Research and development means an establishment or other facility for carrying on investigation in the natural, physical, or social sciences, which may include engineering or product development. 
    Residence, duplex , means a single structure containing two residential units, neither of which is an accessory apartment. 
    Residence, multifamily , means a single structure containing three or more residential units, none of which is an accessory apartment. 
    Residence, single-family , means a detached structure containing one residential unit, with or without permitted accessory apartments. 
    Residential home-care facility means group residence occupied by people in need of assistance in their daily lives. Such facilities are designed and operated to house people with similar or common needs, such as a facility for frail elderly people, or people recovering from head injuries. Professional supervision and some services such as health monitoring, recreational activities, and transportation may be an integral component of the use. 
    Residential unit means one or more rooms, designed, occupied, or intended for occupancy as a separate living quarter, with cooking, sleeping, and sanitary facilities provided within the dwelling unit for the exclusive use of a single household or family. 
    Restaurant means an establishment where food and drink are prepared, served and either consumed on site or taken out to consume elsewhere. 
    Retail means selling goods or merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods. This shall not include yard sales and other such activities which are incidental to a residential use, unless such incidental activities exceed seven days per year. 
    Self-service storage facility means a structure containing storage spaces of varying sizes leased or rented on individual leases for varying periods of time and specifically for dead storage only, excluding the storage of hazardous or flammable chemicals and explosives. 
    Service or service use means a commercial use, which primarily provides services to people or businesses. There may be incidental retail or office activity, but the primary commercial activity is service. Examples include, but are not limited to, beauty salons and barbershops. 
    Setback means the horizontal distance between a structure and the lot boundaries, measured at right angles or radial to the lot boundary. 
    Sign means any display of lettering, logos, colors, lights, or illumination visible from the property lines, which either conveys a message to the public, or intends to advertise, direct, invite, announce, or draw attention to, directly or indirectly, a use conducted, goods, products, services or facilities available, either on the lot or on any other premises. For purposes of this chapter, the term "sign" shall exclude merchandise display; federal, state, county or municipal property of any sort; necessary highway traffic control or parking control devices on public or private rights-of-way; and municipally assigned structure numbers. 
    Sign, electronic message board means a sign that is capable of displaying words, symbols, figures and images that can be electronically or mechanically changed by remote or automatic means. 
    Sign height means the measure from undisturbed ground directly under the sign to the top of the message area. 
    Sign message area means the total area used to display a sign's message, including all lettering, designs, symbols, logos, together with but not including the support framework, bracing and base, provided that these features remain incidental to the sign itself. Where the message area consists of letters, symbols, logos or devices affixed to the surface of a structure, wall, awning or window, the message area shall be measured by a single, continuous, rectangular perimeter drawn to enclose the extreme limits of the sign elements. The message area of one side of a double-faced sign shall be regarded as the total message area of the sign, provided that each of the double faces is parallel to, and attached directly to, the other. 
    Sign, freestanding, means a self-supporting sign not attached to any building, wall or fence, but in a fixed location. This does not include movable signs. 
    Sign, movable, means a sign capable of being readily moved or relocated, including portable signs mounted on a chassis and wheels, or supported by legs. 
    Sign, neon/LED style is used in the colloquial sense, to indicate the type of sign generally made with shaped glass tubes filled with gas (typically a noble gas such as neon or argon) which radiate colored light when an electric current is added. For purposes of this chapter, a neon sign is not considered an internally illuminated sign, but is defined separately. An LED (light-emitting diode) style sign is one that utilizes a two lead semiconductor light source, which emits light when activated. 
    Sign, off-site, means a sign, which is not located on the lot to which its message refers. 
    Sign, off-site commercial, means a sign with a commercial message relating to a commercial activity not conducted on the lot on which the sign is located. 
    Sign, projecting, means a sign which is affixed to the wall of a building and which extends more than 12 inches beyond the surface to which it is affixed. 
    Sign, wall, means a sign affixed to the wall of a building or to an awning, provided the sign does not extend more than 12 inches beyond the surface to which it is attached. 
    Sign, window, means a window, or portion thereof, on which sign message is displayed, whether by permanent or temporary attachment, but exclusive of merchandise display. 
    Special exception means a process by which the zoning board of adjustment alters the standard provisions of this chapter in a manner specified in this chapter, and only when conditions specified in this chapter apply. 
    Storage means the depositing, stockpiling, or safekeeping of items, goods, or materials not used on a regular basis. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected, on or in the ground, or an attachment to something having a fixed location on the ground, including: permanent or temporary buildings; carports; porches; and other building features including stacks and antennas. This definition shall not include sidewalks, fences, driveways, septic systems, utility poles or lines, boundary markers, flagpoles, or retaining walls. 
    Structure height means the vertical distance from the lowest point of finish grade at the base of the structure to the highest point of the structure, but excluding chimneys, lightning rods and other such appurtenances. 
    Studio means the workshop of an artist, sculptor, photographer, or craftsperson. 
    Telecommunications facilities means any structure, antenna, tower, or other device which provides commercial mobile wireless services, cellular telephone services, specialized mobile radio communications (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), and personal communications service (PCS), paging services, and common carrier wireless exchange access services or similar services marketed to the general public or commercial user. 
    Tower means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term "tower" also includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and similar structures. 
    Warehouse means a structure or space used primarily for the storage of goods and materials. 
    Wholesale means selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional or professional business users; or to other wholesalers. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  1.11; Ord. of 5-7-1997; Ord. of 5-6-1998; Ord. of 12-5-2007; Ord. of 11-19-2008; Ord. No. 2008/09-3, 6-1-2009; Ord. No. 2009-10-01, 7-20-2009; Ord. of 8-4-2010; Ord. No. 2016/2017-01, 3-1-2017; Ord. No. 5-2016/2017,  2, 6-21-2017; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-12. - Site plan review authority. 
    The planning board, in accordance with RSA 674:43, is empowered to review and approve or disapprove site plans for the development or change or expansion of use of tracts for nonresidential uses or for multifamily dwelling units, whether or not such development includes subdivision or re-subdivision of the site. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of the town clerk to file with the Rockingham County Register of Deeds a certificate of notice showing that the planning board has been so authorized, and giving the date of such authorization. 
(2)  This authority was originally granted to the board on November 7, 1984, and was re-affirmed in the 1991 town Charter, and is re-affirmed on the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  1.12; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-13. - Lots split by zoning district boundaries. 
    Where an existing lot of record falls into more than one zoning district, the following shall apply: 
(1)  For lots which are large enough to be subdivided, the provisions of each district shall be applied separately to each portion of the lot. 
(2)  For lots which are not large enough to be subdivided, the provisions of the district which comprises the largest share of the lot shall apply to the entire lot. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  1.13; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Secs. 32-14-32-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BASE ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 32-45. - M-1 district. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this district shall be to provide for the ongoing use of the mill buildings in the downtown. It is recognized that the abandonment of these buildings would be a detriment to the community, and especially to the village and waterfront areas. It is also recognized that proper use and redevelopment within this district must be directed to enhance the quality of the village, protect the important historic resources within the district, and enhance the downtown Lamprey River waterfront. 
(b)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  Permitted by right. Uses permitted by right are listed in the table of permitted uses in section 32-56. 
(2)  Special use permit. Uses other than those specified in the table of permitted uses in section 32-56 may be allowed if granted a special use permit by the planning board. The granting of such permit shall require the board to find that the proposed use is consistent with the purposes of this district, is suitable for the location proposed, and would not cause significant adverse impacts. 
a.  Self-storage facilities may be approved by the planning board if granted a special use permit. Special use permits for self-storage facilities shall only be granted if they are located entirely within an existing building; and if granted site plan review approval. 
b.  Mixed-use redevelopments are permitted in the M-1 district by special use permit. Pursuant to the authority of RSA 674:21 and section 32-9, the planning board is granted discretionary authority to grant a special use permit for mixed-use mill redevelopment on parcels in the M-1 district, provided there is compliance with this section. 
1.  Purpose. The purpose is to allow for a mixture of commercial and residential uses in order to promote redevelopment of the historic mills in the M-1 Downtown Mill District. Such uses are intended to be complementary so as to provide an integrated approach to development based on a master site development plan; to be fiscally beneficial to the town; to provide efficient use of public services; and to make opportunities for commercial, public and multifamily residential dwelling units, all to enhance the quality of the downtown, the riverfront and the historic nature of the district. 
2.  Permitted uses. The uses, which are permitted by right in a mixed-use mill redevelopment, are in accordance with the table of permitted uses in section 32-56. 
3.  Special use permit restrictions. Mixed-use mill redevelopments shall be limited to: 
(i)  Projects involving the rehabilitation and/or reconstruction of existing mill structures. Special use permits issued under this section are not intended for the wholesale demolition of existing buildings and construction of new primary structures. Construction of accessory structures, such as decks, porches, and patios, is permitted. New building construction, including additions, required to replace the square footage of existing buildings deemed economically unsuitable for rehabilitation due to the extent of structure deterioration is also allowed. 
(ii)  Projects where no more than 70 percent of the existing developable gross floor building area shall be used for residential use and no less than 30 percent of the existing developable gross floor area is to be dedicated to nonresidential use including commercial, retail, office, governmental, cultural, and other uses, in accordance with the table of permitted uses in section 32-56. An increase in residential square footage is allowed by the planning board through the issuance of bonuses as set forth in subsection (b)(2)b.6 of this section. 
(iii)  The mixed-use mill redevelopment shall include a minimum of five percent artist live/work space units. Up to 40 percent of the finished square footage of such units may be allocated for nonresidential use. 
4.  Master site development plan required. As part of the application for a special use permit, the applicant shall prepare an overall master site development plan. This is a conceptual plan, drawn to scale, which graphically depicts the project. It is not intended to be a fully engineered drawing. At minimum, the plan shall include: 
(i)  The type, location, intensity, amount and percent of gross developable building area dedicated to various residential and nonresidential uses. 
(ii)  The calculations showing how the number of dwelling units was derived and the allocation of gross developable building area to residential and nonresidential uses. 
(iii)  Provisions for utilities, access roads, sidewalks, parking, and private and public ways. 
(iv)  Areas proposed for public and private open space. 
(v)  Any buildings, or portion thereof, to be removed, the footprint of said buildings to remain and any replacement structures and new additions to be built, as well as their corresponding square footage and lot coverage. 
(vi)  A phasing plan, if the project will be developed in more than one phase. Information on subsequent phases must be detailed enough to allow the planning board to fully evaluate the impacts and proposed mitigation measures of both the current phase and the full build out of the project. 
(vii)  A justification of density bonuses, if any, which will be incorporated into the overall design. This shall include a description of amenities being proposed in order to obtain density bonuses (e.g., interior public community and cultural space, public open space, historic preservation treatment, and qualifying energy conservation technologies). 
5.  Impact criteria for granting a special use permit. The impacts of the mixed-use mill redevelopment will be evaluated in conjunction with the special use permit process, rather than the site plan approval process. In order to obtain a special use permit from the planning board, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the planning board the following criteria are met: 
(i)  The proposed mixed-use mill redevelopment shall not create undue hazards or unreasonable expenditures of public funds, and that the public health and safety will be maintained during and following development. 
(ii)  The proposed mixed-use mill redevelopment shall generate a net positive fiscal impact for the town. The planning board may require the preparation and review of a fiscal impact assessment to demonstrate compliance with this requirement. 
(iii)  The proposed mixed-use mill redevelopment shall include provisions, satisfactory to the planning board, to insure that current and future municipal service capacity for police, fire, public works, water, sewer, general government, recreation, school services and facilities will not be adversely affected by the development. The planning board may require the preparation and review of a report on municipal service capacity to demonstrate compliance with this requirement. 
(iv)  The proposed mixed-use mill redevelopment shall not create an undue hazard or nuisance for vehicle or pedestrian traffic; shall include adequate provisions for safe and efficient traffic access, circulation and parking; and shall promote safe pedestrian and public transportation linkages between the site and Main Street to maximum practical extent. The planning board may require the preparation and review of a traffic impact assessment, as well as an on- and off-site improvement plan for pedestrian and traffic safety, including, but not limited to, traffic calming measures, pedestrian bridges and crosswalks, and other mitigation to demonstrate a safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian plan. 
(v)  Adequate and appropriate public utilities and infrastructure (water, sewer, stormwater management, parking, and other) shall be available or provided to support the proposed mixed-use mill redevelopment. The planning board may require the preparation of a public utility and infrastructure report to demonstrate compliance with this requirement. 
(vi)  The proposed mixed-use mill redevelopment shall not result in unreasonable impacts to adjoining properties or uses, by way of light, noise, pollution, visual blight, odor, vibration or other nuisance. The planning board may require the preparation and review of environmental studies, as it may deem necessary to meet this criteria. 
The planning board may waive the requirement that any or all of these studies be submitted if, in its discretion, it determines that the studies are not necessary for the board to make an informed decision. The planning board may engage the services of various professionals to assist it in the evaluation of any studies it may require. The applicant shall pay all costs associated with the independent review of such studies. In order to keep the approval process from being burdensome on the applicant, demonstration by the applicant of compliance with article V of this chapter shall give just cause for the planning board to grant a waiver of any duplicative site plan review regulations, provided there have been no material changes in any conditions, and/or material revisions, to the applicant's approved master site development plan, which may give cause for further special studies or technical assistance required by the planning board. 
6.  Dimensional requirements. In general, mixed-use mill redevelopments are governed by the dimensional requirements of article III of this chapter and the dimensions table, with the exception of section 32-86 and the stated requirement for maximum residential density. The maximum residential density for residential units which are proposed as part of a mixed-use mill redevelopment in the M-1 district shall be based upon the total developable gross square footage of the buildings to be rehabilitated and/or reconstructed. The base permitted residential area is a maximum of 70 percent of said total. The number of permitted residential dwelling units shall be calculated by dividing the base permitted residential area by 1,300. Density bonuses, permitting an additional number of units and an additional percentage of the total gross developable area of the buildings to be devoted to residential use, may be granted by the planning board for mixed-use mill redevelopment projects, as follows: 
(i)  An additional bonus of up to six percent for units and residential square footage shall be granted by the planning board if the applicant provides at least two percent of the gross developable building area for interior public community and cultural space. 
(ii)  An additional bonus of up to six percent for units and residential square footage shall be granted by the planning board if the applicant provides exterior public open space, such as a courtyard, park, formal urban space, and fishing or waterfront viewing pier, together with landscaping and pedestrian-oriented amenities which integrate the mill redevelopment with the Main Street, current and planned public river walk construction and adjacent public spaces and private properties. 
(iii)  An additional bonus of four percent for units and residential square footage shall be granted by the planning board if the building is rehabilitated in accordance with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Historic Rehabilitation. 
(iv)  An additional bonus of up to four percent for units and residential square footage shall be granted by the planning board if construction is U.S. Green Building Council LEED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) certifiable as demonstrated by a completed LEED checklist/scorecard. 
7.  General requirements. 
(i)  The special use permits shall apply only to a specific project as proposed at the time of approval. Changes to the proposed project must be approved by the planning board as amendments to the special use permit. 
(ii)  All understandings reached between the applicant and the planning board shall be outlined in a legally binding development agreement. 
(iii)  Special use permits shall be valid for two years from the date of approval. Should active and substantial construction not have begun within two years, the permit shall be null and void. The planning board may, at its sole discretion, grant an extension of this two-year period. 
(iv)  Unless specifically stated otherwise herein, an application for a special use permit is subject to the application, submission, public hearing, notice, and administrative requirements of RSA 676:4(I) and this chapter and the subdivision regulations set forth in Appendix A to this Code. 
(v)  If requested by the applicant, the planning board may waive any of the requirements for mixed-use mill redevelopments provided the board makes a finding that the purpose and intent of this section will be fulfilled despite the grant of the waiver. 
(vi)  Off-site parking associated within the mixed-use mill redevelopment shall be allowed within the M-1, M-2, M-2A, or B-1 zoning districts, provided it is located within 500 feet of the proposed site, regardless of whether the corresponding zoning district and this chapter prohibits any use which is being applied for pursuant to this section. The planning board may increase this distance to 1,000 feet where parking is intended for employees rather than residents and customers. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  2.01; Ord. of 8-2-2000; Ord. of 11-19-2008; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-46. - M-2 district. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this district shall be to protect and enhance the commercial, social, civic and residential functions of the downtown village area. It is recognized that the village is an important place of business and of social interaction. Controls are intended to enhance the village by providing for relatively high density, a mix of uses, public access to the Lamprey River, and design compatible with the pedestrian scale and historic nature of the area. 
(b)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  Uses permitted by right are listed in the table of permitted uses in section 32-56. 
(2)  The following uses may be permitted by special exception, provided that they meet the accompanying standards: 
a.  Multifamily residential. The following conditions shall apply: 
1.  Preparation and acceptance by the zoning board of adjustment of a fiscal impact statement which, in addition to analyzing general impacts, assesses school impacts in particular; and 
2.  Preparation and acceptance by the zoning board of adjustment of a market analysis which demonstrates the feasibility of added multifamily housing in a community which already has an over-abundance of multifamily housing, sufficient to ensure reasonable expectation of ongoing occupancy of units to support maintenance and upkeep of the property. 
(c)  Design standards. The following design standards shall apply in this district and are intended to enhance the pedestrian environment and to protect and enhance overall character of the village: 
(1)  Building orientation. To ensure that the village area retains its pedestrian orientation, all new buildings shall face the primary street on which the lots fronts. Further, the primary pedestrian access shall be located on the front of the building. 
(2)  Outdoor seating. Restaurants, with or without lounge use, may have outdoor seating. Site plan review approval shall indicate the total number of seats permitted for the use, and shall designate the area in which seats can be located outdoors. This outdoor seating option is not available to lounge-only uses or to social clubs. 
(3)  Outdoor merchandise display and sales. Outdoor display and sales of merchandise is permitted in areas designated on an approved site plan. 
(4)  Awnings. Awnings over doors and windows along streets are encouraged to enhance the pedestrian environment. A minimum clearance of seven feet shall be required where the awning projects over a public sidewalk, and awnings shall not be subject to the setback requirements and may have ten percent of their area covered with a commercial message. 
(5)  Drive-through facilities. Drive-through facilities shall be prohibited in this district because the intent is to encourage pedestrian-oriented design in the village and to encourage the vehicle-oriented businesses to locate in other districts. 
(6)  On-site parking. On-site parking shall not be allowed between the front of the primary structure and the street. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  2.02; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-46A. - M-2A district. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this district shall be to protect, enhance, and expand the commercial, social, civic and residential functions of the downtown village area. It is recognized that the village is an important place of business and of social interaction. Controls are intended to enhance the village by providing for relatively high density, a mix of uses, public access to the Lamprey River, and design compatible with the pedestrian scale and historic nature of the town. 
(b)  Permitted Uses. 
(1)  Uses permitted by right are listed in the table of permitted uses in section 32-56. 
(2)  The following uses may be permitted by Special Use Permit issued by the Planning Board: Multi-family residential and mixed-use development with three or greater residential units. 
The granting of such permits shall require the Planning Board to find the proposed use is consistent with the purpose of this district, is suitable for the location proposed, would not cause significant adverse impact, and meets the conditions as set forth below: 
a.  The Planning Board shall require a Fiscal Impact Study be completed by a consultant selected by the town, paid for by the applicant, that shows the multi-family residential or mixed use project with 3 units or more residential units will not have a negative fiscal impact on the town. 
b.  The Planning Board shall require a Market Analysis be completed by a consultant selected by the town, paid for by the applicant, that demonstrates the or mixed use project with three units or more residential units will not have a negative impact on the town's housing market. 
c.  The project shall have at least two (2) on-site parking spaces per residential unit. 
d.  Multi-family residential use, with no commercial use within the building, shall be limited to no greater than four residential units within a single building. 
e.  No residential units shall be located in the street level space if the building has frontage on North Main Street, Main Street, South Main Street, or Exeter Road. (from Section 5.08 ( C) (1) and (2).) 
f.  Multi-family residential condominium unit in this zone shall not exceed 1,200 square feet and not have more than two bedrooms. Residential apartments in this zone shall not exceed 1,000 square feet and not have more than two bedrooms. 
(c)  Waivers to road setback, side/rear setback, and structure height. Reduction in these dimensional controls may be permitted by Special Use Permit issued by the Planning Board. The granting of such permit shall require the Planning Board to find that the proposed use is consistent with the purpose of the district, is suitable for the location proposed, would not cause significant adverse impacts, and the proposed setback and structure height is consistent with the applicable setbacks and/or structure height of existing building(s) located on adjacent lots. 
(Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-47. - M-3 district. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the M-3 district shall be to provide additional area for the development of professional office space and health care related uses which are compatible with the existing nature and character of this predominantly residential neighborhood, to be accomplished to the extent possible through the re-use of existing buildings in the district. 
(b)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  Uses permitted by right are listed in the table of permitted uses in section 32-56. 
(2)  The following uses may be permitted by special exception, provided that they meet the accompanying standards: 
a.  Medical care facility, office, light manufacturing, place of assembly, or out-of-home adult day care. The following conditions shall apply: 
1.  The existing residential structure shall be re-used with only minor exterior changes, or where a new structure must be constructed, the new structure shall be designed and constructed in a manner which is compatible with the scale, design and site arrangement of the surrounding neighborhood. 
2.  Re-use of the structures may be required in whole or in part as determined feasible by the zoning board of adjustment. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  2.03; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-48. - M-4 district. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the M-4 district shall be to provide for the ongoing use of the golf course and to facilitate adjacent commercial and residential development related to the golf course use. 
(b)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  Uses permitted by right are listed in the table of permitted uses in section 32-56. 
(2)  Special use permit. Uses other than those specified in the table of permitted uses in section 32-56 may be allowed if granted a special use permit by the planning board. The granting of such permit shall require the board to find that the proposed use is consistent with the purposes of this district and is related to golf or outdoor recreation, is suitable for the location proposed, and would not cause significant adverse impacts. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  2.04; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-49. - B-1 district. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the B-1 district shall be to provide areas suitable for businesses, which serve the community and/or people passing through town on Route 108. It is further intended that these businesses be segregated from residential uses to prevent conflict and undue impact on residents by business development. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted by right are listed in the table of permitted uses in section 32-56. For lots in this district, which have access solely from New Road, a single-family use, which may be manufactured housing, shall also be a permitted use. 
(c)  Design standards. The following design standards shall apply in this district, and are intended to protect and enhance the aesthetic qualities and character of the district: 
(1)  Structure re-use. It is the intent of the town that existing structures, which enhance the character of the neighborhood, be re-used. This may be required to the extent feasible by the planning board during the site plan review process. 
(2)  Outdoor seating. Restaurants and/or lounges may move tables and seats outdoors as weather permits. Site plan approval shall limit total seating, and outdoor seating shall be restricted to areas designated for this purpose on the site plan. 
(3)  Outdoor merchandise display and sales. Outdoor display and sales of merchandise is permitted in areas designated on an approved site plan. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  2.05; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-50. - B-2 district. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the B-2 district shall be to provide a large area available for commercial, business and industrial development within the town to broaden the tax base and provide for employment opportunities for residents of the town and region. This district shall provide for these uses and shall exclude residential uses. This protects residents from undue impact, reduces possible sources of conflict and resulting delay for applicants, and reserves this area for the long term commercial, business and industrial development desired by the town. 
(b)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  Uses permitted by right are listed in the table of permitted uses in section 32-56. 
(2)  The following uses may be permitted by special exception, provided that they meet the accompanying standards: 
a.  Support uses. This shall include other uses that are subordinate to and serve the primary uses within this district. The final determination of the types of uses shall be made by the zoning board of adjustment, but shall include at a minimum day care, restaurant, dry cleaning, and business and/or personal services. The intent is to provide for the basic needs of the people working in this district without generating excessive amounts of traffic outside of the district. The following conditions shall apply: 
1.  The support uses shall not occupy more than ten percent of the land area of the district. 
2.  The support uses are reasonably expected to provide service to employees, customers and businesses within this district to a greater extent than they will generate new trips from other districts. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  2.06; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-51. - B-3 district. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the B-3 district shall be to provide a large area available for commercial, business and industrial development within the town to broaden the tax base and provide for employment opportunities for residents of the town and the region. This district shall provide for these uses and shall exclude residential uses as principal uses. This protects residents from undue impact, reduces possible sources of conflict and resulting delay for applicants, and reserves this area for the long term commercial, business and industrial development desired by the town. This development pattern will provide for areas in the outer areas of town with adequate access underutilized for residential uses. 
(b)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  Uses permitted by right are listed in the table of permitted uses in section 32-56. 
(c)  Flexible use development. In accordance with RSA 674:21, the planning board shall have sole authority to approve a flexible use development by conditional use permit. The intent of this permit is to provide for additional use opportunities that may not be listed within the table of permitted uses in section 32-56 but can be shown to be consistent with the purpose of the district. The following criteria shall be used in conjunction with the requirements of this chapter for granting a conditional use permit: 
(1)  The permit is in the public interest. 
(2)  There will be no greater diminution of neighboring property values than would be created under any other use permitted in the zone. 
(3)  There are no existing violations of state or federal law and/or this chapter or regulations on the subject property. 
(4)  The character of the area shall not be adversely affected as determined by consideration of the projects effect on: 
a.  Architecture. 
b.  Transportation. 
c.  Scale of lot coverage. 
d.  Scale of building size. 
e.  Consistency of uses in the immediate area. 
(5)  The granting the permit will not result in undue municipal expense. Applicants shall be required to offset such expenses or the permit will be denied. 
(6)  The proposed use will be developed in a manner consistent with the spirit and intent of this chapter and the Newmarket Master Plan. 
(7)  The capacity of existing or planned community facilities and services (including streets and highways) will not be adversely impacted. 
(8)  The following impacts resulting from the granting of the permits have been mitigated to the extent practical: 
a.  Noise. 
b.  Light. 
c.  Transportation. 
d.  Visual effects. 
(9)  Landscaped or other appropriate buffers of sufficient opacity and materials shall be required if deemed reasonably necessary for the welfare of neighboring properties or the town. 
(10)  All developments shall have frontage on an existing or proposed Class V town. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  2.07; Ord. of 5-7-2003; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-52. - R-1 district. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the R-1 district shall be to provide for the protection of the rural, unspoiled character and open spaces of the outlying areas on the eastern and western sides of town, while accommodating development of high quality residential neighborhoods with low overall density. 
(b)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  Uses permitted by right are listed in the table of permitted uses in section 32-56. 
(2)  The following uses may be permitted by special exception, provided that they meet the accompanying standards: 
a.  Neighborhood convenience store. The town desires to provide for a few small neighborhood convenience stores in the rural neighborhoods in town to serve the residents of those areas. The intent is to reduce the need for people to drive long distances for convenience products, and to prevent traffic congestion and parking problems in the village. The intent has nothing to do with employment or economic development, so design and use are strictly controlled to protect the rural character of the district. The following conditions shall apply: 
1.  The lot complies with all dimensional requirements of this chapter. 
2.  All retail activity shall be conducted indoors. There shall be no outdoor product display or sales. 
3.  Because the use shall be relative inconspicuous, a wall sign shall be permitted in addition to all other signage otherwise permitted in the district. The message area of the wall sign shall not exceed 12 square feet and shall not be illuminated. 
4.  The use shall be limited to not more than 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, including all storage and other space associated with the use. 
5.  The products sold shall generally be of the type sold at convenience stores, intended for the consumption of area residents. Take-out foods may be a part of the use, but shall not be the exclusive or dominant product. 
6.  The sale of gasoline, diesel, or other fuels shall be prohibited. 
7.  Site plan review approval shall be required. 
8.  The neighborhood convenience store shall be permitted on the same lot as a single-family residence. It may be located in the same structure or in a separate structure. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  2.08; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-53. - R-2 district. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the R-2 district shall be to provide for an area of transition between the low-density R-1 residential district and the more intensively developed districts in and around the village area. It is intended that high quality neighborhoods with a greater density and greater mix of uses than would be permitted in the R-1 residential district shall be accommodated. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted by right are listed in the table of permitted uses in section 32-56. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  2.09; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-54. - R-3 district. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the R-3 district shall be to provide for an area of transition between the low-density R-1 residential district and the more intensively developed districts in and around the village area. It is intended that quality neighborhoods with a greater density and greater mix of uses than would be permitted in the R-1 residential district shall be accommodated. This district permits multifamily residential use and is located in two areas with high concentrations of existing multifamily residential structures. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted by right are listed in the table of permitted uses in section 32-56. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  2.10; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-55. - R-4 district. 
(a)  Purpose. The R-4 district accommodates the high-density residential neighborhood immediately adjacent to the village area. Because of the generally small lot sizes and steep, narrow roads serving these areas, the mix of uses is strongly controlled. High density is still permitted because it predominates the existing land use pattern. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted by right are listed in the table of permitted uses in section 32-56. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  2.11; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-56. - Table of permitted uses. 
TABLE OF PERMITTED USES 
Uses checked are permitted by right 
USE M1 M2 M2A M3 M4 B1 B2 B3 R1 R2 R3 R4 Single-family res. including manufactured housing X X X X Single-family residential excluding manufactured housing X X X X Duplex residential X X X X Multi-family residential X 3 X 6,7 X Mixed use development X7 X7 X 6, 7 X 7 X 7 Age-restricted housing (elderly) X X X X 1 1 1 Residential home care facility X Nursing home X X X X Day care (any size) X X X X X X Family group child day care X Family child day care X X Bed & breakfast X X X X X X X X Hotel X X X X X X X Conference center X X X X Indoor and/or outdoor recreation facility X X X X X X X Golf course X X Country club X X X Health club X X X X X X Marina X X X Retail X X X X X X Office X X X X X Studio X X X X X X Service X X X X Restaurant X 4 X X X X Lounge X X X X X Wholesale X X X X X X Warehouse X X X Light manufacturing X 5 X X X X X Manufacturing X X Research & development X 5 X X X X Automotive repair X X Commercial amusement X X X Civic use X X X X Cultural use X X X X Place of assembly X X X X Education facility X X X X X Commercial excavation X X X X Forestry & agriculture, including animal husbandry X X Forestry & agriculture, excluding animal husbandry X X X X Fraternal organization X X X Flexible use development 2 Office complex X X X  
Notes: 
1 See section 32-236 Affordable Elderly Housing for individual district limitations and requirements. 
2 See B3 district for requirements for conditional use permit. 
3 See M-1 district for requirements for special use permit allowing multi-family residential use only as part of a mixed use mill redevelopment, 32-45(b)(2). 
4 No drive-through restaurants are allowed. 
5 Only light manufacturing and research and development uses, limiting the hours of operation to between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
6 See M-2A district requirements for special use permit allowing multi-family residential and mixed-use development involving three or greater residential units in section 32-46A M-2A District (b)(2). 
7 See section 32-233 for requirements. 
(Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Secs. 32-57-32-83. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 32-84. - Road frontage. 
    All new lots are required to meet the road frontage requirements of this section. 
(1)  Purpose. Road frontage requirements address several policy issues. First, frontage is required to ensure safe access to each property by the property owner, emergency service vehicles, delivery vehicles, and guests. Second, longer frontage requirements can be one component of a system to help protect the capacity of arterial roads by reducing the number of lots along that road, thus reducing the number of curb cuts and resulting traffic conflict points. This contributes to the goal of lessening vehicle congestion in the streets. Third, frontage requirements affect the spacing of buildings, thus impacting neighborhood character, ensuring adequate sunlight and air circulation, preventing overcrowding of land and undue concentration of population, and securing safety from fires and other dangers. 
(2)  All lots shall front on: 
a.  A state or town road with a classification of Class I, II or V, as defined in RSA 229:5; 
b.  A private road, either: constructed to town standards as required by the subdivision regulations of the planning board at the time the lots were created; or for which adequate financial security has been posted to ensure proper construction; or 
c.  A Class VI road proposed to be improved to current town standards and for which adequate financial security has been posted with the town to ensure completion of the improvements. 
(3)  Length of frontage. The minimum length of frontage in each district is specified in the dimensions table. 
(4)  Open space design. The provisions of article VI of this chapter permit reduction of certain road frontage standards. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  3.01; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-85. - Lot size. 
    All new lots are required to meet the lot size requirements of this section. 
(1)  Purpose. Lot size requirements are an important component in addressing many of the general purposes of this chapter, including lessening vehicle congestion in the streets, securing safety from fires and other dangers, providing adequate sunlight and air circulation, preventing overcrowding of land and avoiding undue concentration of population, enhancing pedestrian travel, contributing to community character and quality neighborhoods. 
(2)  Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size in each district is specified in the dimensions table. Note additional requirements in sections 32-153, 32-155, and 32-157. 
(3)  Open space design. The provisions of article VI of this chapter permit reduction of certain lot size standards. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  3.02; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-86. - Residential density. 
    Residential density shall not exceed the requirements of this section. Residential density is measured by the number of residential units per acre. 
(1)  Purpose. Control of residential density is an important component in addressing many of the general purposes of this chapter, including lessening vehicle congestion in the streets, preventing overcrowding of land, avoiding undue concentration of population, facilitating adequate provision of public facilities, utilities and services, assuring proper use of natural resources, and contributing to community character and quality neighborhoods. 
(2)  Maximum residential density. The maximum residential density in each district is specified in the dimensions table. 
(3)  Open space design. The provisions of article VI of this chapter do not permit an increase of residential density. The standards for residential density shall apply regardless of the pattern of development. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  3.03; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-87. - Setbacks. 
    Structures shall be set back from property lines in conformance with the minimum and maximum setback requirements set forth in this section. 
(1)  Purpose. Control of setbacks is important for a variety of reasons. The proximity of a structure to a road affects the character of the neighborhood, encourages or discourages pedestrian activity, and may block site distance for cars at an intersection or driveway. The proximity of a structure to abutting lots affects fire safety, the provision of adequate sunlight and air circulation for this and neighboring lots and structures, and the availability of space for site amenities such as landscaping, driveways and so forth. In this chapter, maximum setbacks are required in certain instances. While the minimum is applied in most communities, the maximum setback is still unusual and warrants further explanation. The maximum setback is applied in the village area, where it is highly desirable to site the buildings close to the sidewalks and streets. The resulting built environment provides for a visually consistent streetscape, and enhances the pedestrian character of the village by forcing the buildings to be close to the sidewalks and preventing on-site parking in front of the buildings. 
(2)  Structure setbacks. Minimum and maximum setbacks from roads and other property boundaries are specified in the dimensions table. Maximum setbacks shall not apply to accessory structures. 
(3)  Open space design. The provisions of article VI of this chapter may permit reduction of certain setback standards. 
(4)  Special exceptions. 
a.  The zoning board of adjustment can relax the maximum setback in the M-2 district to a maximum of 25 feet by granting a special exception when the following condition is met: 
1.  The area within the front setback will be used for outdoor restaurant seating, retail display, or other active use associated with the permitted use. In no case shall parking be permitted within the front setback. 
b.  In cases where the setback requirements have changed since a subdivision was approved, and where the current requirements are more restrictive than those in effect at the time of the subdivision approval, the zoning board of adjustment may reduce the current setback requirement to that permitted at the time of the subdivision approval by granting of a special exception. The zoning board of adjustment shall grant a special exception when the following conditions are met: 
1.  Application of the current setback standards would render the lot unbuildable; or 
2.  The zoning board of adjustment determines that the former setback requirements are sufficient to secure the purposes of this section. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  3.04; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-88. - Structure height. 
    Structure heights shall not be less than the minimum nor more than the maximum requirements set forth in this section. 
(1)  Purpose. Control of structure height is important for a variety of reasons. Structure height is related to fire safety and the fire department's ability to protect public safety. However, there are other important issues beyond the immediate safety issue. Structure height strongly affects the character of the neighborhood and the allowance of adequate sunlight and air circulation. It is a critical control of intensity of use, especially for nonresidential uses. In this chapter, both minimum and maximum structure heights are required in certain instances. While the maximum is applied in many communities, the minimum requirement is unusual and warrants further explanation. The minimum height requirement is applied in the M-2 district, where it is highly desirable to maintain a relatively consistent visual facade of tall buildings along the village streets. Most buildings will have multiple stories, providing lower rent commercial or residential space over the more desirable street level space. Other buildings, especially those which serve a civic function such as churches, are suitably tall even without the multiple stories, so there is no restriction on the number of stories. 
(2)  Structure height. Both minimum and maximum structure heights are specified in the dimensions table. Maximum structure height shall apply to all structures, but minimum structure height shall apply only to primary structures and not to accessory structures. 
(3)  Open space design. The provisions of article VI of this chapter do not permit alteration of structure height requirements. The standards for structure height shall apply regardless of the pattern of development. 
(4)  Special exception. The zoning board of adjustment can relax the maximum structure height limit to a maximum of 60 feet by granting a special exception when the following conditions are met: 
a.  The proposed structure, which exceeds the height limit, must exceed the height limit to fulfill its unique purpose, such as an agricultural silo, church steeple, or a communications antenna. 
b.  There shall be no occupied floor space above the standard height limit. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  3.05; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-89. - Dimensions table. 
    The following dimensional requirements shall apply: 
Requirement Measure M-1 M-2 M-2A M-3 M-4 B-1 B-2 B-3 R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 Minimum Road Frontage feet 75 50 50 75 150 150 150 150 200 100 100 50 Minimum Lot Size acres 1/4 1/4 1/4 1/2 1 1/2 1 2 2 1/2 1/2 1/4 Maximum Residential Density units/acre 20 6 6 2 1 2 1 - 1/2 2 2 4 Minimum Road Setback feet 10 5 5 20 20 15 25 75 40 25 25 5 Maximum Road Setback feet n/a 10 10 50 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Minimum Side/Rear Setback feet 10 10 10 20 25 25 30 20* 25 15 15 10 Maximum structure Height feet 50 50 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 Minimum Structure Height feet n/a 24 24 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a  
*Note: B-3 district additional setbacks: 
B-3 District Side/Rear Setbacks Feet To residential district boundaries 75 To residential uses 50  
1.  The maximum residential density for multi-family residential housing in the M-1 district is as stated in section 32-45(b)(2)b.6. 
2.  The planning board may waive the road setbacks, side and rear setbacks and height restrictions within the M-2A district to match the conformity of adjacent buildings, through the issuance of a Special Use Permit pursuant to section 32-46A(d). 
(Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Secs. 32-90-32-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SIGNS 

Sec. 32-120. - Purpose. 
    Consistent with the overall purpose of this chapter, it is the town's intent to require signs, which enhance the character of the community and protect its visual environment. Businesses need identification and the public needs direction, so the town must balance these needs with the protection of community. Excessive signs shall be prevented. Sizes, materials, mounting locations and other such factors shall be consistent with the public objectives in the area in which a sign is located. Signs shall be readable and clear, and properly maintained. Signs shall not cause safety problems. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  4.01; Ord. of 5-7-2003; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-121. - Application process. 
    Except as listed below, all new signs or modifications to signs shall require a permit from the code enforcement officer. A written application and a $50.00 fee shall be submitted to the town. The request shall have sufficient information to determine compliance with these requirements and shall include drawings. 
(1)  Exempt signs. The following signs do not require a sign permit from the town, and are not subject to the setback requirements: 
a.  Sign with a message area of one square foot or less, which bears only property numbers, post office box numbers, names of occupants, other non-commercial identification, or with a message of the following type: "open", "closed", "now hiring", "vacancy", "no vacancy", etc. 
b.  Directional sign, with no commercial message, indicating entrance and/or exit to a site, with a message area of two square feet or less. 
c.  Legal notice, such as "no trespassing" signs, with a message area of two square feet or less. 
d.  Business name and/or directional sign with a message area of three square feet or less which are located over doorways. 
e.  Government or religious flags. 
f.  Window sign, unless a neon-style/LED sign per section 32-123(b). 
g.  Sign identifying lawn, garage or barn sales, with a message area of six square feet or less, and displayed not more than one day prior to the event and removed not more than one day following the end of the event providing such sale does not occur on more than four days per calendar year. 
h.  Sign for a government election, with time limits as specified in state law, or if no state law applies, then erected no more than 45 days prior to the election and removed within ten days following the election, except for primaries where the winners signs may remain until ten days after the final election (see RSA 664 for further information). 
i.  Real estate sign for the sale or lease of the property on which the sign is located, with total message area not to exceed the permitted message area for other freestanding signs on the property. Real estate signs, being temporary, shall be permitted in addition to other permitted signs. Off-site real estate signs shall be limited to directional signs, with a maximum message area of two square feet, indicating directions to properties for sale and/or open houses. Non-projecting signs, unless otherwise permitted, shall not be allowed within the public right-of-way. Real estate signs must comply with the Sign Height and Message Area table under Sec. 32-124(1)(b). 
j.  Promotional sign for public or institutional events, as authorized by the town council. 
k.  Directional sign to help locate facilities for persons with disabilities, with the message area not to exceed two square feet, as required for compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. 
l.  Announcement board, with a message area not to exceed 12 square feet, on the property of the town, school, public service organization, or religious institution, because such activities are vital to the civic function of these properties. 
m.  For construction in progress, one or more signs per lot with a total combined message area not to exceed 24 square feet, identifying the owner, architect, contractors, and/or developer, to be removed within one month of the completion of the project. 
n.  Sign for fraternal or social clubs, local service agencies and philanthropic organizations, which identifies meeting times and locations, with a message area of three square feet or less. 
o.  Awnings with messages, as permitted in section 32-46(c)(4) in the M-2 and M-2A district. Awnings shall not be of translucent material. 
p.  One subdivision identification sign, not to exceed twelve square feet in size and six feet in height, at the entrance of a subdivision denoting the name of the development, provided the signage is located out of the public right-of-way and is approved by the Planning Board. 
(2)  Maintenance. No permit shall be required for normal maintenance, which shall include repainting and other surface renewal. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  4.02; Ord. of 5-7-2003; Ord. No. 5-2016/2017,  3, 6-21-2017; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-122. - Sign content. 
    The town has no intention of restricting individual free speech, but the town does recognize its right to place reasonable restrictions upon commercial speech. Further, the town wishes to prevent excessive or unnecessary signs along road corridors. In keeping with this reasoning, off-site commercial signs shall be prohibited. The town, however, may develop and install a standardized system of municipally-owned business directional signs, similar to the state system, to better index the community for people. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  4.03; Ord. of 5-7-2003; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-123. - General design standards. 
(a)  Illumination. 
(1)  Each light source shall be located, directed and/or shielded such that it is not visible at any point along the property boundary, nor from any right-of-way or neighboring property; and 
(2)  Internal illumination of signs is permitted only in the B-1 District. The method of internal illumination shall be limited to the following techniques: 
a.  Backlighting of non-translucent letters, characters and/or symbols surface mounted on a non-translucent background. 
b.  For signs with a translucent message face and an internal light source, letters, characters and/or symbols shall be light colored against a darker colored background. 
(b)  Neon/LED-style. One neon/LED-style window sign shall be permitted in each business in the B-1, B-2, M-2 and M-2A districts. Message area shall not exceed four square feet. Neon/LED-style signs shall be prohibited in all other districts. Such signs shall not blink or flash. 
(c)  Motion. Moving signs, or signs which give the appearance of motion, shall be prohibited. 
(d)  Flashing/blinking. Flashing, blinking, alternating type electronic message centers, or digital type lighting shall be prohibited. 
(e)  Materials. Except for the sign face of a permitted, internally illuminated sign, the use of plastic shall be prohibited on the exterior of signs and their supporting structures. Wood, wrought iron, metal, stone, brick, and other natural materials, which are more traditional building materials in the region, should be used to the maximum extent feasible. High Density Urethane (HDU) signs, giving the appearance of wood, are permitted; however, other forms of plastic are not allowed. 
(f)  Projection. Signs shall not project over a public street, but projecting signs, as permitted herein, may project over town sidewalks, and over other sidewalks with the sidewalk owner's consent. A minimum of eight feet of clearance underneath shall be provided. 
(g)  Placement. Signs shall not be placed in such a position as to endanger vehicular, bicycle or pedestrian traffic by obstructing a clear view, by causing confusion with governmental signs and signals, or by any other means. 
(h)  Movable signs. Movable signs shall be prohibited. No vehicle, including parts thereof, trailers, and other accessories, shall be used as a means of circumventing the purpose and intent of this Ordinance. 
(i)  Lighted signs. Signs, other than neon signs where permitted, in which light sources create the message shall be prohibited. 
(j)  Temporary items. The following shall be allowed for one week per calendar year by permit from the code enforcement officer: search lights; balloons or other gas-filled figures; and banners and/or pennants. Feather flags, and pennants, as permanent fixtures, are not permitted in any zone. 
(k)  Message boards. Message boards (whether digital, electronic, manual and/or with interchangeable letters) are not permitted in any zone. 
(l)  Sandwich board signs. Sandwich board signs may be placed on sidewalks in the M-1, M-2, and M-2A Districts. They must be less than two feet wide and less than three feet high. Sandwich board signs may not obstruct a sidewalk to less than 48 inches of clear travel path. Such signs may only be placed on the sidewalk, while the business is open. Sandwich board signs shall be made of wood and shall be designed to they are not affected by less than storm force winds. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  4.04; Ord. of 5-7-2003; Ord. No. 5-2016/2017,  4, 6-21-2017; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-124. - Regulations by district. 
    Specific restrictions regarding the type, message area, height, setback, and illumination are as follows: 
(1)  Freestanding signs. One freestanding sign per lot shall be permitted in all districts as follows: 
a.  Setback. All freestanding signs shall be set back a minimum of five feet from the property boundary. 
b.  Sign height and message area. Maximum sign height and message area shall be limited as follows: 
Zoning District Maximum Sign Height (feet) Maximum Message Area (sq. ft.) M-1 12 16 M-2/M-2A 12 16 M-3 8 16 M-4 12 32 B-1 12 32 B-2 12 32 B-3 8 32 R-1 8 12 R-2 8 8 R-3 8 8 R-4 8 8  
c.  In the M-1, M-2, M-2A, and B-1 districts, a projecting sign may be substituted for a freestanding sign. The message area shall not exceed eight square feet, and no part of the sign or its supporting mechanisms shall extend above the top of the wall to which the sign is attached. 
d.  In the B-3 district, signs must be made of wood or other natural materials and shall not be internally lit. Any lighting shall be directed from above and shall be installed and maintained so that no light is directed onto roadways or abutting properties. 
(2)  Wall signs. 
a.  Districts. In addition to freestanding signs, wall signs shall be permitted on primary buildings in the following districts: M-1, M-2,; M-2A; M-3, M-4, B-1, B-2, and B-3. In all other districts, wall signs shall be permitted only as an alternative to a freestanding sign. 
b.  Height. The top of the wall sign shall not extend above the top of the wall to which it is attached. 
c.  Number of wall signs. Not more than one wall sign shall be permitted per lot, except for a lot with multiple businesses, in which case each business shall be permitted its own wall sign; or a lot adjoining two or more streets, in which case a wall sign facing each street shall be permitted. 
d.  Message area. The message area of a wall sign shall not exceed three percent (or five percent with a Special Use Permit approved by the Planning Board) of the area of the wall to which it is attached. Where the wall may include two or more off-set sections parallel to one another, the area of the wall shall include the area of all the sections parallel to and facing the same direction as that portion of wall to which the sign is attached. Where multiple wall signs are permitted, the sum of the message areas shall not exceed three percent (or five percent if approved by Special Use Permit approved by the Planning Board) of the area of the front wall of the primary structure on that lot. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  4.05; Ord. of 5-7-2003; Ord. No. 5-2016/2017,  5, 6-21-2017; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-125. - Signs in platted right-of-way. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, no sign shall be permitted within any platted right-of-way. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  4.06; Ord. of 5-7-2003; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-126. - Maintenance. 
    All surfaces and supporting structures of signs, whether erected prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or not, shall be maintained in a safe and well-kept and aesthetically pleasing condition to the satisfaction of the code enforcement officer. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  4.07; Ord. of 5-7-2003; ; Ord. No. 5-2016/2017,  6, 6-21-2017; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-127. - Nonconforming signs. 
    Signs lawfully in existence before the adoption of regulations, which make them nonconforming, shall be permitted to continue in existence and be maintained. No change in type, size of message area and/or support structure, height, location, message, illumination, number, or material shall be permitted without application to and approval from the town. Nonconforming aspects of the sign may continue, but no additional types of nonconformity shall be created by any change. Permitted changes may allow reduction in any one or more nonconforming aspects, but shall not allow any nonconforming aspect of the sign to become increasingly nonconforming. If a nonconforming sign is abandoned, the grandfathered rights shall terminate, and any replacement shall comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  4.08; Ord. of 5-7-2003; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Secs. 32-128-32-152. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 32-153. - Aquifer protection overlay district. 
(a)  Authority and purpose. Pursuant to RSA 674:16-21, the town adopts an aquifer protection district and accompanying regulations in order to protect, preserve and maintain existing and potential groundwater supplies and related groundwater recharge areas within the town. The objectives of the aquifer protection district are: 
(1)  To protect the public health and general welfare of the citizens of Newmarket. 
(2)  To prevent development and land use practices that would increase risk of contamination or reduce the recharge of identified aquifers. 
(3)  To provide for future growth and development of the town, in accordance with the Master Plan, by insuring the future availability of public and private water supplies. 
(4)  To encourage uses that can appropriately and safely be located in the aquifer recharge areas. 
(5)  To incorporate by reference and encourage implementation of the recommendations and findings of the recently completed report by Dufresne-Henry, entitled "Delineation of Wellhead Protection Area: Newmarket Plains Aquifer, December - 1999" in order to protect the existing and future viability of the town's primary water supply. 
(6)  To incorporate by reference newly updated information and Wellhead Protection Area (WHPA) Delineation Map, as contained in a letter report dated October 3, 2006, to the Town of Newmarket, entitled "Delineation of Newmarket Plans Aquifer Wellhead Protection Area" prepared by Comprehensive Environmental Incorporated (CEI). 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Aquifer means a geologic formation, group of formations, or part of a formation that is capable of yielding quantities of groundwater usable for municipal or private water supplies 
    Groundwater means all the water below the land surface in the zone of saturation or in rock fractures capable of yielding water to a well. 
    Groundwater recharge means the infiltration of precipitation through surface soil materials into groundwater. Recharge may also occur from surface waters, including lakes, streams and wetlands. 
    Impervious surface-protective means a surface through which regulated substances cannot pass when spilled. Impervious surfaces-protective include concrete unless unsealed cracks or holes are present. Asphalt; earthen, wooden or gravel surfaces; or other surfaces, which could react with or dissolve when in contact with the substances stored on them are not considered impervious surfaces-protective. 
    Leachable wastes means waste materials, including but not limited to solid wastes, sewage sludge and agricultural wastes that are capable of releasing contaminants to the surrounding environment, and specifically excluding wastes from functional, approved residential septic systems. 
    Mining of land means the removal of geologic materials for the purpose of extracting topsoil, sand and gravel, metallic ores or bedrock and excavation as defined in RSA 155-E and Newmarket Excavation Regulations. 
    Seasonal high water table (SHWT) refers to the upper limit of the ground water in a soil that becomes seasonally saturated with water. 
    Toxic or hazardous materials or regulated substance means petroleum, petroleum products, and substances listed under 40 CFR 302 7-1-90 edition, excluding propane and other liquefied fuels which exist as gases at normal atmospheric temperature and pressure. 
    Wellhead protection area is defined as found in RSA 485-C:2(XVIII), as amended. 
(c)  District boundaries. 
(1)  Location . 
a.  The aquifer protection district shall include all land identified as stratified drift aquifer (of any kind) in the vicinity of Newmarket Plains (along NH Route 152, Lee Hook Road, Langs Lane, and Ash Swamp Road) on Plate 6 of the report entitled "Geohydrology and Water Quality of Stratified Drift Aquifers in the Exeter, Lamprey, and Oyster River Basins, Southeastern New Hampshire" (USGS, Water Resources Investigations Report 88-4128, 1990 revised). 
b.  The wellhead protection area is designated by the map: Wellhead Protection Area - WHPA Delineation MAP (Attachment D), as contained in a letter report dated October 3, 2006 to the Town of Newmarket entitled "Delineation of Newmarket Plans Aquifer Wellhead Protection Area" (Comprehensive Environmental Incorporated (CEI), incorporated herein by reference. 
(2)  The aquifer protection district is a zoning overlay district, which imposes additional requirements and restrictions to those of the underlying district. In all cases, the more restrictive requirements shall apply. 
(3)  Appeals. When the actual boundary of the aquifer protection district is in dispute by any landowner or abutter actually affected by said boundary, the planning board, at the landowner's/abutter's expense and request, may engage a professional geologist or hydrogeologist to prepare a report addressing the location and extent of the aquifer and recharge area relative to the property in question. This report shall include but not be limited to the following: 
a.  A two-foot interval topographic layout prepared by a registered land surveyor of the subdivision and/or area to be developed; 
b.  A high intensity soils map of the subdivision and/or area to be developed prepared by a soils scientist qualified in hydrologic studies including a written report of his on-site field inspection and test boring data; 
c.  The aquifer protection district boundary shall be overlaid on the plat and the newly proposed boundary location shall be indicated on the same plat by a broken line; 
d.  Evidence derived from a pumping test or a sufficient number of test borings, test pits, observation wells and groundwater elevations to clearly demonstrate that the area in question does not meet the definition of aquifer or recharge area; and 
e.  Where the area in question is wellhead protection area, evidence shall also comply with guidelines published by the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services for Phase II delineations of public water systems in order to determine the contribution zone of any portion of a municipal water supply that lies beneath the subject parcel. 
Any additional mapping, hydrogeological reports or information which becomes available as a result of recent or on-going scientific investigations of the locations and extent of aquifers performed by the U.S. Geological Survey, New Hampshire state agencies or boards, the Town of Newmarket or agents of any of the above. 
(4)  The planning board may, based upon any findings or reports submitted under this section, adjust the boundary or area designation of the aquifer protection district to more correctly define the aquifers and recharge areas on a site-specific, case-by-case basis. 
(d)  Use regulations for the aquifer protection district. 
(1)  Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size shall be governed by the dimensional controls outlined in the applicable zoning district. In all cases standard lot size shall be at least two acres. The minimum lot size within the wellhead protection area shall be at least three acres. Open space subdivisions are encouraged in the aquifer protection district, provided septic systems are designed to minimize potential contamination to groundwater, to the maximum extent possible. Land areas within the aquifer protection district shall be calculated as providing one unit of density per two acres; land within the wellhead protection area shall provide a density calculation of one unit per three acres. 
(2)  Maximum lot coverage. Within the aquifer protection district, for any use that will render impervious more than ten percent or more than 2,500 square feet of any lot, whichever is greater, a stormwater management plan shall be prepared which the planning board, and town engineer, if necessary, determines is consistent with "Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Urban and Developing Areas in New Hampshire," Rockingham County Conservation District, August 1992 (as amended) and "Best Management Practices for Urban Stormwater Runoff," NH DES, January 1996 (as amended). 
(3)  Site drainage. At the discretion of the planning board, the design and the construction of any drainage facility shall be approved by the public works department, and/or designated town engineer. Drainage facilities shall be designed in accordance with best management practices as described in "Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Urban and Developing Areas in New Hampshire." All stormwater treatment and drainage facilities within the wellhead protection area shall be cleaned/serviced and inspected at least once per year as a minimum, in accordance with design specifications. For all nonresidential uses, the planning board shall be authorized to require monitoring wells to insure water quality standards. 
(4)  Use of deicing chemicals. There shall be minimal use of deicing chemicals on all public and private roads and parking lots within the district. The use of these chemicals shall be free of sodium and chloride to the greatest extent possible. 
(5)  Prohibited uses. In addition to all other uses not permitted in the underlying district, the following uses shall not be permitted in the aquifer protection district overlay district except where permitted to continue as a nonconforming use. Such activities, however, in the wellhead protection area shall be prohibited from any further expansion as a matter of water quality protection and health and safety: 
a.  Disposal, storage, and staging of all solid waste, construction materials, vegetative debris, sludge, biosolids, and stumps, except as part of the process of improving the subject parcel, provided no such waste is buried on the site. 
b.  All disposal, discharge, processing or recycling of hazardous materials. Regulated substances shall be handled in accordance with NH Code of Administrative Rules Part Env-Ws 421. 
c.  Disposal of non-sanitary liquid or leachable wastes from all residential, commercial or industrial uses. Residential septic systems are exempt from this prohibition, pursuant to the definition of "leachable wastes" under subsection (b) of this section. 
d.  Subsurface storage of petroleum and other refined petroleum products. The placement of residential tanks underground for the storage of petroleum and other refined petroleum products shall not be allowed in new construction in the wellhead protection area. Propane fuel or other non-liquid fuel supplies shall be used and may be stored underground. 
e.  Outdoor unenclosed or uncovered storage of road salt and other deicing chemicals. 
f.  Dumping of snow containing deicing chemicals brought from outside of the aquifer protection district. 
g.  Commercial animal feedlots where animals are kept. 
h.  Automotive service and repair shops, junk and salvage yards. 
i.  Injection wells that dispose of waste in the ground. 
j.  Within the wellhead protection area, the establishment of a new excavation site is prohibited unless it is incidental to a permitted use and with the exception of any existing excavation legally permitted under the excavation regulations of the town at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. (See subsection (d)(7) of this section.) 
k.  The commercial storage of fertilizers, animal manure and compost unless in accordance with the Manual of Best Management Practices for Agriculture in New Hampshire, NH Department of Agriculture, Markets and Food, August 1998, and subsequent revisions, and for an agricultural use already in existence at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. Normal residential uses are exempt from this prohibition. 
l.  Any groundwater withdrawal well extracting water for nonresidential purposes in excess of 57,000 gallons per day. 
(6)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted, provided they are conducted in accordance with the purposes and intent of this section: 
a.  All uses permitted in the underlying zone, provided that all such uses requiring a septic system are reviewed by the town engineer for compliance with applicable rules, laws, and best management practices. 
b.  Maintenance, repair of any existing structure in conformance with the regulations of this section. 
c.  The expansion of a nonconforming use as long as it complies with the nonconforming use provisions of this section and section 32-5; provided, however, that such expansion presents no tangible increased risk of contamination or quantity reduction to the groundwater at the site. If such use is determined to be an imminent hazard to public health and safety by the town council or the health officer, it may not expand or be changed unless to a conforming use. 
d.  Farming, gardening, nursery, forestry, harvesting, residential composting, grazing and recreational uses provided that fertilizers, pesticides and other management practices are deemed safe by the Rockingham County Conservation District. These uses of land in the aquifer protection district must not cause a tangible increased risk of contamination or decreased quantity to the aquifer as determined by the town and its consultants. 
e.  Municipal uses, such as the town garage, schools, and such other uses as the town deems appropriate provided reasonable efforts are made to protect and preserve the quality and quantity of groundwater in the aquifer protection district. 
f.  Commercial uses permitted in the underlying zone that are not water-dependent. Water withdrawals shall be permitted for the purposes of on-site irrigation and for providing potable water for on-site employees but not for manufacturing or industrial processes. Wells shall also be permitted for groundwater monitoring and sampling. 
1.  Any groundwater withdrawal well extracting water for nonresidential purposes for a total of less than 57,000 gallons per day may be approved only upon a determination that no impact upon the Newmarket water supply will result. 
(7)  Nonconforming earth, sand, and gravel excavations. 
a.  Sand and gravel excavations that are in existence at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived may continue, provided they are in full compliance with all governing local and state regulations. Upon expiration of previously approved excavation permits, all sand and gravel excavations within the aquifer protection district shall apply for a conditional use permit granted by the planning board in accordance with the procedural process as found in the excavation regulations based on the required submission of the following: 
1.  Submission of quarterly reports on depth of excavation, spills, and timetable for excavation and reclamation. 
2.  A development agreement requiring incremental reclamation and other conditions for an exception to the minimum distance requirement. 
b.  Any sand and gravel excavation within the boundaries of the aquifer protection district that is no longer in operation or is considered to be an abandoned use shall be reclaimed within one calendar year of the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived or within one calendar year of the date of abandonment, whichever is later. 
c.  Any sand and gravel excavation within the boundaries of the aquifer protection district that is operated by the town for the purpose of providing sand or gravel utilized by the public works department shall be exempt from the requirements for a conditional use permit; however, no excavation activity shall occur below the SHWT. 
d.  At no time shall excavations occur below four feet above the SHWT. Compliance with this provision shall be determined by the submission of an annual report showing the SHWT as established by test pits (two per acre of excavation area distributed evenly throughout the excavation area) and witnessed by a licensed New Hampshire Soil Scientist. 
e.  All refueling and vehicle maintenance shall be done, to the extent practical, outside of the aquifer protection area; if done within the aquifer protection area, such activity shall be completed on an impervious surface-protective or other facility, to be approved by the town engineer, that mitigates the spread of any unforeseen spill. 
(e)  Hydrogeological study. 
(1)  Within the aquifer protection district, a hydrogeological study shall be required for developments involving the disturbance of more than 50,000 square feet on the same parcel within a period of five years. No further development will be permitted unless a full study has been completed for the entire development potential of the parent parcel in accordance with the regulations in effect at the time. Hydrogeological studies shall be performed by a professional hydrogeologist. These studies shall be sufficiently detailed to evaluate the development's impacts to groundwater within the parcel to be developed and the surrounding land. 
(2)  For any proposed groundwater withdrawal associated with a subdivision containing four or more houses, or as found in subsection (e)(1) of this section, with individual supply wells or a centralized community supply well or for any other groundwater withdrawal in excess of 1,500 gallons per day for the development, a hydrogeological study must be conducted at the expense of the developer, owner, or applicant. The study shall be performed by a professional geologist or equivalently qualified hydrogeologist. The study shall evaluate the effects of the proposed withdrawal on the long-term water levels, groundwater flow direction, the limits of the wellhead protection area for the town's municipal wells and assess the availability of groundwater for a future municipal or smaller community supply well. The study shall evaluate both the short-term and the cumulative effects of this withdrawal with other existing and reasonably expected future withdrawals within the aquifer (i.e., the town's withdrawal in addition to all other current or approved withdrawals). The planning board may refer to the NH DES requirements for Site Selection of Small Production Wells for Community Water Systems, Env-Ws 378, as amended, for guidance on study design. 
(f)  Design and performance standards. 
(1)  Where portions of a site are partially located outside of the aquifer protection overlay zone, potential pollution sources such as on-site waste disposal systems and impervious surfaces should be located outside and down gradient of the zone to the extent feasible. 
(2)  Any change of use for a site shall require site plan review. The planning board shall be authorized to require additional measures to ensure adequate groundwater protection. 
(3)  The provisions of this section are minimum requirements; any town board or official who has jurisdiction over any activity or permit within the boundaries of this section may impose additional criteria to achieve the goals and objectives of this section. 
(4)  All activities, uses and construction shall be undertaken in such a manner so as to protect the town's aquifers. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  5.01; Ord. No. 2002-04, 3-6-2002; Ord. No. 2007-08, 10-17-2007; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-154. - Shoreland protection overlay district. 
(a)  Purpose. The waters of Great Bay, the Lamprey and Piscassic Rivers, and other surface waters contribute greatly to the heritage and unique qualities of the Town of Newmarket. It is the town's intent to conserve and maintain the integrity of these water resources, and to ensure that adjacent shoreland uses complement them. This shall serve to prevent degradation of the water resources, protect ecological integrity, reduce pollution, protect wildlife and fisheries habitats and travelways, protect and enhance natural beauty and scenic qualities, and foster tourism. It is accomplished by maintaining and enhancing natural forests and shoreland habitat and buffers. This is consistent with the general purpose of this chapter, the policies of the Newmarket Master Plan, and the State Comprehensive Shoreland Protection Act, as set forth in RSA 483-B. 
(b)  Comprehensive Shoreland Protection Act. RSA 483-B is a New Hampshire State law, which applies to the land areas within 250 feet of the reference line of public waters. Public waters, as defined in RSA 483-B:4(XVI), include: coastal waters, including the Great Bay Estuary and the associated tidal rivers subject to the ebb and flow of the tide; lakes, artificial impoundments and ponds of ten or more acres listed on the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services Official List of Public Waters; designated rivers under RSA 483:15; and year round flowing waters of fourth order or higher streams listed on the New Hampshire Hydrographic Dataset (NHHD) per RSA 483-B:4(XVI)(c). Measurement is taken from the reference line as defined per RSA 483-B:4(XVII), as amended. 
(c)  Overlay district boundary . The shoreland protection overlay district shall include all land within 250 feet of the reference line. The applicable water bodies are designated on the Newmarket Shoreland Protection Overlay District Map, as amended. In Newmarket, these include all tidal waters of Great Bay, the Lamprey River and Lubberland Creek, the non-tidal portion of the Lamprey River, the impoundment above the Macallen Dam, and the Piscassic River. 
(d)  General requirements. The following shall apply in the shoreland protection overlay district: 
(1)  Within the areas of Newmarket's shoreland which have been exempted from the provisions of the RSA 483-B:12 pursuant to RSA 483-B:12, by the Commissioner of the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services (NH DES), the following minimum standards as set forth in RSA 483-B:9 shall still apply regarding II(a) salt storage yards, automobile junkyards, solid or hazardous waste facilities; II(d) fertilizer application; V(a)(2)(A) chemicals, and V(a)(2)(D) erosion and siltation. 
(2)  Within all other areas of the protected shoreland, the minimum standards as set forth in RSA 483-B:9 in its entirety shall apply regarding salt storage yards, building setbacks, automobile junkyards, water dependent structures, solid or hazardous waste facilities, fertilizer application, maintenance of waterfront and natural woodland buffers, septic systems, erosion and siltation, minimum lots and residential and nonresidential development (minimum lot size and shoreland frontage), impervious surfaces, and common ownership with the following exceptions: 
a.  The primary structure setback from the reference line shall be 125 feet. 
b.  Accessory structures are permitted; however, they shall be setback at least 20 feet from the reference line and meet the requirements of the Env-Wq 1405 of the New Hampshire Code of Administrative Rules. They shall have no toilet facilities and shall not be used for habitation. 
(e)  Exempt parcels. The following tax map and parcel numbers are exempt from the Comprehensive Shoreland Protection Act per RSA 483-B:12, as shown on the Newmarket Shoreland Protection Overlay District map, as amended: U2-57, U2-59, U2-60-B, U2-316, U2-330, U2-331, U2-333, U2-321, U2-327, U2-354-1, U2-355, U2-356, U2-357, U2-358, U2-359, U2-360, U2-361, U2-362, U2-363, U2-364, U2-366, U2-367, U2-368, U3-1, U3-2, U3-3, U3-4, U3-5, U3-6, U3-7, U3-8, U3-12, U3-13, U3-15, U3-16, U3-17, and U3-18. 
(f)  Definitions . For the purpose of interpretation relevant to this section of this chapter, the definitions as set forth at RSA 483-B:4 of the Comprehensive Shoreland Protection Act shall apply. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  5.02; Ord. No. 2010/2011-011, 8-4-2010; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-155. - Wetland protection overlay district. 
(a)  Purpose. Wetlands are a critical natural resource that affect water quality, flooding, wildlife, recreation, and aesthetics, and their protection is a goal of the Master Plan. Wetlands protect surface water quality by reducing the speed of surface water runoff, allowing for the deposit of sediment and nutrients. Wetlands protect shorelines from erosion. Wetlands absorb water during times of flooding, thus helping to reduce floodwater elevations. Wetlands help to maintain the quality of groundwater recharge. Wetlands provide habitat for a wide variety of wildlife, including fish, birds, deer other animals. Wetlands contribute to a broad range of recreational opportunities, including canoeing, hunting, fishing and bird watching. Wetlands contribute to the aesthetic values of the town, providing for open space, natural vistas, landform contrasts, and early autumn foliage. These purposes, in combination with the fact that wetlands are often ill-suited to development activities, demonstrate why the long-term protection of wetlands contributes greatly to the welfare of the community. 
(b)  Authority. The wetland protection overlay district is enacted to implement the recommendations of the Town of Newmarket Master Plan. The provisions of this section and the special permit process are adopted in accordance with RSA 674:21. Additional sources considered during the drafting of this section include Buffers for Wetlands and Surface Waters (rev. 1997) and the New Hampshire Estuaries Project Management Plan (2000). 
(c)  Overlay district boundaries. The wetlands protection overlay district shall include all areas of land that meet the criteria of the NH DES Wetlands Bureau rules for determination of wetlands, poorly drained and very poorly drained soils (as amended), prime wetlands, as delineated by the Newmarket Conservation Commission and approved in accordance with RSA 482-A:15 (as amended) and associated buffers, as defined in this chapter. (Changes in prime wetland designation require this section to be re-adopted in order for these provisions to apply to the new areas.) (Latest adoption version: Newmarket Prime Wetland Designation Study, West Environmental Inc., report dated: January 28, 2003.) 
(1)  The location of a wetland boundary in any particular case must be determined by on-site inspection. Determination of jurisdictional wetlands shall be performed by a NH certified soils or wetlands scientist in accordance with NH DES rules. 
(2)  Prime wetlands and associated buffers. Prime wetlands shall not be included in the minimum lot size or as part of any lot density calculation as required by any part of this chapter. There shall be no disturbance of any kind (including but not limited to construction, filling, dredging and the removal of vegetation) within a prime wetland or within a buffer area within 75 feet around the prime wetland. Structures shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from prime wetlands. On-site septic systems shall be set back a minimum of 125 feet from prime wetlands. 
(3)  Very poorly drained soils (or Hydric A soils, if so designated on site) and associated buffer. Such wetlands shall not be included in the minimum lot size or as part of any lot density calculation as required by any provision of this chapter. There shall be no disturbance of any kind (including but not limited to construction, filling, dredging and the removal of vegetation unless in accordance with the provisions of this chapter) within such wetlands or within a buffer area 50 feet around such wetlands. 
(4)  Poorly drained soils (or Hydric B soils, if so designated on site) and associated buffer. Such wetlands may be used to fulfill up to 25 percent of the area of the minimum lot size or 25 percent of any lot density requirement as part of any section of this chapter. There shall be no disturbance of any kind (including but not limited to construction, filling, dredging and the removal of vegetation unless in accordance with the provisions of this chapter) within such wetlands or within a buffer area 25 feet around such wetlands. 
(5)  If there is reasonable question or dispute as to the boundary of this overlay district, the owner of the property or the town may hire a qualified soil scientist to examine the area and report all findings to the town. The cost of such investigation shall be borne by the applicant for the development permit or approval. 
(d)  General requirements. The following requirements shall apply within the wetland overlay district: 
(1)  Agricultural and forestry uses shall be permitted within the wetland overlay district, provided that such uses are carried out in accordance with best management practices. Forestry uses within prime wetlands shall be permitted, provided that tree removal complies with RSA 483-b:9(V)(a) of the Comprehensive Shoreland Protection Act for all areas within the prime wetland and associated buffer. 
(2)  No surface water withdrawal shall be permitted within the wetland overlay district. This section does not cover surface withdrawals for public water supplies or that are necessary for emergency situations (such as to prevent flooding or the spread of pollution or to assist in firefighting efforts). 
(3)  Where development within the wetland or its buffer is required for access to, and use of, an adjacent surface water, footbridges, catwalks, and/or docks shall be permitted. Such structures shall be constructed on posts or pilings where appropriate so as to permit the unobstructed flow of water, and the natural contour of the wetland shall be preserved. Minor filling for construction of a boat ramp shall be permitted upon obtaining a state wetlands permit, and subject to the requirements of the shoreline protection overlay district (section 32-154, as amended). 
(4)  Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, the construction of additions and extensions to single-family dwellings shall be permitted within wetland buffers provided that the dwelling lawfully existed prior to the delineation of the wetland area and that the proposed construction conforms to all other applicable codes of the town. 
(e)  Driveway and utility crossings. Driveway and utility crossings through the wetland protection overlay district may be permitted for the legitimate use of land areas outside of this overlay district. Crossings may be permitted only if granted a special use permit by the planning board. The planning board may approve, deny or approve with conditions a special use permit upon a determination of compliance with the following criteria: 
(1)  Such dredging, filling or other alteration associated with driveway and/or utility crossings shall be designed to minimize adverse impacts on the wetland, even if this requires adjustments in design outside of this overlay district. 
(2)  Such activity is required for the legitimate use of land areas outside of the overlay district, and there is no reasonable way to eliminate the impact or shift the impact to a wetland of less functional value, and still accommodate the use. 
(3)  Provisions shall be made as a condition of a special use permit to restore the surrounding site to a functional grade, condition and vegetative state in terms of both quality and quantity in order to reduce long-term damage to the site. 
(4)  The proposed crossing impacts less than 6,000 square feet of very poorly drained soils and associated buffer area and 12,000 square feet of poorly drained soils and associated buffer areas. 
(f)  Dredge, fills or other impacts. Other dredge, fills or impacts for development and any crossing impact in excess of the requirements of subsection (e)(4) of this section may be permitted only if granted a special use permit by the planning board. The planning board may approve, deny or approve with conditions a special use permit upon a determination of compliance with the following criteria: 
(1)  The wetland is not within 150 feet of the Great Bay, Lamprey River, Piscassic River or Follett's Brook. 
(2)  The applicant has prepared a mitigation proposal, upon consultation with the Newmarket Conservation Commission, that provides for increased wetland buffers elsewhere on the site that surround a wetland of greater size or greater functional value than the impacted wetland. Increased buffer areas shall only qualify for this permit if the horizontal distance or total area of the buffer is doubled. Protected areas shall be noted on a plan filed in the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds and shall be noted as no disturbance/no cut zones on the plan and in the field; or 
(3)  The applicant has provided for the perpetual protection of an area of off-site wetlands of a greater area and equal or higher functional value located in an open space priority area, as denoted in the Newmarket Open Space Conservation Plan in a way that is proportional to the size and functionality of the impacted wetlands (assistance may be in the form of contributions to a wetland protection land bank if such is created). 
(4)  The applicant has provided the planning board with written comments on the proposed mitigation proposal from the conservation commission. 
(5)  Any mitigation proposal submitted to the board shall attest to the above requirements and shall be completed under the authority and certification of a NH certified wetland scientist using standard-accepted scientific methods. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  5.03; Ord. of 2-4-2004; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-156. - Class A watershed protection overlay district. 
    Septic systems shall be set back a minimum of 150 feet from the reference line of all Class A surface waters. The definition of "reference line," pursuant to RSA 483-B:4(XVII)(d), shall be the ordinary high-water mark. Class A surface waters in Newmarket include the Piscassic River and Follett's Brook. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  5.04; Ord. of 5-7-2003; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-157. - Steep slope protection overlay district. 
(a)  Purpose. The ability of land to accommodate development is related to its slope, among other factors. Steeper slopes are more fragile than flatter slopes, and are far more susceptible to erosion and runoff problems once the earth is disturbed. The Master Plan calls for control of development based on slope, and in particular calls for greatest care on slopes of 25 percent or more. 
(b)  Restrictions. To accomplish the purposes of the steep slope protection overlay district, the following shall apply to all contiguous areas with a slope of 25 percent or greater: 
(1)  Construction of new roads through areas with a slope of 25 percent or greater shall be minimized. 
(2)  Slopes of 25 percent or more shall not be used to fulfill more than 25 percent of the area of the minimum lot size, as required per section 32-85. 
(3)  Prior to any disturbance of earth, suitable provisions for the prevention of erosion and for the control of runoff shall be made. Such provisions shall be maintained in full working order until the site is again stabilized with vegetation or permanent improvements. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  5.05; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-158. - Floodplain protection overlay district. 
(a)  Establishment. The ordinance from which this section is derived, adopted pursuant to the authority of RSA 674:16, shall be known as the Town of Newmarket Floodplain Protection Overlay District. The regulations in this section shall overlay and supplement the regulations in this chapter, and shall be considered part of this chapter for purposes of administration and appeals under state law. If any provision of this section differs or appears to conflict with any provision of this chapter or other ordinance or regulation, the provision imposing the greater restriction or more stringent standard shall be controlling. 
(b)  Purpose. The purposes of the floodplain protection overlay district are to: protect floodplains from development and construction activities which would aggravate flooding; prevent development in locations which would place occupants at risk or which would likely require rescue of occupants by emergency services personnel during floods; protect the floodplains for use as habitat and for the aesthetic qualities; and ensure town compliance with the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(c)  Overlay district boundaries. 
(1)  Study and map. This section shall apply to all lands designated as special flood hazard areas based on the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its "Flood Insurance Study for the County of Rockingham, N.H." and the associated flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) dated May 17, 2005, or as amended, which are hereby incorporated into this section by reference. 
(2)  Boundaries. This overlay district shall include all areas, which are inundated with water during the 100-year flood (special flood hazard areas as shown on the FIRM). To determine this boundary, the following order of precedence shall apply: 
a.  In Zone AE, refer to the elevation data provided in the "Flood Insurance Study for the Town of Newmarket, N.H." and accompanying flood insurance rate map; 
b.  In unnumbered A zones, reference shall be made to any 100-year flood elevation data available from any federal, state or other source including data submitted for development proposals to the town, including subdivisions and site plan reviews. 
(d)  Standards. The building official shall review all building permit applications for new construction or substantial improvements to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is located in a special flood hazard area, the following standards shall apply to all new construction or substantial improvements within this overlay district: 
(1)  All proposed development shall require a permit from the building official. Such permit shall not be issued until the applicant has provided all other local, state and federal permits. 
(2)  New structures or expansion of existing structures may be constructed within this overlay district only in the M-1 and M-2 districts. 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvement shall: 
a.  Be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
b.  Be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
c.  Be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages; 
d.  Be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
e.  If residential, have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the 100-year flood elevation; 
f.  If nonresidential, have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the 100-year flood elevation, or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities shall: 
1.  Be flood-proofed so that below the 100-year flood elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
2.  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy; and 
3.  Be certified by a NH licensed professional engineer specializing in structural engineering or a NH licensed architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of the floodplain protection overlay district; 
g.  If the structure has an enclosed area below the lowest floor that is subject to flooding, shall conform to the following requirements: 
1.  The enclosed area shall be unfinished or flood resistant, usable solely for vehicle parking, structure access, or storage; 
2.  The area is not a basement; 
3.  Shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a NH licensed professional engineer specializing in structural engineering or a NH licensed architect, or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
(i)  A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
(ii)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
(iii)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  Manufactured homes, to be substantially improved, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood level, and shall be securely anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but shall not be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to any other applicable requirements for anchoring to resist wind forces. 
(5)  For all new or substantially improved structures, the applicant shall furnish the following information to the building official: 
a.  The as-built elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) in relation to NGVD, and include whether or not such structure contains a basement; 
b.  If the structure has been flood-proofed, the as-built elevation (in relation to NGVD) to which the structure was flood-proofed; and 
c.  Certification of flood proofing, if required. 
(6)  Where new or replacement water or sewer systems (whether municipal, community or on site) are proposed, these systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into these systems and discharges from these systems into floodwaters. On-site systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them and contamination from them during periods of flooding. 
(7)  All recreational vehicles placed on sites shall either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
b.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or 
c.  Meet all requirements pertaining to the elevation and anchoring of manufactured homes per subsection (d)(4) of this section. 
(8)  In riverine situations: 
a.  Prior to the alteration or relocation of a watercourse, the applicant for such authorization shall notify the NHDES Wetlands Bureau and submit copies of such notification to the building official, in addition to the copies required by RSA 482-A:3. Further, the applicant shall be required to submit copies of said notification to those adjacent communities as determined by the building official, including notice of all scheduled hearings before the wetlands bureau. 
b.  The applicant shall submit to the building official, certification provided by a NH licensed professional engineer, assuring that the flood carrying capacity of an altered or relocated watercourse can and will be maintained. 
c.  The building official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any regulatory floodway data available from federal, state, or other sources as criteria for requiring that all development comply with the following: "No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development are allowed within the regulatory floodway that would result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the base flood discharge." 
d.  Along watercourses that have not had a regulatory floodway designated or determined by a federal, state or other source, no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the FIRM, unless it is demonstrated by the applicant that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
(9)  Other permits. The building official shall not grant a building permit until the applicant certifies that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334. 
(10)  Special flood hazard area . In special flood hazard areas the building official shall determine the 100-year flood elevation in the following order of precedence according to the data available: 
a.  In Zone AE, refer to the elevation data provided in the town's flood insurance study and accompanying FIRM. 
b.  In Zone A the building official shall obtain, review, and reasonably use any 100-year flood elevation data available from any federal, state or other source including data submitted for development proposals submitted to the town for subdivision and site plan approvals. 
(e)  Variances. 
(1)  In the case of an application for variance made to the zoning board of adjustment, three additional standards shall apply in addition to the usual five variance standards under state law. The applicant shall have the burden of showing: 
a.  That the variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense; 
b.  That if the requested variance is for activity within a designated regulatory floodway, no increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge will result; and 
c.  That the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(2)  The zoning board of adjustment shall notify the applicant in writing that: 
a.  The issuance of a variance to construct below the base flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage; and 
b.  Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained as part of the variance application record. 
(f)  Records. Separate records shall be maintained, and made available for public inspection on request, for all development permits and variances in this overlay district. Such records shall include all materials submitted as part of the application, and an explanation of the final decision on such application. The code enforcement officer shall report all variances issued in reports to the FEMA Federal Insurance Administrator upon request, but not more frequently than annually. 
(g)  Supplemental definitions. In addition to the definitions provided in section 32-11, the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) requires that additional definitions be included in this section for the town to remain in the NFIP. The supplemental definitions in this section shall apply only to this overlay district, and these shall supersede any other municipal definition in case of conflict in this section. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    100-year flood. See Base flood. 
    Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within the Town of Newmarket subject to a one percent or greater possibility of flooding in any given year. The area is designated as Zones A and AE on the FIRM. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Base flood elevation means the computed elevation to which floodwater is anticipated to rise during the base flood. Base flood elevations (BFEs) are shown on flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) and on the flood profiles. The BFE is the regulatory requirement for the elevation or flood proofing of structures. The relationship between the BFE and a structure's elevation determines the flood insurance premium. 
    Basement means any area of a structure having its floor subgrade on all sides. 
    Building . See Structure. 
    Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operation, or storage of equipment or materials. 
    FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: the overflow of inland or tidal waters; or the unusual and rapid accumulation or run-off of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means the official map incorporated with this section, on which FEMA has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the Town of Newmarket. 
    Flood insurance study means an examination, evaluation, and determination of flood hazards and if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination and determination of mudslide or flood related erosion hazards. 
    Floodplain or flood prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. 
    Flood proofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway . See Regulatory floodway. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term "functionally dependent use" includes only docking and port facilities that are necessary for the loading or unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building or repair facilities but does not include long term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places, or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in a state with an historic preservation program which has been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in a community with an historic preservation program that has been certified either: 
(1)  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(2)  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in a state without an approved program. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, structure access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a structure's lowest floor, provided that such an enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this overlay district. 
    Manufactured home means manufactured housing as defined in section 32-11, but also for floodplain management purposes, the term "manufactured home" includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on site for greater than 180 days. This includes manufactured homes located in a manufactured home park or subdivision. 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mean sea level means the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 to which the base flood elevations shown on Newmarket's Flood Insurance Rate Maps are referenced. 
    New construction , for the purpose of determining insurance rates, means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, new construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle built on a single chassis, with 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck, and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
    Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Special flood hazard area . See Area of special flood hazard. 
    Start of construction includes substantial improvements, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a structure in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure. The market value of the structure should equal: the appraised value prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvements" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the structure commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. This term includes structures, which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions or any alteration of a historic structure as defined herein, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's flood plain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required under subsection (d)(3)f, (d)(5), or (d)(8)d of this section is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, where specified, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  5.06; Ord. of 8-4-2010; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-159. - Telecommunications facility overlay district. 
(a)  Purpose. The ordinance from which this section is derived is enacted in order to establish general guidelines for the siting of telecommunication towers and antennas and to enhance and fulfill the following goals: 
(1)  Preserve the authority of the town to regulate and to provide for reasonable opportunities for the siting of telecommunication facilities while ensuring that telecommunications provider's service remains effective and efficient. 
(2)  Reduce or eliminate adverse impacts such facilities may create. Adverse impacts may include, but are not limited to, impacts on aesthetics, impacts on environmentally sensitive areas, impacts to historically significant locations, impacts on flight corridors, reduction in property values, and health and safety concerns. 
(3)  Provide for co-location and minimal impact siting options through an assessment of technology, current locational options, future location availability, innovative siting techniques, and siting possibilities beyond the geographic boundaries of the town. 
(4)  Permit the construction of new towers only where all other reasonable alternatives have been exhausted, and to encourage the owners and users of towers and antennas to configure them in a manner that minimizes visual impacts of said structures. 
(5)  Require antenna co-location on existing tower structures through cooperation and agreements between providers. 
(6)  Provide for documentation of scheduling of recurring maintenance and safety inspections for all telecommunications facilities and appurtenances. 
(7)  Provide for the demolition and removal of abandoned facilities. Provide a procedure for the town to remove abandoned towers to provide for the health and safety of citizens. 
(8)  Provide for the removal or upgrade of technologically outmoded or abandoned facilities. 
(b)  Location. Telecommunication facilities shall be allowed in accordance with the following: 
(1)  On parcels situated in and owned by the town known as: 
Map Lot General Location No. Acres U1 16 Packers Falls Road-Follett's Brook 32.0 96 97 U2 84 Elm Street-Little League Park 4.7 109B Beech Street Ext near Senior Center 1.28 U4 5 Exeter Street-Police/Ambulance 1.0 U5 57T Great Hill-Water tank 0.5 R3 30-47 Lita Lane-Land south of apartments 19.5 R5 9-1 Route 152-Sewall Well 18.93 R6 36 Route 152-Town Transfer Station 190.0 38 39 40 50B Route 152-Town Garage 24.0 52 U2 281 Simon's Lane-near daycare 1.0  
(2)  As co-location on pre-existing towers, antennas, and alternative tower structures. 
(3)  In other areas of Newmarket by special use permit, provided written proof be provided to the planning board that the use meets the purposes of this overlay district and that an evaluation has taken place showing that the sites listed in subsection (b)(1) of this section are unavailable or unworkable for a new telecommunications facility or co-location on an existing tower/alternative tower structure. 
(c)  Telecommunication facilities procedural requirements. All facilities shall be subject to site plan review, except as exempted in subsection (e) of this section. 
(d)  Performance standards. 
(1)  Principal or secondary use. Subject to this section, an applicant who obtains site review approval to site under this chapter as a secondary and permitted use may construct telecommunications facilities in addition to the existing principal use. Antennas and towers may be considered either principal or secondary uses. A different existing use or an existing structure shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on a lot. Towers that are constructed, and antennas that are installed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, shall not be deemed the expansion of a nonconforming use or structure. Telecommunications facilities shall not be considered an accessory use. 
(2)  Height requirements. The height requirements and limitations outlined in this section shall preempt all other height regulations as required by this chapter, and shall apply only to telecommunications facilities. 
a.  New tower construction: 180 feet maximum, up to 199 feet on towers allowing co-location. 
b.  Co-location on pre-existing tower: current height plus 15 percent, not to exceed 200 feet. 
c.  On existing alternative tower structure: current height plus 40 feet. 
(3)  Setbacks and separation. The following setbacks and separation requirements shall apply only to telecommunication facilities, and shall supersede all other such standards found elsewhere in this chapter or other applicable town ordinances and regulations. 
a.  Towers shall be set back a distance equal to 150 percent of the height of the tower from any residential structure not located on the property the tower is sited upon. 
b.  Towers shall not contain any permanent or temporary signs, writing, symbols, or any graphic representation of any kind, except legal notice, such as "No Trespassing" or "Danger" signs, with a message area of two square feet or less and limited to ten feet above grade. 
(4)  Federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, FCC, and any other agency of the federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owner of the towers and antennas governed by this section shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations, within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a more stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal, in accordance with this regulation, of the tower or antenna, as abandoned, at the owner's expense through the execution of the posted security. 
(5)  Certification of safety standards and continued need. The owner of a tower or antenna shall provide an annual certification to the code enforcement officer verifying compliance with building codes and safety standards. All towers shall comply with applicable building codes and TIA/EIA-222-F standards at all times. The certification shall also verify that the structure is still needed for the operation of the owner's network. Said certification shall be submitted to the code enforcement officer prior to December 31 of each year. Failure to submit an annual certification shall constitute abandonment and be ground for removal in accordance with subsection (g) of this section. 
(e)  Exemptions. 
(1)  Amateur radio; citizen band radio; receive-only antennas. This section shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna that is under 70 feet in height and is owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur or citizens band station operator, and/or is used exclusively for receive-only antennas. This section adopts the provisions and limitations as referenced in RSA 674:16(IV). 
(2)  Essential services and public uses. Henceforth, from the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived, telecommunications facilities shall not be considered as infrastructure, essential services, or public utilities, as defined or used elsewhere in the town's ordinances and regulations. Siting for telecommunications facilities shall be considered a use of land, and is addressed by this section. 
(f)  Bonding, security and insurance. Recognizing the extremely hazardous situation presented by abandoned and unmonitored towers, the town administrator shall set the form and amount of security that represents the cost for removal and disposal of abandoned towers in the event that the tower is abandoned and the tower owner is incapable and unwilling to remove the tower in accordance with subsection (g) of this section. Bonding and surety shall be consistent with section 5.04 of the Newmarket Site Plan Review Regulations set forth in Appendix B to this Code. Furthermore, the planning board shall require the submission of proof of adequate insurance covering accident or damage. 
(g)  Removal of abandoned antennas and towers. Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months, or is no longer needed for the operation of the network, shall be considered abandoned and hazardous to the public health and safety. The owner shall remove the abandoned facility, including tower footings, equipment shelter, and fencing within 90 days of receipt of a declaration of abandonment from the building official notifying the owner of such abandonment. A declaration of abandonment shall only be issued following a public hearing, noticed per town regulations, with notice to abutters and the last known owner/operator of the tower. If the abandoned tower is not removed within 90 days, the town may execute the security and have the tower removed. If there are two or more users of a single tower, this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  5.07; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-160. - Downtown commercial overlay district. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the downtown commercial overlay district shall be to protect and enhance the commercial, social, civic and residential functions of the downtown village area. It is recognized that the village is an important place of business and of social interaction. Controls are intended to enhance the village by recognizing the importance of street level commercial space, providing for relatively high density, a mix of uses, and design compatible with the pedestrian scale and historic nature of the area. 
(b)  Overlay district boundaries. The downtown commercial overlay district boundaries shall include all properties within the M-2 district and having frontage on Main Street or South Main Street. 
(c)  Requirements. 
(1)  All permitted uses allowed in the M-2 district shall be allowed, except single-family residential, excluding manufactured housing, duplex residential, and age-restricted housing shall be prohibited in any street level space. 
(2)  All uses permitted by special exception in the M-2 district shall follow the applicable requirements of section 32-46(b)(2), except that multifamily residential shall be prohibited in any street level space. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  5.08; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-161. - Historic overlay district. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the historic overlay district is to protect and preserve cultural resources, particularly structures, buildings, and places of historic, architectural, and community value in an effort to promote a vibrant downtown, support existing and new business, conserve property values, foster economic development and revitalization, strengthen and expand the local economy and business community, and instill an appreciation of the town's cultural heritage and civic beauty for the education, pleasure, and general welfare of the citizens of Newmarket. 
(b)  Overlay district boundaries. The historic overlay district shall include all the property within the area delineated as the "Newmarket Industrial and Commercial Historic District" as listed on the National Register of Historic Places in December 1980. District boundaries may be amended and new districts may be proposed following the enactment procedures of RSA 675. 
(c)  Enforcement. The provisions of this section shall be enforced as provided in RSA 674:49 and section 32-8. 
(d)  Penalties. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to fines and penalties pursuant to RSA 676:17. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  5.09(A), (B), (I), (M); Ord. No. 2008/09-3, 5-6-2009; Ord. No. 2009/10-01, 7-29-2009; Ord. No. 2009/2010-05, 11-4-2009; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-162. - Skilled nursing facility (SNF) overlay district. 
(a)  Purpose. The intent of the skilled nursing facility (SNF) overlay district is to allow opportunities for nursing homes with skilled nursing facilities and memory care units within an overlay zoning district. 
(b)  Overlay district boundaries. The SNF overlay district shall include properties that currently fall within the B-1 and B-2 zoning districts on the southern portion of New Road. It includes the following properties: Tax Map R3, Parcel 58-8 (39.5 acres), Tax Map R3, Parcel 56 (32.3 acres), and Tax Map R3, Parcel 54 (20.93 acres). See attached map. 
(c)  Definitions. 
    Nursing home/skilled nursing facilities mean facilities which are licensed by the New Hampshire Department of Health and Human Services under Chapter He-P 800; Part He-P 803 Administrative Rules and provide a range of social and health services, including 24 hour a day supervision and the provision of medical care and treatment, according to a plan of care by appropriately trained or licensed individuals who are employees of or who are under contract to the facility. 
    Skilled nursing facilities (SNF) mean licensed healthcare facilities (often in a wing of a nursing home) for individuals who require a higher level of medical care than can be provided in a nursing home or assisted living facility. Such care is provided by trained individuals, such as registered nurses (RNs) and physical, speech, and occupational therapists. These services can be necessary over the short term for rehabilitation from illness or injury, or they may be required over the long-term for patients who need care on a frequent or around the clock basis due to a chronic medical condition. Examples of skilled nursing services include wound care, intravenous (IV) therapy, injections, physical therapy and the monitoring of vital signs and medical equipment. These facilities are built to the life Safety Code NFPA 101 as adopted by the Commissioner of the New Hampshire Department of Safety (in Saf-C 6000,) and as amended pursuant to RSA 153:5, I. 
    Memory care facilities mean supported residential health care designed for individuals who have memory related medical diagnoses, such as dementia, Alzheimer's disease, or any other diagnosed memory loss related malady. Memory care is licensed under Chapter He-P 800; Part He P-805 Supported Residential Health Care Facility licensing Rules. Memory care units shall be staffed by skilled nursing professionals, who offer specialized dementia care and nursing services. Memory care units provide 24-hour supervised care and can be a stand-alone facility or part of a continuum of care provided within a separate wing or floor of a nursing home/skilled nursing facility. 
    Dementia is loss of intellectual functions (thinking, reasoning, and remembering) severe enough to interfere with daily functioning. It is not a disease in itself but a group of symptoms. Alzheimer's is the most common, others include Huntington's Disease, Lou Gehrig's Disease, Multi-Infarct Dementia (Vascular Dementia), and Parkinson's Disease. These facilities are built to life Safety Code NFPA 101 as adopted by Commissioner of the New Hampshire Department of Safety (in Saf-C 6000) and as amended pursuant to RSA 153: 5, I. 
(d)  Permitted uses. 
Nursing homes/skilled nursing facilities. 
Memory care units. 
Accessory uses - Related to providing residents with services such as meals, housekeeping, medical and health services, well-being programs and recreation facilities, and related management support services. 
(e)  Design/Development standards. 
Minimum lot size: 20 acres 
Road Setback: 100 feet 
Development Cap: For the SNF Overlay District a development cap of 75 units of nursing home/skilled nursing beds and/or memory care units are allowed. 
Buffer: There shall be a 75 foot landscaped buffer around the perimeter 
Parking: Parking: 0.5 space per nursing home/SNF or memory care unit or bed. 
(f)  Development review process. 
(1)  Projects within the SNF overlay district shall require a special use permit pursuant to Sec 32-9 of the Town of Newmarket Zoning Ordinance and RSA 676:4 I and other regulations as set forth in the Town's subdivision and site review regulations. Given the limited scale of development envisioned by the SNF, it shall be required that all SNF development projects be constructed at one time without phasing. In addition, SNF overlay district projects shall be subject to site plan review approval by the planning board under Appendix B-Site Plans Sec. 1.02. 
(2)  The special use permit shall apply only to a specific project, as proposed, at the time of approval. Changes to the proposed project must be approved by the planning board, as amendments to the special use permit. 
(3)  All understandings reached between the applicant and the planning board shall be outlined in a legally binding development agreement. 
(4)  Special use permits shall be valid for two years from the date of planning board approval. Should active and substantial construction not have begun within two years, the special use permit shall be null and void. The planning board may, at its sole discretion, grant an extension to this two year period. 
(5)  Unless specifically stated otherwise herein, an application for a special use permit is subject to the application, submission, public hearing, notice and administrative requirements of RSA 676:4, I and Appendix A - Subdivision and Appendix B - Site Plan. 
(Ord. of 10-18-2017,  2) 
Secs. 32-163-32-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RESIDENTIAL OPEN SPACE DESIGN DEVELOPMENT BY SPECIAL USE PERMIT 

Sec. 32-191. - Authority. 
    Pursuant to RSA 674:21, the planning board is hereby authorized to grant a special use permit for a residential open space design development in accordance with the restrictions and requirements of this article. The planning board is further authorized to adopt amendments to the subdivision regulations in accordance with RSA 674:35 and RSA 674:36 in order to further administer the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  6.01; Ord. of 9-1-2004; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-192. - Purpose. 
    This article provides an optional flexible method of residential development that is consistent with principles of sound planning and wise land use that are not implemented through traditional zoning methods. All residential developments seeking a special use permit shall be administered by the planning board to insure that open space design development opportunities do not adversely impact neighboring properties, or the citizens and Town of Newmarket. The planning board shall consider the following purposes and balance them accordingly during review of individual applications: 
(1)  Maintain and preserve rural character of the Town of Newmarket by allowing an alternative residential development option which preserves large areas of open space, provides for visual buffers from existing roads and residential development, and permits agricultural opportunities on parcels of open space. 
(2)  Require the preservation of large, contiguous parcels of open space throughout the town and in neighboring jurisdictions and as found in the Newmarket Open Space Conservation Plan. 
(3)  Provide for a diversity of housing types, opportunities, and styles. 
(4)  Encourage flexible road design that will contribute to and enhance a rural atmosphere and maintain adequate safety design standards. 
(5)  Encourage connected corridors of open land throughout town and region for preservation of habitat, environmental resources, and public enjoyment. To enhance the opportunity for protected open spaces in town and new subdivisions eventually adjoin each other, ultimately forming an interconnected network of conservation areas across the town. 
(6)  Encourage open space design in highly sensitive areas of town that are part of an overall plan for the conservation of natural resources and preservation of large contiguous unfragmented parcels of land. 
(7)  Require minimal lot sizes and the clustering of homes in close physical proximity to maximize preservation of open space lands. 
(8)  Provide for a flexible and coordinated application process to reduce design costs to the applicant and promote a collaborative result with board input. The special use permit is meant to allow the board to participate jointly with the applicant to prepare a development that is consistent with this chapter, applicable regulations, and the Master Plan for the Town of Newmarket. 
(9)  Minimize fragmentation of open space, habitat, and conservation land on a variety of scales. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  6.02; Ord. of 9-1-2004; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-193. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Community homeowners' association means a private nonprofit corporation, association or other nonprofit and/or voluntary legal entity established by the developer for the benefit and enjoyment of the residents of the development. Membership in said association shall be mandatory for property owners and made a required covenant in any deed issued or conveyed. It shall provide voting and use rights in the common area when applicable and may charge dues to cover expenses, which may include tax liabilities of the common area, recreational or utility facilities. Articles of association or incorporation must be acceptable to the planning board and reviewed by town counsel and any other municipal, county, state agency, body, commission or department required by law to approve of the same. 
    Developable land base means the total area of land that forms the basis for determining the baseline for development and conservation land calculations. This area shall be calculated using the following limitations (the more restrictive designation shall apply): 
(1)  Not included: 
a.  Open water/land that is subject to tidal flows. 
b.  Very poorly drained soils. 
c.  Slopes equal to or greater than 25 percent. 
(2)  Included up to and equal to 25 percent of the developable land base. The total of the following areas can be used, in their aggregate, to account for no more than 25 percent of the developable land base: 
a.  Poorly drained soils. 
b.  Lands that are within utility easements. 
c.  Lands within the 100-year floodplain. 
    Exclusive use land division means land ownership divisions that are created as part of this chapter and are limited to the exclusive use of the owner. This land division is meant to provide flexibility in design, provide for the siting of structures and ownership. The ownership interest can include fee-title, condominium format, or any other reasonable method of division. The creation and modification of these land parcels shall be considered a subdivision in accordance with RSA 672:14 but shall not require compliance with provisions of this chapter regarding frontage and lot area except as found in this article. 
    Open space - common land means any parcel or area of land set aside as a result of an approval under this chapter. This land area shall be designated for the benefit and enjoyment of the residents of the approved development. These areas may contain accessory structures for recreation purposes, water access, and improvements necessary and appropriate for the educational, recreational, cultural, social or other noncommercial/nonresidential/non-industrial uses for residents of the subdivision, plus any utility services (including water wells, well radii, and individual and/or common septic facilities or land areas required for state septic approvals) utilized by the residents of the subdivision. Other than the above, common land shall be preserved in perpetuity through deed restriction, conservation easement, or other legal restriction. The restriction shall be recorded and designated on the approved and recorded plat to prohibit from any further use, subdivision, or development. 
    Open space - conservation land means land that is preserved as protected open space in perpetuity through deed restriction, conservation easement, or other legal restriction and that is designated on the approved and recorded plat. Restrictions must be tied to the title of the land, regardless of its subsequent ownership. Such land may be given to a public body dedicated to conservation of forests, parkland, etc., or to a private conservation trust, with the intent of preserving in its original ecological condition. Conservation land areas may be located within well radii and may contain wells and associated appurtenances but shall not contain septic facilities, drainage facilities, or other recreational structures. Only unpaved pedestrian trails and associated structures (such as kiosks, walking bridges, etc.) are permitted in these spaces. Conservation land is not required to be open to the public access unless it is required as part of an elective bonus provision provided for in this chapter or at the wishes of the landowner. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  6.03; Ord. of 9-1-2004; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-194. - Location. 
    Open space design subdivisions shall be permitted in the R-1, R-2, and M-4 districts. Open space design subdivisions in the M-4 district shall meet additional criteria with respect to outdoor recreation, such other requirements shall be adopted by the planning board as part of the subdivision regulations. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  6.04; Ord. of 9-1-2004; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-195. - Special use permits. 
    All open space design developments shall obtain a special use permit from the planning board. The special use permit shall clearly set forth all conditions of approval and shall list all plans, drawings and other submittals that are part of the approved use. Prior to the granting of a special use permit, the planning board shall hold a public hearing. Everything shown or otherwise indicated on a plan or submittal that is listed on the special use permit shall be considered to be a condition of approval. Construction shall not deviate from the stated conditions of approval without modification by the planning board. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  6.05; Ord. of 9-1-2004; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-196. - Standards for approval. 
    In addition to standard review requirements of the subdivision regulations, the planning board must find the following conditions to have been met in order to grant a special use permit. 
(1)  The application is in compliance with all requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  There is no existing violation of state or federal environmental law or regulation or this chapter on the site. Applications where such a violation exists must include mitigation or remediation plans as part of an application. 
(3)  The open space in the development is designed consistent with the requirements of this chapter. This determination, to be made by the planning board, shall be made by considering the following aspects of the surrounding area. 
a.  Protection of natural resources, determined through analysis of the following: 
1.  Protection of environmentally sensitive areas, including but not limited to, wetlands, shoreland buffers, wildlife corridors, significant groundwater resources, etc.; 
2.  Maintenance of viewsheds and other visually appealing aspects of the site; 
3.  Connectivity to regional open space areas and adjoining parcels; 
4.  Identification and preservation of wildlife corridors and rare and/or endangered species and supporting habitats. 
b.  Protection of cultural resources, determined through analysis of the following: 
1.  Establishment of new and protecting existing trailways for travel; 
2.  Protection of historic buildings or significant historical landscapes; 
3.  Establishment, protection and promotion for agricultural uses of the site; 
4.  Enhancement of other active or passive recreation facilities or opportunities. 
c.  At least 40 percent of the developable land base for the parcel must be set aside and designated as the minimum required open space. 
1.  At least 75 percent of minimum required open space shall be designated as conservation land, as defined in this chapter. 
2.  Up to 25 percent of the minimum required open space may be considered common land, as defined in this chapter. 
3.  Additional land that is not included in the developable land base shall be considered additional open space - conservation land as defined herein but shall not be subject to other requirements regarding shape and size. 
d.  The minimum restricted open space and/or common area within a development subject to a special use permit under this chapter shall be owned by and/or legally restricted by requirements of this chapter by an easement owned by at least one of the following: 
1.  Community homeowners' association, which may use it only in accordance with these restrictions, or may later grant the land to a private or public entity to hold as conservation land. 
2.  A public or private conservation entity that shall hold and have enforcement rights related to the status of the land as conservation land. 
3.  As additional protection, all land to be restricted shall include a notation on the recorded Mylar indicating the land as "This land is designated and restricted as open space in accordance with RSA 674:21-a and shall be enforceable by the Town of Newmarket." 
e.  The minimum restricted open space shall be designed in accordance with additional regulations governing the shape, configuration, location, and management plan adopted by the planning board as part of the subdivision regulations. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  6.06; Ord. of 9-1-2004; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-197. - Application procedure. 
    Applications for special use permits for an open space design development shall be made in accordance with the procedures set forth in the relevant sections of the subdivision regulations of the Newmarket Planning Board. These applications shall be joined with an application for subdivision approval in the interest of procedural ease. The planning board shall adopt regulations providing for the following minimum required milestones in the application process. 
(1)  Pre-application discussion. Planning department. 
(2)  Environmental resource and yield plan submittal. Planning department. 
(3)  Yield equation and yield plan review and recommendation to the planning board. Planning department. 
(4)  Submission hearing, preliminary plan review, and yield equation/plan approval. Planning board review - notification and public hearing required. 
(5)  Site walk. 
(6)  Application consideration. 
(7)  Decision. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  6.07; Ord. of 9-1-2004; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-198. - Approval of applications. 
    The planning board may condition its approval on reasonable conditions necessary to accomplish the objectives of this chapter, the Newmarket Master Plan, or any other relevant federal, state, or local regulation ordinance or law. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  6.08; Ord. of 9-1-2004; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-199. - Parent parcel. 
    Lot size and frontage. The minimum parent parcel lot size shall be governed as any development that is required to produce a minimum of five acres of restricted open space that satisfies this chapter. The minimum frontage for the development shall be of sufficient length to provide safe access for a roadway to access the parcel. The width of the access shall be a minimum of 50 feet and shall be dedicated as a fee title interest to the town for a public roadway or a community homeowners' association for a private roadway. Frontage on roads existing at the time of application shall be preserved as buffers to the maximum extent possible in addition to all required setbacks. The access to the development shall be over fee-title ownership land and cannot be through an easement of right-of-way. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  6.09; Ord. of 9-1-2004; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-200. - Density. 
    Maximum density, in terms of the number of allowable units, for an open space design shall be determined by use of an environmental resource and yield plan and development yield equation. All numbers that are 0.5 and over (x.5 and above) shall be rounded up to the next highest round number. The purpose of the yield plan and the development yield equation is to show the density that is reasonably achievable with respect to environmental impacts, economic realities, and sound land use. The intent is to create a resource inventory that is part of the overall application and not to require an applicant to incur additional expense in the formal engineering design of two separate subdivision plans. Both methodologies shall be submitted showing the development count and the allowed density shall be determined by the planning board. The planning board shall adopt additional regulations, as part of the subdivision regulations that provide for the requirements and submittal of materials in accordance with this article. 
(1)  An additional density bonus of ten percent may be granted by the planning board as part of the special use permit provided the minimum open space required as part of section 32-196(3)c is greater than or equal to 50 percent of the developable land base. 
(2)  An additional density bonus of five percent may be granted by the planning board as part of the special use permit provided public access is granted to the open space for passive recreation purposes. Such grant shall be non-lapsing and provided for in the deeds of the parcels. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  6.10; Ord. of 9-1-2004; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-201. - General requirements. 
    This article supersedes any provision to the contrary found elsewhere in this chapter with respect to lot size, setbacks, frontage, access, and unit density for land divisions created under this chapter. 
(1)  Only single-family detached residential uses shall be permitted in an open space design development. 
(2)  Setbacks, dimensions, and building sites. In addition to these minimum requirements, the planning board shall adopt regulations governing the definition and location of building sites, the design of shared access points and driveways, and other provisions necessary to carry out these requirements. 
a.  The following frontage requirements shall apply: 
1.  The development shall have 50 feet of frontage where the parcel accesses the existing town road system and the access shall be within the Town of Newmarket. 
2.  Each single-family lot or unit shall have a minimum of 25 feet of exclusive use land with frontage on interior roadways or access roads for driveway purposes. Shared driveways and access easements along access roads may be permitted to satisfy this requirement. 
3.  No more than three houses may share a single access point to the interior roadways. 
4.  No building shall be more than 500 feet from the interior roadways. 
b.  Developments that contain three dwelling units or less may be accessed from an existing town road via a single, shared private right-of-way, provided the following additional requirements are provided: 
1.  The buildings are no greater than 500 feet from the point of access. 
2.  The parcel has 200 feet or more of frontage on an existing town road. 
3.  Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall produce evidence that notice of the limits of municipal responsibility and liability pursuant to RSA 674:41(I)(d)(2) has been recorded in the county registry of deeds for the site for which the building permit is sought. 
4.  The minimum required open space for any such development shall be eight acres. 
c.  All developments shall contain a legal description that designate a reasonable amount of exclusive use land attributable to each particular structure for the purpose of ownership and reasonable accessory structures, landscaping, and yard areas. This provision is not meant to establish a minimum lot area and none shall be required beyond this provision. 
d.  The following setbacks shall apply to all residential structures within the development: 
1.  75-foot setback from all exterior property lines of the parent parcel. 
2.  25-foot setback from the edge of pavement for roadways within, and part of, the development. 
3.  30-foot structural separation for all single-family structures within the development. 
4.  Ten-foot structural setback from all exclusive use land delineation lines, except where shared access easements are provided. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  6.11; Ord. of 9-1-2004; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-202. - Other regulations applicable. 
    The planning board shall adopt regulations as part of the subdivision regulations as directed herein and consistent with this chapter, which shall apply to the open space design development, including the right to waive such regulations. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  6.12; Ord. of 9-1-2004; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-203. - Utilities. 
    All utilities serving the development shall be underground. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  6.13; Ord. of 9-1-2004; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-204. - Expiration. 
    Any special use permit shall expire if active and substantial development or building has not begun on the site by the owner or the owner's successor in interest within 12 months after the day of approval, or in accordance with the terms of approval (RSA 674:39). 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  6.14; Ord. of 9-1-2004; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Secs. 32-205-32-231. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OTHER REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 32-232. - Home occupation and home-based business. 
    The purpose of allowing home occupations and home-based businesses is to enhance economic opportunities for residents without significantly detracting from the quality of the neighborhoods. 
(1)  Home occupation. One home occupation shall be permitted in each residential unit. No town approval is required. This type of home occupation shall be such that there are no impacts detectable from beyond the property boundaries. There shall be no nonresident employees, no increase in traffic generation, no increase in parking, and no outside activity or storage of any kind. A sign meeting the standards of article IV of this chapter shall be permitted. 
(2)  Home-based business. One home-based business shall be permitted in each single-family residential unit, subject to the following: 
a.  The home-based business is accessory to the residential use. 
b.  Size limits. The home-based business shall not exceed the following size limits without a special use permit from the planning board. The board shall consider the size of the lot, the suitability of access, ability to provide municipal services, impact on neighbors and the neighborhood, and other such considerations. 
1.  Nonresident employees shall not be greater than one per acre of lot size, or greater than a total of four. 
2.  The home occupation shall be located within the dwelling or an accessory structure, and shall be limited to a floor area of not more than one-third of the total floor area of the primary residential structure including its attic, basement and attached garage. 
c.  Home-based businesses uses may include office, personal or business service, light manufacturing, or other uses of a similar nature, but there shall be no on-site sale of goods except as is incidental to the primary activity or service. 
d.  There shall be no outdoor activity or use, including storage and parking of commercial vehicles of 1.5-ton capacity or greater, beyond the provision of employee parking. 
e.  The home occupation shall not be such that it requires regular or frequent service by heavy commercial trucks since this would adversely impact the character of the neighborhood. 
f.  Sufficient on-site parking shall be provided. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  7.01; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-233. - Mixed-use development. 
(a)  Nonresidential only. Mixing of multiple nonresidential uses on a lot shall be permitted. 
(b)  Mix of residential and nonresidential uses on one lot. In certain instances, it is appropriate to have a mix of permitted uses on a single lot. Residential use may be permitted in combination with nonresidential uses on a single lot or in a single structure, provided the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Permitted only in the M-1, M-2, M-3, M-2A and M-4 districts, and in other districts as specified elsewhere in this chapter. Mixed-use redevelopments within the M-1 district are subject to the special use permit requirements as set forth in section 32-45(b)(2)b. 
(2)  Site plan review approval shall be required for the entire property to ensure that the site is suitable for the proposed mix of use. 
(c)  Existing commercial properties in M-2A zone shall not add 3 residential units or more unless it can be shown by completion of a Fiscal Impact Study and a Market Analysis that the entire development will have a positive fiscal impact compared to current tax revenues. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  7.02; Ord. of 11-18-2009; Ord. of 08 07 2013; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-234. - Accessory apartments. 
(a)  Purpose . Accessory apartments are permitted in all zoning districts that permit single-family residential uses to ensure adequate provision of small, affordable residential units for various segments of the population, to help homeowners utilize excess space to generate revenue to help offset the costs of home ownership, and to encourage the adaptive reuse of historic homes. 
(b)  One accessory apartment shall be permitted per detached single-family residence if granted a special exception by the zoning board of adjustment. The accessory apartment shall be contained entirely within or attached to the detached single-family residence. The zoning board of adjustment shall grant the special exception if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The accessory apartment shall be a minimum of 300 square feet and a maximum of 1,000 square feet of finished living area. 
(2)  The accessory apartment shall either be an efficiency apartment (without a separate bedroom), or a one-bedroom or two bedroom apartment. 
(3)  One of the dwelling units must be owner-occupied. 
(4)  There shall be a minimum of two parking spaces for each dwelling unit. A parking space shall be defined as a rectangular space nine feet by 18 feet. Parking spaces shall be permitted within the setbacks if the location is over 50 feet from abutting dwelling units. 
(5)  No exterior changes shall be made unless they maintain the aesthetic continuity of the accessory dwelling unit with the principal dwelling unit as a single-family dwelling. 
(6)  Adequate water supply and sewage disposal shall be provided. If town water and sewer services the site, tie-in fees shall be paid. 
(7)  Granting of the special exception would be consistent with section 32-5(1)b. 
(8)  An interior door shall be provided between the principal dwelling unit and the accessory dwelling unit; however, it shall not be required to remain unlocked. 
(c)  Subdivision and site plan review approval are not required. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  7.03; Ord. of 9-1-2004; Ord. No. 2016/2017-01, 3-1-2017; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-235. - Sexually oriented businesses. 
(a)  Purpose . The purpose of this section is to regulate sexually oriented businesses which, unless closely regulated, may have serious secondary effects on the community. These secondary effects include, but are not limited to, the following: depreciation of property values, deterioration of neighborhoods, increases in vacancy rates in residential and commercial areas, increases in incidences of criminal activity, increases in litter, noise, and the interference with residential property owner's enjoyment of their property in the vicinity of such businesses. It is the Town's intent to prevent community-wide adverse impacts, which can be brought about by the concentration of adult businesses in close proximity to each other or proximity to incompatible uses such as schools, churches, parks, public facilities and buildings and residentially zoned uses. The town finds that it has been demonstrated in various communities that the concentration of adult businesses causes adverse impacts described in this subsection and can cause businesses and residents to move elsewhere. It is, therefore, the further purpose of this section to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of sexually oriented businesses or their close proximity to incompatible uses, while permitting the location of such businesses in certain areas. (See additional information considered upon adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived available as reviewed and incorporated into the record of the planning board as part of its hearing on February 13, 2001, regarding the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived.) 
(b)  Definitions . The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Establishment means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, in whole or in part, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; 
(3)  The additions of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or 
(4)  The relocation of any sexually oriented business 
    Sexually oriented businesses or SOB includes the following: 
(1)  Any business conducted for the entertainment of adults, engaged in the selling, renting, or displaying of publications depicting the specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities described herein or other material of a sexually explicit nature. Included in the definition is any business, that as substantial or significant course of conduct, sells, offers for sale, rents, exhibits, shows or displays publications depicting the anatomical areas or specified sexual activities described herein or other material of a sexually explicit nature. Also included in this definition is any business selling, renting, or displaying sexually oriented devices intended for use in the specified sexual activities. 
(2)  A particular business at a particular location that sells, offers for sale, rents, exhibits, shows or displays specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities in the form of a book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, film video or any other form or medium, or sexually oriented devices intended for use in the specified sexual activities, which receives 15 percent or more of the gross revenue from, or devotes 15 percent or more of the stock on hand or 15 percent or more of the gross floor area to such activity, is presumed to be engaging in substantial or significant conduct with respect to such activity. 
(3)  Any business wherein the selling of any food or beverage served by employees engaged in partial or total nudity or exposed specified anatomical areas. 
(4)  Any business conducted for the entertainment of adults wherein an employee, patron or any other person engages in or are shown specified sexual activities or exhibit or engage in partial or total nudity or otherwise expose specified anatomical areas. 
(5)  Any business, which as a substantial or significant portion of its business, provides live or filmed entertainment wherein specified anatomical areas of the human anatomy are exposed. 
    Specified anatomical areas includes any of the following, whether actual or simulated: 
(1)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or 
(2)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, buttock, and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
    Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or sexual touching of human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or deviant, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of, or in connection with, any of the activities set forth in this definition. 
(c)  Sales of obscene matter. A sexually oriented business may not sell or display obscene matter, as that term is defined by RSA 650:1 as it is amended. 
(d)  Location requirements. A sexually oriented business shall not be located within a residential district or within 750 feet of any of the following: 
(1)  A church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building, which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities; 
(2)  A public or private educational facility including but not limited to child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, private schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior colleges, and universities; school includes the school grounds, but does not include facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a school; 
(3)  A public park or recreational area which has been designated for park or recreational activities including but not limited to a park, playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis courts, or other similar public land within the town which is under the control, operation, or management of the town parks and recreation authorities; 
(4)  The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use as defined in this chapter; 
(5)  An entertainment business which is oriented primarily towards children or family entertainment; or 
(6)  A licensed premises, licensed pursuant to the alcoholic beverage control regulations of the state. 
(e)  Development and performance standards. The following development standards shall apply to all sexually oriented businesses: 
(1)  No adult business shall be located in any temporary or portable structure. 
(2)  Trash dumpsters shall be completely enclosed by a screening enclosure so as not to be accessible to the public. 
(3)  Off-street parking shall be provided as specified in the site plan review regulations. 
(4)  The entire exterior grounds, including the parking lot and landscaped areas, shall be lighted in such a manner that all areas are clearly visible at all times. 
(5)  Any signage shall conform to the requirements of this chapter, and shall not contain sexually oriented photographs, silhouettes, or other pictorial representations. 
(6)  All entrances to an SOB shall be clearly and legibly posted by a notice indicating that minors are prohibited from entering the premises. 
(7)  No residential structure or any other nonconforming structure shall be converted for use as an adult business. 
(8)  No residence, apartment, living quarters or mobile home shall be located on the parcel where an adult business is located. 
(9)  The following performance standards shall apply to all sexually oriented businesses: 
(10)  The establishment of any sexually oriented business shall require site plan review approval from the planning board. As part of any application to the planning board, the applicant shall provide copies of any other permit required by the town, state, or federal government. No approval shall become final until local licensing requirements have been satisfied. 
(11)  The adult business shall not conduct or sponsor any special events, promotions, festivals, concerts, or similar activities, which would create a demand for parking spaces beyond the number of spaces, required for the business. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  7.04; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-236. - Affordable elderly housing. 
(a)  Authority. In accordance with RSA 674:21(c) and RSA 674:21(h), the ordinance from which this section is derived is adopted to permit the establishment and construction of affordable elderly housing facilities in the Town of Newmarket. Consistent with the provisions of RSA 674:21, this section provides for a use incentive that permits increased densities and development flexibility. 
(b)  Purpose . It is declared to be in the public interest and for the general welfare of the Town of Newmarket to permit the development of affordable elderly housing facilities specifically suited to address the special housing needs of the elderly. It is the purpose of this section to establish provisions under which affordable elderly housing developments may be permitted by the planning board in a flexible manner that recognizes the unique needs of such facilities in terms of design, cost and accessibility while protecting the health and safety of the residents and the general welfare of the citizens of Newmarket. 
(c)  Special use permit and overlay district. Affordable elderly housing facilities are permitted by special use permit at a density and within an overlay zone as designated herein. The special use permit shall be administered by the planning board. The board is authorized to grant, deny or grant with conditions a permit to establish an affordable elderly housing facility. Site plan review approval, in accordance with the planning board's regulations, shall also be required. The planning board shall be authorized to adopt additional regulations as part of the site plan review regulations in order to address the unique concerns related to affordable elderly housing facilities and implement this section. 
(d)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Affordable . An elderly housing facility shall be considered "affordable" if 75 percent or more of all units that are approved for the site, that have been constructed, are operated and constructed in accordance with the guidelines of or have been funded by a federal, state or local program that provides below market-rate housing for low or moderate income persons as part of its purpose. 
    Affordable elderly housing means housing used, designed and adapted for use by elderly citizens, 55 years of age and older, and complying with the design requirements of the Architectural Barrier Free Design Code for the State of New Hampshire, as amended, and licensed by any appropriate state and/or federal agencies. Affordable elderly housing may be contained in a single building or group of buildings and shall have protective mechanisms (such as a land use restriction and/or conditions on local approvals) to ensure occupation of such units by adults over 55 years of age for a period as long as the structures or use fails to comply with all underlying zoning requirements for the district in which it is located. An in perpetuity age restriction shall be enforceable by the Town of Newmarket as part of necessary local approvals. Conversion of affordable elderly housing facilities to other uses shall not occur unless the proposed use complies with all applicable zoning and site plan review regulations, even if such conversion requires the demolition and removal of excess units. 
(e)  Criteria for approval. The planning board may grant approval to permit the construction of affordable elderly housing only upon a finding that the following specified conditions exist. The applicant shall provide a narrative justifying its position on these criteria. The enforcement of these criteria shall be met to the maximum extent possible with due regard to the affordability of the project: 
(1)  Any site on which an affordable elderly housing complex is proposed shall be reviewed with respect to the availability of shopping services, medical services and transportation services thereto, and that the proposed construction and design of the affordable elderly housing complex shall contain the usual amenities and living aids found in housing designed for use by the elderly and as required by state and federal law such as accessibility features, communal facilities, etc. 
(2)  That the public interest will be served generally if the proposal were to establish affordable elderly housing on the site and the establishment of an affordable elderly housing complex on the site would not cause a diminution in the property values of surrounding parcels. 
(3)  That any conflicts with the character of the adjacent properties will be minimal in terms of the size and bulk of the visible buildings, through the use of buffers, landscaping or location of the buildings on site. This provision is meant to assure that facilities are reasonably consistent either with residential style buildings or sufficiently secluded so as to minimize negative impacts to abutting property. 
(4)  The development shall be landscaped so as to enhance its compatibility with the town with emphasis given to the use of existing natural features where possible. 
(5)  The design and site layout of the development shall emphasize the rural character of the town, maximize the privacy of the dwelling units, preserve the natural character of land, provide for the separation of parking and neighboring residential uses, and consider such factors as orientation, energy usage, views, etc. 
(6)  Parking facilities shall comply with the existing site plan review regulations, unless the planning board authorizes waivers in accordance with information submitted showing a decreased need in parking. The planning board may require land to be set-aside for future parking facilities and require adequate financial security to assure its construction with the Newmarket Site Review Regulations. 
(7)  Seventy-five percent of all units on the site shall be identified as and remain affordable in accordance with this section for as long as the on-site structures fail to comply with all other zoning requirements of the underlying district. 
(8)  Affordable elderly housing facilities shall not include manufactured housing units. 
(f)  Requirements. 
(1)  Zoning requirements for the underlying district shall apply unless covered below. 
a.  The planning board shall, through its site plan review regulations, review the location and provision of drainage facilities, adequate access for emergency vehicles, parking, landscaping and other facilities required to serve the residents of the facility. 
b.  Setbacks for affordable elderly housing facilities shall be 35 feet from all property lines. 
c.  The buffer shall be of sufficient opacity to adequately shield the abutting residential properties from the development. Buffer strips must contain vegetation that will partially screen the view from adjacent residential property during all seasons. This screening must limit visual contact between uses and create a strong impression of the separation of spaces. 
d.  Existing trees and vegetation must be incorporated into the buffer strips or landscaping design. Fencing alone may not be considered an acceptable method of screening, but fencing may be an element of design. 
(2)  Overlay zone. Affordable elderly housing shall be permitted within the R-1, R-2 and R-3 districts on sites that are presently served (or is brought to the site) by both town water and sewer and also have frontage and access limited to one of the following roadways: Route 108 from the Newfields boundary north to Elm Street, Route 152 or Bennett Way. 
(3)  Density. 
a.  As part of the special permit process, the planning board may permit an increased density for the number of units per developable acre of land. The board shall consider factors such as sufficiency of access, water and sewer capacity, functionality, site design and layout. Standard permissible density shall be eight units per developable acre. In no case shall the density, including bonuses, exceed ten units per developable acre. 
b.  The calculation of developable acres shall not include: very poorly drained soils, slopes exceeding 25 percent and water bodies. No more than 25 percent of the total calculation of developable acres may be comprised of poorly drained soils. 
c.  Density bonus. When an applicant proposes a site design that includes landscaping and setbacks that meet the following criteria, a density bonus may be awarded by the board of up to 25 percent (to a maximum of ten units per developable acre): 
1.  The facility provides for a naturally landscaped buffer increased by an additional 25 percent where a proposed development abuts residential property. 
2.  No roads or driveways shall be located within any part of this buffer zone, but may be located in the additional setback area. 
3.  Where existing vegetation is not present, a buffer of similar opacity may be planted providing the same separation. Deciduous and coniferous trees shall be incorporated within the design and shall have a caliper of at least three inches at a point six inches above the root ball. One tree shall be planted for every 100 square feet of buffer area. 
(g)  Saving clause. If any portion of this section is found invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, this finding shall not invalidate the remainder of this section. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  7.05; Ord. of 9-25-2002; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-237. - Lighting and illumination. 
(a)  Purpose . This section is intended to eliminate problems of glare, minimize light trespass and obtrusive light created by improperly designed and installed outdoor lighting. Further purposes are to enhance and protect the quality of the New Hampshire night sky, Newmarket's rural character, and conserve energy and resources. These concerns are balanced while maintaining safety, security and productivity by establishing limits for the area that certain kinds of outdoor-lighting fixtures can illuminate and by limiting the total allowable illumination in the Town of Newmarket. 
(b)  Prohibitions . This section applies to all lighting within the Town of Newmarket on any site except for legal nonconforming uses as covered in section 32-5 and temporary or emergency lighting. 
(1)  Mercury vapor lamps fixtures and lamps. The installation of any mercury vapor fixture or lamp for use as outdoor lighting is prohibited. 
(2)  Laser source light. The use of laser source light or any similar high intensity light for outdoor advertising or entertainment, when projected above the horizontal is prohibited. 
(3)  Searchlights . The operation of searchlights for advertising purposes is permitted by permit issued by the building inspector for a period of two nights (regardless of hours in operation) per year per lot. 
(4)  Neon . Neon lighting shall be limited to signage use and must be located within the exterior dimension of the sign as approved under this section. Neon lighting as architectural accents or used as window displays is prohibited. 
(c)  Residential lighting . These provisions are intended to prevent private and public nuisances and protect property values. This section applies to existing and proposed single-family and duplex residential uses. 
(1)  Residential lighting uses shall not be used or maintained in such a fashion as to inhibit or interfere with the use and enjoyment of neighboring properties. 
(2)  Spot lights, flood lights and other bright security lighting shall be limited in such a fashion as to not direct light onto neighboring property. Security lighting using motion detection switches are encouraged, but continual lighting must be angled or shielded in such a fashion as to not produce glare onto neighboring property, particularly dwelling units. 
(3)  Accent lighting, low-wattage seasonal lighting and other fixtures commonly associated with residential uses are not intended to be prohibited by this section. 
(d)  Nonresidential and multifamily uses. These provisions are intended to provide for more comprehensive lighting regulations due to potential negative impact on a greater number of residents and the public from inappropriate lighting installation or fixtures. In addition, it is the intent of these restrictions to prevent lighting conflicts and competing lighting installations in commercial areas of the Town of Newmarket, particularly where the town encourages mixed-use development. This section applies to nonresidential uses and any structure with three or more residential units. The planning board shall adopt regulations as part of the site plan review regulations that implement the purpose and intent of this section. 
(1)  A building permit shall be required prior to the installation of any new fixtures on existing nonresidential and multifamily uses. If the original site plan approval granted by the planning board specified, in detail, the type and nature of lighting, any increase or change in lighting that may have an increased impact on the site shall be referred to the planning board for site plan review. The building official shall approve a permit for other installations upon a finding that the fixtures comply with the following general lighting requirements. 
(2)  General lighting requirements: 
a.  All lighting in the Town of Newmarket is required to have full-cutoff shielding, except for that portion of lighting installation that is consistent with the Mill yard Lighting Theme as defined in the Newmarket Planning Board Site Plan Review Regulations, set forth in Appendix B to this Code. 
b.  The new installation of up-lighting, by any method, is prohibited; however, the limited use of upward landscape lighting on a case-by-case basis may be approved provided the lighting does not spill onto neighboring properties or public ways. 
c.  Non-cutoff wall pack type fixtures are prohibited. 
d.  Existing lighting sources that do not present a health and safety issue with respect to glare on public ways or nuisance as a result of off-site illumination shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(3)  New fixtures accompanying establishment of new uses or change of use that requires site plan review shall have lighting plans approved as part of the site plan review process. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  7.06; Ord. of 6-18-2003; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Sec. 32-238. - Impact fees. 
(a)  Authority and applicability. 
(1)  The ordinance from which this section is derived is authorized by RSA 674:21 as an innovative land use control. The administration of this section shall be the responsibility of the planning board. This section, as adopted by the town council, as well as regulations and studies adopted by the planning board consistent with and in furtherance of this section, shall govern the assessment of impact fees imposed upon new development in order to meet the needs occasioned by that development for the construction or improvement of public capital facilities owned or operated by the Town of Newmarket or the Newmarket School District. 
(2)  The public capital facilities for which impact fees may be assessed in Newmarket include, and are limited to, water treatment and distribution facilities; wastewater treatment and disposal facilities; sanitary sewers; stormwater, drainage and flood control facilities; public road systems and rights-of-way; municipal office facilities; public school facilities; public safety facilities; solid waste collection, transfer, recycling, processing and disposal facilities; public library facilities; and public recreation facilities not including public open space. 
(3)  Prior to assessing an impact fee for one or more of the public capital facilities enumerated in this section, the planning board shall have adopted such studies or methodologies and related fee schedules that provide for a process or method of calculating the proportionate share of public capital improvement costs that are created by new development. For purposes of this chapter, the "Methodologies for the Calculation of Impact Fees for Newmarket, New Hampshire" dated October 23, 2000, are those prepared by Bruce Mayberry, Planning Consultant, Yarmouth, Maine and approved by the Newmarket Planning Board and are incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof. Said adopted methodologies may only be revised after a public hearing by the planning board and after a subsequent public hearing and amendment of this chapter by the town council. Such calculations shall reasonably relate to the capital costs associated with the increased demand placed on capital facility capacity by new development. 
(4)  The following regulations shall govern the assessment of impact fees for public capital facilities in order to accommodate increased demand on the capacity of these facilities due to new development. 
(b)  Findings . The Town of Newmarket hereby finds that: 
(1)  The Town of Newmarket is responsible for and committed to the provision of public capital facilities and services at standards determined by the town to be necessary to support development in a manner, which protects and promotes the public health, safety and welfare; 
(2)  Public capital facilities have been and will be provided by the town utilizing funds allocated through the Capital Improvements Program, which has been adopted and regularly updated by the planning board per the Newmarket Town Charter; 
(3)  An impact fee ordinance for public capital facilities is consistent with the goals and objectives of the Master Plan and the Capital Improvements Program of the Town of Newmarket; 
(4)  New development in Newmarket will create the need for the construction, equipping, or expansion of public capital facilities in order to provide adequate public capital facilities for its residents; 
(5)  Impact fees may be used to assess an equitable share of the growth-related cost of the capacity of public capital facilities resulting from the new development in proportion to the facility demands created by that development; 
(6)  According to data compiled by the NH Office of State Planning, as of 1999 Newmarket had the lowest equalized property valuation per capita of all cities and towns in Rockingham County; 
(7)  An analysis of equalized valuation per capita prepared by the NH Office of State Planning for years 1980, 1990 and 1999 indicates that Newmarket's equalized valuation per capita was 30 to 40 percent lower than the state average in those comparison years; 
(8)  In the absence of impact fees, anticipated residential and nonresidential growth and associated capital improvement costs will likely necessitate an excessive expenditure of public funds in order to maintain adequate public capital facility standards and to promote and protect the public health, safety, and welfare; 
(9)  Impact fees assessed pursuant to this section will not exceed the costs of: 
a.  Providing additional or expanded public capital facilities necessitated by new development in Newmarket; and/or 
b.  Compensating the Town of Newmarket or the Newmarket School District for public capital facility capacity that it provided in anticipation of new development in Newmarket. 
(c)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Fee payer means the applicant for the issuance of a permit that would create new development as defined in this subsection. 
    Gross floor area means the sum of the areas of all floors of main and accessory buildings on the lot as measured to the outside surfaces of the exterior walls. The gross floor area shall include basements, lobbies, and stair openings, elevator shafts and storage. The gross floor area shall exclude open wells (atriums), mechanical rooms, crawl spaces and attics without floors, attics used only for mechanical services, porches, balconies and open-sided roofed-over areas. 
    New development. 
(1)  The term "new development" means an activity, which results in: 
a.  The creation of a new residence or residential units (as defined by section 32-11); 
b.  The conversion of a legally existing use, or additions thereto, which would result in a net increase in the number of residential units; 
c.  Construction of a new nonresidential building or, a net increase in the gross floor area of any nonresidential building; 
d.  The conversion of an existing use to another use if such change creates a net increase in the demand on public capital facilities that are the subject of impact fee assessment methodologies adopted by the planning board; or 
e.  A new or modified service connection to the public water system or the public wastewater disposal system of the Town of Newmarket that would result in a net increase in demand on the capacity of these facilities. 
(2)  The term "new development" shall not include the replacement of an existing mobile home, or the reconstruction of a structure that has been destroyed by fire or natural disaster where there is no change in its size, intensification of, or type of use, and where there is no net increase in demand on the public capital facilities of the Town of Newmarket. 
(d)  Computation of impact fee. 
(1)  The amount of each impact fee shall be assessed in accordance with written procedures or methodologies adopted and amended by the planning board for the purpose of public capital facility impact fee assessment in Newmarket. These methodologies shall set forth the assumptions and formulas comprising the basis for impact fee assessment, and shall include documentation of the procedures and calculations used to establish impact fee schedules. The amount of any impact fee shall be computed based on the municipal public capital improvement cost of providing adequate public capital facility capacity to serve new development. Such documentation shall be available for public inspection in the finance office of the Newmarket Town Hall. 
(2)  In the case of new development created by the conversion or modification of an existing use, the impact fee assessed shall be computed based upon the net increase in the impact fee assessment for the new use as compared to the highest impact fee that was, or would have been, assessed for the previous use in existence on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(e)  Assessment of impact fee. 
(1)  Impact fees shall be assessed by the code enforcement officer, prior to or as a condition to issuance of a building permit on new development to compensate the Town of Newmarket for the proportional share of the public capital facility costs generated by this development. 
(2)  Any person who seeks a permit for new development, including permits for new or modified service connections to the public water system or public wastewater disposal system that would increase the demand on the capacity of those systems, is hereby required to pay the public capital facility impact fees authorized under this section in the manner set forth herein, except where all or part of the fees are waived in accordance with the criteria for waivers established in this section. 
(f)  Waivers . The planning board may grant full or partial waivers of impact fees where the board finds that one or more of the following criteria are met with respect to the particular public capital facilities for which impact fees are normally assessed. 
(1)  A person may request a full or partial waiver of public school capital facility impact fees for those residences or residential units that are lawfully restricted to occupancy by senior citizens age 62 or over or to households with at least one person age 55 and over, as applicable, in a development that is maintained in compliance with the provisions of RSA 354-A:15, Housing For Older Persons. The planning board may waive school impact fee assessments on age-restricted units where it finds that the property will be bound by lawful deeded restrictions on occupancy for a period of at least 20 years. 
(2)  The planning board may agree to waive all or part of an impact fee assessment and accept in lieu of a cash payment, a proposed contribution of real property or facility improvements of equivalent value and utility to the public. Prior to acting on a request for a waiver of impact fees under this provision that would involve a contribution of real property or the construction of capital facilities, the planning board shall submit a copy of the waiver request to the town council for its review and consent prior to its acceptance of the proposed contribution. The value of contributions or improvements shall be credited only toward facilities of like kind, and may not be credited to other categories of impact fee assessment. Full or partial waivers may not be based on the value of exactions for on-site or off-site improvements required by the planning board as a result of subdivision or site plan review, and which would be required of the developer regardless of the impact fee assessments authorized by this section. 
(3)  The planning board may waive an impact fee assessment for a particular capital facility where it finds that the subject property has previously been assessed for its proportionate share of public capital facility impacts, or has contributed payments or constructed capital facility capacity improvements equivalent in value to the dollar amount of the fees waived. 
(4)  The planning board may waive an impact fee assessment where it finds that, due to conditions specific to a development agreement, or other written conditions or lawful restrictions applicable to the subject property, the development will not increase the demand on the capacity of the public capital facility or system for which the impact fee is being assessed. 
(5)  A fee payer may request a full or partial waiver of the amount of the impact fee for a particular development based on the results of an independent study of the demand on public capital facility capacity and related costs attributable to that development. In support of such request, the fee payer shall prepare and submit to the planning board an independent fee calculation or other relevant study and supporting documentation of the public capital facility impact of the proposed development. The independent calculation or study shall set forth the specific reasons for departing from the methodologies and schedules adopted by the town. The planning board shall review such study and render its decision. All costs incurred by the town for the review of such study, including consultant and counsel fees, shall be paid by the fee payer. 
(6)  A person may request a full or partial waiver of impact fees for construction within a plat or site plan approved by the planning board prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. Prior to granting such a waiver, the board must find that the proposed construction is entitled to the four-year exemption or vested status provided by RSA 674:39, pursuant to that statute. This waiver shall not be applicable to phases of a phased development project where active and substantial development, building and construction has not yet occurred in the phase in which construction is proposed. 
(7)  The planning board may waive impact fees where it finds that a proposed accessory dwelling unit (ADU) will meet both of the following criteria: 
a.  Be created from conversion of existing finished living area; and 
b.  The ADU will not increase the number of existing bedrooms on the property and where it finds that one or more of the existing bedrooms on the property will be dedicated to the ADU use or removed from its existing use or location. For purposes of this section, a proposed studio ADU will account for one bedroom. 
(g)  Payment of impact fee. 
(1)  No building permit shall be issued for new development as defined in this section until the code enforcement officer has assessed the impact fee. The code enforcement officer shall not issue a certificate of occupancy for the development on which the fee is assessed until the impact fee has been paid in full or has been waived by the planning board. In the interim between assessment and collection, the planning board may authorize another mutually acceptable schedule for payment, or require the deposit of an irrevocable letter of credit or other acceptable performance and payment guarantee with the Town of Newmarket. 
(2)  Where off-site public capital improvements have been constructed, or where such improvements will be constructed simultaneously with new development, and where the town has appropriated necessary funds to cover such portions of the work for which it will be responsible, the code enforcement officer may collect the impact fee for such capital facilities at the time a building permit or a permit to connect to the public water or public wastewater system is issued. 
(h)  Appeals . 
(1)  A party aggrieved by a decision made by the code enforcement officer pursuant to the assessment or collection of impact fees authorized by this section may appeal such decision to the zoning board of adjustment as provided by RSA 676:5, as amended. 
(2)  The decision of the zoning board of adjustment may be appealed to the superior court as provided by RSA 677:2-14. 
(3)  A party aggrieved by a decision of the planning board under this section may appeal such decision to the Rockingham County Superior Court as provided by RSA 676:5(III) and RSA 677:15, as amended. 
(i)  Administration of funds collected. 
(1)  All funds collected under this section shall be properly identified and promptly transferred for deposit into separate impact fee accounts for each type of public capital facility for which impact fees are assessed. Each impact fee account shall be a non-lapsing special revenue fund account and under no circumstances shall such revenues deposited therein accrue to the general fund. The town treasurer shall have custody of all accounts, and shall pay out the same upon approved vouchers through the accounts payable system. 
(2)  The finance director shall record all fees paid, by date of payment and the name of the person making payment. The finance director shall maintain an updated record of the current ownership, tax map and lot reference number of properties for which fees have been paid under this section for each permit so affected for a period of at least nine years from the date of receipt of the impact fee payment associated with the issuance of each permit. 
(3)  Impact fees collected may be spent from time to time by order of the finance director shall be used solely for the reimbursement of the town or the Newmarket School District, in the case of school impact fees, for the cost of the public capital improvements for which they were collected, or to recoup the cost of public capital improvements made by the town or the school district in anticipation of the needs for which the impact fee was collected. 
(4)  In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments have been or will be issued by the Town of Newmarket or the Newmarket School District for the funding of capacity-related improvements, impact fees from the appropriate related public capital facility impact fee accounts may be applied to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt instruments. 
(5)  At the end of each month, the finance director shall prepare a report to the town treasurer, giving particular account of all impact fee transactions during that month. At the end of each fiscal year, the finance director shall prepare a report to the town council, planning board, town treasurer, and the town administrator, giving a particular account of all impact fee transactions during the year. 
(j)  Use of funds. 
(1)  Funds withdrawn from the public capital facility impact fee accounts shall be used solely for the purpose of acquiring, constructing or expanding, equipping, or improving public capital facilities, to increase their capacity, or to recoup the cost of such capacity improvements. 
(2)  Effective upon passage of the ordinance from which this section is derived, the annual updates of the Newmarket Capital Improvement Program shall contain a procedure for assigning funds, including any accrued interest, from all of the public capital facilities impact fee accounts for specific public capital facility improvement projects related expenditures or debt service. Monies, including any accrued interest not assigned in any fiscal period, shall be retained in the same public capital facilities impact fee account until the next fiscal period, except as provided by the refund provisions of this section. 
(3)  Funds may be used to provide refunds as described in this section. 
(k)  Refund of fees paid. 
(1)  The current owner of record of property for which an impact fee has been paid shall be entitled to a full or partial refund, whichever is applicable, plus accrued interest under the following circumstances: 
a.  When either the full or partial portion of the impact fee, whichever is applicable, has not been encumbered or legally bound to be spent for the purpose for which it was collected within a period of six years from the date of the full and final payment of the fee; or 
b.  When the town, or, in the case of school impact fees, the Newmarket School District, has failed, within the period of six years, from the date of the full and final payment of such fee, to appropriate their proportionate share of related public capital improvement costs. 
(2)  The town council shall provide all owners of record, who are due a refund, written notice of the amount due, including interest accrued, if any, and shall promptly cause said refund to be made. 
(l)  Additional assessments. Payment of the impact fee under this section does not restrict the town or the planning board from requiring other payments or improvements from the fee payer, as required by the subdivision or site plan review regulations, or as otherwise authorized by law. 
(m)  Scattered or premature development. Nothing in this section shall be construed so as to limit the authority of the Newmarket Planning Board to deny new proposed development which is scattered or premature, requires an excessive expenditure of public funds, or otherwise violates this chapter, or the Newmarket Planning Board Site Plan Review Regulations or Subdivision Regulations, or which may otherwise be lawfully denied. 
(n)  Review and change in method of assessment. The methodologies adopted by the planning board for impact fee assessment, and the associated fee schedules, shall be reviewed periodically and amended as necessary by the planning board. Such review shall take place not more than five years from the initial adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived, nor more frequently than annually, except as required to correct errors or inconsistencies in the assessment formula. Any proposal for changes in the impact fee assessment methodology or the associated fee schedule shall be submitted to the town council for its review and comment prior to final consideration of the proposed changes by the planning board. The review by the planning board and town council may result in recommended changes or adjustments to the methodology and related fees based on the most recent data as may be available. No change in methodology or in the impact fee schedules shall be adopted by the planning board until it shall have been the subject of a public hearing noticed in accordance with RSA 675:7. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  7.07; Ord. of 2-7-2001; Ord. of 06-21-2017; Ord. No. 3-2017/2018, 4-18-2018) 
Sec. 32-239. - Accessory sheds. 
    An accessory shed is permitted on any lot subordinate to and customarily incidental to a primary residential use with a minimum five-foot rear and five-foot side setback in the M2, M2A, M3, R2, R3, and R4 Zoning Districts subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  The maximum floor area of the accessory shed shall be 120 square feet (exterior dimension) or less, with no dimension being greater than 15 feet, or less than eight feet. 
(2)  The height of the accessory shed shall be no greater than 12 feet. 
(3)  The accessory shed shall be located to the side or rear of the primary structure and not in the front yard. For purposes of this section, the front yard is determined as that area in front of the primary structure. 
(4)  A building permit is required for all accessory sheds regardless of the size. 
(5)  Only one accessory shed shall be permitted per lot under this section. 
(Ord. of 2-14-1996,  7.08; Ord. of 12-5-2007; Ord. of 06-21-2017) 
Appendix A - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed in this appendix are the subdivision regulations adopted by the planning board on June 13, 1995. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings and catchlines have been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference- Subdivision regulations, RSA 674:35. 

SECTION 1.00. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1.01. - Purpose. 
    The general purpose of this Regulation is to protect the public health, safety, convenience, prosperity and general welfare of the Town, consistent with the policies of the Master Plan, as lots are divided, new land use patterns are established, and new roads and other infrastructure are built. Throughout this Regulation, the Board seeks to balance the process of growth, development and change with the need to protect and enhance those qualities which make Newmarket a safe and desirable place to live, work and visit. In keeping with this general purpose, the following are specific objectives: 
(A)  Provide against such scattered or premature subdivision of land as would involve danger or injury to health, safety, or prosperity by reason of the lack of water supply, drainage, transportation, schools, fire protection, or other public services, or necessitate the excessive expenditure of public funds for the supply of such services; 
(B)  Provide for the harmonious development and redevelopment of the Town and its environs; 
(C)  Provide adequate and coordinated open space, neighborhood parks, and other recreation areas with adequate public access; 
(D)  Provide for proper spacing and patterns of properties and buildings to ensure adequate sunlight and air circulation, access for firefighting apparatus and equipment to buildings, and establishment of land use patterns compatible with traditional New England design, especially in new residential neighborhoods; 
(E)  Ensure that land is of sufficient character to be used for building purposes without danger to health, and additionally ensuring that development does not exceed the capability of the land to safely provide on-site water supply and sewage disposal in areas not served by municipal water and sewer systems; 
(F)  Facilitate adequate provision of public facilities, utilities and services; and 
(G)  Require proper arrangement, design, and construction of streets, sidewalks, pedestrian and bicycle paths, and other transportation improvements to compose a safe, convenient and environmentally compatible system of vehicular and pedestrian travel which integrates with the overall Town and regional systems. 
Sec. 1.02. - Authority. 
    Under authority of RSA 764:35 and authorization from Town Meeting, as amended, the Planning Board repeals the previous Subdivision Regulations and hereby adopts this new Regulation on June 13, 1995. 
Sec. 1.03. - Definitions. 
    Definitions shall be those provided in the Newmarket Zoning Ordinance adopted February 14, 1996, in Zoning Ordinance  1.11, and the additional definitions as follows: 
    Best Management Practices (BMP): As outlined in the NHDES Stormwater Manual, (Vols. 1-3), published in Dec. 2008 or as amended, Best Management Practices are generally considered to be the most effective and practical means of preventing soil erosion and/or controlling peak flow rates as well as minimizing pollutant loads and runoff volumes generated from site development. These may include both structural and non-structural measures associated with site development. 
    Bioretention Area: Also often referred to as a Rain Garden, consists of a shallow, landscaped depression that receives runoff from impervious surfaces and allows the initial "first-flush" of runoff (typically first one inch of runoff) to infiltrate into native soils or an engineered soil matrix for water quality treatment. These areas are generally planted with a mix of native grasses, sedges and shrubs. 
    Boundary Line Adjustment: 
1)  The alteration of lot boundaries between two or more adjoining lots which does not increase the number of lots. 
2)  The creation of a different form or division of ownership of an existing property, which does not require physical changes. 
    Disturbance: Any activity that involves altering the existing terrain which includes clearing and grubbing, grading and adding impervious area that will change the runoff flow and volume from an existing site. 
    Impervious Surface: Any surface that cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall including, but not limited to, surfaces such as building rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways and compacted gravel (e.g., driveways and parking lots). 
    Low Impact Development (LID): Low impact development is a site planning and design strategy intended to maintain or replicate predevelopment hydrology through the use of site planning, source control, and small scale practices integrated throughout the site to capture and infiltrate runoff as close to its source as possible. Where existing soils limit the natural infiltration potential, LID strategies may include, but not be limited to, preserving existing wooded buffer areas, use of cisterns to capture and reuse stormwater or the use of roof gardens to minimize the generation of roof runoff. 
    Major Subdivision: 
1)  The division of a lot into a greater number of lots, but which does not fit the definition of a Minor Subdivision. 
2)  An increase in the number of residential units on a single lot, but which does not fit the definition of a Minor Subdivision. 
    Maximum Extent Practicable (MEP): To show that a proposed development has met a standard to the maximum extent practicable, the applicant must demonstrate the following: 
(1)  All reasonable efforts have been made to meet the standard, 
(2)  A complete evaluation of all possible management measures has been performed, and 
(3)  If full compliance cannot be achieved, the highest practicable level of management is being implemented. 
    Minor Subdivision: 
1)  The division of a lot into a greater number of lots, provided that no new road is required; that there is no potential for a road to be required for the full development of any remaining developable portion of the land; and that the resulting number of lots does not exceed six. 
2)  An increase in the number of residential units on a single lot, provided that the total proposed number of such units does not exceed six. 
    Subdivision: Division of a lot into two or more lots, plats, sites, or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, rent, lease, condominium conveyance or building development. It includes re-subdivision and, where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or territory subdivided. The division of a parcel of land held in common and subsequently divided into parts among several owners shall be deemed a subdivision. The granting of an easement in gross for public utilities shall not be deemed a subdivision. 
Sec. 1.04. - Communications between Town and applicant. 
    There are many people involved in the processing of each application, and communication problems develop quickly if great care is not taken from the start. To prevent communication problems from developing, it is important for both the Town and the applicant to designate one person each to coordinate all communications. This prevents repetition of questions, prevents two people from giving different answers to the same question, and should help to keep interpretation consistent. 
(A)  Applicant's Authorized Representative. The application form requires designation of one person to act as the "authorized representative." All communication to the applicant shall be made through this person, and this person shall be present at all meetings with the Board. In the text of this Regulation, references to the applicant shall also imply the authorized representative. 
(B)  Town. 
(1)  All communications to the Town shall be directed to the Planning Board Secretary unless otherwise directed by the Chairman of the Board. This may be common during larger applications, such as when an engineer reviewing the road design needs to talk to the design engineer to clarify issues. 
(2)  Individual Board members shall not discuss the application with the applicant, abutters, or any other person associated or affected by the application except at the Board meetings, which may include formal site visits with the applicant. Otherwise, all questions should be directed to the Planning Board Secretary. This procedure is essential to ensure that all Board members and the public receive the same information about the application, and that all Board members are therefore equally able to render the best decision possible. 
Sec. 1.05. - Applicability. 
    These Regulations cover the following types of activities: 
(A)  Lot Consolidation. Pursuant to RSA 674:39-a, the combination of two or more lots under common ownership to form a single lot requires that the Board approve, sign and record at the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds a Notice of Merger. A copy shall also be provided to the Town Assessor. The Board shall approve the merger so long as it does not create (or worsen existing) violation(s) of the land use codes. To obtain the Board's approval, this item must be placed on the agenda of a regular meeting of the Board. No public hearing or abutter notice is required. All costs shall be paid by the lot owner. 
(B)  Subdivisions. This Regulation provides for three different types of applications, each with its own specific requirements: 
(1)  Boundary Line Adjustment. The alteration of lot boundaries between two or more adjoining lots which does not increase the number of lots; or the creation of a different form or division of ownership of an existing property, which does not require physical changes. Further information and instructions are provided in Section 2.03. 
(2)  Minor Subdivision. This can be either of two types of proposal. First, the division of a lot into a greater number of lots, provided that no new road is required; that there is no potential for a road to be required for the full development of any remaining developable portion of land within the original lot; and that the resulting number of lots does not exceed six. Second, an increase in the number of residential units on a single lot, provided that the total proposed number of such units does not exceed six. Further information and instructions are provided in Section 2.04. 
(3)  Major Subdivision. This can be either of two types of proposal. First, the division of a lot into a greater number of lots, but which does not fit the definition of a Minor Subdivision. Second, an increase in the number of residential units on a single lot, but which does not fit the definition of a Minor Subdivision. Further information and instructions are provided in Section 2.05. 
Sec. 1.06. - About Town regulations. 
(A)  Related Town Codes. The Town of Newmarket has other regulations, which may affect an application, as follows: 
Chapter I: Planning Board Bylaws Chapter II: Conservation Commission Bylaws Chapter III: Zoning Board of Adjustment Bylaws Chapter IV: Zoning Ordinance Chapter V: Subdivision Regulations Chapter VI: Site Plan Review Regulations Chapter VII: Excavation Regulations  
(B)  Organization and Cross References. To fully understand this code, it is important to understand how this Regulation is organized and cross referenced. 
(1)  Organization of this Regulation. 
(a)  Sections. This Regulation is divided into six Sections. Each Section is simply a grouping of related issues or requirements, and readers should identify the article in which an answer is likely to be found. The six sections are: 
 1.00 General Provisions  2.00 Application Procedures  3.00 Design Standards  4.00 Plat Standards  5.00 Administration  6.00 Application Forms and Checklists  
(b)  Subsections. Each Section is divided into subsections, each of which may be further divided as needed. It is easiest to use the Table of Contents to locate the major subsections. 
(2)  Cross Referencing System. Within this Regulation, there are many references to other Sections of this code. These cross references are provided to help the reader find needed information, and to inform the reader of related provisions. The reference for this General Provisions Section is written as follows: 
 1.00 
The symbol "" means section. In all cases, the information following the "" starts with the Section, then the subsections in descending order. The reference for this subsection is written as follows: 
 1.06(B)(2) 
The number to the left of the decimal point refers to the Section, the number following the decimal point is the subsection, and so forth. Additional levels of hierarchy would be shown as follows: 
 1.01(B)(3)(c)[2][e] 
The reader should note that only the first letter is capitalized, and that the rounded parentheses are used before the square parentheses. Also, the text of each level is indented farther than the previous level. 
(C)  [Shall/Should.] The term "shall" requires a mandatory action in all cases, while "should" implies that the action is appropriate in most cases. The Board is responsible for deciding, on a case-by-case basis, how to apply the "should" provisions. 
(D)  State Laws. State laws are referenced frequently in this Regulation. In New Hampshire, State laws are known as Revised Statutes Annotated, which is abbreviated as, "RSA," and are followed by the appropriate chapter and section references. 
Editor's note- The organization of the other regulations listed in subsection (A) of this section is no longer accurate, as it was changed as part of the recodification process. 
Sec. 1.07. - General guidance. 
    The following advice is offered to assist the applicant, especially if the applicant is unfamiliar with land development processes. 
(A)  All applicants will need to hire professionals to prepare part or all of the application. In all cases, a NH Licensed Land Surveyor is required. In some cases, other specialists will be needed, possibly including a licensed Professional Engineer, an attorney, a soil scientist, or others. While such assistance does cost money, their skills and abilities are essential to ensure that the Town and applicant have sound information on which to base their decisions. 
(B)  The Board is concerned about processing all applications fairly and quickly. To accomplish this, the applicant shares certain responsibilities. The applicant must be properly prepared. This includes reading these Regulations to understand the issues, which must be addressed, and includes dealing with all the significant issues up front. Incomplete submittals, or failure to properly address issues will result in unnecessary delays in obtaining a final decision from the Board. 
(C)  The application process is similar for all applications, although the amount of work and time to obtain an approval vary widely. 
(1)  All applications follow this basic process: 
  Preparation. The applicant prepares the application, usually done by hired professionals. This may involve some discussion with the Board through conceptual consultation or design review meetings. 
  Application Acceptance. Upon submittal of the application materials to the Town, the application is placed on the next available Planning Board agenda for consideration. By State law, there is a minimum lead-time of 15 days. 
  Scattered and Premature. The Board may make certain findings that a proposed development is scattered and premature, which may lead to modification of the application or could result in denial. 
  Road Layout. For Major Subdivisions only, the Board requires extra meetings to discuss road layout and function before it will accept or review final road design plans. This permits transportation issues to be discussed conceptually before the exact details of specific designs are developed. 
  Public Hearing. All applications will have a public hearing. This is the official opportunity for the public to ask questions about the application, to raise issues, offer suggestions, or indicate their support or opposition. The Hearing may be interspersed with periods of deliberation by the Board, and may be continued to future dates. 
  Decision. In the end, the Board must decide whether to approve or deny the application. In the majority of cases, the Board approves the application with conditions, which means that there are additional administrative or technical requirements, which must be satisfied to obtain the full approval. 
(2)  Timing. Perhaps the most commonly asked question about an application to a planning board is "how long will it take?" There is no standard answer. At a minimum, there must be a meeting with the Board, and this alone requires at least 15 days lead-time. Boundary Line Adjustments and Minor Subdivisions are often approved at a single meeting. Major Subdivisions, however, require a minimum of two meetings and are likely to take two to three months to complete. However, this general answer is all based on the assumptions that the applicant is properly prepared, and that no unusual circumstances arise. Without the applicant's consent, however, it is very unlikely that an application process can take longer than six months. 
SECTION 2.00. - APPLICATION PROCESS 

Sec. 2.01. - Preliminary conceptual consultation. 
    This meeting shall be directed at a review of the basic concept of the proposal and suggestions, which might be of assistance in resolving problems with meeting requirements during final consideration. The Board and applicant may discuss proposals in conceptual form only and in general terms such as desirability of types of development and proposals under the Master Plan. The presentation to the Board of new surveys, engineering plans or similar materials shall require the Design Review process to be followed, so the Chairman must be careful to keep these discussions at a general level. Typically, maps from the Master Plan, tax maps, county soil survey maps and the like are acceptable levels of generality upon which to base these discussions. Such consultation shall not bind either the applicant or the Board, and statements made by Board members shall not be the basis for disqualifying said members or invalidating any action taken. Such discussion may occur without the necessity of giving formal public notice, but such discussions may occur only at formal meetings of the Board. Preliminary conceptual consultation meetings are strictly optional to the applicant. 
Sec. 2.02. - Design review. 
(A)  The Board and applicant may engage in non-binding discussions beyond conceptual and general discussions, addressing more specific design, planning and engineering details, provided that the design review may proceed only after formal public notice is provided. Statements made by Board members shall not be the basis for disqualifying said members or invalidating any action taken. The applicant shall pay appropriate public notice fees as specified in  2.06(B), and shall provide all required materials and information required for public notice per  2.10 and  2.11. Design Review meetings are strictly optional to the applicant, but such meetings can be helpful in identifying and resolving problems in an application prior to major design investments by the applicant. 
(B)  The Design Review meeting is especially appropriate for receiving comments on the general road plan of a Major Subdivision per  2.16(A), and for reviewing the concepts for an Open Space Development subdivision. 
Sec. 2.03. - Boundary line adjustment. 
    The application for a Boundary Line Adjustment shall be made to the Board, and shall follow the process specified in  2.06 through  2.20 of this Regulation. Approved plans shall be signed and recorded at the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds. 
(A)  The applicant shall submit to the Board the following: 
(1)  Correctly completed application form, signed by the owner. 
(2)  Abutters list, with: correct abutters, dated within five days of submittal, and signed by preparer, with accompanying adhesive mailing labels. 
(3)  Payment of fees for administration per  2.06(A)(1), and public notice per  2.06(B)(2). 
(4)  Three paper copies of final plans complying with all requirements of  4.00. 
(5)  Copy of application for State Subdivision approval if the application affects the location or setback of an existing or proposed septic system. 
(B)  The Board will generally use the Checklist for Application Completeness; Boundary Line Adjustment Application, provided in  6.00, to ensure completeness prior to accepting the application. The applicant is encouraged to use this checklist to ensure the submittal contains all needed information and materials. 
(C)  Time and budget permitting, the Board will generally have written reviews of the application prepared by a professional planner, and a Professional Engineer where appropriate. Where possible, these written reviews should be prepared and available one week prior to the meeting at which application acceptance will be considered. The reviews will address both application completeness and compliance with applicable laws, regulations and ordinances. Additional reviews may be prepared in the case of applications, which take more than one meeting. Applicants may pick up copies of the written reviews at the Town Offices as soon as they are available to the Board. 
(D)  Board members should visit the site prior to the meeting to familiarize themselves with the site, although individual Board members should not discuss the application with the applicant except at the Board's meetings. The Board may, by motion, require a site visit prior to application approval. 
Sec. 2.04. - Minor subdivision. 
    The application for a Minor Subdivision shall be made to the Board, and shall follow the process specified in  2.06 through  2.20 of this Regulation. Approved plans shall be signed and recorded at the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds. 
(A)  The applicant shall submit to the Board the following: 
(1)  Correctly completed application form, signed by the owner. 
(2)  Abutters list, with correct abutters, dated within five days of submittal, and signed by preparer, with accompanying adhesive mailing labels. 
(3)  Payment of fees for administration, per  2.06(A)(2), and public notice, per  2.06(B). 
(4)  Three paper copies of final plans complying with all requirements of  4.00. 
(5)  Documentation that the following applications and correspondence has been submitted: letters to the appropriate Town officials regarding local permits and reviews, for issues including but not limited to connection to the municipal water and/or sewer systems, connection to the municipal stormwater drainage system, and emergency services review. 
(B)  The Board will generally use the Checklist for Application Completeness, Minor Subdivision Application, provided in  6.00, to ensure completeness prior to accepting the application. The applicant is encouraged to use this checklist to ensure the submittal contains all needed information and materials. 
(C)  Time and budget permitting, the Board will generally have written reviews of the application prepared by a professional planner, and a Professional Engineer where appropriate. Where possible, these written reviews should be prepared and available one week prior to the meeting at which application acceptance will be considered. The reviews will address both application completeness and compliance with applicable laws, regulations and ordinances. Additional reviews may be prepared in the case of applications, which take more than one meeting. Applicants may pick up copies of the written reviews at the Town Offices as soon as they are available to the Board. 
(D)  Board members should visit the site prior to the meeting to familiarize themselves with the site, although individual Board members should not discuss the application with the applicant except at the Board's meetings. The Board may, by motion, require a site visit prior to application approval. 
Sec. 2.05. - Major subdivision. 
    The application for a Major Subdivision shall be made to the Board, and shall follow the process specified in  2.06 through  2.20 of this Regulation. Approved plans shall be signed and recorded at the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds. 
(A)  The applicant shall submit to the Board the following: 
(1)  Correctly completed application form, signed by the owner. 
(2)  Abutters list, with correct abutters, dated within five days of submittal, and signed by preparer, with accompanying adhesive mailing labels. 
(3)  Payment of fees for administration, per  2.06(A)(2), and public notice, per  2.06(B). 
(4)  Copies of plans, as follows: 
(a)  One Mylar plan, at a scale of 1:12,000, showing the original lot's boundaries and proposed road layout, and depicting the surrounding area and roads sufficient to locate the Mylar plan on the Town Base Map. This plan is to be used to evaluate the road function and layout, per  2.16(A). 
(b)  Three paper copies of plans indicating existing property boundaries per  4.10(A), existing conditions per  4.10(B), municipal and zoning district boundaries per  4.10(C), and the 100-year floodplain per  4.10(E). 
(c)  Three paper copies of sketched plans, which show conceptual plans for the proposed conditions on the property, per  4.10(F). These plans shall be used by the Board to evaluate the proposal with respect to its intermediate decisions on road function and layout, and scattered or premature development. 
(5)  Documentation that the following applications and correspondence has been submitted: 
(a)  Letters to the appropriate Town officials regarding local permits and reviews, for issues including but not limited to connection to the municipal water and/or sewer systems, connection to the municipal stormwater drainage system, and emergency services review. 
(B)  The Board will generally use the Checklist for Application Completeness, Major Subdivision Application, provided in  6.00, to ensure completeness prior to accepting the application. The applicant is encouraged to use this checklist to ensure the submittal contains all needed information and materials. 
(C)  Time and budget permitting, the Board will generally have written reviews of the application prepared by a professional planner, and a Professional Engineer where appropriate. Where possible, these written reviews should be prepared and available one week prior to the meeting at which application acceptance will be considered. The reviews will address both application completeness and compliance with applicable laws, regulations and ordinances. Additional reviews may be prepared in the case of applications, which take more than one meeting. Applicants may pick up copies of the written reviews at the Town Offices as soon as they are available to the Board. 
(D)  Board members should visit the site prior to the meeting to familiarize themselves with the site, although individual Board members should not discuss the application with the applicant except at the Board's meetings. The Board may, by motion, require a site visit prior to application approval. 
Sec. 2.06. - Fees. 
    In accordance with RSA 676:4,I(g), the applicant shall pay the following fees to compensate the Town for its expenses in processing, noticing and reviewing each application: 
(A)  Administration: 
(1)  Lot Line Adjustment: $50.00. 
(2)  Major Subdivision: $400.00 plus $150/lot. 
(3)  Minor Subdivision: $200.00 plus $50/lot. 
(B)  Public Notice: 
(1)  $75.00 per newspaper notice; plus 
(2)  $7.00 per abutter or other party notified. 
(C)  Recording: The applicant shall reimburse the Town the cost of recording at the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds, with specific amounts as set by the Register of Deeds. 
(D)  Other costs incurred by the Board in reviewing the application, as limited in  5.02, may be passed through to the applicant by the Board. 
(Amd. of 10-12-1999; Amd. of 10-11-2011) 
Sec. 2.07. - Complete application. 
    For the Board to have authority to approve an application, the applicant must provide a complete application per RSA 676:4,I(b). Specific lists of materials required to comprise a complete application submittal are listed, by type of application, in  2.03,  2.04, and  2.05. Applications which appear to the staff to be complete shall be scheduled on the next available Board agenda for consideration. 
Sec. 2.08. - Submittal of application materials. 
    All materials to be submitted to the Board for consideration shall be submitted prior to the meeting so that Board members, the public, and staff may have sufficient opportunity to review the application without unnecessarily rushing the review and/or delaying the proceedings of the meeting. The following shall apply: 
(A)  Application Acceptance. In accordance with RSA 676:4,I(b), all materials required to constitute a complete application shall be submitted to the Board at least 21 days prior to the meeting at which it will be considered for application acceptance. 
(B)  Other Public Hearings. New materials shall be submitted to the Board at least 14 days prior to a meeting when a new public notice is required. 
(C)  Continued Meetings. When consideration of an application is continued and new information is required, the Board shall specify the deadline for filing this new information. In no case shall it be less than one day prior to the meeting. The deadline shall be stated in the motion to continue. 
(Amend of 1-24-2017) 
Sec. 2.09. - Application for other permits/approvals. 
(A)  The Board shall not grant a final approval to an application until all other government permits and approvals are obtained. The only exception to this requirement shall be when State or Federal permits require prior local approval. Applicants are advised to apply early for these other approvals to avoid unnecessary delays in obtaining final approval of the Subdivision application, but applicants with Major Subdivisions are advised to delay applications to the State until general design guidance has been provided by the Board. 
(B)  Concurrent Application. Where the proposed development requires approval under both the Subdivision Regulations and the Site Plan Review Regulations, a concurrent application may be required by the Board. The applicant shall provide all materials required for complete applications for both regulations (see Subdivision Regulations  2.07 and Site Plan Review Regulations  2.07), except that the public notice fees shall not be paid twice. 
Sec. 2.10. - Public notice. 
    Public notice pursuant to RSA 676:4,I(d) shall be required for all applications. The public notice shall identify the property owner, the location, and a general description of the scope and purpose of the proposal. 
(A)  Public notice shall be required for the following: 
(1)  Design review meetings; 
(2)  Meetings at which an application is considered for acceptance; and 
(3)  Meetings at which a public hearing is conducted. 
(B)  Public notice shall be mailed to the applicant, the applicant's authorized representative, any professional (surveyor, engineer, architect, soil scientist) whose stamp and signature appear on any of the plans or other materials submitted as part of the application package, and each abutter at least 10 days prior to the meeting for which the notice is required. Such notification shall be mailed by certified mail. 
(1)  Using the Abutters List form provided in  6.00 of this Regulation, the applicant shall prepare a list of abutters using Town records no sooner than 5 days prior to the submittal of the application; and 
(2)  The applicant shall provide three adhesive mailing labels for each party on the abutters list, including the applicant and authorized representative. The labels shall be no larger than 1" by 2.75" in size. 
(C)  Public notice shall be posted at the Town Offices at least 10 days prior to the meeting. 
(D)  Public notice for Minor Subdivision and Major Subdivision applications, but not for Boundary Line Adjustment applications, shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation. This notice shall be sent to the newspaper at least 10 days prior to the meeting. 
(E)  Continuation of a meeting or public hearing shall not require new public notice provided that, at the prior meeting or hearing, the Board shall state the location, date, and time at which the continued session shall resume per RSA 676:4,I(d). 
Sec. 2.11. - Regional notice. 
    In accordance with RSA 36:54-58, applications which might have a regional impact shall require additional public notice, and by State law require additional time for public notice. 
(A)  Determination of potential regional impact shall be found only for applications defined as Major Subdivisions, and further which meet any of the following criteria: 
(1)  Any portion of the property is located within 500 feet of the border of the Town of Newmarket; 
(2)  The proposal involves 20 or more residential units; 
(3)  The proposal involves property located on the shore of Great Bay; or 
(4)  Other, as the Board may reasonably determine. 
(B)  Notice shall be sent by certified mail 14 days in advance of the scheduled public hearing to the Strafford Regional Planning Commission (for impacts in Durham or Lee) and/or the Rockingham Planning Commission (for impacts in Epping, Newfields, Stratham, Greenland or Newington), and to each town reasonably likely to be affected, with each governmental entity to be considered an abutter for purposes of offering testimony and computing public notice fees. 
Sec. 2.12. - Application acceptance. 
    Before an application is reviewed by the Board, it must be accepted by a formal vote of the Board. The applicant shall attend this meeting to ensure that questions can be answered and issues clarified as necessary. Per RSA 676:4,I(b), the Board shall vote to accept the application only if determines that the application is complete per this Regulation. Upon acceptance, review of the application may proceed. If an application is not accepted, the Board may proceed with Design Review discussions per  2.02. The Design Review meeting may be continued to another date and time for Application Acceptance without further public notice. 
Sec. 2.13. - Applicant's presentation. 
    Following application acceptance, the applicant shall make a brief, general presentation to the Board and audience. This presentation should include a brief description of the proposed project and a general description of the design, layout, and so forth. The applicant may list specific issues of concern which they would like the Board to discuss during deliberations, but this forum is only intended to ensure general familiarity with the application. The applicant is solely responsible for bringing any audio-visual materials or equipment needed. The Chairman shall have sole authority to limit the time taken for this presentation to keep the meeting moving, and applicants should plan on 10 minutes or less for most applications. For applications, which are reviewed over a series of meetings, this presentation may be appropriate at the beginning of each session. 
Sec. 2.14. - Public hearing. 
    The Board shall open a public hearing following application acceptance and the applicant's presentation. The purpose shall be to solicit public input, comments, questions and concerns. The Chairman may temporarily suspend public comment during the public hearing so that the Board may deliberate, vote of waivers, and so forth. The public hearing may be continued if additional meetings are necessary, provided that the Board follows the continuation procedures specified in  2.10(E). Only when all pertinent, new public input is complete shall the Chairman close the public hearing. The applicant shall be responsible for attending the public hearing, including all continuations, to ensure that questions can be answered and issues clarified as needed. 
Sec. 2.15. - Deliberation. 
    The Board shall deliberate as necessary to determine the appropriate decision. The deliberation does not necessarily follow the public hearing, and may be interspersed with the public hearing, or may occur prior to the public hearing. This is the appropriate forum for the applicant and Board to discuss specific issues. The Board should keep in mind, however, the purpose of the public hearing, and therefore should generally defer decisions until after relevant public input is received. 
Sec. 2.16. - Intermediate decisions. 
    Deliberations for each application will be unique, but there are several intermediate decisions, which may be particularly applicable in certain cases: 
(A)  Major Subdivision Road Function and Layout. For Major Subdivision applications only, the Board shall first review the general function and layout of the proposed or potential roads on the entire property. Final plans for Major Subdivisions should not be prepared until after this review has taken place. 
(1)  Purpose. The importance of this step cannot be understated. Establishing the layout of roads and property boundaries has an important impact on the character and function of the community. Roads can detract from the neighborhood, or they can enhance it. Traffic circulation and safety can be enhanced or impaired in the neighborhood and in affected surrounding areas. New development can relate in a positive or negative manner to the existing developments nearby. Among the most influential and long lasting determinants of these functions are the establishment of the road network and property boundaries, and for this reason the general proposal should be reviewed and generally approved before further details are worked out. 
(2)  This decision shall be based on the Board's initial opinion regarding the proposal with respect to the Road Design Objectives described in  3.02(A), including traffic function, road layout, scale and aesthetics. Of particular importance at this point of the review is an assessment of the general pattern of the road network, how well it fits into and connects with the adjacent road network, how the road design will affect its traffic functions, how the road design fits into the features of the site, and how the transportation functions will relate to the land use functions when the site is fully developed. 
(3)  If the applicant so chooses, this discussion and a tentative decision can occur during a Design Review meeting, per  2.02. The decision of the Board must be confirmed following application acceptance since the Design Review is non-binding by State law. The advantage to using the Design Review process for this purpose would be to permit the applicant to receive feedback on the general road plan prior to investing time and money in the final design, hopefully resulting in monetary savings and quicker approval of the application. If the Design Review meeting is not used for this purpose, the Board shall not review and approve a Major Subdivision application in one meeting. It shall proceed through this intermediate decision, and shall continue the discussion of the details to a later meeting prior to discussing any other details pertaining to roads or lots. 
(B)  Scattered or Premature Development. The Board may deny an application if it determines that the proposed development would be scattered or premature. If the Board is considering denial of an application on this ground, it shall first determine, by majority vote, that the application, if approved, would be scattered or premature by virtue of one or more the reasons listed in  1.01(A) and RSA 674:36,II(a). In making this determination, the Board shall specify the exact nature of its concerns. Prior to denying an application on this basis, the Board shall provide the applicant, if the applicant is agreeable, with sufficient time to determine whether or not there is any reasonable way to modify the proposal or to directly mitigate the adverse impacts in a manner such that the proposal would no longer be considered scattered or premature. 
Sec. 2.17. - Decision. 
    Pursuant to RSA 676:4,I(c), the Board shall issue a decision within 90 days of application acceptance, subject to time extensions as per RSA 676:4,I(f). Applications which are not accepted require no decision. The Board must approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the application as follows: 
(A)  Approval. The Board shall grant approval to an application when it fully complies with the standards and processes of this Regulation and other applicable law. 
(B)  Conditional Approval. The Board may grant conditional approval to an application when minor additional action by the applicant will bring the application into full compliance for approval. This may include the posting of financial securities, payment of fees, minor changes in design, and other matters, subject to the requirements of  2.17(C)(2), and RSA 676:4,I(i). These statuary requirements are summarized as follows: 
(1)  Minor plan changes, whether or not imposed by the Board as a result of a public hearing, compliance with which is administrative and which does not involve discretionary judgment; or 
(2)  Conditions which are in themselves administrative and which involve no discretionary judgment on the part of the Board; or 
(3)  Conditions with regard to the applicant's possession of permits and approvals granted by other governmental units. 
(C)  Disapproval. The Board shall disapprove an application when it fails to comply with the standards and/or procedures of this Regulation, for failure to meet reasonable deadlines established by the Board, or for failure to pay fees. 
(1)  If the Board includes the phrase "without prejudice" in the motion to disapprove, it signifies that the application was denied solely for procedural reasons, and that it may be re-submitted to the Board at a later date without design changes, but shall be subject to the codes in effect at the time of the new application. Applications disapproved without this stipulation shall not be considered again by the Board unless the applicant demonstrates that there have been design changes or changes in regulations affecting the application. 
(2)  Conditional Approvals shall be valid for a period of not more than six months. If the conditions of the approval have not been satisfied within this time, the conditional approval shall automatically lapse. The Planning Board may grant a single six-month extension to accommodate unusual circumstances, but the applicant is required to provide a written request for extension to the Board before the expiration date. The Board shall consider the request at its next regular meeting, and such action shall not require a public hearing. 
Sec. 2.18. - Notice of decision. 
    As required by RSA 676:3, within 72 hours of the meeting the Board shall issue a Notice of Decision which states the final decision reached by the Board regarding the application. 
(A)  In the case of a conditional approval, the Notice of Decision shall state all conditions to be met for final approval. 
(1)  In the event that the conditions are satisfied, the Board shall issue a supplemental Notice of Decision stating that the application is approved since all conditions have been satisfied, and shall sign and record the plat(s) if applicable. 
(2)  In the event that the conditions are not satisfied, the Board shall issue a supplemental Notice of Decision stating that the application is denied for failure to comply with the conditions of approval in a timely manner. 
(B)  In the case of a disapproval, the Notice of Decision shall state the reasons for denial as required by RSA 676:4,I(h) and RSA 676:3,I. 
Sec. 2.19. - Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by any decision made in the course of applications pursuant to this chapter may appeal as follows: 
(A)  Decisions by the Planning Board based solely upon interpretation of the Zoning Ordinance may be appealed to the Zoning Board of Adjustment or Rockingham Superior Court per the provisions of RSA 676:5,III. Appeals to the ZBA must be filed within 20 days, and appeals made to Superior Court must be filed within 30 days. 
(B)  All other decisions by the Planning Board may be appealed to Rockingham County Superior Court per the provisions of RSA 677:15. There is a 30-day time limit in which to make an appeal. 
(C)  The time limit for appeals begins on the day on which the Planning Board decision is filed and first becomes available for public inspection. Per  2.18, this should occur within 72 hours of the Board's decision. 
Sec. 2.20. - Revocation of approval. 
    The Board may act to revoke an approval per the requirements of RSA 676:4-a. 
SECTION 3.00. - DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 3.01. - Character of the land. 
    The Board shall consider the physical character of the land involved, including soils types, slopes, drainage characteristics, exposure to sunlight and wind, wildlife habitat, potential views, and other such characteristics, in determining what action to take with respect to the application. 
(A)  An application to subdivide land of such character that it cannot, in the judgment of the Board, be safely used for the proposed purposes because of danger to public health or safety shall not be approved. 
(B)  Where the character of the land is not adequately considered, the Board may require modification of the application to enhance the function and quality of the development, or to reduce adverse impacts resulting from the development. 
(C)  Lots shall contain contiguous areas of developable land such that the driveway, building, water supply and sewage disposal, and other improvements can be constructed without filling of wetlands or other such adverse impacts, which could be eliminated by different subdivision design. The number of lots may be reduced by the Board to reduce adverse impacts. The Board shall have the authority to require design changes to minimize impacts regardless of the actions of other local or State permitting actions, such as the issuance of a permit to fill wetlands for a driveway crossing. 
(D)  Site lot lines shall generally be at right angles or radial to street lines. 
Sec. 3.02. - Roads. 
    This section represents a compilation of sources on this complex and important subject. Among the sources are: Residential Street Design and Traffic Control (by Homburger, Deakin, et al; Institute of Transportation Engineers. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ. 1989.) and "Neo-Traditional Neighborhood Design and Its Implications for Traffic Engineers," by Eva Lerner-Lam, Stephen P Celniker, Gary W. Halbert, Chester "Rick" Chellman, and Sherry Ryan, Compendium of Technical Papers, 61st Annual Meeting of the Institute of Transportation Engineers, 1991. Some of the text of this section is quoted from these sources, but there has been no attempt to provide specific quotations. The understanding of these authors is greatly appreciated by the Town of Newmarket. 
(A)  Design Objectives. Before road design can be addressed, the Town's design objectives must be laid out as clearly as possible so that the design professionals can understand what is expected of them, and to develop a better understanding of the multiple demands placed on road design. First and foremost, roads must be recognized as complex public spaces which accommodate and impact traffic, parking, pedestrians, bicyclists, and aesthetics, among other things. Road design objectives are further categorized and specified as follows: 
(1)  Traffic Function. Roads must accommodate safe access to properties, convenient and efficient pickups and deliveries, emergency access, maintenance services, and other such uses. The overall road system should provide for sufficient number and layout of collectors and arterials to handle through traffic flow as one means of protecting local residential streets from through traffic. Further, local residential streets shall be linked to traffic carrying streets in a way that simultaneously provides good access to other parts of the community and region and minimizes the chances of residential streets' use by through traffic. Further, residential streets should be protected from vehicles moving at excessive speeds, typically greater than 25 to 30 mph. The design engineer is challenged to balance this last provision against RSA 265:60,II, which dictates higher speed limits in most cases. Proper access management is essential in protecting the traffic capacity of arterial roads. 
(2)  Road Layout. The general layout of roads shall be a regular, inter-connected, geometric, angular (as opposed to curvilinear) pattern so that there are alternative routes to most, if not all destinations. The layout of proposed roads shall provide for the continuation of the principal streets in adjoining areas, if applicable. The number of permanent cul-de-sacs shall be minimized. Suitable connections and reservation for future connections to remaining lands and adjacent lots shall be provided. Layout geometry shall be designed to take advantage of the topography and proposed future development patterns, creating vista terminations and improving the view of, and the view from buildings and other prominent vistas. Layout shall also be carefully designed to avoid creation of a situation where the local road is used for through traffic flow. 
(3)  Scale. The scaling of the facility must facilitate the appropriate level of sharing of road use among cars, walkers, bicycles, emergency vehicles and others. The final product shall permit comfortable and safe pedestrian and bicycle movements as well as motorized vehicular movements, and shall protect vulnerable users such as children, the disabled, and the elderly. 
(4)  Aesthetics. Road design should enhance the overall aesthetics of the neighborhood through well-designed street layout and landscaping. Additionally, recreation areas in the form of commons or public squares should be used as focal points and vista terminations. Aesthetics must be achieved through the thoughtful integration of all aspects of design, and cannot simply be "added on" to a design. 
(5)  Quality Construction. Regardless of the outcome of the more policy-oriented layout and function issues of the road system, the construction of roads shall be of high quality. Roads shall be constructed to standards suitable for the climate, the environment in which they are built, and for the proposed use. The resulting road should require a minimal amount of maintenance for quite many years. 
(6)  Stormwater Management. The road design and other associated lot development shall include adequate stormwater management provisions that meet requirements specified in  3.03 of these Regulations. The use of permeable asphalt or concrete is encouraged wherever appropriate to minimize increases in runoff volume and peak flow rates leaving the site. 
(B)  Design Standards. Although it is the intent of these Regulations to provide design parameters to guide overall design, it is the responsibility of the engineer designing the road to apply her or his professional expertise in creating the design. Additionally, the Town shall have another engineer review the design for compliance with the purposes and controls of this Regulation as well as with accepted engineering practices. It should be noted that the Board expects to create only local roads, and that more suitable standards for design and construction shall be required for collectors and arterials should such functions be proposed or expected. 
(1)  Design speed of local roads shall be 30 MPH. This may be altered where necessary to comply with RSA 265:60,II(c), except that 30 MPH shall be the maximum design speed if the speed limit can be reduced to 30 MPH or less per RSA 265:62. 
(2)  The grade of a road shall not be less than 1% nor greater than 8%. The maximum grade of a road approaching an intersection shall be 3% within 50' of the intersection. 
(3)  All roads shall have a road crown of at least 1/4" per 1'. 
(4)  All roads shall be paved. The minimum width of pavement per travel lane shall be 12'. Curbing shall be required as specified in  3.03(A) or  3.03(B). Where no curbing or where Cape Cod curbing is required, gravel shoulders at least 4' in width shall be required on each side of the road. 
(5)  The centerline of a cul-de-sac shall be aligned with the centerline of the street. The surface of the pavement shall slope away from the center of the cul-de-sac. Temporary cul-de-sacs shall be provided, with easements for their construction and use as appropriate, in locations where future connections are planned but cannot be provided at the time of development. Where connections can be made, they shall be made. 
(6)  Except as provided herein, driveway locations shall not be specified on the subdivision plan, but the sight distances along the frontage shall be protected. Safe stopping and intersection sight distances shall meet or exceed the standards specified in the Transportation and Traffic Engineering Handbook (ITE, Second Edition, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1982, pp 590-3). 
(a)  For access onto State highways, driveway location consistent with the State Driveway Permit shall be shown. 
(b)  For subdivisions fronting on arterial roads, the number of driveway accesses onto the arterial road shall be minimized: 
[1]  Access onto internal roads rather than the arterial road shall be required to the extent possible; and 
[2]  A single shared driveway shall be required for adjoining lots, which must access directly onto the arterial road. 
(7)  No point along a road centerline shall be more than 1,000' from a single point of access in the road network. This requirement is similar to a maximum cul-de-sac length standard, but applies more broadly to the cul-de-sac and the adjacent road network. 
(8)  Roads shall intersect at 90 degrees, plus or minus 15 degrees. 
(9)  Other safety provisions may be required if appropriate, including but not limited to curbing and guardrails. 
(10)  The designer shall prepare a report which documents how the proposed design complies with the design objectives listed in  3.02(A). This report may be included as part of the Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Report as required by  3.03 of these regulations. 
(C)  Property Issues. 
(1)  The minimum width of any road right-of-way shall be 50'. A larger width may be required where conditions warrant. Additionally, flairs or curve radii may be required at intersections where such provisions would be beneficial. 
(2)  Reserve strips which restrict access to the right-of-way from adjacent lots or roads shall be prohibited. 
(3)  Easements for cut and fill slopes, drainage, water lines, sewer lines and other such improvements shall be provided as appropriate. 
(4)  The application shall specify ownership and responsibility for maintenance of the right-of-way and all improvements therein. Subdivision approval in no way implies Town acceptance of any road or right-of-way, and in no way obligates the Town in any future consideration of such acceptance. 
(D)  Construction. 
(1)  Only that portion of the right-of-way shall be cleared and grubbed as is necessary to meet safety requirements. Where possible, preservation of existing vegetation, ground cover and especially trees is highly desirable. The extent of clearing shall be noted on the plans. Excavation of roadbeds shall consist of removing earth or ledge to a depth of at least 2' below the finished roadbed grade shown on the final profile. Filled roadbeds shall be formed by spreading successive layers of fill material not greater than 6" in depth. Each layer shall be compacted to a density of at least 95% of maximum density before another layer is begun. Material containing loam, forest litter, wood, roots, or other substances that will not provide a stable bed or embankment shall not be used. Broken ledge may be used in layers in fills over 4' in thickness. The voids in each layer shall be filled with earth or spalls. Broken ledge or boulders larger than1/2 cubic yard shall not be placed within 2' of the finished grade. 
(2)  Types of materials and methods of construction shall be in accordance with "New Hampshire Standard Specifications," 1983, Section 304, hereby incorporated into this Regulation by reference. 
(a)  Minimum base course depth shall be not less than 18" of gravel, topped with 6" of crushed gravel. Additional base material may be required depending on the nature of the land. 
(b)  Two courses of pavement shall be required: 
[1]  Base course of not less than 2" thickness. The base course pavement shall go through one winter freeze-thaw cycle prior to adding the wear course so that problems can be identified and corrected properly. 
[2]  Wear course of not less than 1.5" thickness. 
(3)  Stumps and other debris shall not be disposed of in the right-of-way. 
(4)  Bridges with a span of 10' or more shall be designed to HS-20 loading specifications (AASHTO Specifications, hereby incorporated into these regulations by reference). 
(5)  Side slopes cut in soil above the finished roadway shall not exceed a ratio of 3' horizontal to 1' vertical, and shall be graded, covered with 4" (compacted depth) of topsoil, and suitably seeded. Side slopes in ledge above the finished roadway shall not exceed a ratio of 1' horizontal to 2' vertical. Embankment slopes away from the edge of the finished roadway shall not be constructed at a ratio steeper than 4' horizontal to 1' vertical unless the horizontal length exceeds 10', in which case a ratio of 3' horizontal to 1' vertical may be used. 
(6)  Because of the nature of the design and construction of roads, certain design modifications are made in the field on virtually every construction project. The Board acknowledges that such changes will be necessary from time to time, and authorizes the inspecting engineer representing the Town to exercise his/her professional judgment in making such changes, and asks that the engineer to document such changes and remain consistent with the purposes of this Regulation and this Section in making their judgment. 
(E)  Traffic Impact Analysis. 
(1)  A traffic impact analysis shall be required in the following circumstances: 
(a)  The subdivision involves the creation of 20 or more residential lots or residential units; 
(b)  The subdivision is intended to facilitate non-residential land uses; or 
(c)  Other, as deemed necessary by the Board. 
(2)  The traffic impact analysis shall be prepared by a NH licensed Professional Engineer. This analysis shall be prepared to meet, at a minimum, the "Guidelines for Traffic Impact Analysis" (by the Strafford Regional Planning Commission, dated July 1986; a copy is available for viewing at the Planning Office). 
(F)  Other. 
(1)  Grade Stakes. The applicant shall be responsible for placing grade stakes at 50' intervals adjacent to the road course where there are abrupt changes in grade and at 100-foot intervals where a more level contour is present. Each stake shall be securely placed where it will not be disturbed by construction. Each stake will indicate a station number, its offset from the centerline of the road, and the extent of cut or fill to the finished centerline grade. Grade stakes shall be preserved until the completion of the road. If grade stakes are removed or damaged to the extent that they cannot be read, it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to replace them. 
(2)  Road Names. Proposed road names shall not duplicate any existing road name in Newmarket, and shall be approved in advance by the Town Council. Each road name shall be adequately identified with a road name sign at each intersection. Upon completion of the road, the applicant shall notify the Town Clerk, who shall notify the Commissioner of the NH Department of Transportation of the new road, as required per RSA 231:133,III. 
(3)  Clean-Up. Before release of any financial security, the road surface and associated drainage structures shall be cleaned of any accumulated sediment or debris, so that it is left in a neat and presentable condition. Construction-related debris of all kinds, both natural and man-made, shall be completely removed from the right-of-way. 
(4)  [Traffic Control Signs.] All roads shall have such traffic control signs as are necessary to provide for safety and efficiency. It shall be the applicant's responsibility to provide and install all required signs. 
(5)  [Class VI or Private Roads.] Subdivision along a Class VI road, or any private road, shall not be approved unless the applicant upgrades such road to meet the design standards of this Regulation. The provisions of RSA 231:28 may be applicable. 
(6)  Road Acceptance. Acceptance of any road by the Town is the sole responsibility of the Town Council, and approval of a subdivision plan by the Planning Board shall not imply or compel acceptance of the road by the Town. While a private road, the applicant shall make adequate provisions for the ongoing maintenance of the road. 
Sec. 3.03. - Stormwater management. 
    All developments shall provide adequate stormwater management for the purposes of preventing both onsite and downstream flooding, provide water quality treatment and prevent erosion of adjacent and downgradient areas. All applications shall be accompanied by a completed Subdivision Stormwater Management Checklist to the Planning Board prior to consideration for review. 
    All development will include on-site control of peak flows and run-off volumes as well as water quality treatment as described in detail below and requires the submission of a Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Report with accompanying plans for review and approval by the Planning Board. The Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Plan shall satisfy the report requirements as specified in  3.03(B) below: 
(A)  Connection to the municipal storm drainage system shall be allowed only as necessary if the use of vegetated or onsite measures are not available or infeasible due to existing soils, space limitations or other property constraints, or as otherwise determined necessary by the Board. All projects shall meet the criteria below to the maximum extent practicable, whether or not the onsite drainage facilities are connected to the municipal system. 
(1)  The design and installation of any on-site structural BMP measure shall be in accordance with the NHDES Stormwater Manual, Vols. 1 and 2, dated Dec. 8. 2008, or as amended, and meet the requirements therein. 
(2)  The applicant shall demonstrate that adequate onsite stormwater provisions and drainage facilities are included to prevent increases in the predevelopment peak runoff rate leaving the site for various design storm frequencies up to a 50-year, 24-hour design storm, consistent with the requirements of  3.03(B) of these Subdivision Regulations. Provisions for water quality treatment and groundwater recharge shall also be included. Runoff potentially generated from additional lot development aside from the roadway itself shall be included in the analysis. 
(3)  Such drainage facilities shall be located in the street rights-of-way where feasible to allow convenient access for future maintenance. Where topography or other conditions are such as to make this impractical, perpetual unobstructed easements for future maintenance, repair and upgrade of the system shall be provided across all properties. Such easements shall be 25' or more in width, and shall have satisfactory access to the road. An Operations and Maintenance Plan shall be included for all stormwater BMPs as described in  3.03(C) of these Subdivision Regulations. 
(4)  Where curbing is included in the road design to channel stormwater into the drainage system, the curbing shall consist of granite. 
(B)  A Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Report shall be prepared and certified by a licensed NH Professional Engineer and submitted with the Subdivision application. It shall be prepared and certified by a licensed NH Professional Engineer specializing in Civil Engineering. This Report and plans shall include the following information: 
(1)  An existing conditions plan that shows all of the items listed in  2.05 of these Subdivision Regulations as well as the pre-development watershed boundaries, drainage patterns, channelized flow areas, existing vegetation, wetlands, conveyance structures and all locations where runoff exits the site. Buffer setback limits as required by the Town's Zoning Ordinances and/or State regulations shall be clearly shown. 
(2)  A Stormwater plan that shows all of the items listed in  2.05 of these Subdivision Regulations as well as post-development watershed boundaries, drainage patterns, channelized flow areas, proposed areas of disturbance, wetlands, proposed impervious areas, temporary stock pile areas, construction refueling areas, all temporary and permanent stormwater treatment BMPs, erosion control measures, stormwater outlet locations and any drainage and maintenance access easements. A summary of the drainage analysis showing a comparison of the estimated peak flow and volumes for various design storms at each of the outlet locations shall be included on the plan. 
(3)  A drainage analysis that includes a description of all methods, assumptions and estimates of pre and post-development peak stormwater flow rates (cubic feet per second) and volumes (acre-feet) for the 2-, 10-, 25-, 50- and 100-year, 24-hour, frequency storm events. 
(4)  Design details for all measures used to control peak flow rates, provide for groundwater recharge and/or to capture and reuse stormwater. These design details shall be in accordance with the NHDES Stormwater Manual, Dec. 2008 or as amended. 
(5)  A description and associated design and sizing details of all stormwater treatment measures that will be used for water quality protection. Stormwater treatment measures shall be sized to treat the water quality volume produced from 1-inch of runoff from all impervious areas. 
(6)  A description and design details of the erosion control measures to be used during the construction and vegetation establishment phase to minimize erosion and sediment movement into drainage structures, wetlands and surface waters. 
(7)  Landscaping plan and details that show planting areas, proposed plant species focusing on native species suitable to anticipated site conditions and provisions for controlling the establishment of nuisance invasive species. 
(8)  An Operations and Maintenance Plan that outlines the proposed inspection and maintenance schedule for all temporary erosion control and permanent stormwater treatment measures. The Plan shall describe the inspection protocols and thresholds for determining when maintenance activities are needed and identify the responsible individuals or parties that will perform these activities. The Plan shall also describe the methods for reporting and recordkeeping to ensure the activities have been performed. Records shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer annually as to comply with the maintenance program. 
(9)  The applicant shall provide covenant documents for filing with the registry of deeds which demonstrate that the obligation of stormwater BMP maintenance runs with the land and that the Town has legal access to inspect and/or maintain, if necessary, onsite stormwater infrastructure. 
(10)  A listing and copies of any additional federal or state permit application documents and associated correspondence that may be required. 
(C)  Minimum Requirements for Stormwater. All subdivisions shall be subject to the following minimum requirements unless a waiver has been granted by the Planning Board: 
(1)  The subdivision shall include measures to control the post-development peak rate of runoff at each point where runoff leaves the site so as to not exceed the estimated pre-development peak rate, for the 2-, 10-, 25- and 50-year, 24-hour storm events. Any site that was wooded in the last five years shall be considered undisturbed woods for purposes of estimating pre-development rates and volumes. Any runoff that flows through the site from upgradient properties should be included in the calculations. 
(2)  Efforts shall be made to maintain existing natural drainage patterns and existing mature vegetation to the maximum extent practicable. 
(3)  The site design shall include Low Impact Development (LID) strategies and design measures to the maximum extent practicable to promote groundwater recharge and minimize increases in runoff volumes. For sites where infiltration is limited due to existing soil conditions, the applicant must demonstrate that any increase in the pre-development runoff volumes will not cause additional channel scour, erosion, flooding, damage to downstream properties or result and/or contribute to a water quality impairment. 
(4)  Efforts shall be made to limit any single, contiguous section of impervious area draining to one outlet area to be no more than 10% of the lot area. Impervious areas shall be disconnected through the use of bioretention areas, infiltration areas, dry wells, vegetated buffers, use of cisterns or other similar measure to capture and/or treat runoff onsite. 
(5)  The design of the stormwater drainage system shall provide for the discharge of stormwater without damage or functional impairment to adjacent and downstream properties, streets, drainage structures, culverts, soils, wetland areas, stream channels or vegetation. 
(6)  All stormwater treatment Best Management Practices (BMPs) shall be designed in accordance with the NH Stormwater Manual, Dec. 2008, or as amended. 
(7)  All stormwater BMPs shall be planted with appropriate native grasses, shrubs, trees, and/or other plantings sufficient to prevent soil erosion and enhance vegetative uptake of nutrients and other stormwater pollutants. 
(8)  All stormwater BMPs that will detain runoff shall be designed to drain within a maximum of 24 hours for vector control. BMPs designed to contain a permanent pool of water for water quality treatment purposes shall be shaped and include shoreline shallow marsh areas to limit the size of the permanent pool. 
(9)  Runoff from roadway shall be treated to achieve 80% removal of Total Suspended Solids and 50% removal of both total nitrogen and phosphorus using appropriate treatment measures, as specified in the NH Stormwater Manual. Vol. 1 and 2, December 2008, as amended, or other equivalent means. Where practical, the use of gravel wetlands for water quality treatment is preferred given its relatively high nitrogen removal efficiency, as reported by the UNH Stormwater Center. 
(10)  The subdivision plan shall include adequate temporary and permanent erosion control measures consistent with the design guidelines and specifications included in the NH Stormwater Manual, Vol. 3, December 2008, or as amended, 
(11)  Prior to any soil disturbance or tree clearing, appropriate erosion and sediment control measures shall be installed and areas to be protected shall be clearly marked and delineated using construction fencing or some other appropriate means to prevent damage from construction equipment. 
(12)  After erosion control measures have been installed and the areas to be protected are clearly marked, an onsite meeting shall be held with the Town Planner and Engineer prior to the start of any soil disturbance activities to review the construction sequence, timing and measures to protect sensitive areas. 
(13)  The Planning Board may request weekly erosion control inspections to be conducted by either the Town Engineer or another qualified professional at the expense of the applicant, depending on the development size, anticipated construction period, time of year and sensitivity of adjacent resources. 
(14)  All temporary control measures shall be removed after final site stabilization. Any trapped sediment contained within the storm drain system or treatment areas shall be removed using appropriate measures consistent with the maintenance plan included in the approved Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Report. 
(15)  The Planning Board reserves the right to request the applicant to post a performance bond or other security to cover the costs of future inspections or maintenance activities associated with onsite BMPs, if not performed by the landowner(s) or other responsible party. 
(D)  Any new stream crossing or culvert upgrade proposed by the Applicant shall comply with the NHDES Stream Crossing Regulations, Env-Wt 900 (adopted May 2010), or as amended, to minimize impacts to flow and animal passage. 
(E)  An Erosion Control Plan shall be included as part of the Stormwater Management Report that describes the types of measures to be used, their locations, the construction timing and sequence, temporary and permanent stabilization measures to be used as well as an inspection and maintenance program. 
(F)  Consistent with  5.02, and 5.08 of the Subdivision Regulations, applicants may be required at the Planning Board's discretion, to deposit sufficient funds in an escrow account to cover all costs incurred by the Town to perform inspection(s) of the erosion control measures during site construction and at the completion of the construction phase. The number of inspections and associated fees will be determined by the Planning Board and discussed with the Applicant as part of the Subdivision approval process and may depend on the size of the project and the duration of the project. The Planning Board may contract with a consultant to perform inspection services. 
(Amd. of 5-23-2000) 
Sec. 3.04. - Pedestrian, bicycle and transit amenities. 
    Adequate provisions shall be made to accommodate pedestrians, bicyclists and transit service. 
(A)  Pedestrians. For subdivisions near the downtown, sidewalks shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  Sidewalks shall be installed along Route 108 in front of any lots fronting on the road between its intersection with Bennett Way to the south and to the Durham town boundary to the north. 
(2)  Sidewalks shall be installed along Route 152 in front of any lots fronting on the road between its intersection with Route 108 to the east and to its crossing of the Piscassic River to the west. 
(3)  Sidewalks shall be installed along one side of any new road constructed within1/2 mile of either of the portions of Route 108 or Route 152 listed in subsections (1) or (2) above. 
(4)  To the extent the development will be the primary beneficiary from adequate connection to the main sidewalk network in Town, connection from the site to the network may be required by the Board. 
(B)  Bicycles. Road design shall take adequate consideration of the need to safely accommodate bicyclists in residential neighborhoods, in the village, and in commercial areas. 
(C)  Transit. The Town desires to encourage transit use. Therefore, any subdivision, which would create 25 or more lots or residential units, shall contact the manager of the COAST system to determine if facilities or design provisions to accommodate transit service to the development are necessary now or in the near future. Future expectations shall be based only upon adopted capital and operations plans for COAST and/or the Seacoast Metropolitan Planning Organization. The applicant shall provide all needed facilities and design changes. 
Sec. 3.05. - Survey monumentation. 
    Proper and complete survey monumentation shall be installed on the properties involved prior to final approval of the application. 
(A)  Granite bounds shall be set at the intersection of existing or proposed lot sidelines with existing or proposed streets. The size of such bounds shall be 4" by 4" by 30", with a 3/8 " drill hole in the center. The surveyor shall excavate a hole sufficiently large enough to properly place the bounds securely in the ground. 
(B)  Iron pins (pipe or rod) are to be placed at all property line corners and angles, and at all points of curvature and points of tangency. The size of pins shall be 1/2" diameter by 30" long, and shall be driven into the ground at accurate locations, leaving 2" exposed. All newly installed pins shall include a surveyor's "cap" to help identify their location in the field. 
(C)  Certificate of Monument Installation. The applicant's surveyor shall certify in writing that the bounds and pins have been installed according to the submitted plan, using the form entitled "Certification of Monument Installation." This form must be completed and submitted to the Board prior to receipt of final approval of the application. A copy of this form is contained in  6.00. 
Sec. 3.06. - Water supply. 
    All subdivisions shall provide adequate water supply for consumption. Water supply for fire safety is addressed separately in  3.10(B). 
(A)  Municipal Water Supply. The applicant shall comply with the Newmarket Water System Ordinance. In the absence of such a code, connection to the system shall be required if distribution lines are located 100' of any part of the original lot, and such connection shall conform with all requirements established by the Public Works Director. 
(B)  Non-Municipal Water Supply. In areas outside of the municipal water supply service area, provisions shall be made for on-site water supply or connection to a community water supply system. The well location and its protective radius, if required by the State, shall be indicated on the plat. All community water supply systems and facilities shall be designed by a NH licensed Professional Engineer specializing in Civil Engineering. Unless owned by the Town, the Town shall not be responsible for a community water system. 
(C)  [Sufficient Water Supply.] All lots shall have sufficient water supply to provide for consumption. 
Sec. 3.07. - Sewage disposal. 
    All subdivisions shall provide for adequate and sanitary disposal of sewage. 
(A)  Municipal Sewer Service Area. Compliance with the Newmarket Sewer Use Ordinance shall be required. In the absence of such a code, connection to the system shall be required if collection lines are located within 100' of any part of the original lot, and such connection shall conform with all requirements established by the Public Works Director. 
(B)  In areas outside of the municipal sewer service area, sufficient area shall be reserved for on-site sewage disposal. Unless otherwise specified by the State, a 4,000 square foot area suitable for the siting of a septic system shall be designated on each lot. 
Sec. 3.08. - Utilities. 
    Utilities shall generally be located within the road right-of-way, well behind any curb and never closer than the ditch line. 
(A)  Where utility transmission lines are not located within the road right-of-way, perpetual unobstructed easements for future maintenance, repair and upgrade of the system shall be provided across all properties. Such easements shall be 15' or more in width, and shall have satisfactory access to the road. 
(B)  Easements for proposed or future utility connections to adjacent properties may be required by the Board. 
(C)  Street lights shall be required at every street intersection. Additional mid-block lighting may be required as appropriate. 
(D)  In accordance with RSA 674:36(III), all utilities shall be installed underground. The installation of overhead wires and utility poles are prohibited. Where connections to existing overhead utilities are required, the utilities must be submerged as soon as practical within the developed site. 
(Amd. of 8-14-2001) 
Sec. 3.09. - Landscaping. 
    Landscaping requirements for subdivision approval are limited to establishment or re-establishment of suitable vegetative ground cover to ensure site stability, and to provision of street trees where needed. 
(A)  Vegetative Ground Cover. No disturbed area shall be left permanently exposed and unprotected. Sufficient topsoil shall be provided and suitable grasses or other vegetation shall be established as quickly as possible to stabilize the site and prevent excessive erosion. Interim erosion control measures shall be provided as needed, but shall be removed when the ground cover is established and the site is stabilized. 
(B)  Street Trees. Where any road is proposed through an open field, or where the existing vegetation will be removed or is of a character such that the road will get no shade in the summer, street trees shall be planted at regular intervals, not to exceed 100', along both sides of the right-of-way where appropriate. Such trees shall have a caliper of at least 3" at a point six inches above the top of the root ball, and shall be of a suitable hardwood species to ensure that the road is not shaded in the winter. Further, the Board may require removal of coniferous trees along the road where it finds that shade from such trees could cause icing problems. 
(C)  Entrance Design & Signage. Landscaped entrances to new subdivision streets are encouraged. Plant varieties selected should be hardy, drought resistant, non-invasive species and require minimal maintenance. A blend of deciduous, evergreen, flowering, and non-flowering plant varieties is encouraged to provide and attractive year-round display. Native plant species or plant species that are well adapted for growth and survival in Newmarket or the surrounding region are preferred. 
For a subdivision, one sign is permitted at the entrance, subject to Planning Board approval. Such signs shall not be located in the public right-of-way, but situated on land within an easement designated for that purpose, with maintenance provisions or as part of the development's open space, to be held in common and maintained by the Community Homeowners' Association, as applicable. The Planning Board may approve the addition of a second sign, if located on a monument or stone wall or within a landscaped setting. 
(Ord. of 06-13-2017(1)) 
Sec. 3.10. - Emergency services. 
    There shall be adequate provisions for emergency service access to all lots. There may be some trade-offs required when balancing the desire to maintain the scale of a neighborhood versus the desire to provide access sufficient for emergency vehicle access. 
(A)  All applicants shall provide a copy of the subdivision plan to the Police Department and Fire Department for their reviews and comments. While their input will weigh heavily, the Board reserves the final authority to make design decisions. 
(B)  Water for Firefighting. At a minimum, there shall be a source of water for firefighting along a Class V or better road within 1 mile of each lot or building site proposed. Sources shall be limited to the following: 
(1)  A fire hydrant connected to the municipal water supply system; 
(2)  A fire hydrant connected to a community water system, which has sufficient storage volume and flow; 
(3)  A dry hydrant connected to an underground storage tank with a sufficient water supply and capacity; 
(4)  A dry hydrant in a fire pond or other standing water body with sufficient volume; or 
(5)  Other, as determined acceptable to the Fire Chief. 
Sec. 3.11. - Recreational amenities. 
(A)  Neighborhood Parks. Recreation lands in close proximity to residences are an important amenity in neighborhoods. In general, small areas of land reserved for open space and passive recreation, or developed for other forms of active recreation shall be required for each Major Subdivisions which is not designed as an Open Space Development and which creates, or has the potential to create, 25 or more lots or residential units, as follows: 
(1)  At a minimum, one park shall be provided. For subdivisions, which have the potential for 50 or more residential lots or units, two parks shall be provided. 
(2)  The area of all park lots shall include at least two acres of contiguous developable land. 
(3)  Where possible, the design and intended use of the neighborhood parks should be consistent with the layout of roads, as is discussed in  3.02(A)(4). 
(4)  The applicant shall place a permanent deed restriction on each recreation lot, deeming it a non-buildable lot. Further, the deed restriction shall specify permitted types of recreation development are permitted. The deed restriction shall be shown on the plat, and shall be filed at the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds. 
(5)  Ownership. 
(a)  The parks, if owned and maintained privately, may have restricted access. Further, provisions shall be made to ensure sufficient funding for ongoing maintenance of the park and its facilities, for payment of property taxes, and other such expenses. 
(b)  If such areas are offered to and are accepted by the Town, they shall be open to the general public, and there shall be sufficient nearby on-street parking. 
(6)  If acceptable to the Board, public access to Great Bay or the Lamprey River may be substituted for all of the required parks. 
(B)  Public Access. It is in the public interest to establish and maintain public accesses to Great Bay and the Lamprey River. Such access may include provisions for direct water access, or may be for other uses, which are enhanced by close proximity to the waters such as walking paths, picnic areas, and scenic overlooks. Where such amenities can be incorporated into the application, it would be appreciated by the Board and the Town. To qualify, public accesses must be permanently available to the general public. 
Sec. 3.12. - Mitigation of impacts. 
    Where, in the opinion of the Board, the off-site impacts of a proposed development would adversely affect the public health, safety, convenience, prosperity or general welfare of the Town, the Board may require off-site improvements to mitigate the adverse impacts. 
Sec. 3.13. - Floodplain management. 
(A)  National Flood Insurance Requirements. 
(1)  The Planning Board shall review the proposed development to assure that all necessary permits from governmental agencies for which approval is required by Federal or State law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 192, 33 U.S.C. 1334 have been received. 
(2)  The Planning Board shall require all proposals for development greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is lesser, include Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data within such proposals (i.e., floodplain boundary and 100-year flood elevation). The elevation data shall be referenced to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 so as to be consistent with the Town's FIRM maps. 
(3)  The Planning Board shall require the applicant to submit sufficient evidence (construction drawings, grading and land treatment plans) so as to allow a determination that: 
(a)  All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(b)  All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(c)  Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(B)  Floodplain Standards. All subdivisions and other proposed new development shall be designed to be reasonably safe from flooding. If any portion of the property subject to an approval under this Regulation is within the 100-year floodplain, the proposal shall: 
(1)  Be designed consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  Have all public utilities and facilities such as water, sewer and electrical systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(3)  Provide drainage systems adequate to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Amd. of 4-13-2010) 
Sec. 3.14. - Residential open space design. 
(A)  Open Space Plan Evaluation Criteria. In evaluating the layout of house sites and open space, the following criteria will be considered by the Planning Board and Technical Review Committee as indicating design appropriate to the site's natural, historic, and cultural features, and meeting the purposes of this ordinance. Diversity and originality in layout shall be encouraged to achieve the best possible relationship between development and conservation areas. Accordingly, the Planning Board shall evaluate proposals to determine whether the proposed preliminary plan: 
(1)  Protects and preserves all floodplains, wetlands, and steep slopes from clearing, grading, filling, or construction (except as may be approved by the town as part of the application). 
(2)  Preserves and maintains mature woodlands, existing fields, pastures, meadows, and orchards, and creates sufficient buffer areas to minimize conflicts between residential and agricultural uses. For example, locating houselots and driveways within wooded areas is generally recommended, with two exceptions. 
(a)  Where significant wildlife habitat or mature woodlands that raise an equal or greater preservation concern, as determined by the Board in accordance with intent of the ordinance. 
(b)  The second involves predominantly agricultural areas, where remnant tree groups provide the only natural areas for wildlife habitat. 
(3)  If development must be located on open fields or pastures because of greater constraints in all other parts of the site, dwellings should be sited on the least prime agricultural soils, or in locations at the far edge of a field, as seen from existing public roads. Other considerations include whether the development will be visually buffered from existing public roads, such as by a planting screen consisting of a variety of indigenous native trees, shrubs, and wildflowers (specifications for which should be based upon a close examination of the distribution and frequency of those species found in a typical nearby roadside stone wall). 
(4)  Maintains or creates an upland buffer of natural native species vegetation of a depth sufficient to protect and maintain the ecological stability of adjacent wetlands and surface waters, including creeks, streams, springs, lakes and ponds. The sufficiency of a buffer shall be set at 100 feet unless waived by the Planning Board. The waiver request shall be completed by a qualified environmental professional using the guidance and framework laid out in the document entitled "Buffers for Wetlands and Surface Waters: A Guidebook for New Hampshire Municipalities." Available from Newmarket Town Hall or online at: http://www.nh.gov/oep/resourcelibrary/documents/buffershandbook.pdf. 
(5)  Designs around existing stonewalls between fields or meadows, and minimizes impacts on large woodlands (greater than five acres), especially those containing many mature trees or a significant wildlife habitat, or those not degraded by invasive vines. Also, woodlands of any size on highly erodible soils with slopes greater than 10% should be avoided. However, woodlands in poor condition with limited management potential can provide suitable locations for residential development. When any woodland is developed, great care shall be taken to design all disturbed areas (for buildings, roads, yards, septic disposal fields, etc.) in locations where there are no large trees or obvious wildlife areas, to the fullest extent that is practicable. 
(6)  Leaves scenic views and vistas unblocked or uninterrupted, particularly as seen from public thoroughfares. For example, in open agrarian landscapes, a deep "no-build, no-plant" buffer is recommended along public roads where those views or vistas are prominent or locally significant. The concept of "foreground meadows," with homes facing the public thoroughfare across a broad grassy expanse works, is strongly preferred to mere buffer strips, with or without berms or vegetative screening. In wooded areas where the sense of enclosure is a feature that should be maintained, a deep "no-build, no-cut" buffer should be provided, to preserve existing vegetation. 
(7)  Avoids the concentrated siting of new construction on prominent hilltops or ridges, by taking advantage of lower topographic features. 
(8)  Protects wildlife habitat areas of species listed as endangered, threatened, or of special concern by State or Federal law. 
(9)  Designs around and preserves sites of historic, archaeological, or cultural value, and their environs, insofar as needed to safeguard the character of the feature, including stone walls, spring houses, barn foundations, cellar holes, earthworks, and burial grounds. 
(10)  Protects rural roadside character and improves public safety and vehicular carrying capacity by avoiding development fronting directly onto existing public roads. Establishes buffer zones along the scenic corridor of rural roads with historic buildings, stonewalls, and so on. 
(11)  Landscapes common areas (such as community greens), cul-de-sac islands, and both sides of new streets with native species shade trees and flowering shrubs with high wildlife conservation value. 
(12)  Includes a pedestrian circulation system designed to assure that pedestrians can walk safely and easily on the site, between properties and activities or special features within the neighborhood open space system. Roadside footpaths should connect with off-road trails, which in turn should link with potential open space on adjoining undeveloped parcels (or with existing open space on adjoining developed parcels, where applicable). 
(13)  Fragmentation of open space should be minimized so that these resource areas are not divided into numerous small parcels located in various parts of the development. To the greatest extent practicable, this land shall be designed as a single block with logical, straightforward boundaries. Long thin strips of conservation land shall be avoided, unless the conservation feature is linear or unless such configuration is necessary to connect with other streams or trails. The open space shall generally abut existing or potential open space land on adjacent parcels (such as in other subdivisions, public parks, or properties owned by or eased to private land conservation organizations). Such subdivision open space shall be designed as part of larger contiguous and integrated greenway systems, as per the policies in the Open Space Protection and Management Plan and the Newmarket Master Plan. 
(B)  Open Space Use and Management. 
(1)  Natural features shall generally be maintained in their natural condition, but may be modified to improve their appearance, or restore their overall condition and natural processes, as recommended by natural resource professionals and in compliance with an approved land stewardship plan. Permitted modifications may include: 
(a)  Woodland management. 
(b)  Reforestation. 
(c)  Meadow management. 
(d)  Wetlands management. 
(e)  Streambank restoration and protection. 
(f)  Buffer area landscaping. 
(2)  To preserve scenic views, ridge tops and hilltops should be contained within common open space wherever possible. Trees shall not be removed from ridge tops or hilltops. 
(3)  The boundaries of common open space shall be marked by natural features wherever possible, such as stonewalls, edges of woodlands, streams, or individual large trees. Where no such natural demarcations exist, additional plantings, fences, or other landscape features should be added to enable residents or the public, if applicable, to distinguish where common open space ends and private lot areas begin. Where structural demarcations, such as fences, are used, they shall be the minimum needed to accomplish this objective. 
(4)  Trails in common open space that are located within 50 feet of homes in the development shall be identified by plantings, markers, fences, or other landscape features. 
(5)  No portion of the minimum required open space shall be less than 50 feet in width unless the area contains a trail, or a trail to be built. 
(6)  Safe and convenient pedestrian access and access for maintenance purposes shall be provided to common open space areas that are not used for agricultural purposes, in accordance with the following: 
(a)  At least one access point per 10 houses shall be provided, having a width equal to or greater than the minimum width of a lot within the development. This width may be reduced to no less than 50 feet if the applicant can demonstrate that, due to natural site constraints, meeting the width requirement would run counter to the objectives of this Section. 
(b)  Access to common open space used for agriculture may be restricted for public safety and to prevent interference with agricultural operations. 
(7)  Maintenance and operation of common facilities. 
(a)  A plan and narrative for the use, maintenance, and insurance of all common facilities, including provisions for funding, shall be provided to and approved by the Planning Board prior to final approval. Such plan shall: 
(1)  Define ownership. 
(2)  Establish necessary regular and periodic operation and maintenance responsibilities. 
(3)  Estimate staffing needs, insurance requirements, and other associated costs and define the means for funding the same on an ongoing basis. 
(4)  Include a Land Stewardship Plan specifically focusing on the long-term management of open space lands. 
(b)  In the event that the association established to own and maintain common areas and facilities, or any successor organization thereto, fails to properly maintain all or any portion of the aforesaid common areas or facilities, the Town may serve written notice upon such association setting forth the manner in which the association has failed to maintain the aforesaid common areas and facilities. Such notice shall set forth the nature of corrections required and the time within which the corrections shall be made. Upon failure to comply within the time specified, the association, or any successor organization, shall be considered in violation, in which case the Town shall have the right to enter the premises and take the needed corrective actions. The costs of corrective actions by the Town shall be assessed against the properties that have the right of enjoyment of the common areas and facilities. This authority shall be documented in the application and the documents establishing the association. The recitation shall include a description of the parcel, enforcement authority under RSA 674:21-a, and the Land Stewardship Plan. 
(8)  The Land Stewardship Plan shall include a narrative, based on the site analysis required by the special use permit, describing: 
(a)  Existing conditions, including all natural, cultural, historic, and scenic elements in the landscape; 
(b)  Objectives for each common open space area, including: 
(1)  The proposed end state for the area and the measures proposed for achieving the end state. 
(2)  Proposed restoration measures, including: 
(a)  Measures for correcting increasingly destructive conditions, such as erosion. 
(b)  Measures for restoring historic features. 
(c)  A maintenance and operations plan identifying activities needed to maintain the stability of the resources, including mowing schedules, weed control measures, planting schedules, and clearing and cleanup measures and schedules. 
(C)  Design Standards for Building Sites. 
(1)  All lots in a cluster shall have access from interior streets. 
(2)  All lots shall abut common open space to the front or rear. Common open space across a street shall qualify for this requirement. 
(3)  In locating house sites, disturbance to woodlands, stonewalls, and individual mature trees shall be minimized. However, when the objective is to preserve prime farmland soils and large areas of contiguous land suitable for agricultural use, dwellings may be located within woodlands, provided that no more than 20 percent of a single wooded lot is cleared for the construction of a dwelling, driveway, garage, storage building, well, and private onsite waste treatment system. 
(D)  Design Guidelines for Roadways, Shared Accessways, Trails, and Other Facilities. 
(1)  General Design. All roadways shall be designed in accordance with the Newmarket Subdivision Regulations. 
(2)  Connectivity. It is the intent of this ordinance that most open space design developments do not include provisions for connectivity of roadways where the majority of house sites are located. If connectivity is desired by the Board for future development purposes and/or reasons of health and safety, the Board may require secondary roads to serve the house sites and encourage the use of separate connector roads to serve as the mode of interconnectivity. 
(3)  Design Flexibility. The Board shall consider greater flexibility in specific adherence to design requirements related to curve and tangent requirements, pavement width, right-of-way width and clearing requirements. This flexibility shall be exercised in the pursuit of site design that minimizes impacts to the site and provides flexibility in siting dwellings. 
(E)  Procedures for Conservation Subdivisions. 
    Process Overview. The sequence of actions prescribed in this article [Section] is as listed below. These steps shall be followed sequentially and may be combined only at the discretion of the Planning Commission: 
1. Pre-application discussion, technical review 2. Environmental resource and yield plan submittal 3. Yield equation and yield plan review and recommendation 4. Submission hearing, preliminary plan, and yield equation/plan approval 5. Sitewalk 6. Application Review 7. Decision  
(1)  Pre-Application Discussion. A pre-application discussion is strongly encouraged between the applicant, the site designer(s), and members of the Planning Board. The purpose of this informal meeting is to introduce the applicant and the site designer(s) to the regulations and procedures and to discuss the applicant's objectives in relation to the town requirements. The town may designate a consultant experienced in development design and in the protection of natural features and greenway lands to meet with the applicant and to attend meetings as authorized under these regulations and RSA 676:4. 
(2)  Environmental Resource and Yield Plan Submittal. At the Pre-application discussion the applicant shall submit the yield equation and environmental resource yield plan for technical review. The submissions shall not be required to meet engineering specifications or surveying standards for purposes of the yield plan; however, the environmental characteristics of the site shall be determined and delineated in accordance with applicable professional standards. 
(a)  Environmental Resource and Yield Plan. The application shall include a sketch plan showing the delineation of environmental resources on the site and the maximum number of dwelling units that would be reasonably achievable under the zoning ordinance and subdivision regulations for a conventional design, consistent with the minimum lot size, lot widths, set backs, and all other applicable provisions, purposes, and objectives of the zoning ordinance and subdivision regulations in place at the time of the submission and compare it to the number of dwelling units proposed. This plan is intended to utilize required design information for the open space application and overlay a sketched conventional subdivision. At a minimum, the following information shall be provided: 
i.  Property boundaries; 
ii.  Streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands, as defined in this ordinance and associated zoning buffers; 
iii.  Topographic contours at 2-foot intervals; 
iv.  General vegetation characteristics; 
v.  General soil types showing with reasonable certainty, the ability to provide on-site septic facilities if not on public sewer service; 
vi.  A sketch of lot lines and setbacks showing reasonable building envelopes; 
vii.  A sketch of potential rights-of-way for roads and utilities in compliance with the subdivision regulations; 
viii.  Archaeological sites, cemeteries and burial grounds; 
ix.  Land on the parcel that has been set aside from development as part of a conservation easement, development agreement, or other similar legal restriction; 
x.  Existing roads and structures; 
[xi.  Reserved;] 
xii.  Existing abutting conservation land and trails; 
xiii.  Waivers that would be required for approval and statement of justification for the waiver under the relevant provision of the applicable subdivision regulation; 
xiv.  Wetland impacts that would be required for conventional design. 
(b)  Development Yield Equation. The maximum number of lots is determined by dividing the area of the tract of land by the minimum lot size specified in the underlying zoning district. In making this calculation, the following shall apply to the Developable Land Base as required by  6.03(E): 
i.  A 10% reduction in the developable land base to account for public facilities (roads, drainage, and utility easements); 
ii.  A complete removal of all land on the parcel that has been set aside from development as part of a conservation easement, development agreement, or other similar legal restriction; 
iii.  Isolated pockets of upland that are reachable only through a wetland fill that requires an impact to Prime Wetlands, over 6,000 square feet of impact to very poorly drained soils, over 12,000 square feet in impact to poorly drained soils or an aggregate of over 1 (one) acre in impact to wetlands of any types in the entire project. 
(c)  Delineation of Open Space and the Developable Land Base. The calculation of the Developable Land Base, as required by  6.03 and reviewed under  6.06(C)(3) of the Newmarket Zoning Ordinance sets the baseline for the open space calculations. This calculation is meant to be a numerical calculation that relates to an actual physical description of the area of the parcel to be protected as open space. The area of the parcel that is to be set aside must meet the minimum requirements of the developable land base calculations. As a practical matter, the open space will likely be larger given the inclusion of wetlands in the final parcel. The calculation insures that adequate uplands and "developable" land is set aside to further the multiple purposes of the open space design ordinance. 
(3)  Yield Equation and Yield Plan Review and Recommendation. The Planning Department shall use the environmental resource and yield plan and yield equation submission to make a recommendation on the validity of the yield plan and a preliminary recommendation on the delineation of the restricted open space in accordance with these regulations and the Open Space Design Ordinance. The Planning Department shall forward a recommendation on for Planning Board review at the submission hearing. 
(4)  Submission Hearing, Preliminary Plan, Yield Equation/Plan Approval. "Preliminary Plan" refers to a preliminarily engineered sketch plan drawn to illustrate initial thoughts about a conceptual layout for open space lands, house sites, and street alignments. This is the stage where drawings are tentatively illustrated, before heavy engineering costs are incurred in the design of any proposed subdivision layout. 
(5)  Sitewalk. The Planning Board may schedule a mutually convenient date to walk the property with the applicant and site designer. The purpose of this visit is to familiarize town officials with the property's special features, and to provide an informal opportunity to offer guidance (or at least a response) to the applicant regarding the tentative location of the conservation land and potential house locations and street alignments. 
(6)  Application Review: Four-Step Process. Each sketch plan or Conceptual Preliminary Plan shall follow a four-step design process, as described below. When the conceptual Preliminary Plan is submitted, applicants shall be prepared to demonstrate to the Planning Board that these four design steps were followed by their site designers in determining the layout of their proposed streets, houselots, and greenway lands. This process shall be accomplished during the first 30 days of the statutory review period for applications before the board. 
(a)  Designating the Open Space. During the first step, all potential conservation areas are identified and shall consist of wetlands, floodplains, slopes over 25%, and shall include identification of the most sensitive and noteworthy natural, scenic, and cultural resources on that remaining half of the property. The applicant shall locate the restricted open space using the location criteria contained in the Open Space Design Ordinance. 
(b)  Location of House Sites. During the second step, potential house sites are tentatively located. Because the proposed location of houses within each lot represents a significant decision with potential impacts on the ability of the development to meet the evaluation criteria contained above, subdivision applicants shall identify tentative house sites on the preliminary plan. 
(c)  Street and Lot Layout. The third step consists of aligning proposed streets to provide vehicular access to each house in the most reasonable and economical way. When lots and access streets are laid out, they shall be located in a way that avoids or at least minimizes adverse impacts on the Conservation Areas. To the greatest extent practicable, wetland crossings and streets traversing existing slopes over 15% shall be strongly discouraged. Street connections shall generally be encouraged to minimize the number of new cul-de-sacs to be maintained by the town and to facilitate easy access to and from homes in different parts of the property. Where cul-de-sacs are necessary, those serving six or fewer homes may be designed with "hammer-heads" facilitating three-point turns. Cul-de-sacs serving more than six homes shall generally be designed with a central island containing indigenous trees and shrubs (either conserved on site or planted). In situations where more formal, "neo-traditional," or village-type layouts are proposed, Steps Two and Three may be reversed, so that the location of house sites follows the location of streets and squares. 
(d)  Lot Lines. The fourth step is simply to draw in the lot lines (where applicable). These are generally drawn midway between house locations and may include L-shaped "flag-lots." 
(7)  Decisions. For each preliminary step the decision shall be in the form of a vote. Decisions that are made on limited submission of information, as contemplated by this development approach, shall not be binding if further information is discovered during the process that results in modifications to the result. The conditional and final approval shall be issued in accordance with RSA 676:3 and 676:4. 
SECTION 4.00. - PLAT STANDARDS 

Sec. 4.01. - Size. 
    Full size plat sheets shall measure 22" tall by 34" wide or smaller sizes as acceptable by the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds, and reduced size plats shall measure 11" tall by 17" wide, or 81/2" tall by 11" wide. 
Sec. 4.02. - Material and number of copies. 
    The applicant shall provide three or more paper copies of each full size plat sheet and one paper copy of each reduced size plat sheet. Copies of plat sheets to be recorded shall be printed on Mylar, or other material as specified by the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds. 
Sec. 4.03. - Basic information. 
    All plat sheets shall contain the following: 
(A)  Title Block. The title block shall indicate the: 
(1)  Title of the sheet; 
(2)  Owner's name; 
(3)  Applicant's name, if other than owner; 
(4)  Tax map and parcel number; and 
(5)  Name and address of the person or company which prepared the sheet. 
(B)  Scale. The scale of the plan shall be given in text and graphic form. 
(C)  North Arrow. 
(D)  Dates. Each sheet shall indicate the date of original preparation, and the date and nature of each revision. 
Sec. 4.04. - Boundary survey plans. 
    The plat sheet(s), which provides the required boundary or other survey information, shall be stamped and signed by a N.H. Licensed Land Surveyor. The surveyor shall certify on the plans that "All plans meet the current standards as set forth by the N.H. Joint Board of Licensure and the N.H. Land Surveyors Association." 
Sec. 4.05. - Engineering plans. 
    The plat sheet(s), which provides any required engineering information, shall be stamped and signed by a N.H. licensed Professional Engineer. This shall include all road designs, drainage plans, community or municipal water system plans, and municipal sewer system plans. 
Sec. 4.06. - Approval sheet(s). 
    In addition to those items required per  4.03 and  4.04, the plat sheet(s) on which the Planning Board will indicate approval shall have: 
(A)  A 2" tall by 4" wide empty space reserved for the Board's written endorsement, which shall be indicated by a municipal approval stamp and signature of the Chairman of the Board; 
(B)  A note indicating the title and most recent date of revision for all supplemental plat sheets; 
(C)  A locus map showing the location of the property within the municipality; and 
(D)  Notes providing the following information: 
(1)  Indication of all existing or proposed easements of record, covenants and deed restrictions. 
(2)  Indicate the zoning district, including applicable overlay districts, if such districts exist. 
(3)  Area of each lot. 
(4)  Length of road frontage for each lot. 
(5)  List of waivers and substitutions granted by the Board. 
(6)  Any other development restrictions, limitation or requirements. 
Sec. 4.07. - Multiple sheets. 
    Where the size of the property and the scale of the plat require multiple sheets, match lines shall be provided. 
Sec. 4.08. - Scale. 
    A scale of 1" equals 100' is the recommended scale, although other scales which provide a greater level of detail and accuracy may be used. 
Sec. 4.09. - Area of coverage. 
    Plans submitted for approval under this Regulation shall depict the entire area and boundary of each lot, except as follows: 
(A)  Boundary Line Adjustment. Each lot of 5 acres or less in area shall be shown in its entirety. For lots larger than 5 acres, the plan shall depict a portion of the lot, at least 5 acres in size, which includes the area from the boundary line adjustment to the nearest road frontage. Additionally, the entire road frontage of both lots shall be included for any proposed changes, which would alter the amount of frontage on a lot. 
Sec. 4.10. - Site information. 
    The set of plans submitted shall provide the following information about the site: 
(A)  Boundary survey of the existing property boundaries, indicating: 
(1)  Distances, deflection angles, radii, arc lengths, control angles, monument locations, and other necessary survey data; 
(2)  The names of all abutters, including map and parcel numbers; 
(3)  Roads, right-of-ways, intersections and driveways within 50' of the lot; 
(4)  Location and nature of easements of record, deed restrictions and covenants; and 
(5)  References to deeds, earlier surveys, and other pertinent information as determined by the LLS. 
(B)  Existing conditions on the property, showing: 
(1)  Elevation contours: 
(a)  For Boundary Line Adjustments, this shall not be required. 
(b)  For Minor Subdivisions and Major Subdivisions, contours at 2' intervals shall be required, except that lots, which will remain 10 acres or more, shall require 5' contour intervals. 
(2)  Delineation of hydric soils on the entire lot shall be required. This work shall be conducted by a NH Licensed Soil Scientist. Additionally, soil types and boundaries per the Rockingham County Soil Survey shall be indicated. Poorly and very poorly drained soils shall be clearly labeled as such. In locations where the boundary of such soils is important in evaluating the proposed design of the subdivision, the Board may require the applicant to provide a high intensity soil survey, conducted by a NH Licensed Soil Scientist. 
(3)  Existing buildings, wells, septic systems, water lines, sewer lines, drainage facilities, utilities and other such improvements, in plan view, with description of uses and sizes, if applicable. 
(4)  Approximate location of buildings, wells and septic systems, in plan view, within 100' of the site. 
(5)  Surface waters, stalls, and other significant natural and man-made resources. 
(C)  Municipal and zoning district boundaries, including base and overlay districts. 
(D)  Setback lines. 
(E)  Elevation of 100-year floodplain, or the extent of the 100-year floodplain as otherwise defined by FEMA. 
(F)  Proposed conditions on the property, showing: 
(1)  Boundary survey of the existing and proposed property boundaries, showing all information provided for  4.10(A), plus distances, deflection angles, radii, arc lengths, control angles, monument locations, and other necessary survey data for proposed property boundaries. 
(2)  Proposed contours at 2' intervals in areas where changes are proposed. 
(3)  Buildings in plan view for subdivision plans being concurrently reviewed for Site Plan Review approval. 
(4)  Proposed use(s), if other than single-family residential. 
(5)  Plans for transportation, providing all information required to assess compliance with  3.02 (Roads) and  3.04 (Pedestrian, Bicycle and Transit Amenities). For road plans, cross sections at 100' stations and a centerline profile shall be provided. 
(6)  Plans for drainage, providing all information required to assess compliance with  3.03 (Drainage). 
(7)  Plans for water supply, sewage disposal, utilities, and firefighting water supply, providing all information required to assess compliance with  3.06 (Water Supply),  3.07 (Sewage Disposal),  3.08 (Utilities), and  3.10(B) (Water for Firefighting). 
(8)  Plans for landscaping, providing all information required to assess compliance with  3.09 (Landscaping). 
(9)  Plans for recreational amenities, providing all information required to assess compliance with  3.11 (Recreational Amenities). 
(10)  Each lot shall be numbered according to the Town's tax map numbering system. 
(11)  Location of a test pit and percolation test on each lot, with results provided in an accompanying report. 
(G)  For subdivisions with new roads, a design sketch of the streetscape of the development when fully built out, to help permit the Board and abutters to visualize the development. 
SECTION 5.00. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 5.01. - Waivers or substitutions. 
    The Board may waive a portion of this Regulation, or permit substitution of an alternative standard for one in this Regulation only as specified in this Section. 
(A)  Waivers. The Board may grant a waiver of any Design Standard ( 3.00) or Plat Standard ( 4.00) of this Regulation in accordance with the following: 
(1)  The applicant shall provide a written request for waiver. The request shall specify the section for which the waiver is requested, the extent of the waiver, and the justification. Where multiple waivers are being requested, a separate request shall be provided for each. 
(2)  In evaluating the request, the Board shall not grant the waiver unless it finds that: 
(a)  Granting of the waiver shall not be detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare; 
(b)  Granting of the waiver shall not, in the opinion of the Board, be injurious to other parties; 
(c)  Granting of the waiver shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this Regulation; and 
(3)  The Board may condition any waiver granted so as to secure the objectives of this Regulation. 
(B)  Substitutions. In the event that an alternative Design Standard ( 3.00) is provided, the Board may permit substitution for the Town design standard. Such substitution shall be permitted at the Board's option only when, in the Board's opinion, the alternative standard is independently and scientifically derived, is generally accepted by the planning community, and would better accomplish the intent of this chapter for this case. The request for a substitution shall be made in writing, and a complete copy of the alternative design standard shall be provided to the Town for its records (i.e., provide a copy of applicable books, articles, etc.). Substitution shall require a formal motion of the Board, and the minutes of the meeting should indicate the Board's reasoning for future reference. No waiver is required for design standard substitutions. 
Sec. 5.02. - Technical assistance. 
    In the event that the Board requires technical assistance and/or special studies to adequately and properly evaluate an application or perform subsequent inspections, it may secure such professional assistance. This may include planning reviews, engineering review, legal reviews, special studies, and other such assistance. The applicant shall reimburse the Town for the cost of such assistance, but the individual or company engaged shall work for, and report directly to the Town. 
Sec. 5.03. - Recording approved plans. 
    Upon stamping and signing an approved final plan, the Town shall deliver the Mylar plan to the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds to ensure that there is no tampering with the plans prior to recording, and to ensure that there is no delay in recording the plan such that the delay would extend the protection period under RSA 674:39. A signed paper Copy of the plan shall be retained by the Town for its records, and additional paper copies of the plan may be signed for the applicant, surveyor, and others. 
Sec. 5.04. - Financial securities. 
    The applicant shall be required to provide financial securities for site improvements in accordance with the following: 
(A)  Use. Suitable financial securities shall be provided to ensure that the applicant will complete all site work in accordance with the plans. The securities, if called by the Town, may be used to stabilize the site, ensure site safety, minimize any adverse impacts on the neighborhood and Town, complete the work, and prepare the as-built plans. In the event that the security is called by the Town, the Board may schedule and hold a public hearing to consider revocation of the Subdivision Approval per the process of RSA 676:4-a. The Board may request that all municipal permits be suspended until the matter is resolved. 
(B)  Amount. The amount shall be 100% of the cost of all site work, excluding site work covered by other financial securities held by other governmental entities (such as for State driveway permits). The specific dollar amount shall be negotiated with the Town Administrator. 
(C)  Form of Security. The form of financial security, and all associated agreements or stipulations shall be negotiated with the Town Administrator. At a minimum, the Town shall accept cash, a joint passbook account, and an irrevocable letter of credit. The Town shall have full access to these securities in the case that the Town must utilize them to secure the purposes of this section. 
(D)  Other Requirements. If requested by the applicant, there shall be a provision for reducing the amount of the security as work is completed, but the Town shall retain sufficient security at all times to ensure that it can fulfill all remaining purposes. The Town retains the right to apply cost escalation factors to protect against inflation. The Town retains the right to specify time deadlines for the completion of any or all improvements. 
Sec. 5.05. - Approval required. 
    Prior to land clearing, site preparation, construction or any other such activity may begin on a site, and before any municipal permit for such activity may be issued, approval under this Regulation is required. All activity on the site shall be in accordance with the approval. 
Sec. 5.06. - As-built plans. 
(A)  The Board requires that the applicant prepare and submit to the Public Works Director a set of as-built plans for all roads, underground drainage systems, and underground utilities. All such as-built plans shall meet the current standards as set forth by the N.H. Joint Board of Licensure and the N.H. Land Surveyors Association. 
(B)  The only as-built subdivision plan, which the Board will approve from the effective date of this Regulation forward, is a plan showing the location of structures on condominium property. Such plans shall: 
(1)  Be certified to be correct, and stamped and signed by a N.H. Licensed Land Surveyor; 
(2)  Be accompanied by Certificates of Occupancy, if applicable; 
(3)  Clearly identify in the title block exactly what the as-built plan is approving (especially where the plan depicts only some of multiple units as being completed); and 
(4)  Have the following plat note printed on each sheet: "These as-built plans are pursuant to, and without modification of the original Planning Board approval, and meet the current standards set forth by the N.H. Joint Board of Licensure and the N.H. Land Surveyors Association." 
Sec. 5.07. - Enforcement. 
    The Code Enforcement Officer, or other duly appointed designee of the Town Council, shall be responsible for enforcement. 
Sec. 5.08. - Inspections. 
    The Town shall hire, at the applicant's expense, a qualified consultant to perform inspections during the construction of roads, drainage facilities, water systems, sewer systems, and other improvements as appropriate. Inspection shall be sequenced to ensure that work is properly completed throughout the project in accordance with the approved plans. 
(A)  For road construction, there shall be inspections following grubbing and clearing, following preparation and compaction of the subgrade, during placement of base course materials, prior to binder coarse paving, prior to wear coat paving, and upon completion of all work. Cut or fill slopes shall also be subject to inspection and approval. 
(B)  All underground utilities shall be inspected and approved prior to burial. 
(C)  Water and sewer inspections shall be required as specified by the Public Works Director at the time of approval. 
(D)  The developer shall be responsible for notifying the inspection consultant at each of the construction phases, and may request additional inspections at any time during construction. Failure to provide adequate notification will result in a delay of the approvals and release of the financial security. If any part of the work is found to be inadequate, the Town may order the deficient work to be reconstructed prior to its acceptance. All requests shall be made at least three working days prior to the desired inspection. 
(E)  The inspector shall be responsible for maintaining a record of each inspection. At a minimum, the records shall contain the date of inspection, improvement or portion inspected (identified by station or other reasonable means), conditions found, and actions taken (approval or disapproval). Reasons for disapproval shall be supplied to the developer, in writing, within 48 hours of the inspection. 
Sec. 5.09. - Compliance with other codes. 
    The Subdivision Regulations in no way relieve an applicant from compliance with the Zoning Ordinance, the Site Plan Review Regulations, or any other code or requirement adopted by the Town or any other governmental unit. In the event that the requirements of this Regulation are in conflict with the other codes, the more stringent shall apply. This is also required by RSA 676:14. 
Sec. 5.10. - Saving clause. 
    If any clause, portion or section of this Regulation is found invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, this finding shall not invalidate the remainder of this Regulation. 
SECTION 6.00. - APPLICATION FORMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- These separate documents are also available online at www.newmarketnh.gov and at the Newmarket Planning Office. 

[Sec. 6.01.] - Stormwater management checklist. 


[Sec. 6.02.] - Application completeness checklist for major subdivision. 



[Sec. 6.03.] - Application completeness checklist for minor subdivision. 



[Sec. 6.04.] - Application completeness checklist for boundary line adjustment. 



Appendix B - SITE PLANS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed in this appendix are the site plan regulations, adopted by the Planning Board on August 22, 1995. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings and catchlines has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference- Site plans, RSA 674:43 et seq. 

SECTION 1.00. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1.01. - Purpose. 
    The general purpose of this regulation is to guide the character of non-residential and multi-family development, re-development, expansion, and change of use in order to implement the policies of the Master Plan, providing for the public health, safety, convenience, prosperity and general welfare. Throughout this Regulation, the Board seeks to balance the process of growth, development and change with the need to preserve and enhance those qualities which make Newmarket a safe and desirable place to live, work and visit. In keeping with this general purpose, the following are specific objectives: 
(A)  Promote the harmonious and aesthetically pleasing development of the Town, ensuring visual harmony of the sites with their surrounding neighborhoods, establishing site designs consistent with and/or complimentary to traditional New England designs, providing adequate green space and open space, providing for proper building location to ensure adequate sunlight and air circulation, and protecting the natural beauty of the Town; 
(B)  Enhance the downtown village area and waterfront by providing an appropriate mix of uses, improving appearance, maintaining traditional New England character, enhancing pedestrian orientation, and promoting mixed use mill redevelopment; 
(C)  Protect the public from undue hazards, disturbances, and nuisances; 
(D)  Promote commercial development, including opportunity for home-based work, to broaden the tax base and employ residents; 
(E)  Protect environmental quality by means of controlling sediment erosion and increases in run-off volumes and discharges of non-point source pollution; 
(F)  Ensure that land is of sufficient character to be used for building purposes without danger to health, and additionally ensuring that development does not exceed the capability of the land to safely provide on-site water supply and sewage disposal in areas not served by municipal water and sewer systems; 
(G)  Guard against such conditions as would involve danger or injury to health, safety, or prosperity by reason any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Inadequate stormwater management; 
(2)  Conditions conducive to flooding; 
(3)  Inadequate protection to preserve the quality of groundwater and surface water resources; 
(4)  Undesirable and preventable elements of pollution such as noise, smoke, soot, particulates, or any other discharge into the environment which might prove harmful to persons, structures, or adjacent or neighboring properties 
(5)  Inadequate provision of fire safety, prevention and control; 
(H)  Facilitate adequate provision of public facilities, utilities and services; and 
(I)  Provide for adequate transportation by requiring appropriate provision and arrangement of roads, driveways, sidewalks, traffic aisles, parking, loading areas, bicycle facilities, emergency vehicle accesses, transit amenities, and off-site connections while minimizing the creation of additional impervious surfaces. 
Sec. 1.02. - Authority. 
    Under authority of RSA 674:43 and authorization from Town Meeting, as amended, the Planning Board repeals the previous Site Plan Review Regulations and hereby adopts this new Regulation on August 22, 1995. 
Sec. 1.03. - Definitions. 
    Definitions shall be those provided in the Newmarket Zoning Ordinance adopted February 14, 1996, in Zoning Ordinance  1.11 [section 32-11 of the Code], and the additional definitions as follows: 
    Best Management Practices (BMP): As outlined in the NHDES Stormwater Manual, (Vols. 1-3), published in Dec. 2008 or as amended, BMPs are generally considered to be the most effective and practical means of preventing soil erosion and/or controlling peak flow rates as well as minimizing pollutant loads and runoff volumes generated from site development. These may include both structural and non-structural measures associated with site development. 
    Bioretention Area: Also often referred to as a Rain Garden, consists of a shallow, landscaped depression that receives runoff from impervious surfaces and allows the initial "first-flush" of runoff (typically first 1 inch of runoff) to infiltrate into native soils or an engineered soil matrix for water quality treatment. These areas are generally planted with a mix of native grasses, sedges and shrubs. 
    Disturbance: Any activity that involves altering the existing terrain which includes clearing and grubbing, grading and adding impervious area that will change the runoff flow and volume from an existing site. 
    Impervious Surface: Any surface that cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall and consist of surfaces such as building rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways and compacted gravel (e.g., driveways and parking lots). 
    Low Impact Development (LID): Low impact development is a site planning and design strategy intended to maintain or replicate predevelopment hydrology through the use of site planning, source control, and small scale practices integrated throughout the site to capture and infiltrate runoff as close to its source as possible. Where existing soils limit the natural infiltration potential, LID strategies may include, but not be limited to, preserving existing wooded buffer areas, use of cisterns to capture and reuse stormwater or the use of roof gardens to minimize the generation of roof runoff. 
    Maximum Extent Practicable (MEP): To show that a proposed development has met a standard to the maximum extent practicable, the applicant must demonstrate the following: 
(1)  All reasonable efforts have been made to meet the standard; 
(2)  A complete evaluation of all possible management measures has been performed; and 
(3)  If full compliance cannot be achieved, the highest practicable level of management is being implemented. 
    Redevelopment: Any construction, alteration, or improvement that disturbs more than 20,000 square feet of area or adds more than 5,000 square feet of impervious area on an existing developed parcel This definition of redevelopment only pertains to the Stormwater Management and Sediment requirements of Section 3.07. 
Sec. 1.04. - Communications between Town and applicant. 
    There are many people involved in the processing of each application, and communication problems develop quickly if great care is not taken from the start. To prevent communication problems from developing, it is important for both the Town and the applicant to designate one person each to coordinate all communications. This prevents repetition of questions, prevents two people from giving different answers to the same question, and should help to keep interpretation of opinions consistent. 
(A)  Applicant's Authorized Representative. The application form shall designate one person to act as the "authorized representative." All communication to the applicant shall be made through this person, and this person shall be present at all meetings with the Board. In the text of these Regulations, references to the applicant shall also imply the authorized representative. 
(B)  Town. 
(1)  All communications to the Town shall be directed to the Planning Board Secretary unless otherwise directed by the Chairman of the Board. This may be more likely during larger applications, such as when an engineer reviewing the road design needs to talk to the design engineer to clarify issues. 
(2)  Individual Board members must exercise care when discussing application matters with the applicant, abutters, or other parties outside the forum of the Board's meetings. Care must be taken to keep an open mind throughout the entire process, not drawing conclusions until all relevant information has been received at the public hearing. Additionally, Board members should tell the Board and the public the substance of any information they have received from the applicant, abutters or other parties so that all can benefit from this knowledge, and to provide an opportunity to challenge any information provided. 
Sec. 1.05. - Applicability. 
    There are three possible applications of this Regulation to the development or change of a non-residential or multi-family site. The following criteria specify the level of review necessary: 
(A)  Not Applicable. Upon receipt of a written letter of acknowledgment from the Code Enforcement Officer, this Regulation is not applicable for the following: 
(1)  Temporary Events which require no permanent alterations to the site and which function safely within the approved configuration of the site, as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer; 
(2)  Special Events approved by the Town Council; 
(3)  Home Occupations; 
(4)  Within the M-2 district, change of use, from one non-residential use to another non-residential use, which involves no more than 500 square feet of gross floor space. 
(B)  Minor Review. A Minor Review by the Planning Board shall be required for the following: 
(1)  Change of use of a non-residential site, for which no change in floor area is proposed, and which either maintains or decreases the intensity of use on the site with respect to parking demand and traffic generation or for a site with 2,000 square feet or less of gross floor area; 
(2)  Expansion of non-residential floor space by 500 square feet or less, with no change of use; 
(3)  Within the M-2 district, any change of use of an existing non-residential building which will be accompanied by a renovation of the facade of the building which, in the opinion of the Planning Board, will enhance its aesthetic contribution to the heritage and visual qualities of the village; 
(4)  Site improvement alterations without new development, re-development, expansion or change of use; or 
(5)  Establishment of a bed and breakfast. 
(C)  Major Review. A Major Review by the Planning Board shall be required for the following: 
(1)  Establishment of non-residential uses where no non-residential use currently exists; 
(2)  Establishment of multi-family use where no multi-family use currently exists; 
(3)  Any other development, re-development, change of use or expansion of a multi-family or non-residential site, and not addressed in the  1.05(A) or (B). 
Sec. 1.06. - About Town regulations. 
(A)  Related Town Codes. The Town has other regulations, which may affect an application. The following is a list of related codes: 
Chapter I: Planning Board Bylaws Chapter II: Conservation Commission Bylaws Chapter III: Zoning Board of Adjustment Bylaws Chapter IV: Zoning Ordinance Chapter V: Subdivision Regulations Chapter VI: Site Plan Review Regulations Chapter VII: Excavation Regulations  
(B)  Organization and Cross References. To fully understand this code, it is important to understand how this Regulation is organized and cross referenced. 
(1)  Organization of this Regulation. 
(a)  Sections. This Regulation is divided into six Sections. Each Section is simply a grouping of related issues or requirements, and readers should identify the article in which an answer is likely to be found. The six sections are: 
 1.00 General Provisions  2.00 Application Procedures  3.00 Design Standards  4.00 Plat Standards  5.00 Administration  6.00 Application Forms and Checklists  
(b)  Subsections. Each Section is divided into subsections, each of which may be further divided as needed. It is easiest to use the Table of Contents to locate the major subsections. 
(2)  Cross Referencing System. Within this Regulation, there are many references to other Sections of this code. These cross references are provided to help the reader find needed information, and to inform the reader of related provisions. The reference for this Section is written as follows: 
 1.00 
The symbol "" means section. In all cases, the information following the "" starts with the Section, then the subsections in descending order. The reference for this subsection is written as follows: 
 1.06(B)(2) 
The number to the left of the decimal point refers to the Section; the number following the decimal point is the subsection, and so forth. Additional levels of hierarchy would be shown as follows: 
 1.01(B)(3)(c)[2][e] 
The reader should note that only the first letter is capitalized, and that the rounded parentheses are used before the square parentheses. Also, the text of each level is indented farther than the previous level. 
(C)  [Shall/Should.] The term "shall" requires a mandatory action in all cases, while "should" implies that the action is appropriate in most cases. The Board is responsible for deciding, on a case-by-case basis, how to apply the "should" provisions. 
(D)  State Laws. State laws are referenced frequently in this Regulation. In New Hampshire, State laws are known as Revised Statutes Annotated, which is abbreviated as "RSA," and are followed by the appropriate chapter and section references. 
Editor's note- The organization of the other regulations listed in subsection (A) of this section is no longer accurate, as it was changed as part of the recodification process. 
Sec. 1.07. - General guidance. 
    The following advice is offered to assist the applicant, especially if the applicant is unfamiliar with land development processes. 
(A)  All applicants will need to hire professionals to prepare part or all of the application. A NH Licensed Land Surveyor and/or licensed Professional Engineer are required. In some cases, other specialists will be needed, possibly including an attorney, a soil scientist, or others. While such assistance does cost money, their skills and abilities are essential to ensure that the Town and applicant have sound information on which to base their decisions. 
(B)  The Board is concerned about processing all applications fairly and quickly. To accomplish this, the applicant shares certain responsibilities. The applicant must be properly prepared. This includes reading these Regulations to understand the issues that must be addressed, and includes dealing with all the significant issues up front. Incomplete submittals or failure to properly address issues will result in unnecessary delays in obtaining a final decision from the Board. 
(C)  The application process is similar for all applications, although the amount of work and time to obtain an approval vary widely. 
(1)  All applications follow this basic process: 
  Preparation. The applicant prepares the application, usually done by hired professionals. This may involve some discussion with the Board through preliminary conceptual consultation or design review meetings. 
  Application Acceptance. Upon submittal of the application materials to the Town, the application is placed on the next available Planning Board agenda for consideration. By State law, there is a minimum lead-time of 15 days. 
  Public Hearing. All applications will have a public hearing. This is the official opportunity for the public to ask questions about the application, to raise issues, offer suggestions, or indicate their support or opposition. The Hearing may be interspersed with periods of deliberation by the Board, and may be continued to future dates. 
  Decision. In the end, the Board must decide whether to approve or deny the application. In the majority of cases, the Board approves the application with conditions, which means that there are additional administrative or technical requirements, which must be satisfied to obtain the full approval. 
(2)  Timing. Perhaps the most commonly asked question about an application to a planning board is "how long will it take?" There is no standard answer. At a minimum, there must be a meeting with the Board, and this alone requires at least 15 days lead-time. Simple applications are often approved at a single meeting, while more complex applications may take two or three months to complete. However, this general answer is all based on the assumptions that the applicant is properly prepared, and that no unusual circumstances arise. Without the applicant's consent, however, it is very unlikely that an application process can take longer than six months. 
(Amd. of 11-18-1997) 
SECTION 2.00. - APPLICATION PROCESS 

Sec. 2.01. - Preliminary conceptual consultation. 
    This meeting shall be directed at a review of the basic concept of the proposal and suggestions that might be of assistance in resolving problems with meeting requirements during final consideration. The Board and applicant may discuss proposals in conceptual form only and in general terms such as desirability of types of development and proposals under the Master Plan. The presentation to the Board of new surveys, engineering plans or similar materials shall not be allowed under this process, so the Chairman must be careful to keep these discussions at a general level. Typically, maps from the Master Plan, tax maps, county soil survey maps and the like are acceptable levels of generality upon which to base these discussions. Such consultation shall not bind either the applicant or the Board, and statements made by Board members shall not be the basis for disqualifying said members or invalidating any action taken. Such discussion may occur without the necessity of giving formal public notice, but such discussions may occur only at formal meetings of the Board. Preliminary conceptual consultation meetings are strictly optional to the applicant. 
Sec. 2.02. - Design review. 
    The Board and applicant may engage in non-binding discussions beyond conceptual and general discussions, addressing more specific design, planning and engineering details, provided that the design review may proceed only after formal public notice is provided. Statements made by Board members shall not be the basis for disqualifying said members of invalidating any action taken. The applicant shall pay appropriate public notice fees as specified in  2.05(B), and shall provide all required materials and information required for public notice per  2.09 and  2.10. Design Review meetings are strictly optional to the applicant, but such meetings can be helpful in identifying and resolving problems in an application prior to major design investments by the applicant. 
Sec. 2.03. - Minor review. 
    The application for a Minor Review shall be made to the Board, and shall follow the process specified in  2.05 through  2.18 of this Regulation. Approved Minor Review plans shall not be recorded at the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds. The following shall be provided to the Board: 
(A)  Completed application, which shall contain the following: 
(1)  Correctly completed application form, signed by the property owner(s). 
(2)  Abutters list, with correct abutters, dated within five days of submittal, and signed by preparer, with accompanying adhesive mailing labels. 
(3)  Payment of fees for administration and public notice. 
(4)  One copy of a boundary survey which meets the requirements of  4.10(A)(1) and (2). The abutters shall be revised by the applicant if abutters are not shown on the plan, or if they have changed since the survey was originally prepared. 
(5)  Three copies of a Site Sketch, which complies with the following standards: 
(a)  Drawn roughly to scale at 1" equals 20'. A tape measure should be used to measure important distances, and these measurements should be labeled on the site sketch. 
(b)  Shows key elements of the site, including buildings, setback lines, parking spaces, driveways, traffic aisles, pedestrian, bicycle and wheelchair facilities, drainage facilities, surface waters, wells, septic systems, and other relevant information. 
(c)  Clearly depicts the changes proposed, including changes to site improvements. 
(6)  Documentation that the following applications and correspondence have been submitted: 
(a)  Letters to the appropriate Town officials regarding local permits and reviews for issues including but not limited to driveways, water and sewer systems, and safety review. 
(b)  Copies of applications for State permits including but not limited to wetlands, septic, driveway, site specific, and underground storage tank. 
(7)  List uses on the site, along with data about the amount of each activity (floor area, seating capacity, etc.). 
(8)  The following additional information shall be required for an application regarding a telecommunications facility: 
(a)  Written proof that a proposed use/facility complies with FCC regulations on radio frequency (RF) exposure guidelines, and FAA regulations on tower lighting. 
(b)  Written proof that an evaluation has taken place, as well as the results of such evaluation, satisfying the requirements of the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) further referenced in applicable FCC rules. If an Environmental Assessment (EA) or an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) is required under the FCC rules and NEPA, submission of the EA or EIS to the Board prior to the beginning of the federal thirty (30) day comment period, and the Town's site review process, shall become part of the application requirements. 
(c)  Provide an inventory of existing towers that are within the jurisdiction of the Town and those within two miles of the border thereof, including specific information about the location, height, design of each towers, as well as economic and technological feasibility for co-locations on the inventoried towers. 
If the applicant is proposing to build a new tower, the applicant shall submit written evidence demonstrating that no existing permitted tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. This evidence shall consist of one or more of the following: 
[1]  Substantial evidence that no existing permitted towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet the applicant's engineering requirements, provided that a description of the geographic area required is also submitted. 
[2]  Substantial evidence that existing permitted towers are not of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering requirements, and why. 
[3]  Substantial evidence that the existing permitted towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment. 
[4]  Substantial evidence that applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing permitted towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna. 
[5]  Substantial evidence that the fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share the existing permitted tower or structure are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable. 
[6]  Substantial evidence that the applicant can demonstrate other limiting factors that render existing permitted towers and structures unsuitable. 
(d)  The applicant proposing to build a new tower shall submit an agreement with the Town that allows for the maximum allowance of co-location upon the new structure. Such statement shall become a Condition to any Approval. This statement shall, at a minimum, require the applicant to supply available co-location for reasonable fees and costs to other telecommunications providers. Failure to provide such an agreement is evidence of the applicant's unwillingness to cooperate with the orderly and well-planned development of the Town and is grounds for denial. 
(e)  The applicant shall submit the engineering information detailing the size and coverage required for the facility location. The Planning Board may have this information reviewed by a consultant for verification of any claims made by the applicant regarding technological limitations and feasibility for alternative locations. Cost for this review shall be borne by the applicant in accordance with NH RSA 676:4(g). 
(f)  Each applicant for a tower, monopole, or alternative structure shall submit a design certified by a New Hampshire Licensed engineer that the structure has been engineered to accommodate the maximum number and type of all compatible telecommunication media antenna. 
(B)  The Board will generally use the Checklist for Application Completeness, Minor Review Application, provided in  6.00, to ensure completeness prior to accepting the application. The applicant is encouraged to use this checklist to ensure that the application is complete prior to submittal. 
(C)  Time and budget permitting, the Board will generally have a written review of the application prepared by a professional planner. Where possible, this written review should be prepared and available one week prior to the meeting at which application acceptance will be considered. The review will address both application completeness and compliance with applicable laws, regulations and ordinances. Additional reviews may be prepared in the case of applications, which take more than one meeting. Applicants may pick up a copy of the written review at the Town Offices as soon as it is available to the Board. 
(D)  Board members should visit the site prior to the meeting to familiarize themselves with the site. The Board may, by motion, require a site visit prior to application approval. 
Sec. 2.04. - Major review. 
    The application for a Major Review shall be made to the Board, and shall follow the process specified in  2.05 through  2.18 of this Regulation. Approved Major Review plans shall be signed and recorded at the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds. The following shall be provided to the Board: 
(A)  Completed application, which shall contain the following: 
(1)  Correctly completed application form, signed by the owner. 
(2)  Abutters list, with correct abutters, dated within five days of submittal, and signed by preparer, with accompanying adhesive mailing labels. 
(3)  Payment of fees for administration and public notice. 
(4)  Three paper copies of all plans, complying with all requirements of  4.00. 
(5)  Documentation that the following applications and correspondence have been submitted: 
(a)  Letters to the appropriate Town officials regarding local permits and reviews for issues including but not limited to driveways, water and sewer systems, and safety review. 
(b)  Copies of applications for State permits including but not limited to wetlands, septic, driveway, site specific, and underground storage tank. 
(6)  The following additional information shall be required for an application regarding a telecommunications facility: 
(a)  Written proof that a proposed use/facility complies with FCC regulations on radio frequency (RF) exposure guidelines, and FAA regulations on tower lighting. 
(b)  Written proof that an evaluation has taken place, as well as the results of such evaluation, satisfying the requirements of the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) further referenced in applicable FCC rules. If an Environmental Assessment (EA) or an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) is required under the FCC rules and NEPA, submission of the EA or EIS to the Board prior to the beginning of the federal thirty (30) day comment period, and the Town's site review process, shall become part of the application requirements. 
(c)  Provide an inventory of existing towers that are within the jurisdiction of the Town and those within two miles of the border thereof, including specific information about the location, height, design of each towers, as well as economic and technological feasibility for co-locations on the inventoried towers. 
If the applicant is proposing to build a new tower, the applicant shall submit written evidence demonstrating that no existing permitted tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. This evidence shall consist of one or more of the following: 
[1]  Substantial evidence that no existing permitted towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet the applicant's engineering requirements, provided that a description of the geographic area required is also submitted. 
[2]  Substantial evidence that existing permitted towers are not of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering requirements, and why. 
[3]  Substantial evidence that the existing permitted towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment. 
[4]  Substantial evidence that applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing permitted towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna. 
[5]  Substantial evidence that the fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share the existing permitted tower or structure are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable. 
[6]  Substantial evidence that the applicant can demonstrate other limiting factors that render existing permitted towers and structures unsuitable. 
(d)  The applicant proposing to build a new tower shall submit an agreement with the Town that allows for the maximum allowance of co-location upon the new structure. Such statement shall become a Condition to any Approval. This statement shall, at a minimum, require the applicant to supply available co-location for reasonable fees and costs to other telecommunications providers. Failure to provide such an agreement is evidence of the applicant's unwillingness to cooperate with the orderly and well-planned development of the Town and is grounds for denial. 
(e)  The applicant shall submit the engineering information detailing the size and coverage required for the facility location. The Planning Board may have this information reviewed by a consultant for verification of any claims made by the applicant regarding technological limitations and feasibility for alternative locations. Cost for this review shall be borne by the applicant in accordance with NH RSA 676:4(g). 
(f)  Each applicant for a tower, monopole, or alternative structure shall submit a design certified by a New Hampshire Licensed engineer that the structure has been engineered to accommodate the maximum number and type of all compatible telecommunication media antenna. 
(B)  The Board will generally use the Checklist for Application Completeness; Major Review Application, provided in  6.00, to ensure completeness prior to accepting the application. The applicant is encouraged to use this checklist to ensure that the application is complete prior to submittal. 
(C)  Time and budget permitting, the Board will generally have written reviews of the application prepared by a professional planner and a Professional (Civil) Engineer. Where possible, these written reviews should be prepared and available one week prior to the meeting at which application acceptance will be considered. The reviews will address both application completeness and compliance with applicable laws, regulations and ordinances. Additional reviews may be prepared in the case of applications which take more than one meeting. Applicants may pick up copies of the written reviews at the Town Offices as soon as they are available to the Board. 
(D)  Board members should visit the site prior to the meeting to familiarize themselves with the site. The Board may, by motion, require a site visit prior to application approval. 
Sec. 2.05. - Fees. 
    In accordance with RSA 676:4,I(g) and RSA 674:44,V, the applicant shall pay the following fees to compensate the Town for its expenses in processing, noticing and reviewing each application: 
(A)  Administration: 
(1)  Minor Review: ..... $125.00 
(2)  Major Review, one or more of the following shall apply: 
(a)  Residential Base Fee ..... 250.00 
Per unit ..... 125.00 
(b)  Commercial Base Fee ..... 250.00 
Plus per square foot of floor space: 
0-1,000 ..... 0.12 
1,001-5,000 ..... 0.10 
5,001-10,000 ..... 0.08 
10,001+ ..... 0.05 
(c)  Industrial Base Fee ..... 250.00 
Plus per square foot of floor space: 
0-1,000 ..... 0.06 
1,001-5,000 ..... 0.05 
5,001-10,000 ..... 0.04 
10,001+ ..... 0.03 
(B)  Public Notice: 
Per newspaper notice ..... 75.00 
Plus, per abutter or other party notified ..... 7.00 
(C)  Recording. The applicant shall reimburse the Town the cost of recording at the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds, with specific amounts as set by the Register of Deeds. 
(D)  Other costs incurred by the Board in reviewing the application, as limited in  5.02, shall be passed through to the applicant by the Board unless specifically waived. 
(Amd. of 10-1999; Amd. of 12-2003) 
Sec. 2.06. - Complete application. 
    The applicant must provide a complete application in order for the Board to have authority to approve the application, per RSA 676:4,I(b). Specific requirements are listed in  2.03 and  2.04. In addition to the information that the applicant provides, an application shall not be considered complete without a written review from the Code Enforcement Officer detailing compliance issues with the Zoning Ordinance. Applications, which appear complete, shall be scheduled on the next available Board agenda for consideration. 
Sec. 2.07. - Submittal of application materials. 
    All materials to be submitted to the Board for consideration shall be submitted prior to the meeting so that Board members, the public, and staff may have sufficient opportunity to review the application without unnecessarily rushing the review and/or delaying the proceedings of the meeting. The following shall apply: 
(A)  Application Acceptance. In accordance with RSA 676:4,I(b), all materials required to constitute a complete application shall be submitted to the Board at least 21 days prior to the meeting at which it will be considered for application acceptance. 
(B)  Other Public Hearings. New materials shall be submitted to the Board at least 14 days prior to a meeting when a new public notice is required. 
(C)  Continued Meetings. When consideration of an application is continued and new information is required, the Board should specify the deadline for filing this new information in the motion to continue the meeting. Lacking such direction by the Board, all submittals should be provided not less than one day prior to the meeting. 
(Amend. of 1-24-2017) 
Sec. 2.08. - Application for other permits/approvals. 
    The Board shall not grant a final approval to an application until all other government permits and approvals are obtained. The only exception to this requirement shall be when State or Federal permits require prior local approval. Applicants are advised to apply early for these other approvals to avoid unnecessary delays in obtaining final Town approval. 
Sec. 2.09. - Public notice. 
    Per RSA 676:4,I(d), public notice shall be required for all applications. The public notice shall identify the property owner, the location, and a general description of the proposal. 
(A)  Public notice shall be required for the following: 
(1)  Design review meetings; 
(2)  Meetings at which an application is considered for acceptance; and 
(3)  Meetings at which a public hearing is conducted. 
(B)  Public notice shall be mailed to the applicant, the applicant's authorized representative, any professional (surveyor, engineer, architect, soil scientist) whose stamp and signature appear on any of the plans or other materials submitted as part of the application package, and each abutter at least 10 days prior to the meeting for which the notice is required. Such notification shall be mailed by certified mail. 
(1)  Using the Abutters List form provided in  6.00 of this Regulation, the applicant shall prepare a list of abutters using Town records no sooner than 5 days prior to the submittal of the application; and 
(2)  The applicant shall provide an adhesive mailing label for each party on the abutters list, including the applicant and authorized representative. The labels shall be no larger than 1" by 2.75" in size. 
(C)  Public notice shall be posted at the Town Offices at least 10 days prior to the meeting. 
(D)  Public notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation. This notice shall be sent to the newspaper at least 10 days prior to the meeting. 
(E)  Continuation of a meeting or public hearing shall not require new public notice provided that, at the prior meeting or hearing, the Board shall state the location, date, and time at which the continued session shall resume per RSA 676:4,I(d). The deadline for the applicant's submittal of new or updated materials should also be specified. 
Sec. 2.10. - Regional notice. 
    In accordance with RSA 36:54-58, applications which might have a regional impact shall require additional public notices and additional posting time. 
(A)  Determination of potential regional impact shall be found only for applications which qualify for Major Review and which also meet any of the following criteria: 
(1)  Any portion of the property is located within 500 feet of the border of the Town of Newmarket; 
(2)  The application involves 10,000 square feet or more of new non-residential floor space; 
(3)  The proposal involves 20 or more residential units; 
(4)  The proposal involves property located on the shore of Great Bay or the Lamprey River; or 
(5)  Other as the Board may reasonably determine. 
(B)  Notice shall be sent by certified mail 14 days in advance of the scheduled public hearing to the Strafford Regional Planning Commission and/or the Rockingham Planning Commission, and to each town reasonably likely to be affected, with each governmental entity to be considered an abutter for purposes of listing on the Abutters List, offering testimony, and computing public notice fees. 
Sec. 2.11. - Application acceptance. 
    Before an application is reviewed by the Board, it must be accepted by a formal vote of the Board. The applicant shall attend this meeting to ensure that questions can be answered and issues clarified as necessary. Per RSA 676:4,I(b), the Board shall vote to accept the application only upon determination that the application is complete per this Regulation. Upon acceptance, review of the application may proceed. If an application is not accepted, the Board may proceed with Design Review discussions per  2.02. The Design Review meeting may be continued to another date and time for Application Acceptance without further public notice. 
Sec. 2.12. - Applicant's presentation. 
    Following application acceptance, the applicant shall make a brief, general presentation to the Board and audience. This presentation should include a brief description of the proposed project and a general description of the design, layout, and so forth, to ensure general familiarity with the application. The applicant should also identify specific issues that they would like to discuss in more detail during deliberation. The applicant is solely responsible for bringing any audiovisual materials or equipment needed. The Chairman shall have sole authority to limit the time taken for this presentation to keep the meeting moving, and applicants should plan on 10 minutes or less for most applications. 
Sec. 2.13. - Public hearing. 
    The Board shall open a public hearing following application acceptance and the applicant's presentation. The purpose shall be to solicit public input, comments, questions and concerns. The Chairman may temporarily suspend public comment during the public hearing so that the Board may deliberate, vote on waivers, and so forth. Before acting on intermediate issues such as waivers, the Board should solicit public input specific to the action beforehand to ensure that the Board has received all relevant information. The public hearing may be continued if additional meetings are necessary, provided that the Board follows the continuation procedures specified in  2.09(E). Only when all pertinent, new public input is complete shall the Chairman close the public hearing. The applicant shall be responsible for attending the public hearing, including all continuations, to ensure that questions can be answered and issues clarified as needed. 
Sec. 2.14. - Deliberation. 
    The Board shall deliberate as necessary to make its decisions. The deliberation does not necessarily follow the public hearing, and will likely be interspersed with the public hearing. This is the appropriate forum for the applicant and Board to discuss specific issues. 
Sec. 2.15. - Decision. 
    Pursuant to RSA 676:4,I(c), the Board shall issue a decision within 90 days of application acceptance, subject to time extensions as per RSA 676:4,I(f). Applications, which are not accepted, require no decision. The Board must approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the application as follows: 
(A)  Approval. The Board shall grant approval to an application when the application fully complies with the standards and processes of this Regulation and other applicable laws. 
(B)  Conditional Approval. The Board may grant conditional approval to an application when minor additional action by the applicant will bring the application into full compliance for approval. This may include payment of fees, minor changes in design, and other matters, subject to the requirements of RSA 676:4,I(i): 
(1)  Minor plan changes, whether or not imposed by the Board as a result of a public hearing, compliance with which is administrative and which does not involve discretionary judgment; or 
(2)  Conditions which are in themselves administrative and which involve no discretionary judgment on the part of the Board; or 
(3)  Conditions with regard to the applicant's possession of permits and approvals granted by other governmental units. 
(C)  Disapproval. The Board shall disapprove an application when it fails to comply with the standards and/or procedures of this Regulation, for failure to meet reasonable deadlines established by the Board, or for failure to pay fees. 
(1)  If the Board includes the phrase "without prejudice" in the motion to disapprove, it signifies that the application was denied solely for procedural reasons, and that it may be re-submitted to the Board at a later date without design changes, but shall be subject to the codes in effect at the time of the new application. Applications disapproved without this stipulation shall not be considered again by the Board unless the applicant demonstrates that there have been design changes or changes in regulations affecting the application. 
(2)  Conditional Approvals shall be valid for a period of not more than six months. If the conditions of the approval have not been satisfied within this time, the conditional approval shall automatically lapse. The Planning Board may grant a single six-month extension to accommodate unusual circumstances, but the applicant is required to provide a written request for extension to the Board before the expiration date. The Board shall consider the request at its next regular meeting, and such action shall not require a public hearing. 
Sec. 2.16. - Notice of decision. 
    As required by RSA 676:3, within 72 hours of the meeting the Board shall issue a Notice of Decision which states the final decision reached by the Board regarding the application. 
(A)  In the case of a conditional approval, the Notice of Decision shall state all conditions to be met for final approval. 
(1)  In the event that the conditions are satisfied, the Board shall issue a supplemental Notice of Decision stating that the application is approved since all conditions have been satisfied, and shall sign and record the plat(s) if applicable. 
(2)  In the event that the conditions are not satisfied, the Board shall issue a supplemental Notice of Decision stating that the application is denied for failure to comply with the conditions of approval in a timely manner. 
(B)  In the case of a disapproval, the Notice of Decision shall state the reasons for denial as required by RSA 676:4,I(h) and RSA 676:3,I. 
Sec. 2.17. - Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by any decision made in the course of applications pursuant to this chapter may appeal as follows: 
(A)  Decisions by the Planning Board based solely upon interpretation of the Zoning Ordinance may be appealed to the Zoning Board of Adjustment or Rockingham County Superior Court, as determined by the provisions of RSA 676:5,III. Appeals to the ZBA must be filed within 20 days after the filing of the Notice of Decision in the Town Offices. Appeals made to Superior Court must be filed as specified in  2.17(B). 
(B)  All other decisions by the Planning Board may be appealed to Rockingham County Superior Court per the provisions of RSA 677:15. The appeal shall be presented to the Court within 30 days after the filing of the Notice of Decision in the Town Offices. 
(C)  The time limit for appeals begins on the day on which the Planning Board decision is filed and first becomes available for public inspection. Per  2.16, this should occur within 72 hours of the Board's decision. 
Sec. 2.18. - Revocation of approval. 
    The Board may act to revoke an approval per the requirements of RSA 676:4-a. 
SECTION 3.00. - DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 3.01. - Vehicle access. 
    To ensure safety on the site, and further to protect the safety and capacity of the road network, the following standards are established to control site access: 
(A)  Driveway Permit. Each application shall require a State Driveway Permit for driveway access onto a State road (from NH Department of Transportation, Division 6 in Durham), a Town Driveway Permit for driveway access onto a Town road (Public Works Director), or a letter from the appropriate official stating that a driveway permit is not required. 
(B)  Number of Driveways. Not more than two driveways onto a public road shall be permitted, and one driveway or a shared driveway may be required by the Board to reduce conflict points in busy road corridors. For non-residential sites, connecting drives shall be provided to adjoining non-residential sites where reasonable and needed, permitting access to those sites without burdening the road network. 
(C)  Driveway Design. New and altered driveways shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Driveway widths and right-turn radii shall comply with the standards set forth in the Transportation and Traffic Engineering Handbook (Second Edition, Institute of Transportation Engineers, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1982, pages 621-3)). At a minimum, the M-1 and M-2 districts shall be deemed "high-pedestrian-activity areas" for purposes of curve and width determinations. 
(2)  Driveways shall not be located closer than 50' from the edge of the right-of-way of an intersecting street. 
(D)  Shared Driveways. Where driveway access from NH Route 108 or NH Route 152 is necessary, the Board may require that such lot be served by a shared driveway servicing several lots in order to reduce the number of curb cuts on the road, thus minimizing the number of conflict points and disruptions to traffic flow. A recorded cross-easement for access shall be required. 
(E)  Curbing. The Board may require curbing along the frontage of the site and along the driveway to improve traffic control and safety. Curbing shall be granite. 
(F)  Stopping Sight Distance. Driveways shall have an all-season stopping sight distance as required in the Transportation and Traffic Engineering Handbook (Second Edition, Institute of Transportation Engineers, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1982, pages 590-3), and the requirements of RSA 236:13,III (b) and (c). 
(G)  Traffic Impact. 
(1)  No projects shall create a significant reduction in the level of service of affected public roads. Mitigation measures shall be provided as needed. 
(2)  All applications creating 10,000 square feet or more of new non-residential floor space or creating 20 or more new residential units shall include a Traffic Impact Analysis, prepared by a NH licensed Professional Engineer specializing in Civil Engineering. This analysis shall be prepared to meet, at a minimum, the "Guidelines for Traffic Impact Analysis" (by the Strafford Regional Planning Commission, dated July 1986; copy available for viewing at Town Hall). Where the Board is concerned about traffic impact, it may require this analysis for smaller projects. 
(3)  Traffic control signals and signs, turning lanes, pavement widening, eliminating certain turning movements, and other improvements may be required as determined necessary and practical by the Board. 
(Amd. of 11-18-1997) 
Sec. 3.02. - Parking. 
    Provision of on-site parking is an important component of the site design. The amount of parking provided must be enough that it prevents excessive demands for on-street parking, but not so much that it wastes land and unnecessarily detracts from the aesthetics of the site and neighborhood. The arrangement must be safe and convenient for users. 
(A)  Number of Spaces. 
(1)  In all Zoning Districts except the M-1 and M-2 districts, each site shall provide at least the minimum number of parking spaces for the site, determined as the sum of the following for each use on the site: 
(a)  Residential: 2 spaces per unit; except 1 space per unit for elderly housing or accessory apartment. 
(b)  Retail: 1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area. 
(c)  Office/Business Service: 1 space per 250 square feet of gross floor area. 
(d)  Personal Service: 1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area. 
(e)  Restaurant: 1 space per 3 seats. 
(f)  Lounge: 1 space per 2 seats. 
(g)  Lodging: 1 space per overnight room. 
(h)  Meeting Rooms: 1 space per 4 seats. 
(i)  Industrial: 1 space per 500 square feet of gross floor area. 
(j)  Automotive Service Station: 4 spaces per service bay. 
(k)  Hospital/Nursing Home: 1 space per 2 beds. 
(l)  Mall: 1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area. 
(2)  The following standards, among others, may be suitable for substitution for the standards given in  3.02(A)(1): Parking Generation (Institute of Transportation Engineers, 2nd Edition, 1987); and Parking (Robert Weant and Herbert Levinson, ENO Foundation for Transportation, Westport, CT, 1990). See  5.01(B) for the specific process of substituting alternative standards. 
(3)  In the M-1 and M-2 districts, parking shall be evaluated in a different manner. Typically, on-site parking is insufficient or is lacking completely. However, the downtown currently functions and people do find parking, so rather than establishing a number of spaces required, it is hereby determined that the amount of on-site parking is a base from which to analyze changes in parking demand. New or changing uses shall be evaluated from the perspective of changes in the demand for on-site parking. Proposed changes, which decrease demand, shall be permitted. Proposed changes, which increase demand, shall be permitted only upon provision of additional parking spaces in an amount equal to the increase in parking demand. Such spaces may be provided by one or more of the following means: 
(a)  Additional on-site parking spaces shall be provided. 
(b)  Off-site parking spaces located within 500' of the site shall be provided. The Board may increase this distance to 1,000' where the parking is intended for employees rather than customers. Such spaces must be deeded for the use of this site, and less formal agreements shall not be acceptable to the Board. Additionally, the off-site spaces must be shown as being excess spaces, as evaluated by applying the standards of this Regulation. The off-site parking shall be located in a zoning district, which permits the use being applied for, except where the Zoning Ordinance specifies otherwise. 
(c)  If the Town Council establishes the required mechanism, the applicant can contribute to a Town fund for the maintenance and possible future development of additional downtown parking. A fixed dollar amount per parking space shall be established by the Council. This fund shall be a dedicated fund to be used solely for the purposes of creating and maintaining downtown public parking. 
(4)  Shared Parking. Because different uses in close proximity to one another can effectively and efficiently share parking when their peak parking demands occur at different times of day or on different days of the week, it is often possible to reduce the number of parking spaces and still satisfy the demand. Shared parking is encouraged wherever feasible, and may be required if the Board deems it necessary to accomplish the purposes of this Regulation. Calculations for the reduction in parking shall be consistent with Shared Parking (Urban Land Institute. Washington, DC, 1990). Shared parking may involve multiple uses on a single lot, or may involve multiple uses on two or more lots, provided that in all cases the uses are located within distances as prescribed in  3.02(A)(3)(b). 
(5)  Handicap Parking Spaces. All sites which provide on-site parking shall provide handicap parking spaces and accompanying access aisles in accordance with Federal law, in particular 23 CFR Part 36, Appendix A, Section 4.1.2(5) (see: Federal Register, Volume 56, #144, July 26, 1991). 
(a)  For the convenience of readers, the smaller size parking lot standards are summarized below: 
Total Parking Spaces Minimum That Are 
Accessible 1 to 25 1 26 to 50 2 51 to 75 3 76 to 100 4 101 to 150 5 151 to 200 6 201 to 300 7  
(b)  One in every eight handicap spaces, but not less than one, shall be designated as "van accessible" and shall be served by an 8' access aisle. 
(c)  Each handicap space shall be identified with pavement marking and a sign. Van accessible spaces shall require an additional sign to indicating that it is van accessible. Signs shall be mounted such that they are not obscured by other parked vehicles. 
(6)  On-Street Parking. The applicant may be granted permission to utilize nearby on street or other public parking for part or all of the required parking for the site. A parking study must be prepared for the Board to document the suitability of such allowance. The publication entitled Parking referenced in  3.02(A)(2) may be a suitable reference. 
(B)  Parking Lot Design. 
(1)  Dimensional Requirements. Parking stalls and aisle widths shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Stall size: 
[1]  Parking stalls shall be large enough to fully contain a rectangle 9' wide by 18' long. 
[2]  Handicap parking stalls shall be large enough to fully contain a rectangle 8' wide by 20' long. Parked vehicle overhangs shall not reduce the clear width of an accessible route. All handicap parking spaces shall be served by a parallel access aisle, which shall be a minimum of 5' wide for standard handicap spaces, and 8' wide for van accessible spaces. Adjacent spaces may share an access aisle. 
(b)  For two-way traffic, all parking stalls shall be at right angles to the aisle, and aisle width shall be a minimum of 25'. 
(c)  For one-way traffic, aisle width shall be related to the angle of the parking spaces. Where possible, parking lot designs should incorporate measures to minimize the overall pavement footprint such as angled parking or other measures. 
(2)  Traffic Control Islands. Generally, for any parking lot, not more than two aisles shall run parallel to one another without separation by a curbed traffic control island which runs parallel to and the full length of the aisles. The Board may require additional traffic control islands to prevent or correct traffic safety problems. These islands shall be a minimum of 10' in width to facilitate trees and other landscaping, which will break up the monotony of the paved area and will provide shade for parked cars in the summer. Where possible, the traffic control islands shall include curb cuts and be depressed to allow runoff to pond to a maximum depth of 8 inches in the median. These islands will be planted with a variety of woody and herbaceous native species that can tolerate a wide range of hydrologic conditions with bioengineered soils to improve water retention and allow for infiltration, as appropriate. Overflow structures shall be included to direct excess flow to a stabile upland area to allow additional infiltration. Design and orientation of the aisles and islands is addressed in  3.04(A)(2). Specific planting standards are addressed in  3.06. 
(3)  Traffic Circulation. The parking lot design shall be such that: 
(a)  There is safe and adequate traffic circulation; 
(b)  All parking spaces can be accessed safely from the aisles, with particular care taken to ensure that spaces near the end of an aisle have sufficient room for backing and turning, and such that cars will not back into a road; and 
(c)  Entrances and exits shall provide some channelizing storage space so that cars entering the lot to park do not end up in queues out in the road. 
(4)  [Curbing.] Curbing shall be provided only as needed to control traffic and to direct drainage. Curbing shall be granite in the M-1 and M-2 districts, and shall be concrete elsewhere. 
(5)  [Directional Signage.] Adequate directional signage, complying with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, 1978 by NH Department of Transportation, shall be provided. 
(6)  [Parking Lots, Driveways and Aisles.] Parking lots, driveways and aisles shall be paved. However, every effort shall be made to use pervious asphalt or concrete, where appropriate, to reduce increases in runoff volumes, using design guidance developed by and in consultation with the UNH Stormwater Center (see  3.07 below). At a minimum, pervious asphalt or concrete, pervious pavers or other permeable pavement shall be considered for travel lanes not regularly utilized by large trucks, pedestrian areas and overflow parking areas. 
(C)  Parking Location. Except in the M-1 and M-2 districts, parking areas shall comply with the setback requirements. In no case shall parking be permitted in the front setback area. 
Sec. 3.03. - Loading. 
    All non-residential sites shall provide off-street loading facilities sufficient to meet the needs of the use. The loading facility shall be located and designed so that delivery vehicles can be parked completely out of the right-of-way to minimize adverse impacts on traffic flow on adjacent streets. The loading area shall not obstruct on-site traffic flow, but may allow for temporary alternative use of a reasonable number of on-site parking spaces. 
Sec. 3.04. - Pedestrian, bicycle and transit amenities. 
    Adequate provisions shall be made to accommodate pedestrians, bicyclists and transit service. 
(A)  Pedestrians. 
(1)  All sites shall have sidewalks from the main entrance to the sidewalk and to parking area(s), as applicable. 
(2)  In large parking lots with multiple aisles, driving aisles shall be oriented generally perpendicular to the building to reduce the number of traffic aisles which pedestrians must cross to reach the building. Sidewalks in the middle of aisles may be required if appropriate. 
(3)  The Board may require that sidewalks be installed in front of any lots fronting on the road in the B-1 District. 
(4)  The Board may require that sidewalks be installed along Route 152 in front of any lots fronting on the road between its intersection with Route 108 to the east and to its crossing of the Piscassic River to the west. 
(B)  Bicycles. The Town desires to encourage bicycling and the following shall apply: 
(1)  All sites shall provide lockable bicycle parking/storage. The number of bicycles, which must be facilitated, shall equal not less than 5% of the site parking demand as calculated in  3.02, but shall not be less than two. 
(2)  All non-residential sites with 20,000 square feet or more of floor space may reduce the provision of on-site parking by 5% by providing shower facilities and bicycle parking/storage for employees choosing to bicycle to work. 
(C)  Transit. The Town desires to encourage transit and the following shall apply: 
(1)  If a transit stop is located within 500 feet of the site, the Board may grant a 10% reduction in the provision of on-site parking for newly developed sites. 
(2)  Any site, which contains 25 or more residences or 20,000 square feet or more of non-residential floor space, shall contact the manager of the COAST system to determine if facilities or design provisions to accommodate transit service to the site are necessary now or in the near future. Future expectations shall be based on adopted capital and operations plans for COAST and the Seacoast Metropolitan Planning Organization. The applicant shall provide such needed facilities and design changes, and shall receive the parking reduction granted in  3.04(C)(1). 
(Amd. of 11-18-1997) 
Sec. 3.05. - Snow removal. 
    Snow removal shall be reviewed for all sites, and the general plan for snow removal shall be indicated in a note on the plat. Areas suitable for snow storage shall be designated on the plat, and removal from the site may be necessary if insufficient storage area is available. Landscaping in the snow storage area shall be such that it can withstand the snow pile. Snow shall not be pushed into natural wetland areas, surface waters or onto adjacent lots or right-of-ways without the owner's consent. 
Sec. 3.06. - Landscaping. 
    Every site shall comply with the following standards in order to: enhance site design; enhance privacy; separate, screen and shield potentially conflicting land uses or abutters from undue impact; reserve a portion of the lot to remain undeveloped, permeable and vegetated; control excessive storm water runoff; prevent soil erosion and pollution of water bodies; reduce heat, glare and dust; enhance the Town's aesthetic qualities; and help integrate the built environment with the natural environment. 
(A)  General Standards. The following general standards shall apply to all sites: 
(1)  Suitable vegetative ground cover shall be established and maintained on the finished site to ensure soil stability. Shrubs, flowerbeds or other vegetative landscaping may be substituted for lawn areas without municipal review. Landscaping shall be used to enhance the design and aesthetic quality of the site, and to screen parking areas, dumpsters and other eyesores. 
(2)  Landscaping shall not obstruct the line of sight, nor create other hazards for vehicular traffic, pedestrians, or bicyclists. 
(3)  Trees are of great importance to the Town because they contribute greatly to the objectives of this Landscaping section. Trees shall be provided as follows: 
(a)  In all districts except the M-1 and M-2 districts, either newly planted or existing trees shall be provided at the rate of one tree per 500 square feet of disturbed area. In the M-1 and M-2 districts, trees shall be required as can reasonably be provided to enhance the site. It is recognized that the high ratio of building area to lot size traditionally encountered in these two districts may reduce the ability to provide trees on sites. 
(b)  To the extent possible, trees shall be located within and around the parking areas to break up the monotony of paved expanses. 
(c)  Newly planted trees shall have a caliper of at least 3" at a point six inches above the top of the root ball. 
(d)  Suitable hardwood species shall be required unless otherwise specified by the Board. Softwoods may be preferable for buffering purposes. Hardwoods are more suitable in and around traveled ways since they are less prone to causing icing problems during the winter. 
(e)  Credit may be granted for retention of existing trees. Trees with a caliper of at least 12" but less than 24" shall be credited as three trees, and trees with a caliper of 24" or more shall be credited as six trees. Existing trees to be credited as landscaping shall be suitably protected during site construction. The method of protection shall be placement of a snow fence in a perimeter around the trunk of the tree, a minimum of four feet from the trunk. Pavement shall be placed no closer than four feet from the trunk of the tree. 
(B)  Buffers. 
(1)  Buffer requirements: 
(a)  In the M-1 and M-2 zoning districts, no buffers shall be required. 
(b)  In the B-1 and B-2 zoning districts, 10' buffers shall be required where the site abuts an adjacent residential property or other property for which a buffer is deemed by the Board to be appropriate. 
(c)  In all other zoning districts, the area between the property lines and the side and rear setback lines, but not including any area within a road setback, shall be considered a buffer area. 
(d)  Telecommunications facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of suitable vegetation that effectively screens the view of the tower compound from abutting property. The minimum standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip ten (10) feet wide outside the perimeter of the tower compound. Maintaining existing (natural) vegetation is preferred. 
(2)  The buffer area shall be suitably vegetated and landscaped. Existing trees and shrubs along the perimeter of the site as well as along existing wetland and stream channels shall be maintained and protected to the maximum extent practical. This area shall not be used for outdoor storage or display, parking, or other such uses. Driveways, sidewalks and other such provisions as considered reasonable by the Board may be permitted to cross the buffer area. Where abutting properties would otherwise be subject to undue impact, the Board may require specific plantings and/or an expanded buffer area to screen specific impacts. 
Sec. 3.07. - Stormwater management. 
    All developments shall make adequate provisions for storm water management, which will include onsite control of peak flow and runoff volumes as well as water quality treatment as described in more detail below. All development and redevelopment projects that will disturb more than 20,000 square feet of area or will add more than 5,000 square feet of impervious areas shall submit a Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Report with accompanying plans for review and approval by the Planning Board. All applications shall be accompanied by a completed Site Plan Review Application Stormwater Management Checklist to the Planning Board prior to consideration for review. The Stormwater Management Report shall satisfy the report requirements specified in  3.07(B) below. 
(A)  Municipal Storm Drain Connections. Any proposed connection to the municipal storm drainage system shall be allowed only as necessary, after adequate provisions to provide onsite detention, treatment and groundwater recharge have been fully evaluated and included in the site design to the maximum extent practicable, or as otherwise determined necessary by the Board. If onsite stormwater management is not feasible due to site constraints, the applicant must fully demonstrate why onsite LID strategies and stormwater BMPs are not feasible and submit a written request for a waiver. 
(1)  Any proposed connection to the municipal stormwater drainage system shall be designed and constructed in accordance with standards and specifications of the Town of Newmarket. Stormwater contributions to the Town's sanitary sewer system are strictly prohibited. 
(2)  Where adequate municipal stormwater drainage facilities are not available at the time of application and are deemed necessary due to site constraints or if onsite treatment has been determined to potentially result in adverse impacts to abutting properties (e.g., wet basements, flooding, etc.) or natural resources, it will be the applicant's responsibility to install the necessary municipal storm drain system and any additional capacity improvements needed downgradient of the site, as determined by the Public Works Director and/or Town Engineer. 
(3)  Any new connections or extensions to the municipal storm drain as proposed by the Applicant shall be in the form of a subsurface piped storm sewer system. Such drainage facilities shall be located in the street rights-of-way where feasible. Where topography or other conditions are such as to make this impractical, perpetual unobstructed easements for future maintenance, repair and upgrade of the system shall be provided across all properties. Such easements shall be 25' or more in width, and shall have satisfactory access to the road. Any new connection or extension to municipal storm drain system shall include water quality treatment provisions to capture sediment and petroleum products that may be generated onsite from driveways, roads and parking lots prior to exiting the site. 
(B)  Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Report. The Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Report and accompanying plans shall be submitted with the Site Plan Review Application, if applicable, and shall be prepared and certified by a licensed NH Professional Engineer specializing in Civil Engineering. This Report and plans shall include the following information: 
(1)  An existing conditions plan that shows all of the items listed in  4.00 of these Site Plan Requirements as well as the pre-development watershed boundaries, drainage patterns, channelized flow areas, existing vegetation, conveyance structures and all locations where runoff exits the site. Buffer setback limits as required by the Town's Zoning Ordinances and/or State regulations shall be clearly shown. 
(2)  A proposed conditions plan that shows all of the items listed in  4.00 of these Site Plan Requirements as well as post-development watershed boundaries, drainage patterns, channelized flow areas, proposed areas of disturbance, proposed impervious areas, temporary stock pile areas, construction refueling areas, all temporary and permanent stormwater treatment BMPs, erosion control measures, stormwater outlet locations and any drainage and maintenance access easements. A summary of the drainage analysis showing a comparison of the estimated peak flow and volumes for various design storms at each of the outlet locations shall be included on the plan. 
(3)  A drainage analysis that includes a description of all methods, assumptions and estimates of pre and post-development peak stormwater flow rates (cubic feet per second) and volumes (acre-feet) for the 2-, 10-, 25-, 50- and 100-year, 24-hour frequency storm events. 
(4)  Design details for all measures used to control peak flow rates, provide for groundwater recharge and/or to capture and reuse stormwater shall be in accordance with the NHDES Stormwater Manual, Dec. 2008 or as amended. 
(5)  A description and associated design and sizing details of all stormwater treatment measures that will be used for water quality protection. Stormwater treatment measures shall be sized to treat the water quality volume produced from 1 inch of runoff from all impervious areas. 
(6)  A description and design details of the erosion control measures to be used during the construction and vegetation establishment phase to minimize erosion and sediment movement into drainage structures, wetlands and surface waters. 
(7)  Landscaping plan and details that show planting areas, proposed plant species focusing on native species suitable to anticipated site conditions and provisions for controlling the establishment of nuisance invasive species. 
(8)  An Operations and Maintenance Plan that outlines the proposed inspection and maintenance schedule for all temporary erosion control and permanent stormwater treatment measures. The Plan shall describe the inspection protocols and thresholds for determining when maintenance activities are needed and identify the responsible individuals or parties that will perform these activities. The Plan shall also describe the methods for reporting and recordkeeping to ensure the activities have been performed. Records shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer annually as to comply with the maintenance program. 
(9)  The applicant shall provide covenant documents for filing with the registry of deeds which demonstrate that the obligation of stormwater BMP maintenance runs with the land and that the Town has legal access to inspect and/or maintain, if necessary, onsite stormwater infrastructure. 
(10)  A listing and copies of any additional federal or state permit application documents and associated correspondence that may be required. 
(C)  Minimum Requirements for New Development. All development projects subject to these Site Plan regulations per  1.05 that meet the threshold requirements set forth in  3.07 shall also meet the following minimum requirements unless a waiver has been granted by the Planning Board: 
(1)  The site design shall include measures to control the post-development peak rate of runoff at each point where runoff leaves the site so as to not exceed the estimated pre-development peak rate, for the 2-, 10-, 25- and 50-year, 24-hour storm events. Any site that was wooded in the last five years shall be considered undisturbed woods for purposes of estimating pre-development rates and volumes. Any runoff that flows through the site from upgradient properties should be included in the calculations. 
(2)  Efforts shall be made to maintain existing natural drainage patterns and existing mature vegetation to the maximum extent practicable. 
(3)  The site design shall include Low Impact Development (LID) strategies and design measures to the maximum extent practicable to promote groundwater recharge and minimize increases in runoff volumes. For sites where infiltration is limited due to existing soil conditions, the applicant must demonstrate that any increase in the pre-development runoff volumes will not cause additional channel scour, erosion, flooding, damage to downstream properties or result and/or contribute to a water quality impairment. Efforts shall be made to limit any single, contiguous section of impervious area draining to one outlet area to be no more than 10% of the lot area. Impervious areas shall be disconnected by using bioretention areas, infiltration areas, dry wells, vegetated buffers between impervious areas or use cisterns or other similar measure to capture and/or treat runoff onsite. 
(4)  The design of the stormwater drainage system shall provide for the discharge of stormwater without causing damage or functional impairment to adjacent and downstream properties, streets, drainage structures, culverts, soils, wetland areas, stream channels or vegetation. 
(5)  All stormwater treatment Best Management Practices (BMPs) shall be designed in accordance with the NH Stormwater Manual, Dec. 2008, or as amended. 
(6)  All stormwater BMPs shall be planted with appropriate native grasses, shrubs, trees, and/or other plantings sufficient to prevent soil erosion and enhance vegetative uptake of nutrients and other stormwater pollutants. 
(7)  All stormwater BMPs that will detain runoff shall be designed to drain within a maximum of 72 hours for vector control. BMPs designed to contain a permanent pool of water for water quality treatment purposes shall be shaped and include shoreline shallow marsh areas to limit the size of permanent pool. 
(8)  Runoff from impervious surfaces shall be treated to achieve 80% removal of Total Suspended Solids and 50% removal of both total nitrogen and phosphorus using appropriate treatment measures, as specified in the NH Stormwater Manual. Vol. 1 and 2, December 2008 or as amended or other equivalent means. Where practical, the use of gravel wetlands for water quality treatment is preferred given its relatively high nitrogen removal efficiency as reported by the UNH Stormwater Center. 
(9)  The site design shall include adequate temporary and permanent erosion control measures consistent with the design guidelines and specifications included in the NH Stormwater Manual, Vol. 3, December 2008, or as amended, 
(10)  Prior to any soil disturbance or tree clearing, appropriate erosion and sediment control measures shall be installed and areas to be protected shall be clearly marked and delineated using construction fencing or some other appropriate means to prevent damage from construction equipment. 
(11)  After erosion control measures have been installed and the areas to be protected are clearly marked, an onsite meeting shall be held with the Town Planner and Engineer prior to the start of any soil disturbance activities to review the construction sequence, timing and measures to protect sensitive areas. 
(12)  The Planning Board may request weekly erosion control inspections to be conducted by either the Town Engineer or another qualified professional at the expense of the applicant, depending on the development size, anticipated construction period, time of year and sensitivity of adjacent resources. 
(13)  All temporary control measures shall be removed after final site stabilization. Any trapped sediment contained within the storm drain system or treatment areas shall be removed using appropriate measures consistent with the maintenance plan included in the approved Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Report. 
(14)  The Planning Board reserves the right to request the applicant to post a performance bond or other security to cover the costs of future inspections or maintenance activities associated with onsite BMPs, if these inspections and/or maintenance activities are not performed by the landowner(s) or other responsible party. 
(D)  Minimum Requirements for Redevelopment Projects. For proposed projects meeting the definition of a redevelopment project, the applicant shall attempt to meet the minimum stormwater management requirements of this section for the entire developed area of the site to the maximum extent practical. Where it is not practical or feasible to meet the stormwater management requirements for the entire developed portion of the site, the applicant shall attempt to meet these requirements for at least 50 percent of the total developed area under proposed conditions. Applicants can meet the requirements through a combination of measures including disconnection of impervious area through the use of LID measures, reducing the overall size of the existing impervious area, capturing and reusing stormwater for irrigation purposes and providing structural BMPs for peak flow and water quality treatment as described in the NHDES Stormwater Manual, dated December 8, 2008, or as amended. 
In recognizing the benefits of redevelopment activities and reuse of existing buildings as compared to developing raw land, the Planning Board will work with the applicant to arrive at an acceptable level of stormwater management measures, where meeting the stormwater management requirements for at least 50% of the developed area are shown to be impractical or infeasible. These determinations will be made on a case by case basis as site conditions and constraints will differ greatly between various redevelopment proposals. 
(E)  [Stream Channel Crossings and Culverts.] To ensure adequate conveyance capacity, any new stream channel crossing or culvert upgrade proposed by the applicant shall comply with the NHDES Stream Crossing Regulations Env-Wt 900 (adopted May 2010), or as amended. 
Sec. 3.08. - Water supply. 
    All sites shall provide adequate water supply for consumption and fire protection. Fire safety is also addressed in  3.17. 
(A)  Municipal Water Supply. Compliance with the Newmarket Water System Ordinance. In the absence of such a code, connection to the system shall be required if distribution lines are located within 100' of any part of the frontage of the lot, and such connection shall conform with all requirements established by the Public Works Director. 
(B)  Non-Municipal Water Supply. In areas outside of the municipal water supply service area, provisions shall be made for on-site water supply or connection to a community water supply system. The well location and its protective radius, if required by the State, shall be indicated on the plat. All community water supply systems and facilities shall be designed by a NH licensed Professional Engineer specializing in Civil Engineering. 
(C)  [Sufficient Water Supply.] All sites shall have sufficient water supply to provide for consumption and fire protection. 
(Amd. of 11-18-1997) 
Sec. 3.09. - Sewage disposal. 
    All sites shall provide for adequate and sanitary disposal of sewage. 
(A)  Municipal Sewer Service Area. Compliance with the Newmarket Sewer Use Ordinance shall be required. In the absence of such a code, connection to the system shall be required if collection lines are located within 100' of any part of the frontage of the lot, and such connection shall conform with all requirements established by the Public Works Director. 
(B)  In areas outside of the municipal sewer service area, provisions shall be made for on-site sewage disposal. A State approved disposal system design is required prior to final approval, and the approval number shall be indicated on the plat. The system shall be installed and functioning prior to the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy. 
(Amd. of 11-18-1997) 
Sec. 3.10. - Utilities. 
    The location and design of all utilities on the site shall be shown on the plat, subject to the following: 
(A)  Multi-Family Residential Sites. To enhance the design and quality of multi-family sites, all utility systems shall be placed underground in conformity with the terms and specifications of the utility companies involved. This shall apply to all new multi-family development, as well as any increase in the number of units of an existing multi-family development. 
(B)  Non-Residential Sites. To encourage non-residential development in Newmarket, utility systems may be located above ground or underground, as desired by the property owner. 
Sec. 3.11. - ADA compliance. 
    Adequate provisions shall be made to ensure compliance of sites with the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA). Additional information regarding handicap parking is provided in  3.02(A)(5). 
(A)  Curb ramps shall be provided as necessary. 
(B)  Access aisles adjoining wheelchair accessible parking spaces shall be paved flush to the ground, and the pavement shall extend all the way to the nearest wheelchair accessible entrance. Such parking spaces shall be located adjacent to wheelchair accessible entrances. Wherever practical, the main entrance shall be wheelchair accessible. 
(C)  It is recommended, though not required, that a "drop-off" area be located at wheelchair accessible entrances. 
(D)  Where necessary, wheelchair ramps shall be provided, with a slope not exceeding one foot of rise per 12 feet of run, and a width as required by ADA. 
(E)  The slope of a wheelchair accessible parking spaces and adjoining access aisles shall not exceed one foot of rise per 50 feet of run. 
Sec. 3.12. - Floodplain management. 
(A)  National Flood Insurance Requirements. 
(1)  The Planning Board shall review the proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by Federal or State law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 192, 33 U.S.C. 1334. 
(2)  The Planning Board shall require all proposals for development greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is lesser, include Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data within such proposals (i.e., floodplain boundary and 100-year flood elevation). The elevation data shall be referenced to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 so as to be consistent with the Town's FIRM Maps. 
(3)  The Planning Board shall require the applicant to submit sufficient evidence (construction drawings, grading and land treatment plans) so as to allow a determination that: 
(a)  All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(b)  All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(c)  Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(B)  Floodplain Standards. All site plans, which contain any area within the 100-year floodplain, identified as Special Flood Hazard Areas in the "Flood Insurance Study for the Town of Newmarket, N.H.," together with the associated Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) and other maps, shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The application shall comply with the requirements of the Floodplain Protection Overlay District as set forth in Section 5.06 of the Newmarket Zoning Ordinance. 
(2)  The 100-year flood elevation shall be shown on the plat. 
(3)  Site plan proposals, including their utilities and drainage, shall be located and designed to be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(4)  All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, electrical and water systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate potential flood damage. 
(a)  New and replacement water systems (including on-site systems) shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize infiltration of flood waters and avoid impairment. 
(b)  New and replacement sanitary sewer systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
(5)  Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(6)  Within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse, the applicant shall submit to the Board, certification, prepared by a NH licensed Professional Engineer specializing in Civil Engineering, demonstrating the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse has been maintained. 
(Amd. of 4-13-2010) 
Sec. 3.13. - Preservation of natural features. 
    To the extent practical, natural features shall be preserved on the site. Where appropriate, areas shall be left undisturbed to minimize impacts on the site and to abutters. Excessive cutting, filling and grading should be avoided. Construction methods may be restricted by the Board where necessary to protect the environment or significant resources on the site. All cut trees, debris, rubbish, junk and other waste materials shall be removed from the site for lawfully disposal. On-site stump disposal may be permitted by the Board if it will not interfere with the proper function of the site, and if State standards are met. 
Sec. 3.14. - Sediment and erosion control. 
(A)  All proposed developments that are required to prepare a Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Report shall meet the erosion control and stormwater management requirements specified in  3.07 and shall design BMPs and erosion control practices in accordance with the NHDES Stormwater Manual Vol. 2 and 3, dated Dec. 2008 or as amended. Where proposed projects are required to prepare a Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) for permit coverage under the EPA's General Permit for Stormwater Discharges Associated with Construction Activity, the Applicant shall submit a copy of the SWPPP to the Planning Board upon completion. 
(B)  For sites that are not required to prepare a Stormwater and Erosion Control Management per  3.07 of these Site Plan Regulations, but will involve soil disturbance, the Planning Board may request the applicant to install reasonable erosion controls to prevent erosion during construction, and establish permanent vegetation once final grading is complete. Total suspended solids leaving the site should be limited to near pre-development levels to aid in the protection of the Great Bay estuary. 
(C)  Inspections. All applicants, subject to the Stormwater Management Requirements of  3.07, may be required at the Planning Board's discretion, to deposit sufficient funds in an escrow account to cover all costs incurred by the Town to perform inspection(s) of the erosion control measures during site construction and at the completion of the construction phase. The number of inspections and associated fees will be determined by the Planning Board and discussed with the Applicant as part of the Site Plan approval process and may depend on the size of the project and the duration of the project. The Planning Board may contract with a consultant to perform inspection services. 
Sec. 3.15. - Solid waste disposal and recycling. 
    All sites shall provide adequate facilities for both recycling and disposal of solid waste. All such facilities shall be screened from sight from abutting properties and streets to the extent reasonably possible by means of a fenced or landscaped enclosure. The types of facilities and their enclosure shall be adequately detailed on the plat. 
Sec. 3.16. - Outdoor lighting. 
    The outdoor lighting of sites shall be designed to prevent off-site disturbance, nuisance, hazard, or other adverse impacts on the nearby properties or roads. All outdoor light sources shall be designed, directed and/or shielded such that the nighttime lighting is primarily contained on the site to shield abutting properties and roads. All outdoor lighting shall be located on-site, and the mounting of outdoor lighting shall not exceed 20' unless the Board decides that a greater height better serves the purposes of this Regulation. 
1.  Regulation of Non-Residential and Multi-Family Dwelling Unit Lighting. These regulations are intended to reduce the problems created by improperly designed and installed outdoor lighting. This section shall apply to non-residential development. This section is intended to eliminate problems of glare, minimize light trespass, obtrusive light, protect the quality of the New Hampshire night sky, Newmarket's rural character, and conserve energy and resources. These concerns are balanced while maintaining safety, security and productivity by establishing regulations which limit the area that certain kinds of outdoor-lighting fixtures can illuminate and by limiting the total allowable illumination of lots located in the Town of Newmarket. 
2.  Definitions. For the purposes of this Regulation, terms used shall be defined as follows: 
    Cut-Off Angle (of a luminaire): The angle formed by a line drawn from the direction of the direct light rays at the light source with respect to the vertical, beyond which no direct light is emitted. 
    Direct Light: Light emitted directly from the lamp, off of the reflector or reflector diffuser, or through the refractor or diffuser lens, of a luminaire. 
    Fixture: The assembly that houses the lamp or lamps and can include all or some of the following parts: a housing, a mounting bracket or pole socket, a lamp holder, a ballast, a reflector or mirror, and/or a refractor or lens. 
    Flood or Spot Light: Any light fixture or lamp that incorporates a reflector or a refractor to concentrate the light output into a directed beam in a particular direction. 
    Footcandle: A unit of illuminance amounting to one lumen per square foot. A measure of light falling on a given surface. One footcandle is equal to the amount of light generated by one candle shining on a square foot surface one foot away. 
    Fully Shielded: A fully shielded luminaire is a luminaire constructed or shielded in such a manner that all light emitted by the luminaire, either directly from the lamp or indirectly from the luminaire, is projected below an angle of 20 degrees below the horizontal plane through the luminaire's lowest light emitting part as determined by photometric test or certified by the manufacturer. 
    Glare: Light emitting from a luminaire with intensity great enough to reduce a viewer's ability to see, and in extreme cases causing momentary blindness. 
    Height of Luminaire: The height of a luminaire shall be the vertical distance from the ground directly below the centerline of the luminaire to the lowest direct-light-emitting part of the luminaire. 
    Illuminance: The quantity of light arriving at a surface divided by the area of the illuminated surface, measured in footcandles. 
    Lamp: The component of a luminaire that produces the actual light. 
    Light Trespass: The shining of light produced by a luminaire beyond the boundaries of the property on which it is located. 
    Lumen: A measure of light energy generated by a light source. One footcandle is one lumen per square foot. For the purposes of this Regulation, the lumen-output values shall be the INITIAL lumen output ratings of a lamp. 
    Luminaire: This is a complete lighting system, and includes a lamp or lamps and a fixture. 
    Millyard Lighting Theme: A thematic lighting installation that matches, in general, the lighting scheme currently installed at the Newmarket Mills. Lighting fixtures consistent with this theme shall include free-standing and/or building mounted lighting fixtures that are hooked shaped, with downward facing luminaries that may or may not have decorative scroll-work along the pole. Similar lights have been installed at the Newmarket Public Library, Elm Street and can be found in the Newmarket Downtown Vision Plan. 
    Outdoor Lighting: The night-time illumination of an outside area or object by any man-made device located outdoors that produces light by any means. 
    Partially shielded: Shall mean outdoor light fixtures shielded or constructed so that no more than ten percent of the light rays are emitted by the installed fixture at angles greater than 20 degrees below the horizontal plan, and shall not extend above the horizontal plane, as certified by a photometry test report. 
    Temporary Outdoor Lighting: The specific illumination of an outside area of object by any man-made device located outdoors that produces light by any means for a period of less than 7 days, with at least 180 days passing before being used again. 
    Uplighting: Any light source that distributes illumination above a 90-degree horizontal plane. 
3.  General Lighting Requirements. 
a.  All lighting in the Town of Newmarket is required to have full-cutoff shielding, except for that portion of lighting installation that is consistent with the Millyard Lighting Theme. 
b.  Up-lighting by any method is prohibited; however, the Planning Board may allow limited use of upward landscape lighting on a case by case basis. 
c.  Non-cutoff wallpack type fixtures are prohibited. 
4.  Control of Glare - Luminaire Design Factors. 
a.  Any luminaire with a lamp or lamps rated at a total of more than 1,800 lumens, and all flood or spot luminaires with a lamp or lamps rated at a total of more than 900 lumens shall not emit any direct light above a horizontal plane through the lowest direct-light-emitting part of the luminaire. 
b.  Any luminaire with a lamp or lamps rate at a total of more than 1,800 lumens, and all flood or spot luminaires with a lamp or lamps rated at a total of more than 900 lumens, shall be mounted at a height equal to or less than the value 3 + (D/3), where D is the distance in feet to the nearest property boundary. The maximum height of the luminaire may not exceed 25 feet. 
c.  The luminaire's maximum illuminance shall not exceed the minimum illuminance recommended for that purpose as defined in the most recent "Illuminating Engineering Society Lighting Handbook/References and Applications." 
d.  Installation of lighting fixtures consistent with the Millyard Lighting Theme shall be exempt from section (c). 
5.  Submission of Plans. The submission shall contain but shall not necessarily be limited to the following: 
a.  Plans indicating the location on the premises, and the type of illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, reflectors, and other devices; 
b.  Description of the illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, reflectors, and other devices and the description may include, but is not limited to, catalog cuts by manufacturers and drawings (including sections where required); 
c.  Photometric data, such as that furnished by manufacturers or similar showing the angle of cut off or light emissions; 
d.  A visual impact photometric plan that demonstrates both light coverage and light spillage resulting from the proposed lighting plan; 
e.  Additional Submission. The above required plans, descriptions and data shall be sufficiently complete to readily determine whether compliance with the requirements of this regulation are met. If such plans, descriptions and data cannot enable this ready determination, by reason of the nature or configuration of the devices, fixtures, or lamps proposed, the applicant shall additionally submit as evidence of compliance to enable such determination such certified reports of tests as will do so provided that these tests shall have been performed and certified by a recognized testing laboratory. 
(5) [6.]  Exceptions. 
(a)  Any luminaire with a lamp or lamps rated at a total of 1,800 lumens or less, and all flood or spot luminaires with a lamp or lamps rated at 900 lumens or less, may be used without restriction to light distribution or mounting height, except that if any spot of flood luminaire rated 900 lumens or less is aimed, directed, or focused such as to cause direct light from the luminaire to be directed toward residential buildings on adjacent or nearby land, or to create glare perceptible to persons operating motor vehicles on public ways, the luminaire shall be redirected or its light output controlled as necessary to eliminate such conditions. 
(b)  Luminaires used for public-roadway illumination may be installed at a maximum height of 25 feet and may be positioned at that height up to the edge of any bordering property. Proposed streetlights or replacement of existing streetlights shall be fully shielded. 
(6) [7.]  Prohibitions. 
(a)  Mercury Vapor Lamps Fixtures and Lamps. The installation of any mercury vapor fixture or lamp for use as outdoor lighting is prohibited. 
(b)  Laser Source Light. The use of laser source light or any similar high intensity light for outdoor advertising or entertainment, when projected above the horizontal is prohibited. 
(c)  Searchlights. The operation of searchlights for advertising purposes is permitted by permit issued by the building inspector. 
(d)  Neon. Neon lighting shall be limited to signage use. 
(Amd. of 6-11-2002) 
Sec. 3.17. - Safety review. 
(A)  A letter describing each application shall be sent by the Applicant to the Police Chief and to the Fire Chief, alerting them of the pending application. Approval of the chiefs is not required, except as provided below. The Board may require modification of the site design to enhance public safety. 
(B)  For a site which will receive, handle, store, process, sell or discharge hazardous or toxic materials, written approval of the Fire Chief shall be required. Further, no interior floor drain shall be directed to any stream, storm drain or septic system, or directed into a sanitary sewer without sufficient on-site treatment. 
Sec. 3.18. - Construction standards. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the Professional Engineer designing the site to specify adequate construction standards for all site improvements. Such specifications shall be provided to the Board for its review and approval. 
Sec. 3.19. - Security fencing. 
    Telecommunications facilities shall be enclosed by appropriate security fencing not less than 6 feet in height, and shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device. 
Sec. 3.20. - Aesthetics. 
    This section applies to all telecommunications facilities. 
(A)  Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finisher, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, or be painted a neutral color, to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
(B)  At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the maximum extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities with the natural setting and previously developed environment. These buildings and facilities shall also be subject to all other Site Plan Review Regulation requirements. 
(C)  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. Placement of the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment within an existing structure, such as a church steeple, is preferred. 
(D)  Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the governing authority may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. 
Sec. 3.21. - Architectural/aesthetic review. 
    It is important to the economic success of Newmarket that the appearance of the Town be perceived as an attractive commercial environment, which reflects and compliments its heritage. The architecture of Newmarket spans several periods of design in New England, including some 18 th century, 19 th century, and early 20 th century structures. It is important to continue to allow diversity of building designs and architectural styles, which blend well with the buildings from these periods. 
    It is also important to avoid economic hardship and impose unreasonable standards on existing building owners who wish to make modifications to their structures. This regulation applies only to structures located along Route 108. 
(A)  Design Criteria. New building designs will be evaluated using the following factors. Design criteria are also provided here to assist in this evaluation. 
(1)  Scale, proportion, height and area of a building; 
(2)  Type, shape, and pitch of roof; 
(3)  Size and spacing of windows, doors and other openings; 
(4)  Exterior materials and colors; 
(5)  Styling of front facade; 
(6)  Architectural details and features. 
(B)  The following criteria are to be followed not to specifically dictate one particular architectural style, but rather to provide guidance to allow structures, which are consistent with one of several New England styles present in town. 
(1)  Avoid unbroken expanses of walls. Architectural treatment shall be provided for blank building faces, which are exposed to public view. Such treatments may consist of varying wall setbacks, changing materials or material colors and textures, or other architectural detailing. 
(2)  Avoid long unbroken expanses of rooflines through the use of dormers, skylights, chimneys, brick firebreaks, and changes in ridgeline. 
(3)  Use architectural features and details, such as cornices, pediments, columns, pilasters, corner boards, cupolas, skylights and arches to create interesting buildings. 
(4)  Door and window openings shall be proportional to the facade length and height. Transom lights are encouraged where appropriate to style. 
(5)  All rooftop mechanical equipment shall be screened from public view. This may be accomplished by a peaked, semi-peaked, or mansard roof. 
(6)  Structures shall be compatible with the height, depth, and window proportions of surrounding buildings. 
(7)  Roof design shall be consistent with the overall design of the building. For example, a clapboard or brick building of the late 18 th century or early 19 th century design shall have a peaked roof, while a brick or stone building representing late 19 th century architecture may have either a peaked, flat or mansard roof. 
(C)  All exterior surfaces visible to the public shall be covered with high quality material that is durable and easy to maintain. No unclad, plain masonry block construction or corrugated metal may be used when visible from any public space, adjacent residential area or roadway. The following design features are acceptable when their use is consistent with the overall architectural style of the project. Other materials may be considered acceptable if the board determines they contribute to the overall aesthetics of the project. 
(1)  Roofs. 
(a)  Metal, copper, or colored standing seam; 
(b)  Shingles of asphalt, fiberglass or fire-treated wood; 
(c)  Slate or composite material of slate appearance. 
(2)  Walls. 
(a)  Wood clapboards (painted or stained), or vinyl; 
(b)  Red brick; 
(c)  Granite, marble, or stone (natural or finished). 
(3)  Windows. 
(a)  Multi-paned windows or groupings (removable mullions are acceptable); 
(b)  Large paned windows, consistent with late 1800s or early 1900s architecture are acceptable on the ground floor; 
(c)  Etched, beveled, sandblasted or stained glass; 
(d)  Other window types as architecturally appropriate or application specific. 
(4)  Trim. 
(a)  Wood (painted or stained); 
(b)  Anodized aluminum or vinyl. 
(5)  Color. 
(a)  No specific color requirements are mandated; however, the use of day glow colors or garish corporate logos masquerading as painting are discouraged. 
(6)  Fencing. 
(a)  All fencing installed in the B-1 and M-2 District along Route 108 shall be of natural (wood) or architectural materials such as ornamental metal fencing. 
(b)  The installation of chain link fencing in these areas shall be prohibited. 
SECTION 4.00. - PLAT STANDARDS 

[Sec. 4.001. - Generally.] 
    All plats submitted for Major Review shall provide all information and shall comply with all standards set forth in this Section. 
Sec. 4.01. - Size. 
    Full size plat sheets shall measure 22" tall by 34" wide and reduced size plats shall measure 11" tall by 17" wide or 81/2" tall by 11" wide. 
Sec. 4.02. - Material and number of copies. 
    The applicant shall provide three or more paper copies of each full size plat sheet and one paper copy of each reduced size plat sheet. All sheets to be recorded shall be printed on Mylar or other material as specified by the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds. 
Sec. 4.03. - Basic information. 
    All plat sheets shall contain the following: 
(A)  Title Block. The title block shall indicate: 
(1)  Project name; 
(2)  Owner's name; 
(3)  Applicant's name, if other than owner; 
(4)  Tax map and parcel number; and 
(5)  Name and address of the person or company which prepared the sheet. 
(B)  Scale. The scale of the plan shall be given in both text and graphic form. 
(C)  North Arrow. 
(D)  Dates. Each sheet shall indicate the date of original preparation, and the date and nature of each subsequent revision. 
Sec. 4.04. - Survey plans. 
    The plat sheet(s) which provides the required boundary or other survey information shall be certified as to the accuracy of the plan, and shall be stamped and signed by a N.H. Licensed Land Surveyor (LLS). 
Sec. 4.05. - Engineering plans. 
    The plat sheet(s), which provides any required engineering information, shall be stamped and signed by a N.H. licensed Professional Engineer (PE) specializing in Civil Engineering or other specialization as appropriate to the nature of the work. 
Sec. 4.06. - Approval sheets. 
    The Board will sign both a Mylar (for recording) and a paper (for Town files) copies of the approval sheets. The plat sheet(s) on which the Board will indicate approval shall have: 
(A)  A 2" tall by 4" wide empty space reserved for the Board's written endorsement, which shall be indicated by a municipal approval stamp and signature of the Chairman of the Board; 
(B)  A note indicating the title and most recent date of revision for all supplemental plan sheets, if any; and 
(C)  A locus map showing the location of the property within the municipality. 
(D)  Notes providing the following information: 
(1)  Indication of all existing and proposed easements of record, covenants and deed restrictions. 
(2)  Indicate the zoning district, including applicable overlay districts. 
(3)  Area of the lot. 
(4)  List of waivers and substitutions granted by the Board. 
(5)  Any other development restrictions, limitations or requirements. 
Sec. 4.07. - Multiple sheets. 
    Where the size of the site and the scale of the plat require multiple sheets, match lines shall be provided. 
Sec. 4.08. - Scale. 
    A scale of 1" equals 20' shall be used in all cases. 
Sec. 4.09. - Area of coverage. 
    In the case of an application involving a lot larger than the site being developed, the applicant shall provide a scale drawing of the site in relation to the overall lot boundaries, at a scale of 1" equals 100'. Only that portion of the property directly relevant to the application needs to be shown on the detailed plans. 
Sec. 4.10. - Site information. 
    The set of plans submitted shall provide the following information about the site: 
(A)  Boundary survey of the lot, prepared by an LLS, indicating: 
(1)  Distances, deflection angles, radii, arc lengths, control angles, monument locations, and other necessary survey data; 
(2)  The names of all abutters, including map and parcel numbers; 
(3)  Roads, right-of-ways, intersections and driveways within 50' of the lot; 
(4)  Location and nature of easements of record, deed restrictions and covenant; and 
(5)  References to deeds, earlier surveys, and other pertinent information as determined by the LLS. 
(B)  Existing conditions on the site, prepared by an LLS, showing: 
(1)  Contours at 2' intervals, referenced to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum, and including identification of two or more temporary benchmarks established on the site, located where they will not be disturbed by proposed construction. 
(2)  Delineation of hydric soils on the entire lot shall be required. This work shall be conducted by a NH Licensed Soil Scientist. Additionally, soil types and boundaries per the Rockingham County Soil Survey shall be indicated. Poorly and very poorly drained soils shall be clearly labeled as such. In locations where the boundary of such soils is important in evaluating the proposed design of the site, the Board may require the applicant to provide a high intensity soil survey conducted by a NH Licensed Soil Scientist. 
(3)  Existing buildings in plan view, with description of uses and sizes. 
(4)  Approximate location of buildings, in plan view, within 50' of the site. 
(5)  All site improvements with appropriate details, including but not limited to driveways and traffic aisles, parking, loading, bicycle facilities, sidewalks, solid waste facilities, wells, septic systems, utility locations, and drainage facilities. 
(6)  Surface waters, stonewalls, and other significant natural and man-made resources. 
(7)  Notes. Notes shall provide the following information: 
(a)  Indication of all existing easements of record, covenants and deed restrictions. 
(b)  Indicate the zoning district, including applicable overlay districts. 
(c)  Area of the lot. 
(8)  Municipal and zoning district boundaries. 
(9)  Setback lines. 
(10)  Elevation of 100-year floodplain or the extent of the 100-year floodplain as otherwise defined by FEMA, with all first floor elevations provided for existing and proposed buildings wholly or partially within the 100-year floodplain. 
(C)  Proposed site plan, prepared by a PE specializing in Civil Engineering, showing: 
(1)  Contours at 2' intervals. 
(2)  Buildings in plan view, with description of uses and sizes. 
(3)  Design of driveways, traffic aisles, loading areas, and parking areas, indicating dimensions, striping, signage, and curbing details. 
(4)  Parking calculations, including calculations for the existing site if appropriate, for total demand and for wheelchair accessible parking. 
(5)  Pedestrian, bicycle and transit amenities. 
(6)  Snow storage areas. 
(7)  Landscaping. 
(8)  Drainage facilities and paths of drainage flow. 
(9)  Location of proposed utility, water supply and sewage disposal systems. 
(10)  Wheelchair access facilities. 
(11)  Elevation of the 100-year floodplain, and first floor elevation for each building wholly or partially within the 100-year floodplain. 
(12)  Solid waste disposal and recycling facilities. 
(13)  Outdoor lighting, including type, design, mounting height, shielding and other specifications as needed. 
(14)  Notes providing the following information: 
(a)  Indication of all easements, covenants and deed restrictions. 
(b)  Indicate the zoning district, including applicable overlay districts. 
(c)  Area of the lot. 
(d)  Calculation of impervious area on the lot. 
(e)  Plan for snow removal. 
(f)  List of waivers and substitutions. 
(15)  Other information as required to demonstrate compliance with this Regulation. 
(D)  Elevation view of the front of any building to be altered or constructed. 
SECTION 5.00. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 5.01. - Waivers or substitutions. 
    The Board may waive any portion of this regulation in accordance with RSA 674:44,III(e). However, due to the probable violation of the purpose and intent of this regulation it is unlikely that waivers for any portion of  1.00, 2.00, 5.00, or 6.00 will be granted. 
(A)  Waivers. The Board may grant a waiver of any section of this Regulation in accordance with the following: 
(1)  The applicant shall provide a written request for each waiver. The request shall specify the section to be waived, the extent of the waiver, and the justification. Where multiple waivers are being requested, a separate request shall be provided for each. 
(2)  In evaluating the request, the Board may grant the waiver if it finds that, in the opinion of the Board, granting of the waiver: 
(a)  Shall not be detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare; 
(b)  Shall not be injurious to other parties; and 
(c)  Shall be consistent with the purpose and intent of this Regulation. 
(3)  The Board may condition any waiver granted to secure the objectives of this Regulation. 
(B)  Substitutions. In the event that an alternative Design Standard ( 3.00) is provided, the Board may permit substitution for the Town design standard. Such substitution shall be permitted when, in the Board's opinion, the alternative standard is independently and scientifically derived, is generally accepted by the planning community, and would better accomplish the purpose and intent of this Regulation for this case. The request for a substitution shall be made in writing, and a complete copy of the alternative design standard shall be provided to the Town for its records (i.e., provide applicable books, articles, etc.). Substitution shall require a formal motion of the Board, and the minutes of the meeting should indicate the Board's reasoning for future reference. No waiver is required for design standard substitutions. 
(Amd. of 11-18-1997) 
Sec. 5.02. - Technical assistance. 
    In the event that the Board requires technical assistance and/or special studies to adequately and properly evaluate an application or perform subsequent inspections, it may secure such professional assistance. This may include technical assistance, special studies, legal review of aspects of the application, which are unique or specific to this case (but excluding general legal advice), and other such assistance. The applicant shall reimburse the Town for the cost of such assistance, but the individual or company engaged shall work for, and report directly to the Town. Though not always the case, the standard practice for the Board at the time of writing is to have a hired planner, and a consulting professional engineer if needed, review all applications submitted. 
Sec. 5.03. - Recording approved plans. 
    Upon stamping and signing an approved final Major Review plan, the Town shall deliver the signed Mylar copy to the Rockingham County Registry of Deeds to ensure that there is no tampering with the plans prior to recording, and to ensure that there is no delay in recording the plan such that the delay would extend the protection period under RSA 674:39. A signed paper copy of Major Review plans, or a signed Minor Review site sketch, shall be retained in the Town files only. 
Sec. 5.04. - Financial securities. 
    Financial securities may be required by the Planning Board where circumstances dictate, but in general are not required for Site Plan Review applications. When required, the applicant shall be required to provide financial securities for site improvements in accordance with the following: 
(A)  Use. Suitable financial securities shall be provided to ensure that the applicant will complete all work, except street work and utility installation, in accordance with the plans. In lieu of the completion of street work and utility installation, the planning board may require suitable financial security to ensure that the applicant will complete all street work and utility installations in accordance with the plans. The securities, if called by the Town, may be used to stabilize the site, ensure site safety, minimize any adverse impacts on the neighborhood and Town, complete the work, and prepare the as-built plans. In the event that the security is called by the Town, the Planning Board may schedule and hold a public hearing to consider revocation of the approval per the process of RSA 676:4-a. The Board may request suspension of any building permit, withholding or revocation of the Certificate of Occupancy, and/or other appropriate actions until the matter is resolved. 
(B)  Amount. The amount shall not exceed the sum of: 50% of the cost of all work, excluding the building and site work covered by other financial securities held by other governmental entities (such as for State driveway permits); plus 100% of the cost of all work to be completed after the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy. 
(C)  Form of Security and Associated Agreements. The form of financial security, and all associated agreements or stipulations shall be negotiated with the Town Administrator. At a minimum, the Town shall accept cash, a joint passbook account, and an irrevocable letter of credit. The Town shall have full access to these securities in the case that the Town must utilize them to secure the purposes of this section. 
(D)  Other Requirements. The entire amount of the financial security shall be provided up front, and if requested by the applicant, there shall be a provision for reducing the amount of the security as work is completed. The Town shall retain sufficient security at all times to ensure that it can fulfill its purposes. The Town retains the right to apply reasonable cost escalation factors to protect against inflation. The Town retains the right to specify time deadlines for the completion of any or all improvements. The Town retains the right to require a Site Improvement Agreement to document the exact conditions and stipulations of the financial security. 
(Amd. of 11-18-1997) 
Sec. 5.05. - Approval required. 
    Prior to land clearing, site preparation, construction or any other such activity may begin on a site, and before any municipal permit for such activity may be issued, approval under this Regulation is required. All activity on the site shall be in accordance with the approval. 
Sec. 5.06. - Certificate of Occupancy. 
    Every approval pursuant to this Regulation is granted subject to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy (CO) upon completion of building construction and site work. Issuance of the CO shall be the responsibility of the Code Enforcement Officer. 
(A)  Use of a newly developed site prior to the issuance of the CO shall be prohibited. Where the use of a site is being changed or expanded, continuation of the existing use of the site shall be permitted as reasonable until the CO is issued for the changed or expanded use. 
(B)  The CO may be issued with the condition that certain site improvements be completed at a specified later date where weather or other reasons outside the applicant's control would cause obvious problems. Where the CO is conditioned on subsequent work, the Town may require the applicant to provide financial securities per  5.04. 
(C)  Inspections. Municipal water, sewer and storm water inspections shall be required as specified by the Public Works Director. A final site inspection by the Code Enforcement Officer shall be required prior to the issuance of the CO, and where an as-built plan is required per the approval, this plan shall be provided prior to the final site inspection. 
Sec. 5.07. - As-built plans. 
    The Board may require as-built Site Plans to ensure that a site is developed in accordance with the approved plans and to accurately document the location of underground utilities. All such as-built plans shall meet the current standards as set forth by the N.H. Joint Board of Licensure and the N.H. Land Surveyors Association. 
(A)  With respect to ensuring compliance, the Board shall require such plans where the extent and/or complexity of site construction or the proximity of the site cause reasonable concern about compliance. Such as-builts shall be provided to the Code Enforcement Officer prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. 
(B)  With respect to documentation of underground drainage systems and utilities, all sites which connect to municipal or community utilities, including water, sewer, and stormwater drainage, shall provide as built plans for all buried water, sewer, storm water drainage, electricity, telephone, and other underground pipes, lines and other such items. The as-built plans shall document the location of such pipes and lines from their origin to their connection with municipal, community, or utility company systems. 
Sec. 5.08. - Enforcement. 
    The Code Enforcement Officer, or other duly appointed designee of the Town Administrator, shall be responsible for enforcement. 
Sec. 5.09. - Compliance with other codes. 
    The Site Plan Review Regulations in no way relieve an applicant from compliance with the Zoning Ordinance, the Subdivision Regulations, or any other code adopted by the Town or any other governmental unit. In the event that the requirements of this Regulation are in conflict with the other codes, the more stringent shall apply. This is also required by RSA 676:14. 
Sec. 5.10. - Saving clause. 
    If any clause, portion or section of this Regulation is found invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, this finding shall not invalidate the remainder of this Regulation. 
SECTION 6.00. - APPLICATION FORMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- These separate documents are also available online at www.newmarketnh.gov and at the Newmarket Planning Office. 

[Sec. 6.01.] - Stormwater management checklist. 


[Sec. 6.02.] - Application completeness checklist for minor review. 


[Sec. 6.03.] - Application completeness checklist for major review. 



CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - PRIOR CODE 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the Prior Code, as amended through May 7, 2014, included herein. 
Prior Code 
Section Section 
in Code 1.1.1 2-44 1.1.3 2-45 1.1.4 2-46 1.1.5 2-47 1.1.6 2-48 1.1.7 2-49 1.1.10 2-50 1.2 2-1 1.3.1 2-74 1.3.2 2-75 1.3.3 2-76 1.3.4 2-77 1.3.5 2-78 1.3.6 2-79 2.4.1 12-21 2.4.2 12-19 2.4.3 12-22 2.4.4 12-23 2.4.5 12-24 2.4.7 12-25 2.4.8 12-20 2.4.10 12-26 2.5.1 8-19 2.5.2 8-20 2.9.1 2-102 2.9.2 2-103 2.9.3 2-104 2.9.4 2-105 2.9.5 2-106 2.9.6 2-107 2.9.7 2-108 2.9.8 2-109 2.9.9 2-110 2.10.1 24-21 2.10.2 24-22 2.10.3 24-23 2.10.4 24-24 2.10.5 24-24 2.10.6 24-24 2.10.7 24-24 2.10.8 24-25 2.11.1 2-134 - 2-138 - 28-22 2.11.2 2-139 2.11.3 2-140 2.11.5 2-135 2.11.6 2-136 - 28-22 2.11.7 2-137 - 28-22 2.12.1 28-23 2.12.6 28-23 2.12.7 28-23 2.13.1 28-24 2.13.6 28-24 2.13.7 28-24 2.14 28-1 4.1.4 6-19 4.1.5 6-21 5.7.1 16-21 5.7.2 16-22 5.7.4 16-23 5.7.5 16-24 5.7.7 16-25 8.1.1 14-21 8.1.3 14-19 8.1.4 14-25 8.1.5 14-20 8.1.6 14-26 8.1.7 14-27 8.1.8 14-28 8.1.9 14-29 8.1.10 14-30 8.1.11 14-31 8.1.12 14-32 8.1.13 14-24 8.1.14 14-23 8.1.15 14-22 10.2.1 26-1 10.2.2 26-1 10.2.3 26-2 10:3.1 26-21 - 26-24 10:3.3 26-25 10:3.4 26-26 10:3.5 26-27 10:3.6 26-28 10:3.7 26-29 10:3.8 26-30 10:3.9 26-31 10:3.10 26-32 10:3.11 26-22 10:3.12 26-23 11.2.1 30-1 - 30-40 11.2.2 30-3 11.2.3 30-39 11.2.5 30-41 11.2.6 30-42 11.2.7 30-8 11.2.8 30-8 11.2.9 30-5 11.2.10 30-6 11.2.11 30-7 11.2.13 30-43 11.2.14 30-9 11.2.15 30-4 11.2.16 30-2 11.7.1 30-76 11.7.2 30-77 11.7.3 30-78 11.7.4 30-79 11.7.5 30-80 11.7.6 30-75 12.2.1 22-23 12.2.2 22-24 12.2.3 22-25 12.2.4 22-26 14.3.1 20-7 14.3.2 20-7 14.6.1 20-2 14.7.1 20-3 14.7.2 20-3 14.9.1 30-104 14.9.2 30-106 14.9.3 30-107 14.9.4 30-108 14.9.5 30-105 17.1.1 4-20 17.1.2 4-19 17.1.3 4-23 17.1.4 4-24 17.1.5 4-25 17.1.6 4-26 17.1.7 4-27 17.1.8 4-28 17.1.9 4-29 17.1.10 4-30 17.1.11 4-31 17.1.12 4-32 17.1.13 4-33 17.1.14 4-34 17.1.15 4-35 17.1.16 4-21 17.1.17 4-22 17.4.1 20-4 17.4.2 20-4 17.4.3 20-4 17.4.4 20-4 17.4.5 20-4 17.6.1 20-1 17.6.2 20-1 17.6.3 20-1 17.6.4 20-1 17.6.5 20-1 18.7.1 18-19 18.7.2 18-20 18.7.3 18-21 18.7.4 18-47 18.7.5 18-48 18.7.6 18-49 18.7.8 18-51 18.7.9 18-52 18.7.10 18-53 18.7.11 18-54 18.7.13 18-23 18.7.14 18-24 18.7.15 18-25 18.7.16 18-26 18.7.17 18-27 18.7.18 18-28 18.7.19 18-29 18.7.20 18-22 18.7.27 18-50 20.1.1 10-1 20.1.2 10-3 20.1.3 10-4 20.1.4 10-5 20.1.5 10-2  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
    This table gives the location within this Code of ordinances that are included herein. For the location of ordinances in chapter 32, appendix A or appendix B, see the tables immediately following this table. 
Type of 
Legislation Date Section Section 
this Code Ord. No. 96-02 4-3-1996 4-19-4-35 Ord. No. 97-02 7-2-1997 1.0-7.0 20-5 Ord. No. 97-3 10-1-1997 1 22-56 2 22-57 3 22-58 Ord. No. 1998-02 5-6-1998 8-19, 8-20 Ord. No. 99-04 12-1-1999 1.0-7.0 20-6 Ord. No. 99-05 1-5-2000 22-23-22-26 Ord. No. 2000-02 11-1-2000 30-1-30-9 30-39-30-43 Ord. No. 2000-06 11-1-2000 20-4 Ord. No. 2000-07 11-1-2000 6-19 6-21 Ord. No. 2000-08 11-1-2000 2-44-2-50 Ord. No. 2001-02 2-21-2001 26-1, 26-2 Ord. No. 2001-05 4-4-2001 18-19-18-29 18-47-18-54 Ord. No. 2001-10 8-1-2001 2-1 Ord. No. 2001-11 8-1-2001 2-74-2-79 Ord. No. 2002-05 8-21-2002 14-19-14-32 Ord. No. 2002-08 1-15-2003 30-75-30-80 Ord. No. 2003-10 8-20-2003 20-7 Ord. No. 2003-13 8-20-2003 20-2 Ord. No. 2003-14 8-20-2003 20-3 Ord. No. 2003-16 8-20-2003 30-104-30-108 Ord. No. 2004-10 4-28-2004 20-1 Ord. No. 2004-06 5-4-2004 24-21-24-25 Ord. No. 2004-11 5-5-2004 26-21-26-32 Ord. No. 2004-14 5-5-2004 16-21-16-25 Ord. No. 2004-07 7-4-2004 22-23-22-26 Ord. No. 2005-05 8-4-2004 2-134-2-140 Ord. No. 2004-08 8-28-2004 4-19-4-35 Ord. No. 2005-06 7-6-2005 4-19-4-35 Ord. No. 2005-07 8-3-2005 2-134 Ord. No. 2005-09 8-17-2005 8-19, 8-20 12-19-12-26 Ord. No. 2005-11 12-7-2005 30-75-30-80 Ord. No. 2006-02 4-1-2006 28-22 Ord. No. 2006-03 4-1-2006 28-23 Ord. No. 2006-04 4-1-2006 28-24 Ord. No. 2006-01 5-3-2006 30-40 30-42, 30-43 Ord. No. 2006-07 11-1-2006 22-24 Ord. No. 2006-08 11-1-2006 28-1 Ord. No. 2007-05 6-20-2007 8.01 18-82 - 18-108-18-112 Ord. No. 2008-02 3-19-2008 2-102-2-110 Ord. No. 2008/09-01 7-16-2008 22-1 Ord. No. 2009/2010-03 10-7-2009 24-1 Ord. No. 2009/2010-04 12-16-2009 30-8 Ord. No. 2009/2010-06 12-16-2009 1 16-1 Ord. No. 2009/2010-08 6-16-2010 22-2 Ord. No. 2011/2012-01 4-18-2012 1 26-53 2 26-54 3 26-55 4 26-56 5 26-57 6 26-58 7 26-59 10 26-60 Ord. No. 2011/2012-02 5-2-2012 1 26-79 2 26-80 3 26-81 4 26-82 5 26-83 6 26-84 7 26-85 8 26-86 9 26-87 10 26-88 11 26-89 14 26-90 Ord. No. 2012/2013-03 4-3-2013 1 2-196 2 2-195 3 2-197 4 2-198 5 2-199 6 2-200 Ord. No. 2013/2014-02 5-7-2014 1 10-1 2 10-3 3 10-4 4 10-5 5 10-2 Ord. No. 2014/2015-01 12-17-14       Added 31-21-31-31, 31-41, 31-51-31-53 Ord. No. 2014/2015-02  5- 6-14       Added Adopt. Ord. Ord. No. 2014/2015-03  5- 6-15 1       Added 4-36-4-38 Ord. No. 2014/2015-04  5-20-15 2       Added 18-122-18-128 Ord. No. 2014/2015-05  5-20-15       Rpld 6-21 Ord. No. 2015/2016-01  7-15-15 2       Added 2-212-2-216 Ord. No. 2015/2016-02  1-20-16       Added 20-8 Ord. No. 2-2016/2017  4-19-17 2 30-39 30-43 30-78 Ord. No. 3-2016/2017  5- 3-17 1       Added 1-41-1-44 Ord. No. 4-2016/2017  6-21-17 2(Exh. A)       Added 14-40-14-121 Ord. No. 2-2017/2018  1-17-18 2       Added 30-78(5) Ord. No. 5-2017/2018  6-20-18 2 30-3(5)  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ZONING ORDINANCE 
    This table gives the location of amendments to the Zoning Ordinance, which ordinance was originally adopted on February 14, 1996, and is codified in chapter 32 of this Code. 
Type of 
Legislation Date Section Section 
this Code Ord. of 2-14-1996 2-14-1996 1.01 32-1 1.02 32-2 1.03 32-3 1.04 32-4 1.05 32-5 1.06 32-6 1.07 32-7 1.08 32-8 1.09 32-9 1.10 32-10 1.11 32-11 1.12 32-12 1.13 32-13 2.00(part) 32-56 2.01 32-45 2.02 32-46 2.03 32-47 2.04 32-48 2.05 32-49 2.06 32-50 2.07 32-51 2.08 32-52 2.09 32-53 2.10 32-54 2.11 32-55 3.00(part) 32-89 3.01 32-84 3.02 32-85 3.03 32-86 3.04 32-87 3.05 32-88 4.01 32-120 4.02 32-121 4.03 32-122 4.04 32-123 4.05 32-124 4.06 32-125 4.07 32-126 4.08 32-127 5.01 32-153 5.02 32-154 5.03 32-155 5.04 32-156 5.05 32-157 5.06 32-158 5.07 32-159 5.08 32-160 5.09(A) 32-161 5.09(B) 32-161 5.09(I) 32-161 5.09(M) 32-161 6.01 32-191 6.02 32-192 6.03 32-193 6.04 32-194 6.05 32-195 6.06 32-196 6.07 32-197 6.08 32-198 6.09 32-199 6.10 32-200 6.11 32-201 6.12 32-202 6.13 32-203 6.14 32-204 7.01 32-232 7.02 32-233 7.03 32-234 7.04 32-235 7.05 32-236 7.06 32-237 7.07 32-238 7.08 32-239 Ord. of 5-7-1997 5-7-1997 32-5 32-8 32-10 32-11 Ord. of 5-6-1998 5-6-1998 32-11 Ord. of 8-2-2000 8-2-2000 32-9 32-45 Ord. of 2-7-2001 2-7-2001 32-238 Ord. No. 2002-04 3-6-2002 32-153 Ord. of 9-25-2002 9-25-2002 32-236 Ord. of 5-7-2003 5-7-2003 32-51 32-120-32-127 32-156 Ord. of 6-18-2003 6-18-2003 32-237 Ord. of 2-4-2004 2-4-2004 32-155 Ord. of 3-3-2004 3-3-2004 32-56 Ord. of 9-1-2004 9-1-2004 32-191-32-204 32-234 Ord. No. 2007-08 10-17-2007 32-153 Ord. of 12-5-2007 12-5-2007 32-11 32-239 Ord. of 11-19-2008 11-19-2008 32-11 32-45 32-56 32-89 Ord. No. 2008/09-3 4-15-2009 32-161 32-11 Ord. No. 2009/10-01 7-29-2009 32-11 32-161 Ord. No. 2009/2010-05 11-4-2009 32-161 Ord. of 11-18-2009 11-18-2009 32-233 Ord. No. 2010/2011-011 8-4-2010 32-154 Ord. of 8-4-2010 8-4-2010 32-11 32-158 Ord. No. 2016/2017-01  3- 1-2017 32-5 32-11 32-234 Ord. No. 5-2016/2017  6-21-2017 1 32-2 2 32-11 3 32-121 4 32-123 5 32-124 6 32-126 Ord. of 06-21-2017  6-21-2017 32-1-32-13 32-45-32-56 32-84-32-89 32-102-32-127 32-153-32-161 32-191-32-204 32-232-32-239 Ord. of 10-18-2017 10-18-2017 2       Added 32-162 Ord. No. 3-2017/2018  4-18-2018       Added 32-238(7)  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
    This table gives the location of amendments to the Subdivision Regulations, which regulations were adopted by the planning board on June 13, 1995, and which are printed in Appendix A to this Code. 
Date Section of 
Appendix A 10-12-1999 2.06 5-23-2000 3.03 8-14-2001 3.08 4-13-2010 3.13 10-11-2011 2.06 1-24-2017 2.08 6-13-2017 3.09  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - SITE PLAN REGULATIONS 
    This table gives the location of amendments to the Site Plan Regulations, which regulations were originally adopted on August 22, 1995, and which are printed in Appendix B to this Code. 
Date Section of 
Appendix B 11-18-1997 1.07 3.01 3.04 3.08, 3.09 5.01 5.04 10-1999 2.05 6-11-2002 3.16 12-2003 2.05 4-13-2010 3.12 1-24-2017 2.07  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Revised Statutes Annotated of the State of New Hampshire (RSA). 
RSA 
Section Section 

in Code 21:3 1-2 21:8, 21:9 1-2 21:15 1-2 21:24 1-2 21:34-a 4-28 21:35 1-2 21-P:34 et seq. Ch. 12 (note) Ch. 12, Art. II ch. 21-P 1-44 21-P:35 12-19 21-P:38, 21-P:39 12-21 21-P:39 12-22 ch. 31 Ch. 2 (note) 31:5 Char.  5.4 31:19 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 2 31:19 2-109 31:22 2-105 31:25-31:30 Char.  5.13 38:31 31-28 31:39 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II, 
Div. 2 31:39, III 1-7 14-102 31:40 30-1 31:93 2-212 31:95-d Char.  5.4 31:128 1-1 ch. 32 Char.  5.2 Ch. 2, Art. IV 32:3, III Char.  5.4 32:3, VI Char.  5.4 32:3, VI(c) Char.  5.4 32:5 Char.  5.4 32:11 Char.  3.10 32:16 Char.  5.4 ch. 33 Char.  5.11 Ch. 2, Art. IV 33-5a 24-22 33:3 24-22 33:4-a 24-22 33:5 24-22 33:7-a 24-22 33:8-a Char.  5.4 ch. 35-B Ch. 22 (note) 36:54-58 App. A,  2.11 App. B,  2.10 37:5 Char.  4.6 38:22 14-99 31-27 38:26, II 14-22 38:31 14-22 39:3 Char.  5.4 39:3-d Char.  5.4 39:5 Char.  5.4 40:4 Char.  5.4 40:4-c Char.  5.4 40:4-e Char.  5.4 40:4a Char.  5.4 40:4b Char.  5.4 40:4f Char.  5.4 40:6-10 Char.  5.4 41:11 Ch. 26, Art. II 30-1 47:17 30-1 30-8 47:17, I 14-102 49-B:5 Char.  10.9 49-D:3 Char.  1.2 49-D:4 Char.  4.11 ch. 52 Char.  3.17 chs. 71-90 Ch. 28 (note) 72:27-a 28-21 72:61 et seq. 28-23 72:65 et seq. 28-24 72:69 et seq. 28-22 76:13 14-99 80:52-a 28-1 ch. 91-A Char.  3.7 Char.  10.4 Char.  10.16 2-1 Ch. 2, Art. II 2-76 2-107 2-136 24-24 91-A:3, II(c) 2-78 125-F 14-43 125-N:2, VIII 14-43 ch. 128 1-44 145-M 14-43 147:1 20-8 149-I:6 14-102 149-I:11 14-99 149-M:17, II(a) 20-8 149-M:59 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. III 153:5, I 32-162 154:24 16-21 154:26, 154:27 16-23, 16-24 154:30-a 16-25 ch. 155-A Ch. 6 (note) Ch. 16 (note) ch. 155-E 32-153 155-E:1 32-11 ch. 160-C Ch. 16 (note) ch. 162-K Ch. 8 (note) Ch. 8, Art. II 8-19, 8-20 162-K:1 8-19 ch. 162-L Ch. 8 (note) ch. 162-N Ch. 8 (note) 163-B 20-8 170-E:2 32-11 175:1 30-7 ch. 193 20-4 ch. 202-A 1-44 229:5 32-84 231:28 App. A,  3.02 231:132-a 30-75 231:133, III App. A,  3.02 ch. 236 18-108 236:13, III(b), (c) App. B,  3.01 chs. 259-269 Ch. 30 (note) 261:86 30-39 261:88 30-39 ch. 265 26-31 265-A:44 30-7 265:3-b 26-22 26-31 265:9 26-31 265:14 26-31 265:31 30-5, 30-6 265:50 et seq. 30-4 265:60, II App. A,  3.02 265:60, II(c) App. A,  3.02 265:62 App. A,  3.02 265:68 et seq. Ch. 30, Art. II 265:69 30-39 265:73-a 30-39 265:143 et seq. Ch. 30, Art. III 265:149 Ch. 30, Art. III 287-A 18-122 287-A:3 18-127 ch. 289 1-44 289:5 et seq. 2-139 289:6 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III, 
Div. 3 289:6, I 2-134 317-A:20 14-43 318:1, XVII 14-43 ch. 322 Ch. 18, Art. III 18-108 354-A:15 32-238 chs. 466-470 Ch. 4 (note) ch. 466 Ch. 4, Art. II 4-26 ch. 466-A 4-19 466:31-a 4-28 466:36 4-19 466:50 4-35 482-A:3 32-158 482-A:15 32-155 ch. 483-B 32-154 483-B:4 32-154 483-B:4, XVI 32-154 483-B:4, XVI(c) 32-154 483-B:4, XVII 32-154 483-B:4, XVII(d) 32-156 483-B:9 32-154 483-B:9, V(a) 32-155 483-B:12 32-154 483:15 32-154 ch. 485-A Ch. 14, Art. II 485-A:4, XVI-a 14-43 14-112 485-A:29-44 14-44 ch. 485-C Ch. 14, Art. II 485-C:2, XVIII 32-153 486:13 14-112 ch. 488 Ch. 14, Art. II 625:9 20-8 ch. 640 2-76 ch. 643 2-76 650:1 32-235 651:2 20-8 651:5, X(c) 18-20 ch. 659 10-3 659:3-659:45 10-4 659:43 10-5 659:45 10-2 ch. 664 10-3 32-121 664:14-664:17-a 10-4 669:19-669:29 Char.  5.4 669:30-669:33 Char.  5.4 669:64 Char.  2.3 chs. 672-677 Char.  11.1 chs. 672-678 Ch. 24 (note) 672:14 32-193 673:1, IV 32-10 673:1, V 6-20 673:13 2-74 674:5 et seq. Ch. 24, Art. II 674:5-674:8 Char.  11.1 674:16 32-3 32-158 674:16 et seq. Ch. 32 (note) 674:16, IV 32-159 674:16-674:21 32-153 674:18 32-3 674:21 32-45 32-51 32-155 32-191 32-236 32-238 674:21(c) 32-236 674:21(h) 32-236 674:21, I(i) 32-9 674:21, V(c) 24-22 674:21-a 32-196 App. A,  3.14 674:31-a 32-11 674:35 32-191 App. A (note) 674:36 32-191 674:36, II(a) App. A,  2.16 674:36, III App. A,  3.08 674:39 32-204 32-238 App. A,  5.03 App. B,  5.03 674:39-a App. A,  1.05 674:41, I(d)(2) 32-201 674:43 et seq. App. B (note) 674:43 32-12 App. B,  1.02 674:44, III(e) App. B,  5.01 674:44, V App. B,  2.05 674:46 32-11 674:49 32-161 674:51 et seq. Ch. 6 (note) ch. 675 32-161 675:7 32-238 676:3 App. A,  2.18 App. A,  3.14 App. B,  2.16 676:3, I App. A,  2.18 App. B,  2.16 676:4 App. A,  3.14 676:4(g) App. B,  2.03, 
App. B,  2.04 676:4, I 32-9 32-45 32-162 676:4, I(i) App. A,  2.17 App. B,  2.15 676:4, I(b) App. A,  2.07, 
App. A,  2.08 App. A,  2.12 App. B,  2.06, 
App. B,  2.07 App. B,  2.11 676:4, I(c) App. A,  2.17 App. B,  2.15 676:4, I(d) App. A,  2.10 App. B,  2.09 676:4, I(f) App. A,  2.17 App. B,  2.15 676:4, I(g) App. A,  2.06 App. B,  2.05 676:4, I(h) App. A,  2.18 App. B,  2.16 676:4-a App. A,  2.20 App. A,  5.04 App. B,  2.18 App. B,  5.04 676:5 32-238 676:5, III 32-238 App. A,  2.19 App. B,  2.17 676:14 32-6 App. A,  5.09 App. B,  5.09 676:15 6-19 676:17 6-19 32-161 677:2-674:14 32-238 677:15 32-238 App. A,  2.19 App. B,  2.17 764:35 App. A,  1.02  
